     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The History of the Origins of Christianity. Book I. Life of
                  Jesus.
      Creator(s): Renan, Joseph Ernest (1823-1892).
   CCEL Subjects: All; History
      LC Call no: BR165.R42 V.1
     LC Subjects:

                  Christianity

                  History

                  By period

                  Early and medieval
     __________________________________________________________________

THE HISTORY

  OF THE

                            ORIGINS OF CHRISTIANITY.

BOOK I.

LIFE OF JESUS.

  BY

ERNEST RENAN

    MEMBER OF THE FRENCH ACADEMY.

London:

MATHIESON & COMPANY
     __________________________________________________________________

   TO THE PURE SOUL

   of

   MY SISTER HENRIETTA,

   Who died at Byblus, 24th September, 1861.

   FROM the bosom of God, in which thou reposest, dost thou recall those
   long days at Ghazir, when, alone with thee, I wrote these pages, which
   were inspired by the places we had visited together? Sitting silently
   by my side, thou didst read each sheet and copy it as soon as
   written--the sea, the villages, the ravines, the mountains being
   meanwhile spread out at our feet. When the overpowering light had given
   place to the innumerable host of stars, thy delicate and subtly
   questions, thy discreet doubts, brought me back to the sublime object
   of our common thoughts. Thou saidst to me one day that thou wouldst
   love this book, because, first, it had been written in thy presence,
   and because, also, it was to thine heart. If at times thou didst fear
   for it the narrow opinions of frivolous men, thou felt always persuaded
   that truly religious souls would, in the end, take delight in it. While
   in the midst of these sweet meditations, Death struck us both with his
   wing; the sleep of fever overtook us at the same hour, and I awoke
   alone! Thou sleepest now in the land of Adonis, near the holy Byblus
   and the sacred waters where the women of the ancient mysteries came to
   mingle their tears. Reveal to me, O good genius!--to me, whom thou
   lovedst--those truths which conquer death, strip it of fear, and make
   it almost beloved.

CONTENTS.

   Page
   DEDICATION                                                             iii
   PREFACE (First Time in English)                                        ix
   INTRODUCTION                                                           xxxiii
   CHAPTER I.
   PLACE OF JESUS IN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD                             1
   CHAPTER II.
   INFANCY AND YOUTH OF JESUS -- HIS FIRST IMPRESSIONS                    13
   CHAPTER III.
   EDUCATION OF JESUS                                                     18
   CHAPTER IV.

   THE ORDER OF THOUGHT FROM WHOSE CENTRE JESUS WAS DEVELOPED
                                                                          26
   CHAPTER V.

   THE FIRST SAYINGS OF JESUS -- HIS IDEAS OF A "FATHER GOD" AND OF A PURE
   RELIGION -- FIRST DISCIPLES
                                                                          43
   CHAPTER VI.

   JOHN THE BAPTIST--VISIT OF JESUS TO JOHN, AND HIS ABODE IN THE DESERT
   OF JUDEA--HE ADOPTS THE BAPTISM OF JOHN
                                                                          56
   CHAPTER VII.

   DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEAS OF JESUS RELATIVE TO THE KINGDOM OF GOD
                                                                          66
   CHAPTER VIII.

   JESUS AT CAPERNAUM
                                                                          76
   CHAPTER IX.

   THE DISCIPLES OF JESUS
                                                                          86
   CHAPTER X.

   PREACHINGS ON THE LAKE
                                                                          95
   CHAPTER XI.

   THE KINGDOM OF GOD CONCEIVED AS THE INHERITANCE OF THE POOR
                                                                          104
   CHAPTER XII.

   EMBASSY TO JESUS FROM JOHN IN PRISON -- DEATH OF JOHN -- THE RELATIONS
   OF HIS SCHOOL WITH THAT OF JESUS
                                                                          114
   CHAPTER XIII.

   FIRST ATTEMPTS ON JERUSALEM
                                                                          120
   CHAPTER XIV.

   RELATIONS OF JESUS WITH THE PAGANS AND THE SAMARITANS
                                                                          130
   CHAPTER XV.

   COMMENCEMENT OF THE LEGEND OF JESUS -- HIS OWN IDEA OF HIS SUPERNATURAL
   CHARACTER
                                                                          137
   CHAPTER XVI.

   MIRACLES
                                                                          147
   CHAPTER XVII.

   DEFINITE FORM OF THE IDEAS OF JESUS IN RESPECT OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD
                                                                          156
   CHAPTER XVIII.

   INSTITUTIONS OF JESUS
                                                                          167
   CHAPTER XIX.

   INCREASING PROGRESSION OF ENTHUSIASM AND OF EXALTATION
                                                                          177
   CHAPTER XX.

   OPPOSITION TO JESUS
                                                                          185
   CHAPTER XXI.

   LAST JOURNEY OF JESUS TO JERUSALEM
                                                                          194
   CHAPTER XXII.

   MACHINATIONS OF THE ENEMIES OF JESUS
                                                                          205
   CHAPTER XXIII.

   LAST WEEK OF JESUS
                                                                          213
   CHAPTER XXIV.

   ARREST AND TRIAL OF JESUS
                                                                          226
   CHAPTER XXV.

   DEATH OF JESUS
                                                                          239
   CHAPTER XXVI.

   JESUS IN THE TOMB
                                                                          246
   CHAPTER XVII.

   FATE OF THE ENEMIES OF JESUS
                                                                          250
   CHAPTER XXVIII.

   ESSENTIAL CHARACTER OF THE WORK OF JESUS
                                                                          254

   APPENDIX (First Time in English)
                                                                          269
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    PREFACE

  TO THE

                              THIRTEENTH EDITION.

   THE twelve first editions of this work differ only from one another in
   respect of a few trifling changes. The present edition, on the
   contrary, has been revised and corrected with the greatest care. During
   the four years which have elapsed since the book appeared, I have
   laboured incessantly to improve it. The numerous criticisms to which it
   has given rise have rendered the task in certain respects an easy one.
   I have read all those which contain anything important. I believe I can
   conscientiously affirm that not once have the outrage and the calumny,
   which have been imported into them, hindered me from deriving profit
   from the just observations which those criticisms might contain. I have
   weighed everything, tested everything. If, in certain cases, people
   should wonder why I have not answered fully the censures which have
   been made with such extreme assurance, and as if the errors alleged
   have been proved, it is not that I did not know of these censures, but
   that it was impossible for me to accept them. In the majority of such
   cases I have added in a note the texts or the considerations which have
   deterred me from changing my opinion, or better, by making some slight
   change of expression, I have endeavoured to show wherein lay the
   contempt of my critics. These notes, though very brief and containing
   little more than an indication of the sources at first hand, are
   sufficient in every case to point out to the intelligent reader the
   reasonings which have guided me in the composition of my texts.

   To attempt to answer in detail all the accusations which have been
   brought against me, it would have been necessary for me to triple or
   quadruple this volume: I should have had to repeat things which have
   already been well said, even in French; it would have been necessary to
   enter into a religious discussion, a thing that I have absolutely
   interdicted myself from doing; I should have had to speak of myself, a
   thing I shall never do. I write for the purpose of promulgating my
   ideas to those who seek the truth. As for those persons who would have,
   in the interests of their belief, that I am an ignoramus, an evil
   genius, or a man of bad faith, I do not pretend to be able to modify
   their opinions. If such opinions are necessary for the peace of mind of
   certain pious people, I would make it a veritable scruple to disabuse
   them of them.

   The controversy, moreover, if I had entered upon it, would have led me
   most frequently to points foreign to historical criticism. The
   objections which have been directed against me have proceeded from two
   opposing parties. One set has been addressed to me by freethinkers, who
   do not believe in the supernatural, nor, consequently, in the
   inspiration of the sacred books; another set by theologians of the
   liberal Protestant school, who hold such broad doctrinal views that the
   rationalists and they can readily understand one another. These,
   adversaries and I find ourselves on common ground; we start with the
   same principles; we can discuss according to the rules followed in all
   questions relating to matters of history, philology, and archæology. As
   to the refutations of my book (and these are much the most numerous)
   which have been made by orthodox theologians, both Catholic and
   Protestant, who believe in the supernatural and in the sacred character
   of the books of the Old and New Testament, they all involve a
   fundamental misapprehension. If the miracle has any reality, this book
   is but a tissue of errors. If the Gospels are inspired books, and true,
   consequently, to the letter, from beginning to end, I have been guilty
   of a great wrong in not contenting myself with piecing together the
   broken fragments of the four texts, like as the Harmonists have done,
   only to construct thus an ensemble at once most redundant and most
   contradictory. If, on the contrary, the miracle is an inadmissible
   thing, then I am right in regarding the books which contain miraculous
   recitals as histories mixed with fiction, as legends full of
   inaccuracies, errors, and of systematic expedients. If the Gospels are
   like other books I am right in treating them in the same manner as the
   Hellenist, the Arabian, the Hindoo treated the legendary documents
   which they studied. Criticism does not recognise infallible texts; its
   first principle is to admit that in the text which is examined there is
   the possibility of error. Far from being accused of scepticism, I ought
   to be classed with the moderate critics, since, instead of rejecting en
   bloc weak documents as so much trash, I essay to extract something
   historical out of them by means of delicate approximation.

   And as no one asserts that to put the question in such a manner implies
   a petitio principii, seeing we take for granted à priori that which is
   proved in detail, to wit, that the miracles related by the Gospels have
   had no reality, that the Gospels are not books written under the
   inspiration of Divinity. Those two negations are not with us the result
   of exegesis; they are anterior to exegesis. They are the outcome of an
   experience which has not been denied. Miracles are things which never
   happen; only credulous people believe they have seen them; you cannot
   cite a single one which has taken place in presence of witnesses
   capable of testing it; no special intervention of the Divinity, whether
   in the composition of a book, or in any event whatever, has been
   proved. For this reason alone, when a person admits the supernatural,
   such a one is without the province of science; he accepts an
   explanation which is non-scientific, an explanation which is set aside
   by the astronomer, the physician, the chemist, the geologist, the
   physiologist, one which ought also to be passed over by the historian.
   We reject the supernatural for the same reason that we reject the
   existence of centaurs and hippogriffes; and this reason is, that nobody
   has ever seen them. It is not because it has been previously
   demonstrated to me that the evangelists do not merit absolute credence
   that I reject the miracles which they recount. It is because they do
   recount miracles that I say, "The Gospels are legends; they may contain
   history, but, certainly, all that they set forth is not historical."

   It is hence impossible that the orthodox person and the rationalist who
   denies the supernatural can be of much assistance in such questions. In
   the eyes of theologians, the Gospels and the books of the Bible in
   general are books like no others, books more historic than the best
   histories, inasmuch as they contain no errors. To the rationalist, on
   the contrary, the Gospels are texts to which the ordinary rules of
   criticism ought to be applied; we are, in this respect, like the Arabs
   in presence of the Koran and the hadith, like the Hindoos in presence
   of the Vedas and the Buddhist books. Is it because the Arabs regard the
   Koran as infallible? Is it because we accuse them of falsifying history
   that they relate the origins of Islamism differently from the Mussulman
   theologians? Is it because the Hindoos hold the Lalitavistara to be a
   biography?

   How are such opinions, in setting out from opposed principles, to be
   mutually reconciled? All rules of criticism assume that a document
   subjected to examination has but a relative value, that it may be in
   error, and that it may be improved by comparing it with a better
   document. The profane savant, persuaded that all books which have come
   down to us as legacies are the work of man, did not hesitate to do an
   injury to texts when the texts contradicted one another, when they set
   forth absurd or formal statements which had been refuted by witnesses
   of greater authority. Orthodoxy, on the contrary, positive in advancing
   that the sacred books do not contain an error or a contradiction,
   tolerates the most violent tactics, expedients the most desperate, in
   order to get out of difficulties. Orthodox exegesis is, in this way, a
   tissue of subtleties. An isolated subtlety may be true; but a thousand
   subtleties cannot at once be true. If there were in Tacitus or Polybius
   errors so pronounced as those committed by Luke àpropos of Quirinius
   and of Theudas, we should say that Tacitus and Polybius have been
   deceived. Reasonings which we would not admit if the question were one
   of Greek or Latin literature, hypotheses which a Boissonade, or even a
   Rollin, would never think of, are held to be plausible when the
   question is one of exculpating a sacred author.

   Hence it is orthodoxy which is guilty of a petitio principii, when it
   reproaches rationalism with changing history, because the latter does
   not accept word for word the documents which orthodoxy holds to be
   sacred. Because a fact is written down, it does not thence follow that
   it is true. The miracles of Mahomet have been put into writing as well
   as those of Jesus; and certainly the Arab biographies of Mahomet, that
   of Ibn-Haschim, for example, has a much more historical character than
   the Gospels. Do we on this account admit the miracles of Mahomet? We
   follow Ibn-Haschim with more or less confidence when we have no reasons
   for doubting him. But when he relates to us things that are perfectly
   incredible we make no difficulty about abandoning him. Certainly, if we
   had four lives of Buddha, which were partly fabulous, and as
   irreconcilable amongst themselves as the four Gospels are to one
   another, and if a savant essayed to purge the four Buddhist narratives
   of their contradictions, we should not accuse that savant of falsifying
   the texts. It might well be that he attempted to unite discordant
   passages, that he sought a compromise, a sort of middle course, a
   narrative which should embrace nothing that was impossible, in which
   opposing testimony was balanced and misrepresented as little as
   possible. If, after that, the Buddhists believed in a lie, in the
   falsification of history, we would have a right to say to them: "The
   question here is not one of history, and if we must at times discard
   your texts it is the fault of those texts which contain things
   impossible of belief, and, moreover, which are contradictory."

   At the bottom of all discussion on such matters is the question of the
   supernatural. If the miracle and the inspiration of certain books are
   actual facts, our method is detestable. If the miracle and the
   inspiration of some books are beliefs without any reality, our method
   is the proper one. Now, the question of the supernatural is determined
   to us with absolute certainty, by this simple reason, that there is no
   room for belief in a thing of which the world can offer no experimental
   trace. We do not believe in a miracle, just as we do not believe in
   dreams, in the devil, in sorcery, or in astrology. Have we any need to
   refute step by step the long reasonings of astrology in order to deny
   that the stars influence human events? No. It is sufficient for this
   wholly negative, as well as demonstrable experience, that we give the
   best direct proof--such an influence has never been proved.

   God forbid that we should be unmindful of the services that the
   theologians have rendered to science! The research and the constitution
   of the texts which serve as the basis of this history have been the
   work in many cases of orthodox theologians. The labour of criticism has
   been the work of liberal theologians. But there is one thing that a
   theologian can never be--I mean a historian. History is essentially
   disinterested. The historian has but one care, art and truth (two
   inseparable things; art guards the secret of the laws which are the
   most closely related to truth). The theologian has an interest -- his
   dogma. Minimise that dogma as much as you will, it is still to the
   artist and the critic an insupportable burden. The orthodox theologian
   may be compared to a caged bird; every movement natural to it is
   intercepted. The liberal theologian is a bird, some of the feathers of
   whose wings have been clipped. He believes he is master of himself, and
   he in fact is until the moment he seeks to take his flight. Then it is
   seen that he is not completely the creature of the air. We proclaim it
   boldly; critical inquiries relative to the origin of Christianity will
   not have said their last word until they shall have cultivated, in a
   purely secular and profane spirit, the method of the Hellenists, the
   Arabs, the Hindoos, people strangers to all theology, who think neither
   of edifying, nor of scandalising, nor of defending, nor of overthrowing
   dogmas.

   Day and night, if I might so speak, I have reflected on these
   questions, questions which ought to be agitated without any other
   prejudices than those which constitute the essence of reason itself.
   The most serious of all unquestionably is that of the historic value of
   the fourth Gospel. Those who have not disagreed on such problems give
   room for the belief that they have not comprehended the whole
   difficulty. We may range the opinions on this Gospel into four classes,
   of which the following is the abridged expression. First opinion: "The
   fourth Gospel was written by the Apostle John, the son of Zebedee. The
   statements contained in that Gospel are all true; the discourses which
   the author puts into the mouth of Jesus were actually held by Jesus."
   This is the orthodox opinion. From the point of view of rational
   criticism, this is wholly untenable.

   Second opinion: "The fourth Gospel is, in fact, by the Apostle John,
   although it may have been revised and retouched by his disciples. The
   facts recounted in that Gospel are direct traditions in regard to
   Jesus. The discourses are often from compositions expressing only the
   manner in which the author had conceived the mind of Jesus." This is
   the opinion of Ewald, and in some respects that of Lücke, Weisse, and
   Reuss. This is the opinion that I adopted in the first edition of this
   work.

   Third opinion: "The fourth Gospel is not the work of the Apostle John.
   It was attributed to him by some of his disciples about the year 100.
   The discourses are almost entirely fictitious; but the narrative parts
   contain valuable traditions, ascending in part to the Apostle John."
   This is the opinion of Weizsaecker and of Michael Nicolas. It is the
   opinion which I now hold.

   Fourth opinion: "The fourth Gospel is in no sense the work of the
   Apostle John. And whether, as regards the facts or the discourses which
   are reported in it, it is not a historic book; it is a work of the
   imagination and in part allegorical, concocted about the year 150, in
   which the author has proposed to himself, not to recount actually the
   life of Jesus, but to make believe in the idea that he himself had
   formed of Jesus." Such is, with some variations, the opinion of Baur,
   Schwegler, Strauss, Zeller, Volkmar, Helgenfeld, Schenkel, Scholten,
   and Rénille.

   I cannot quite ally myself to this radical party. I am convinced that
   the fourth Gospel has an actual connection with the Apostle John, and
   that it was written about the end of the first century. I avow,
   however, that in certain passages of my first edition I inclined too
   much in the direction of authenticity. The probative force of some
   arguments upon which I insisted appear to me now of less importance. I
   no longer believe that Saint Justin may have put the fourth Gospel on
   the same footing as the synoptics amongst the "Memoires of the
   Apostles." The existence of Presbyteros Joannes, a personage distinct
   from the Apostle John, appears to me now as very problematical. The
   opinion according to which John, the son of Zebedee, could have written
   the work, an hypothesis which I have never altogether admitted, but for
   which, at moments, I might have shown a certain weakness, is here
   discarded as improbable. Finally, I acknowledge that I was wrong in
   repudiating the hypothesis of a false writing, attributed to an apostle
   who lived in the apostolic age. The second epistle of Peter, the
   authenticity of which no person can reasonably sustain, is an example
   of a work, much less important no doubt than the fourth Gospel,
   counterfeited under such conditions. Moreover, this is not for the
   moment the capital question. The essential question is to know what use
   it is proper to make of the fourth Gospel when one essays to write the
   life of Jesus. I persist in believing that that Gospel possesses a fund
   of valuable information, equal to that of the synoptics, and even
   sometimes superior. The development of this point possesses so much
   importance that I have made it the basis of an appendix at the end of
   this volume. The portion of the introduction relating to the criticism
   of the fourth Gospel has been revised and completed.

   In the body of the narrative several passages have also been modified
   in consequence of what has been just stated. All passages in a sentence
   which implied more or less that the fourth Gospel was by the Apostle
   John, or by an ocular witness of the evangelical facts, have been cut
   out. In order to trace the personal character of John, the son of
   Zebedee, I have thought of the rude Boanerge of Mark, of the terrible
   visionary of the Apocalypse, and not of the mystic, so full of
   tenderness, who has written the Gospel of love. I insist, with less
   confidence, on certain little details which are furnished us by the
   fourth Gospel. The limited quotations I have made from the discourses
   of that Gospel have been still further restricted. I had allowed myself
   to follow too far the opinions of the alleged apostle in what concerned
   the promise of the Paraclete. In like manner I am not now so sure that
   the fourth Gospel is right in respect of its disagreement with the
   synoptics as to the day on which Jesus died. As to the time of the
   Lord's Supper, on the contrary, I persist in my opinion. The synoptic
   account which places the eucharistic institution on the last evening of
   Jesus appears to me to contain an improbability, equivalent to a
   quasi-miracle. It is hence, in my opinion, an adapted version, and
   founded upon a certain confusion of recollections.

   The critical examination of the synoptics has not been modified
   throughout. It has been completed and determined on some points,
   notably in that which concerns Luke. As regards Lysanias, a study of
   the inscription of Zenodorus at Baalbeck, which I did for the
   Phoenician Mission, has led me to believe that the evangelist could not
   have made so grievous a mistake as the ingenious critics think. As
   regards Quirinius, on the contrary, the last memoir of M. Mommsen has
   settled the question against the third Gospel. Mark seems to me more
   and more the primitive type of the synoptic narrative and the most
   authoritative text.

   The paragraph relative to the Apocrypha has been explained. The
   important texts published by M. Ceriani have been employed to
   advantage. I have great doubts in regard to the book of Enoch. I reject
   the opinion of Weisse, Volkmar, and Graetz, who believe that the whole
   book is posterior to Jesus. As to the most important portion of the
   book, which extends from chapter xxvii. to chapter lxxi., I dare not
   decide between the arguments of Helgenfeld and Colani, who regard this
   portion as posterior to Jesus; and the opinion of Hoffmann, Dillmann,
   Koestlin, Ewald, Lücke, and Weizsaecker, who hold it to be anterior.
   How much is it to be desired that the Greek text of that important
   writing could be found! I do not know why I persist in believing that
   this is not a vain hope. I have, in any case, stamped with doubt the
   inductions drawn from the aforenamed chapters. I have shown, on the
   contrary, the singular correspondences between the discourses of Jesus
   contained in the last chapters of the synoptic Gospels and the
   Apocalypses attributed to Enoch, relations in regard to which the
   discovery of the complete Greek text of the epistle attributed to
   Barnabas has cast much light, and which has been much enhanced by M.
   Weizsaecker. The certain results obtained by M. Volkmar in regard to
   the fourth book of Esdras, and which agree, in almost every particular,
   with those of M. Ewald, have been equally taken into consideration.
   Several new Talmudist citations have been introduced The portion
   accorded to Essenism has been enlarged.

   The position I have taken in discarding the bibliography has frequently
   been wrongly interpreted. I believe I have loudly enough proclaimed
   that which I owe to the masters of German science in general, and to
   each of them in particular, so that such a silence might not be taxed
   with ingratitude. Bibliography is only useful when it is complete. Now
   the German genius has displayed such activity in the field of
   evangelical criticism that if I had cited all the works relative to the
   questions treated in this book I would have tripled the extent of the
   notes and changed the character of my narrative. One cannot accomplish
   everything at once. I have restricted myself, therefore, to the rule of
   only admitting citations at first hand. Their number has been greatly
   multiplied. Besides, for the convenience of French readers who are not
   conversant with these studies, I have continued the revision of the
   summary list of the writings, composed in our language, wherever I
   could find details which I may have omitted. Many of these works are
   far removed from my ideas; but all are of a nature to make the
   enlightened man reflect and to make him understand our discussions.

   The thread of the narrative has been much changed. Certain expressions,
   too strong for communistic minds, which were of the essence of nascent
   Christianity, have been softened down. Among those holding personal
   relations with Jesus I have admitted some whose names do not figure in
   the Gospels, but who are known to us through evidence worthy of
   credence. That which relates to the name of Peter has been modified. I
   have also adopted another hypothesis in regard to Levi, son of Alpheus,
   and his relations with the Apostle Matthew. As to Lazarus, I
   unhesitatingly adopt now the ingenious hypothesis of Strauss, Baur,
   Zeller, and Scholten, according to which the pious pauper of the
   parable of Luke and the person restored to life by Jesus are one and
   the same individual. It will nevertheless be seen how I retain some
   reality in associating him with Simon the Leper. I adopt likewise the
   hypothesis of M. Strauss in respect of divers discourses attributed to
   Jesus during his last days, which appear to be quotations from writings
   spread over the first century. The discussion of the texts as to the
   duration of the life of Jesus has been reduced to greater precision.
   The topography of Bethphage and Dalmanutha has been altered. The
   account of Golgotha has been reproduced from the works of M. Vogüé. A
   person well-versed in the history of botany has taught me to
   distinguish, in the orchards of Galilee, between trees which have grown
   there for eighteen hundred years and those which have only been
   transplanted there since then. Some facts have also been communicated
   to me in regard to the potion administered to the crucified, to which I
   have given a place. In general, in the account of the last hours of
   Jesus, I have toned down some phraseology which might have too
   historical an appearance. It is in such cases where the favourite
   explanations of M. Strauss find their best application, where symbolic
   and dogmatic designs let themselves be seen at each step.

   I have said, and I repeat it, that if in writing the life of Jesus one
   confines oneself to advancing only details which are certain, it would
   be necessary to limit oneself to a few lines. He existed. He was from
   Nazareth in Galilee. There was a charm in his preaching, and he
   implanted in the minds of his disciples aphorisms which left a deep
   impression there. His two principal disciples were Peter and John, sons
   of Zebedee. He excited the hatred of the orthodox Jews, who brought him
   before Pontius Pilate, then procurator of Judæa, to have him put to
   death. He was crucified without the gates of the city. It was believed
   that a short time after he was restored to life. This is what is known
   to us for certain, even though the Gospels had not existed or were
   falsehoods, through authentic texts and incontestable data, such as the
   evidently authentic epistles of St. Paul, the epistle to the Hebrews,
   the Apocalypse, and other texts believed in by all. Beyond that, it is
   permissible to doubt. What was his family? What in particular was his
   affinity to that James, "brother of the Lord," who after his death
   plays an important part? Was he actually related to John the Baptist?
   and did the most celebrated of his disciples belong to the school of
   baptism before they belonged to his? What were his Messianic ideas? Did
   he regard himself as the Messiah? What were his apocalyptic ideas? Did
   he believe that he would appear as the Son of Man in the clouds? Did he
   imagine he could work miracles? Were the latter attributed to him
   during his life? Did his legend grow up round himself, and had he
   cognisance of it? What was his moral character? What were his ideas in
   regard to the admission of Gentiles into the Kingdom of God? Was he a
   pure Jew like James, or did he break with Judaism, as did the most
   enthusiastic party of the Church subsequently? What was the order of
   his mental development? Those who seek only the indubitable in history
   must keep silent upon these points. The Gospels, in respect of these
   questions, are not much to be relied on, seeing that they frequently
   furnish arguments for two opposing theses, and seeing that the
   character of Jesus is therein modified to suit the views of the
   authors. For my part I think that on such occasions it is allowable to
   make conjectures, provided that they are presented as such. The texts,
   not being historic, give no certitude, but they give something. It is
   not necessary to follow them with a blind confidence, it is not
   necessary to reject their testimony with unjust disdain. We must strive
   to divine what they conceal, without being absolutely certain of having
   found it.

   It is singular that, in regard to almost all these points, it is the
   liberal school of theology which proposes the most sceptical solutions.
   The more sensible defenders of Christianity have come to consider it as
   advantageous to leave a gap in the historical circumstances bearing
   upon the birth of Christianity. Miracles, Messianic prophecies,
   formerly the bases of the Christian apology, have become an
   embarrassment to it; people seek to discard them. If we would believe
   the partisans of this theology, amongst whom I could cite so many
   eminent critics and noble thinkers, Jesus never pretended to perform a
   miracle; he did not believe himself to be the Messiah; he had no idea
   of the apocalyptic discourses which have been imputed to him as
   touching the final catastrophe. That Papias, so excellent a
   traditionist, and so zealous a collector of the words of Jesus, was an
   enthusiastic millenarian; that Mark, the oldest and the most
   authoritative of the evangelical narrators, was almost exclusively
   preoccupied with miracles, matters little. The career of Jesus is in
   this way so belittled that we are many times at a loss to tell what he
   was. His being condemned to death has no more right to be embraced in
   such a hypothesis than the accident which has made of him the chief of
   an apocalyptic and a Messianic movement. Was it on account of his moral
   precepts or his discourses on the Mount that Jesus was crucified?
   Certainly not. These maxims had for a long time been the current coin
   of the synagogue. No one has ever been put to death for repeating them.
   When Jesus was put to death, it was for saying something more than
   that. A learned man, who has taken an active part in these discussions,
   wrote me lately: "As in former times it was necessary to prove at all
   hazards that Jesus was God, so in our own times the question that the
   Protestant theological school has to prove is that he was not only a
   mere man, but also that he always regarded himself as such. People
   persist in representing him as a man of good sense, as a practical man
   par excellance, and transform him into the image and according to the
   spirit of modem theology. I believe with you that this is not doing
   justice to historical truth, but is neglecting an essential side of
   it."

   This tendency has already been more than once logically produced in the
   bosom of Christianity. What did Marcion aim at? What did the Gnostics
   of the second century try to do? Simply to discard the material
   circumstances of a biography, the human details of which shocked them.
   Baur and Strauss yielded to analogous philosophical necessities. The
   divine Æon which was developed by humanity has nothing to do with
   anecdotic incidents, with the particular life of an individual.
   Scholten and Schenkel held certainly to a historic and actual Jesus,
   but their historic Jesus is neither a Messiah, nor a prophet, nor a
   Jew. People do not know what he aimed at, nor comprehend either his
   life or his death. Their Jesus is an æon after his own manner, a being
   impalpable, intangible. Genuine history is not acquainted with any such
   beings. Genuine history must construct its edifice out of two kinds of
   materials, and, if I may so speak, out of two factors: the first, the
   general state of the human soul in a given age and in a given country;
   the second, the particular incidents which, uniting with general
   causes, determined the course of events. To explain history by
   accidental facts is as false as to explain it by principles which are
   purely philosophic. The two explanations ought mutually to sustain and
   complete each other. The history of Jesus and of the apostles must,
   above all histories, be constructed out of a vast mixture of ideas and
   sentiments; nor would that even be sufficient. A thousand conjectures,
   a thousand whims, a thousand trifles, are mixed up with ideas and
   sentiments. To trace at this time of day the exact details of these
   conjectures, whims, and trifles is impossible; what legend has taught
   us in regard to this may be true, but it may also not be true. In my
   opinion, the best course to hold is to follow as closely as possible
   the original narratives, to discard impossibilities, to sow everywhere
   the seeds of doubt, and to put forth as conjectural the diverse manners
   in which the event might have taken place. I am not quite sure that the
   conversion of St. Paul came about as we have it related in the Acts;
   but it took place in a manner not widely different from that, for St.
   Paul himself has informed us that he had a vision of the resurrected
   Jesus, which gave an entirely new direction to his life. I am not sure
   whether the narrative of the Acts as to the descent of the Holy Spirit
   on the day of Pentecost is quite historic; but the ideas which were
   spread abroad as to the baptism of fire leads me to believe that a
   scene took place in the apostolic circle in which thunder played a
   part, as at Sinai. The visions of the resurrected Jesus were likewise
   occasionally the cause of the fortuitous circumstances interpreted by
   vivid and already preoccupied imaginations.

   If liberal theologians repudiate explanations of this kind, it is
   because they do not wish to subject Christianity to the laws common to
   other religious movements; because also, perhaps, they are not
   sufficiently acquainted with the theory of spiritual life. There are no
   religious movements in which such deceptions do not play a great part.
   It may even be affirmed that they hold a permanent position in certain
   communities, such as the pietist Protestants, the Mormons, and the
   convent Catholics. In those little excited worlds it is not rare that
   conversions are the result of some accident, in which the anxious soul
   sees the finger of God. These accidents, which always contain something
   puerile, are concealed by the believers; it is a secret between heaven
   and them. A fortuitous event is nothing to a cold or indifferent soul;
   it is a divine symbol to a susceptible soul. To say that it was an
   accident which changed St. Paul and St. Ignatius Loyola through and
   through, or rather which gave a new turn to their activity, is
   certainly inexact. It was the interior movement of those strong natures
   which had prepared the clap of thunder; yet the thunderclap had been
   determined by an exterior cause. All these phenomena, moreover, had
   reference to a moral state which no longer belongs to us. In the
   majority of their actions they were governed by dreams which they had
   seen the preceding night, by inductions drawn from a fortuitous object
   which struck their first waking view, or by sounds which they believed
   they heard. It has happened that the wings of a bird, currents of air,
   or headaches, have determined the fate of the world. In order to be
   sincere and exhaustive it is necessary to say this; and when certain
   commonplace documents tell us of incidents of this kind we must take
   care to pass them over in silence. In history there are but few details
   which are certain; details, nevertheless, possess always some
   significance. The historian's talent consists in making a true
   narrative out of details which are of themselves but half true.

   We can hence accord a place in history to particular incidents, without
   being on that account a rationalist of the old school or a disciple of
   Paulus. Paulus was a theologian who, wishing to have as little as
   possible to do with miracles, and not daring at the same time to treat
   the Bible narratives as legends, twisted them about so as to explain
   them in a wholly natural fashion. In this way Paulus desired to retain
   for the Bible all its authority and to enter into the real thoughts of
   the sacred authors. But I am a profane critic; I believe that no
   supernatural writing is true to the letter; I think that out of a
   hundred narratives of the supernatural there are eighty which have been
   pieced together by popular imagination. I admit, nevertheless, that in
   certain very rare cases legend has been derived from an actual fact and
   trans-formed in the imagination. As to the mass of supernatural data
   recounted by the Gospels and by the Acts, I shall attempt to show in
   five or six instances how the illusion may have been created. The
   theologian who is invariably methodical would have that a single
   explanation should hold good from one end of the Bible to the other.
   Criticism believes that every explanation should be attempted, or
   rather, that the possibility of each explanation should be successively
   demonstrated. That an explanation is repugnant to one's ideas is no
   reason for rejecting it. The world is at once an infernal and a divine
   comedy, a strange "round," led by a choragus of genius, now good, now
   evil, now stupid; the good defile into the ranks which have been
   assigned to them, in view of the accomplishment of a mysterious end.
   History is not history if in reading it one is not by turns charmed and
   disgusted, grieved and consoled.

   The first task of the historian is to make a careful sketch of the
   manner in which the events he recounts took place. Now, the history of
   religious beginnings transports us into a world of women and children,
   of brains ardent or foolish. These facts, placed before minds of a
   positive order, are absurd and unintelligible, and this is why
   countries such as England, of ponderous intellects, find it impossible
   to comprehend anything about it. That which is a drawback to the
   arguments, formerly so celebrated, of Sherlock or of Gilbert West upon
   the resurrection, of Lyttelton upon the conversion of Saint Paul, is
   not the reasoning; that is a triumph of solidity; it is the just
   appreciation of the diversity of means. Every tentative religion with
   which we are acquainted exhibits unmistakably an enormous mixture of
   the sublime and the ridiculous. Read these narratives of primitive
   Saint Simonism, written with admirable candour by the surviving adepts.
   By the side of repulsive rôles, insipid declamations, what charm! what
   sincerity, when the man or the woman of the people enters upon the
   scene, hearing the artless confession of a soul which is open to the
   first gentle ray which has struck it! There is more than one example of
   beautiful durable things which have been founded upon singular
   puerilities. It were useless to seek for any proportion between the
   conflagration and the spark which lighted it. The devotion of Salette
   is one of the grandest religious events of our age. These basilicas, so
   respectable, of Chartres and of Laon, were reared upon illusions of the
   same sort. The Fête-Dieu originated in the visions of a female
   religionist of Liège who believed that in her prayers she always saw
   the full moon through a small hole. We could instance movements,
   absolutely sincere, which have been brought about by impostors. The
   discovery of the holy lance at Athens, in which the fraud was so
   patent, decided the fortune of the Crusades. Mormonism, the beginnings
   of which are so shameful, has inspired courage and devotion. The
   religion of the Druzes rests upon a tissue of absurdities which stagger
   the imagination, but it has its devotees. Islamism, which is the second
   great event in the history of the world, would not have existed if the
   son of Amina had not been an epileptic. The gentle and immaculate
   Francis d'Assisi would not have succeeded without Brother Elia.
   Humanity is so feeble of mind that the purest thing has need of the
   co-operation of some impure agent.

   Let us guard against applying our conscientious distinctions, our
   reasonings of cool and clear heads, to the appreciation of these
   extraordinary events, which are at once so much beyond and beneath us.
   There are those who would make Jesus a sage, a philosopher, a patriot,
   a good man, a moralist, or a saint. He was neither or any of these. He
   was a charmer. Let us not make the past our idol. Let us not believe
   that Asia is Europe. With us, for example, the fool is a creature
   outside the rules of society; we torture him so as to make him re-enter
   it; the horrible treatment of fools by ancient houses was the result of
   scholastic and Cartesian logic. In the East, the fool is a privileged
   being; he enters the highest councils without any one daring to stop
   him; people listen to him, he is consulted. He is a being believed to
   be in close proximity to God, inasmuch as, his individual reason being
   extinguished, he is believed to be a partaker in the divine reason. The
   wit which, through delicate raillery, rises above all defects of
   reason, exists only in Asia. A person educated in Islamism told me
   that, repairs having become necessary at the tomb of Mahomet, people at
   Medina for several years made an appeal to the masons, and announced
   that he who should descend into that dreadful place should have his
   head cut off on reascending. "It was necessary," said my interlocutor
   to me, "to picture those places to oneself in a certain manner, and it
   was not for any person to say that they were otherwise."

   Troubled consciences cannot have the clearness of good sense. Now, it
   is only troubled consciences which can lay powerful foundations. I have
   tried to draw a picture in which the colours should be disposed as they
   are in nature, that is to say, at once grand and puerile, in which one
   sees the divine instinct threading its way with safety through a
   thousand peculiarities. If the picture had been without shade, this
   would have been the proof that it was false. The condition of the
   written proofs does not permit of us telling in what instances the
   illusion was consistent with itself. All that we can say is, that
   sometimes it has happened thus. One cannot lead for years the life of a
   thaumaturgist without being often cornered--without having one's hand
   forced by the public. The man who has a legend attaching to his life is
   led tyrannically by his legend. One begins by artlessness, credulity,
   absolute innocence; one ends in all sorts of embarrassments, and, in
   order to sustain the divine power which is at fault, one gets out of
   these embarrassments through the most desperate expedients. When one is
   put to the wall must one leave the work of God to perish, because God
   is slow of coming to the relief? Did not Joan of Arc more than once
   make her voice heard in response to the necessities of the moment? If
   the account of the secret revelation which she made to King Charles
   VII. has any reality, a supposition which it is difficult to deny, it
   must have been that that innocent girl had represented that she had
   received through supernatural intuition that which she had heard in
   confidence. An exposé of religious history which does not some day
   disclose indirectly suppositions of this sort is for the same reason
   argued to be incomplete.

   Every true, or probable, or possible circumstance most then have its
   proper place in my narration, together with its shade of probability.
   In such a history it will be necessary to speak not only of that which
   has taken place, but also of that which had a likelihood of taking
   place. The impartiality with which I have treated my subject has
   interdicted me from not accepting a conjecture, even one that shocks;
   for undoubtedly there were many shocking ones in the fashion of the
   things which are past and gone. I have applied from beginning to end
   the same process in an inflexible manner. I have given the good
   impressions which the texts have suggested to me; I could not,
   therefore, be silent as to the bad. I intend that my book shall retain
   its value even in the day when people shall have reached the point of
   regarding a certain amount of fraud as an element inseparable from
   religious history. It will be necessary to make my hero beautiful and
   charming (for undoubtedly he was so), and that, too, in spite of
   actions which, in our days, might be characterised in an unfavourable
   manner. People have praised me for having tried to construct a
   narrative lovely, human, and possible. Would my work have received
   these eulogiums if it had represented the origin of Christianity as
   absolutely immaculate? That would have been to admit the greatest of
   miracles. The result thence would have been a picture lifeless to the
   last degree. I do not say that this is for want of faults I may have
   made in the composition. Nevertheless, I must leave each text to
   produce its melodious or discordant note. If Goethe had been alive he
   would, with this reserve, have commended me. That great man would not
   have forgiven me for producing a portrait wholly celestial: he would
   have desired to find repellent details; for, assuredly, in actual life
   things happen which would wound us, if only it were given to us to see
   them.

   The same difficulty presents itself, moreover, in the history of the
   apostles. This history is admirable in its way. But what can be more
   shocking than the glossolaly, which is attested by the unexceptionable
   texts of St. Paul? Liberal theologians admit that the disappearance of
   the body of Jesus was one of the grounds for the belief in the
   resurrection. What does that signify, unless the Christian conscience
   at that moment was two-sided, that a moiety of that conscience gave
   birth to the illusion of the other moiety? If the disciples themselves
   had taken away the body and spread themselves over the city crying, "He
   is risen!" the imposture would have been discovered. But there can be
   no doubt that it was not they themselves who did the two things. For
   belief in a miracle to be accepted it is indeed necessary that someone
   be responsible for the first rumour which is spread abroad; but,
   ordinarily, this is not the principal author. The rôle of the latter is
   limited to not exclaiming against the reputation which people have
   given him. Moreover, even if he did exclaim, it would be useless;
   popular opinion would prove stronger than he. In the miracle of
   Salette, people possessed a clear idea of the artifice; but the
   conviction that it would do good to religion carried all before it. The
   fraud was divided between several unconscionable persons, or rather it
   had ceased to be a fraud and became a misapprehension. Nobody, in that
   case, deceives deliberately; everybody deceives innocently. Formerly it
   was taken for granted that every legend implied deceivers and deceived;
   in our opinion, all the collaborators of a legend are at once deceived
   and deceivers. A miracle, in other words, presupposes three conditions:
   first, general credulity; second, a little complaisance on the part of
   some; third, tacit acquiescence in the principal author. Through a
   reaction against the brutal explanations of the eighteenth century, we
   did not fall into the trap of hypotheses which implied effects without
   causes. Legend does not wholly create itself: people assist in giving
   it birth. These points d'appui in a legend are often of a rare
   elasticity. It is the popular imagination which makes the ball of snow;
   there, nevertheless, must have been an original nucleus. The two
   persons who composed the two genealogies of Jesus knew quite well that
   the lists were not of any great authenticity. The apocryphal books, the
   alleged apocalypses of Daniel, Enoch, and Esdras, proceeded from
   persons of strong convictions; but the authors of these works knew well
   they were neither Daniel, Enoch, nor Esdras. The priest of Asia who
   composed the romance of Thekla declared that he had done it out of love
   for Paul. It is incumbent that we should say a great deal about the
   author of the fourth Gospel, who was assuredly a personage of the first
   order. If you chase the illusion of religious history out of one door,
   it will re-enter by another. In fine, it would be difficult to cite a
   great event of the past, whatever it might be, in an entirely
   defensible manner. Shall we cease to be Frenchmen because France has
   been founded by centuries of perfidy? Shall we refuse to profit by the
   benefits of the Revolution because the Revolution committed crimes
   without number? If the house of Capet had succeeded in creating for us
   a good constitutional assize, similar to that of England, would we have
   wrangled over the cure of the king's evil?

   Science alone is pure; for science possesses nothing practical; it does
   not touch men; the Propaganda takes no notice of it; its duty is to
   prove, not to persuade or to convert. He who has discovered a theorem
   publishes its demonstration for those who are capable of comprehending
   it. He does not mount a chariot; he does not gesticulate; he does not
   have recourse to oratorical artifices in order to induce people to
   adopt it who do not perceive its truth. Enthusiasm, certainly, has its
   good faith, but it is an ingenuous good faith; it is not the deep
   reflective good faith of the savant. Only the ignorant yield to bad
   reasonings. If Laplace had been able to gain the multitude over to his
   system of the world, he would not have limited himself to mathematical
   demonstrations. M. Littré, in writing the life of a man whom he
   regarded as his master, pressed sincerity to the point of leaving
   nothing unsaid that would render that man more amiable. That is without
   example in religious history. Science alone seeks after pure truth. She
   alone offers good reasons for truth, and brings a severe criticism into
   the employment of the methods of conviction. This is no doubt the
   reason why, up till now, she has had no influence on the people. It may
   be that in the future, when people are better instructed, even as we
   have been led to hope, they will yield only to good and carefully
   deduced proofs. But it would not be equitable to judge the great men of
   the past according to these principles. There are natures who resign
   themselves to impotence, who accept humanity, with all its weaknesses,
   such as it is. Many great things have not been accomplished without
   lies and without violence. If to-morrow the incarnate ideal were to
   come and offer itself to men in order to govern them, it would find
   itself confronted by the foolish, who wish to be deceived; by the
   wicked, who wish to be subdued. The sole irreproachable person is the
   contemplative man, who only aims at finding the truth, without either
   caring about making it a triumph or of applying it.

   Morality is not history. To paint and to record is not to approve. The
   naturalist who describes the transformations of the chrysalis neither
   blames nor praises it. He does not tax it with ingratitude because it
   abandons its shroud; he does not describe it as bold because it has
   found its wings: he does not accuse it of folly because it aspires to
   plunge into space. One may be the passionate friend of the true and the
   beautiful, and show oneself indulgent at the same time to the simple
   ignorance of the people. Our happiness has cost our fathers torrents of
   tears and deluges of blood. In order that pious souls may taste at the
   foot of the altar the inward consolation which gives them life, it has
   taken centuries of severe constraint, the mysteries of a sacerdotal
   polity, a rod of iron, funereal piles. The success which one owes to a
   wholly great institution does not demand the sacrifice of the sincerity
   of history. Formerly, to be a good Frenchman, it was necessary to
   believe in the dove of Clovis, in the national antiquities of the
   Treasure of Saint Denis, in the virtues of the oriflamme, in the
   supernatural vision of Joan of Arc; it was necessary to believe that
   France was the first of nations, that French royalty was superior to
   all other royalties, that God had for that crown a predilection
   altogether peculiar and was constantly engaged in protecting it. To-day
   we know that God protects equally all kingdoms, all empires, all
   republics; we own that many of the kings of France have been
   contemptible men; we recognise that the French character has its
   faults; we greatly admire a multitude of things which come from abroad.
   Are we on that account worse Frenchmen? We can say, on the contrary,
   that we are better patriots, since, in place of being blind to our
   faults, we seek to correct them; that, in place of depreciating the
   foreigner, we seek to imitate that which he has in him of good. In like
   manner we are Christians. He who speaks with irreverence of the royalty
   of the Middle Ages, of Louis XIV., of the Revolution, of the Empire,
   commits an act of bad taste. He who does not speak kindly of
   Christianity and of the Church of which he forms a part renders himself
   guilty of ingratitude. But filial recognition ought not to be carried
   to the length of closing our eyes to the truth. One is not wanting in
   respect to the government in making the remark that it is not able to
   satisfy the conflicting needs that are in man, nor to a religion in
   saying that she is not free from the formidable objections which
   science has raised against all supernatural belief. Responding to
   certain social exigencies and not to some others, governments fall by
   reason of the same causes which have founded them and which have been
   their strength. Responding to the aspirations of the heart at the
   expense of the protestations of reason, religions crumble away in turn,
   because no force here below can succeed in stifling reason.

   That day will be unfortunate for reason when she would stifle religion.
   Our planet, believe me, labours at some profound work. Do not pronounce
   rashly upon the inutility of such and such of its parts; do not say
   that it is necessary to suppress this wheel-work, which to appearance
   makes but the contrary play of the others. Nature, which has endowed
   the animal with an infallible instinct, has not put into humanity
   anything deceptive. From his organs you may boldly conclude his
   destiny. Est Deus in nobis. Religions are false when they attempt to
   prove the infinite, to determine it, to incarnate it, if I may so
   speak, but they are true when they affirm it. The greatest errors that
   they import into that affirmation are nothing compared to the price of
   the truth which they proclaim. The greatest simpleton, provided he
   practises the worship of the heart, is more enlightened as to the
   reality of things than the materialist who thinks he explains
   everything by accident, and leaves it there.
     __________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION.

  WHICH TREATS PRINCIPALLY OF THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS OF THIS HISTORY.

   A HISTORY of the "Origins of Christianity" ought to embrace the whole
   obscure and, so to speak, subterranean period which extends from the
   first beginnings of this religion to the time when its existence became
   a public fact, notorious and apparent to everybody. Such a history
   ought to consist of four parts. The first, which is now presented to
   the public, treats of the particular fact which was the starting point
   of the new religion, and is wholly concerned with the sublime
   personality of the Founder. The second should treat of the Apostles and
   their immediate disciples, or rather, of the revolutions which took
   place in religious thought in the first two generations of
   Christianity. This should end about the year 100, when the last friends
   of Jesus were just dead, and when the whole of the books of the New
   Testament had almost assumed the form in which they are now read. The
   third book should set forth the state of Christianity under the
   Antonines. We should then observe its slow development and its waging
   of an almost permanent war against the empire, which latter, having at
   that moment attained to the highest degree of administrative perfection
   and being governed by philosophers, combated in the nascent sect a
   secret and theocratic society, which the latter obstinately disowned,
   but which was a continual source of weakness. This book would embrace
   the whole of the second century. The fourth and last part should show
   the decided progress which Christianity had made from the time of
   Syrian emperors. In it we should see the learned constitution of the
   Antonines crumble away, the decadence of ancient civilisation set in
   irrevocably and Christianity profit by its ruin, Syria conquer the
   entire West, and Jesus, in combination with the gods and the deified
   sages of Asia, take possession of a society which philosophy and a
   purely civil government were unable longer to cope with. It was then
   that the religious ideas of the races established upon the coasts of
   the Mediterranean underwent a great change; that the Eastern religions
   everywhere took the lead; that Christianity, having become a large
   Church, totally forgot its millennium dreams, broke its last
   connections with Judaism, and passed entirely into the Greek and Roman
   world. The strifes and the literary labours of the third century, which
   had already taken place openly, have to be described only in their
   general features. Again, the persecutions of the commencement of the
   fourth century, the last effort of the empire to return to its old
   principles, which denied to religious associations a place in the
   State, should be recounted more briefly. Finally, the change of policy
   which, under Constantine, inverted the position, and made of the most
   free and most spontaneous religious movement an official worship
   subject to State control, and in its turn persecutor, would need only
   to be foreshadowed.

   I do not know whether I shall have life and strength to execute no vast
   a plan. I should be satisfied if, after writing the life of Jesus, it
   is given to me to relate, as I understand it, the history of the
   Apostles; the condition of the Christian conscience during the weeks
   which immediately succeeded the death of Jesus; the formation of the
   cycle of legends touching the resurrection; the first acts of the
   Church of Jerusalem, the life of St. Paul, the crisis at the time of
   Nero, the appearance of the Apocalypse, the ruin of Jerusalem, the
   foundation of the Hebrew-Christian sects of Batanea, the compilation of
   the Gospels, and the rise of the great schools of Asia Minor.
   Everything pales by the side of that marvellous first century. By a
   peculiarity rare in history, we can judge better of what passed in the
   Christian world from the year 50 to 75 than from the year 80 to 150.

   The plan upon which this history proceeds prevents the introduction
   into the text of long critical dissertations upon controversial points.
   A continuous succession of notes places likewise the reader in a
   position to verify the sources of all the propositions in the text.
   These notes are strictly limited to quotations at first hand--I mean,
   to the indication of the original passages upon which each assertion or
   hypothesis rests. I am aware that, to persons who have had little
   experience in these studies, many other explanations might be
   necessary; but it is not my habit to do over again what has once been
   done and done well. To cite only books written in French, the following
   can be recommended: [1]

   The above works are for the most part excellent, and in them will be
   found explained a multitude of details upon which I have had to be very
   succinct. In particular, the criticism of the details of evangelical
   texts has been done by M. Strauss in a manner which leaves little to be
   desired. Although M. Strauss may at first have been deceived in his
   theory in regard to the authorship of the Gospels, and although his
   book, in my opinion, has the fault of occupying too much theological
   and too little historical ground, it is indispensable, so as to
   understand the motives which have guided me in a multitude of details,
   to follow the argument (always judicious, though sometimes a little
   subtle) of the book which has been so well translated by my learned
   co-worker M. Littré.

   I am not aware that, in respect of ancient testimony, I have overlooked
   any source of information. Not to mention a multitude of scattered data
   respecting Jesus and the times in which he lived, we still have five
   great collections of writings. These are: first, the Gospels and the
   New Testament writings in general; second, the compositions called the
   "Apocrypha of the Old Testament;" third, the works of Philo; fourth,
   those of Josephus; fifth, the Talmud. The writings of Philo have the
   inestimable advantage of showing us the thoughts which, in the time of
   Jesus, stirred souls occupied with great religious questions. Philo
   lived, it is true, in quite a different sphere of Judaism from Jesus;
   yet, like him, he was quite free from the pharisaic spirit which
   reigned at Jerusalem; Philo is in truth the elder brother of Jesus. He
   was sixty-two years of age when the prophet of Nazareth had reached the
   highest point of his activity, and he survived him at least ten years.
   What a pity it is that the accidents of life did not direct his steps
   into Galilee! What would he not have taught us!

   Josephus, who wrote chiefly for the Pagans, did not exhibit the some
   sincerity. His meagre accounts of Jesus, John the Baptist, and of Judas
   the Gaulonite are colourless and lifeless. We feel that he sought to
   represent these movements, so profoundly Jewish in character and
   spirit, in a form which would be intelligible to the Greeks and Romans.
   Taken as a whole I believe the passage in regard to Jesus to be
   authentic. It is perfectly in the style of Josephus, and, if that
   historian mentioned Jesus at all, it is indeed in this manner that he
   would have spoken of him. We feel, however, that the hand of a
   Christian has retouched the fragment, and has added to it passages
   without which it would have been well nigh blasphemous, as well as
   abridged and modified some expressions. It is necessary to remember
   that Josephus owed his literary fortune to the Christians, who adopted
   his writings as essential documents of their sacred history. It is
   probable that in the second century they circulated an edition of them,
   corrected according to Christian ideas. At all events that which
   constitutes the immense interest of the books of Josephus in respect of
   our present subject is the vivid picture he gives of the times. Thanks
   to this Jewish historian, Herod, Herodias, Antipas, Philip, Annas,
   Kaïaphas, and Pilate are personages whom, so to speak, we can touch,
   and whom we can actually see living before us.

   The Apocrypha of the Old Testament, especially the Jewish part of the
   Sibylline verses, the book of Enoch, the Assumption of Moses, the
   fourth book of Esdras, the Apocalypse of Baruch, together with the book
   of Daniel, which is also itself a real Apocrypha, possess a primary
   importance in the history of the development of the Messianic theories,
   and in the understanding of the conceptions of Jesus in regard to the
   kingdom of God. The book of Enoch, in particular, and the Assumption of
   Moses, were much read in the circle of Jesus. Some expressions imputed
   to Jesus by the synoptics are presented in the epistle attributed to
   Saint Barnabas as belonging to Enoch: Os Enoch legei. It is very
   difficult to determine the date of the different sections of which the
   book attributed to that patriarch in composed. None of them are
   certainly anterior to the year 150 B.C.: some of them may even have
   been written by a Christian pen. The section containing the discourses
   entitled "Similitudes," and extending from chapter xxvii. to chapter
   lxxi., is suspected of being a Christian work. But this has not been
   proved. Perhaps this part is only a proof of alterations. Other
   additions or Christian revisions are recognisable here and there.

   The collection of the Sibylline verses needs to be regarded in the same
   light; but the latter is more easily established. The oldest part in
   the poem contained in Book III., v. 97-817; it appeared about the year
   140 B.C. Respecting the date of the fourth book of Esdras everybody now
   is nearly agreed in assigning this Apocalypse to the year 97 A.D. It
   has been altered by the Christians. The Apocalypse of Baruch has a
   great resemblance to that of Esdras; we find there, as in the book of
   Enoch, several utterances imputed to Jesus. As to the book of Daniel,
   the character of the two languages in which it is written, the use of
   Greek words, the clear, precise, dated announcements of events which go
   back as far as the times of Antiochus Epiphanes; the false descriptions
   which are there drawn of ancient Babylon; the general tone of the book,
   which has nothing suggestive of the writings of the captivity, but, on
   the contrary, corresponds, by numerous analogies, to the beliefs, the
   manners, the turn of imagination of the epoch of Seleucidæ; the
   Apocalyptic form of the visions; the position of the book in the Hebrew
   canon which is outside the series of the prophets; the omission of
   Daniel in the panegyrics of chapter xlix. of Ecclesiasticus, in which
   his position is all but indicated; and a thousand other proofs, which
   have been deduced a hundred times, do not permit of a doubt that this
   book was but the product of the general exaltation produced among the
   Jews by the persecution of Antiochus. It is not in the old prophetic
   literature that it most be classed; its place is at the head of
   Apocalyptic literature, the first model of a kind of composition, after
   which were to come the various Sibylline poems, the book of Enoch, the
   Assumption of Moses, the Apocalypse of John, the Ascension of Isaiah,
   the fourth book of Esdras.

   Hitherto, in the history of the origins of Christianity, the Talmud has
   been too much neglected. I think with M. Geiger that the true notion of
   the circumstances which produced Jesus must be sought in this peculiar
   compilation, in which so much knowledge is mixed with the most
   insignificant scholasticism. The Christian theology and the Jewish
   theology having followed uniformly two parallel paths, the history of
   the one cannot be understood without the history of the other.
   Innumerable material details in the Gospels find, moreover, their
   commentary in the Talmud. The vast Latin collections of Lightfoot,
   Schoettgen, Buxtorf, and Otho contained already on this point a mass of
   information. I have taken upon myself to verify in the original all the
   quotations which I have made use of, without an exception. The
   assistance which has been given in this part of my task by a learned
   Israelite, M. Newbauer, well-versed in Talmudic literature, has enabled
   me to go further and to elucidate certain parts of my subject by some
   new researches. The distinction here between epochs is very important,
   the compilation of the Talmud extending from the year 200 to the year
   500, or thereabout. In the actual condition of these studies, we have
   brought to it as much discernment as it was possible in the actual
   state of these studies. Dates no recent will excite fears among persons
   accustomed to attach value to a document only for the epoch in which it
   was written. But such scruples would here be out of place. Jewish
   teaching from the Asmonean epoch up to the end of the second century
   was chiefly oral. These sorts of intellectual states must not be judged
   by the customs of an age in which much writing takes place. The Vedas,
   the Homeric poems, the ancient Arabic poems, were for centuries
   preserved only in memory, and yet these compositions present a very
   distinct and delicate form. In the Talmud, on the other hand, the form
   possesses no value. Let us add that before the Mischnah of Juda the
   saint, which obliterated the recollection of all others, there had been
   several essays at compilation, the commencement of which goes further
   back perhaps than is commonly supposed. The style of the Talmud is that
   of careless notes; the editors probably did no more than range under
   certain titles the enormous medley of writings which, for generations,
   had accumulated in the different schools.

   It remains for us to speak of the documents which, pretending to be
   biographies of the Founder of Christianity, must naturally take the
   place of honour in a life of Jesus. A complete treatise upon the
   compilation of the Gospels would be a work of itself. Thanks to the
   excellent work which, for the last thirty years, has been devoted to
   this question, a problem which was formerly held to be insoluble has
   been resolved, and, though there is room still left for much
   uncertainty, it is quite sufficient for the requirements of history. We
   shall have occasion later on to revert to this in our second book,
   seeing that the composition of the Gospels was one of the most
   important facts in the future of Christianity in the second half of the
   first century. We shall only touch in this place a single aspect of the
   subject, but one which is indispensable to the solidarity of our
   narrative. Putting to one side all that belongs to a picture of the
   apostolic times, we will inquire only to what extent the data furnished
   by the Gospels can be employed in a history arranged according to
   rational principles.

   That the Gospels are in part legendary is quite evident, inasmuch as
   they are full of miracles and of the supernatural; but there are
   legends and legends. Nobody disputes the principal traits in the life
   of Francis d'Assisi, although at every step the supernatural is
   encountered in it. Contrariwise, no one gives credence to the "Life of
   Apollonius of Tyana," for the reason that it was written long after the
   hero, and avowedly as a pure romance. When, by whom, and under what
   conditions were the Gospels compiled? This is the chief question upon
   which the opinion, it is necessary to form of their credibility,
   depends.

   We know that each of the four Gospels bears at its head the name of a
   personage known either in Apostolic history or in evangelical history
   itself. If these titles are correct it is clear that the Gospels,
   without ceasing to be in part legendary, possess a high value, since
   they take us back to the half century which followed the death of
   Jesus, and even in two cases to eyewitnesses of his acts.

   As for Luke, doubt is hardly possible. The Gospel of Luke is a studied
   composition, founded upon anterior documents. It is the work of a man
   who selects, adapts, and combines. The author of this Gospel is
   undoubtedly the same as that of the Acts of the Apostles. Now, the
   author of the Acts appears to be a companion of Paul, an appellation
   which exactly fits Luke. I am aware that more than one objection can be
   raised against this opinion; but one thing is beyond question, to wit,
   the author of the third Gospel and of the Acts is a man belonging to
   the second Apostolic generation, and that is sufficient for our
   purpose. The date of that Gospel may, however, be determined with quite
   enough precision by considerations drawn from the book itself. The 21st
   chapter of Luke, which is an inseparable part of the work, was
   certainly written subsequently to the siege of Jerusalem, but not very
   long afterwards. We are here, then, upon solid ground; for the work in
   question has been written by the same person, and its unity is perfect.

   The Gospels of Matthew and Mark do not nearly possess the same stamp of
   individuality. They are impersonal compositions, in which the author
   wholly disappears. A proper name inscribed at the head of such works
   does not count for much.

   We cannot, moreover, reason here as in the case of Luke. The date which
   belongs to a particular chapter (to Matthew xiv. and Mark xiii. for
   example) cannot he rigorously applied to the works as a whole, for the
   latter are made up of fragments of epochs and of productions which are
   quite distinct. In general, the third Gospel appears to be posterior to
   the two first, and exhibits the character of a much more advanced
   composition. We cannot, nevertheless, conclude hence that the two
   Gospels of Mark and Matthew were in the some condition as we have them
   when Luke wrote his. These two works, entitled Mark and Matthew, in
   fact, remained for a long time in a loose state, if I may so speak, and
   were susceptible of additions. On this point we have an excellent
   witness, who lived in the first half of the second century. This was
   Papias, bishop of Hierapolis, a grave man, a traditionist, who was busy
   all his life in collecting what was known by any one of Jesus. After
   declaring that in such cases he preferred oral tradition to books,
   Papias mentions two accounts of the acts and words of Christ. First a
   writing of Mark, the interpreter of the Apostle Peter, a short
   incomplete composition, without chronological order, including
   narratives and discourses (lechtheuta e prachtheuta), composed from the
   information and recollections of the Apostle Peter; second, a
   collection of sayings (logia) written in Hebrew by Matthew, which
   everybody has translated as he listed. Certain it is that these two
   descriptions accord pretty well with the general tenor of the two books
   now called the Gospel according to Matthew and the Gospel according to
   Mark--the former characterised by its long discourses; the second,
   above all, by anecdote, and being much more exact than the other on
   minor details--brief even to dryness, the discourses few in number and
   indifferently composed. Nevertheless, that these two works as read by
   us are absolutely identical with those which were read by Papias is not
   sustainable, because, first, the writings of Matthew which were perused
   by Papias were composed solely of discourses in Hebrew, different
   translations of which were in circulation, and, secondly, because the
   writings of Mark and those of Matthew were to him perfectly distinct,
   written without any collusion, and it would seem m different languages.
   Now in the actual state of the texts, the Gospel according to Matthew
   and the Gospel according to Mark present parallelisms so long, and so
   perfectly identical, that it must be supposed that the final compiler
   of the first had the second before him, or vice versâ, or that both
   copied from the same source. That which appears the most probable is
   that we have not the original compilation of either Matthew or Mark,
   that the two first Gospels as we have them are adaptations in which
   each sought to fill up the lacunes of one text from the other. In fact,
   each was desirous of possessing a complete copy. He whose copy
   contained discourses only filled it out with narratives, and
   contrariwise. It is in this way that "The Gospel according to Matthew"
   is found to have appropriated all the anecdotes of Mark, and that "The
   Gospel according to Mark" contains to-day many of the details which
   have come from the Logia of Matthew. Each, moreover, imbibed largely of
   the oral tradition which floated around him. This tradition is so far
   from having been exhausted by the Gospels that the Acts of the
   Apostles, and of the most ancient Fathers, cite many sayings of Jesus
   which appear authentic and are not found in the Gospels that we
   possess.

   It matters little for our present purpose that we should press this
   analysis further, or attempt, on the one hand, to reconstruct in a kind
   of way the original Logia of Matthew, or, on the other, to restore the
   primitive narrative to what it was when it left the pen of Mark. The
   Logia are doubtless presented to us in the great discourses of Jesus,
   which make up a considerable portion of the first Gospel. These
   discourses, in fact, form, when detached from the rest, a complete
   enough narrative. As for the original narratives of Mark, the text of
   them seems to make its appearance now in the first, now in the second
   Gospel, but most often in the second. In other words, the plan of the
   life of Jesus in the synoptics is founded upon two original documents:
   first, the discourses of Jesus collected by the Apostle Matthew;
   second, the collection of anecdotes and of personal information which
   Mark committed to writing from the recollections of Peter. It may be
   said that we still possess these two documents, mixed up with the facts
   of another production, in the two first Gospels, which bear, not
   without reason, the titles of "The Gospel according to Matthew" and
   "The Gospel according to Mark" respectively.

   In any case, that which is indubitable is that very early the
   discourses of Jesus were reduced to writing in the Aramean tongue;
   also, that very early his remarkable actions were taken down. These
   were not texts to be settled and fixed dogmatically. Besides the
   Gospels which have come down to us, there might be others which
   professed equally to set forth the tradition of eyewitnesses. We attach
   little importance to these writings, while their preservers, such as
   Papius, who lived in the first half of the second century, preferred
   always to them oral tradition. Seeing that the world was believed to be
   near an end, people had not much inclination to write books for the
   future; they were solely concerned about preserving in their heart the
   living image of him whom they hoped to see soon again in the clouds.
   Hence, the small authority which, for nearly a hundred years,
   evangelical texts enjoyed. People made no scruple about inserting
   paragraphs in them, of combining various narratives, and in perfecting
   the one by the other. The poor man who had only one book was anxious
   that it should contain all that was dear to his heart. These little
   books were lent by one to another; each transcribed into the margin of
   his copy the phrases and parables he found in others which affected
   him. The most beautiful thing in the world has thus proceeded from an
   obscure and wholly popular elaboration. No edition possessed an
   absolute value. The two editions attributed to Clement Romanus quote
   the sayings of Jesus with two notable variances. Justin, who often
   appeals to that which he calls "The Memoirs of the Apostles," had
   before him a set of evangelical documents a little different from that
   which we have; at all events, he does not take the trouble to give them
   textually. The evangelical quotations in the pseudo-Clementine homilies
   of Ebionite origin present the some character. The spirit was
   everything; the letter nothing. It was when tradition, in the latter
   half of the second century, lost its power, that the text bearing the
   names of apostles or of apostolic men assumed a decisive authority and
   obtained the force of law. Even then free compositions were not
   absolutely interdicted; following the example of Luke people continued
   to write special Gospels by changing the ensemble of older texts.

   Who does not recognise the value of documents constructed thus out of
   the tender recollections and simple narratives of the first two
   Christian generations, still full of the strong impressions produced by
   the illustrious Founder, and which seems to have survived him for a
   long time? Let us add that those Gospels seemed to proceed from those
   branches of the Christian family which were most closely related to
   Jesus. The final labour of compilation of the text which bears the name
   of Matthew appears to have been done in one of the countries situated
   to the north-east of Palestine, such as Gaulonitis, Auranitis, and
   Batanea, where many Christians took refuge at the time of the Roman
   war, where were still to be found at the end of the second century
   relatives of Jesus, and where the first Galilean tendency was longer
   felt than elsewhere.

   So far we have only spoken of the three Gospels called the synoptic. It
   now remains to speak of the fourth, the one which bears the name of
   John. Here the question is much more difficult. Polycarp, the most
   intimate disciple of John, who often quotes the synoptics in his
   epistle to the Philippians, makes no allusion to the fourth Gospel.
   Papias, who was equally attached to the school of John, and who, if he
   had not been his disciple, as Irenæus believes he was, had associated a
   great deal with his immediate disciples--Papias, who had eagerly
   collected all the oral accounts relative to Jesus, does not say a word
   of a "Life of Jesus" written by the Apostle John. If such a mention
   could have been found in his work, Eusebius, who notices everything in
   it which bears on the literary history of the apostolic age, would
   undoubtedly have mentioned it. Justin, perhaps, knew the fourth Gospel;
   but he certainly did not regard it as the work of the Apostle John,
   since he expressly designates that apostle as the author of the
   Apocalypse, and takes not the least account of the fourth Gospel in the
   numerous facts which he extracts from the "Memoirs of the Apostles."
   More than this, upon all the points where the synoptics and the fourth
   Gospel differ he adopts opinions at complete variance with the latter.
   This is all the more surprising, seeing that the dogmatic tendencies of
   the fourth Gospel are marvellously adapted to Justin.

   The same remarks apply to the pseudo-Clementine homilies. The words of
   Jesus quoted by that book are of the synoptic type. In two or three
   places there are, it would seem, facts borrowed from the fourth Gospel.
   But the author of the Homilies certainly does not accord to that Gospel
   an apostolic authority, since on many points be puts himself in direct
   contradiction with him. It appears that Marcion (about 140) could not
   have known the said Gospel, or attributed to it no importance as an
   inspired book. This Gospel accorded so well with his ideas that, if he
   had known it, he would have adopted it eagerly, and would not have been
   obliged, so as to have an ideal Gospel, to make a corrected edition of
   the Gospel of Luke. Finally, the apocryphal Gospels which may be
   referred to the second century, like the Protevangel of James, the
   Gospel of Thomas the Israelite, embellished the synoptic canvas, but
   they took no account of the Gospel of John.

   The intrinsic difficulties which result from the reading of the fourth
   Gospel itself are not less forcible. How is it that, by the side of
   information so precise, and in places felt to be that of eyewitnesses,
   we find discourses totally different from those of Matthew? How is it
   that the Gospel in question does not contain a parable or an exorcism?
   How is it to be explained that side by side with a general plan of the
   life of Jesus, which plan in some respects seems more satisfactory and
   more exact than that of the synoptics, appear those singular passages
   in which one perceives a dogmatic interest peculiar to the author,
   ideas most foreign to Jesus, and sometimes indications which put us on
   our guard to the good faith of the narrator? How is it, finally, that
   by the side of views the most pure, the most just, the most truly
   evangelical, we find those blemishes which we would rather look upon as
   the interpolation of an ardent sectary? Is this indeed John, son of
   Zebedee, the brother of James (who is not mentioned once in the fourth
   Gospel), who has written in Greek those abstract lessons on
   metaphysics, to which the synoptics offer no analogy? Is this the
   essentially Judaising author of the Apocalypse, who, in so few years,
   should have been stripped to this extent of his style and of his ideas?
   Is it an "Apostle of Circumcision," who is likely to have composed a
   narrative more hostile to Judaism than the whole of St. Paul's, a
   narrative in which the word "Jew" is almost equivalent to That of
   "enemy of Jesus"? Is it indeed he whose example was invoked by the
   partisans of the celebration of the Jewish passover in favour of their
   opinion, who could speak with a sort of disdain of the "Feasts of the
   Jews" and of the "Passover of the Jews"? All of this is important. For
   my part, I reject the idea that the fourth Gospel could have been
   written by the pen of a quondam Galilean fisherman. But that, taken all
   in all, this Gospel may have proceeded, about the end of the first
   century or the beginning of the second, from one of the schools of Asia
   Minor which was attached to John, that it presents to us a version of
   the life of the Master worthy of high consideration and often of being
   preferred, is indeed rendered probable, both by external evidence and
   by examining the document under consideration.

   And, in the first place, no one doubts that about the year 170 the
   fourth Gospel did exist. At that date there broke out at Laodicea on
   the Lycus a controversy relative to the Passover, in which our Gospel
   played an important part. Apollinaris, Athenagoras, Polycrates, the
   author of the epistle to the Churches of Vienne and of Lyons, professed
   already in regard to the alleged narrative of John the opinion that it
   would soon become orthodox. Theophilus of Antioch (about 180) said
   positively that the Apostle John was the author of it. Irenæus and the
   Canon of Muratori attest the complete triumph of our Gospel, a triumph
   in respect of which there could no longer be any doubt.

   But, if about the year 170 the fourth Gospel appeared as a writing of
   the Apostle John and invested with full authority, is it not evident
   that at this date it was not of ancient creation? Tatian, the author of
   the epistle to Diogenatus, seems indeed to have made use of it. The
   part played by our Gospel in Gnosticism, and especially in the system
   of Valentinus, in Montanism and in the controversy of the Aloges, is
   not less remarkable, and shows that from the last half of the second
   century this Gospel was included in every controversy, and served as a
   corner stone for the development of the dogma. The school of John is
   the one whose progress is the most apparent during the second century;
   Irenæus proceeded from the school of John, and between him and the
   Apostle there was only Polycarp. Now, Irenæus has not a doubt as to the
   authenticity of the fourth Gospel. Let as add that the first epistle
   attributed to Saint John is, according to all appearances, by the same
   author as the fourth Gospel; now the epistle seems to have been known
   to Polycarp; it was, it is said, cited by Papias; Irenæus recognised it
   as John's.

   But, as some light is now required to be cast upon the reading of the
   work itself, we shall remark, first, that the author therein always
   speaks as an eyewitness. He wishes to pass for the Apostle John, and it
   is clearly seen that he writes in the interest of that apostle. In each
   he betrays the design of fortifying the authority of the son of
   Zebedee, of showing that he was the favourite of Jesus, and the most
   far-seeing of his disciples; that on all the most solemn occasions (at
   the Supper, at Calvary, at the Tomb), he occupied the chief place. The
   relations of John with Peter, which were on the whole fraternal,
   although not excluding a certain rivalry; the hatred, on the other
   hand, of Judas, a hatred probably anterior to the betrayal, seem to
   break through here and there. At times one is constrained to believe
   that John, in his old age, having perused the evangelical narratives
   which were in circulation, on the one hand, remarked various
   inaccuracies; on the other, was chagrined at seeing that in the history
   of Christ he was not accorded an important enough place; that then he
   commenced to recount a multitude of things which were better known to
   him than to the others, with the intention of showing that, in many
   instances where Peter only was mentioned, he had figured with and
   before him. Even during the life of Jesus these petty sentiments of
   jealousy had been betrayed between the sons of Zebedee and the other
   disciples. Since the death of James, his brother, John remained the
   sole inheritor of the intimate remembrances of which the two apostles,
   by common consent, were the depositaries. Those clear remembrances were
   preserved in the circle of John, and as the ideas of the times in the
   matter of literary good faith differed much from ours, a disciple, or
   rather one of those numerous sectaries, already semi-Gnostics, who from
   the end of the first century, in Asia Minor, commenced to modify
   greatly the idea of Christ, might have been tempted to take the pen for
   the apostle and to make on his own account a free revision of his
   Gospel. It would cost him no more to speak in the name of John than it
   cost the pious author of the second Epistle of Peter to write a letter
   in the name of the latter. To identify himself with the beloved Apostle
   of Jesus, he espoused all his sentiments, even his littlenesses. Hence
   this perpetual design of the alleged author to recall that he is the
   last surviving eyewitness, and the pleasure he takes in relating
   circumstances which could only be known to him. Hence, so many petty
   minute details which he would like passed off as the commentaries of an
   annotator: "It was the sixth hour;" "it was night;" "that man was
   called Malchus;" "they had lighted a fire, for it was cold;" "the coat
   was without seam." Hence, finally, the bad arrangement of the
   compilation, the irregularity of the narrative, the disjointedness of
   the first chapters--so many inexplicable features, if we go on the
   supposition that our Gospel is a mere theological thesis without any
   historic value, yet perfectly comprehensible if we regard it as the
   recollections of an old man arranged without the assistance of those
   from whom they proceeded--recollections, sometimes possessing uncommon
   freshness, at others having been subjected to singular modifications.

   An important distinction, in fact, is to he remarked in the Gospel of
   John. This Gospel, on the one hand, presents a sketch of the life of
   Jesus which differs considerably from that of the synoptics. On the
   other, it puts into the mouth of Jesus discourses whose tone, style,
   character and doctrines have nothing in common with the Logia contained
   in the synoptics. In respect of the latter, the difference is such that
   one must make an unqualified choice. If Jesus spoke as Matthew would
   have us believe, he could not have spoken in the manner represented by
   John. Between these two authorities no one has hesitated, or will ever
   hesitate. Removed by a thousand leagues from the simple, disinterested
   and impersonal tone of the synoptics, the Gospel of John shows at every
   step the prepossession of the apologist, the arrière pensée of the
   sectary, the desire to establish a thesis and to overcome his
   adversaries. It was not by pretentious tirades, clumsy, badly written,
   and appealing little to the moral sense, that Jesus founded his divine
   work. Even though Papias had not informed us that Matthew wrote the
   sayings of Jesus in their original tongue, the natural, the ineffable
   truth, the incomparable charm contained in the synoptic Gospels, the
   profoundly Hebraic turn of these discourses, the analogies which they
   present to the sayings of the Jewish doctors of the period, their
   perfect harmony with the Galilean nature--all these characteristics,
   compared with the obscure Gnosticism and the distorted metaphysics
   which fill the discourses of John, speak loudly enough. We do not mean
   to say that there are not to be found in the discourses of John some
   brilliant flashes, some traits which really proceeded from Jesus. But
   the mystical tone of these discourses corresponds in nothing to the
   character of the eloquence of Jesus, such as it is pictured to us in
   the synoptics. A new spirit breathes through them; Gnoticism has
   previously found a footing; the Galilean era of the kingdom of God is
   at an end, the hope of the near advent of Jesus is further off; we
   enter the arid realm of metaphysics, into the darkness of abstract
   dogmatism. The spirit of Jesus is not there, and if the son of Zebedee
   has indeed traced those pages, it is to be supposed that in writing
   them he had forgotten the Lake of Gennesareth and the charming
   conversations he had heard upon its banks.

   One circumstance, moreover, which proves indeed that the discourses
   reported by the fourth Gospel are historical fragments, but that they
   ought to be regarded as compositions, intended to cover, with the
   authority of Jesus, certain doctrines dear to the author, is their
   complete harmony with the intellectual condition of Asia Minor at the
   time they were written. Asia Minor was then the theatre of a strange
   movement of syncretic philosophy; all the germs of Gnosticism existed
   there already. Cerinthus, a contemporary of John, said that æon named
   Christos was united by baptism to the man named Jesus, and had
   separated from him on the cross. Some of the disciples of John would
   appear to have drunk deeply from these strange springs. Can we affirm
   that the Apostle himself had not been subject to the same influences,
   that he did not experience something anolagous to the change which was
   wrought in St. Paul, and of which the epistle to the Colossians is the
   principal witness? No, certainly not. It may be that after the crisis
   of 68 (the date of the Apocalypse), and of the year 70 (the ruin of
   Jerusalem), the old Apostle, with an ardent and plastic soul, disabused
   of the belief of the near appearance of the Son of Man in the clouds,
   inclined towards the ideas that he found around him, many of which
   amalgamated quite well with certain Christian doctrines. In imputing
   these new ideas to Jesus, he only followed a very natural leaning. Our
   recollections are, like everything else, transformable; the ideal of a
   person we have known changes as we change. Regarding Jesus as the
   incarnation of truth, John has succeeded in attributing to him that
   which he had come to accept as the truth.

   It is nevertheless much more probable that John himself had no part in
   them, that the change was made around him rather than by him, and
   doubtless after his death. The long age of the apostle may have
   terminated in such a state of feebleness that he was in a measure at
   the mercy of those around him. A secretary might take advantage of this
   state to speak in his name that which the world called par excellence,
   "the old man," Ho Presbuteros. Certain parts of the fourth Gospel have
   been added subsequently; such is the whole xxi. chapter, in which the
   author seems to have resolved to render homage to the apostle Peter
   after his death, and to answer the objections which might be drawn or
   were already drawn from the death of John himself (v. 21-23). Several
   other places bear the traces of erasures and of corrections. Not being
   accounted as wholly the work of John, the book could well remain fifty
   years in obscurity. Little by little people got accustomed to it, and
   finished by accepting it. Even before it had become canonical many
   simply made use of it as a book of mediocre authority, yet very
   edifying. On the other hand, the contradictions that it offered to the
   synoptic Gospels, which were much more widely circulated, prevented its
   being taken into account when setting forth the contexture of the life
   of Jesus, such as it was imagined to be.

   In this mode some explain away the whimsical contradictions presented
   in the writings of Justin and in the pseudo-Clementine Homilies, in
   which are to be found traces of our Gospel, but which certainly are not
   to be placed upon the same footing as the synoptics. Hence also those
   species of allusions, which are not faithful quotations, but were made
   from it about the year 180. Hence, finally, this singularity, that the
   fourth Gospel appeared to emerge slowly from the Church of Asia in the
   second century, was first adopted by the Gnostics, but only obtained in
   the orthodox Church very limited credence, as can be seen from the
   controversy on the Passover, then it was universally recognised. I am
   sometimes led to believe that it was the fourth Gospel of which Papias
   was thinking when he opposed to the exact information in regard to the
   life of Jesus the long discourses and the singular precepts which
   others have attributed to him. Papias and the old Jadæo-Christian party
   came to esteem such novelties as very reprehensible. This could not
   have been the only instance that a book which was at first heretical
   would have forced the gates of the orthodox Church and become one of
   its rules of faith.

   There is one thing, at least, which I regard as very probable, and that
   is, that the book was written before the year 100; that is to say, at a
   time when the synoptics had not yet a complete canonicity. After this
   date it is impossible any longer to conceive that the author could
   force himself to go beyond the limits of the "Apostolic Memoirs." To
   Justin, and apparently to Papias, the synoptic cadre constitutes the
   true and only plan of the life of Jesus. An impostor who wrote about
   the year 120 to 130 a fantastic gospel contented himself with treating
   in his own way the received version, as had been done in the apocryphal
   Gospels, and did not reverse from top to bottom what was regarded as
   the essential lines of the life of Jesus. This is so true that, from
   the second half of the second century, these contradictions became a
   serious difficulty in the hands of the aloges, and obliged the
   defenders of the fourth Gospel to invent the most embarrassing
   solutions. There is nothing to prove that the author of the fourth
   Gospel had, when writing, any of the synoptic Gospels under his eyes.
   The striking similarities of his narrative to the other three Gospels
   as touching the Passion leads one to suppose that there was then for
   the Passion as well as for the Last Supper an almost fixed account,
   which people knew by heart.

   It is impossible at this distance of time to comprehend all these
   singular problems, and we should undoubtedly encounter many surprises
   if it were given to us to penetrate the secrets of that mysterious
   school of Ephesus, which appeared frequently to take pleasure in
   pursuing obscure paths. But the latter is a capital test. Every person
   who sets himself to write the life of Jesus without having a decided
   opinion upon the relative value of the Gospels, who allows himself to
   be guided solely by the sentiment of the subject, would, in many
   instances, be induced to prefer the narrative of the fourth Gospel to
   that of the synoptics. The last months of the life of Jesus especially
   are explained only by John; several details of the Passion, which are
   unintelligible in the synoptics, assume both probability and
   possibility in the narrative of the fourth Gospel. On the other hand, I
   can defy anybody to compose a life of Jesus that is understandable,
   which takes into account the discourses that the alleged John imputes
   to Jesus. This fashion of his of incessantly preaching himself up and
   of exhibiting himself, this perpetual argumentation, this studied
   stage-effect, these long reasonings attached to each miracle, these
   lifeless and incoherent discourses, the tone of which is so often false
   and unequal, could not be endured by a man of taste alongside of the
   delightful phraseology which, according to the synoptics, constituted
   the soul of the teaching of Jesus. There are here evidently fictitious
   fragments, which represent to us the sermons of Jesus in the same way
   as the dialogues of Plato set forth the conversations of Socrates. They
   resemble the variations of a musician improvising on his own account
   upon a given theme. The theme in question may have existed previously;
   but in the execution the artist gives his fancy free scope. We perceive
   the factitious progressions, the rhetoric, the verisimilitude. Let us
   add that the vocabulary of Jesus is nowhere to be found in the
   fragments of which we speak. The expression of "Kingdom of God," which
   was so common with the master, does not appear even once. But,
   contrariwise, the style of the discourses attributed to Jesus by the
   fourth Gospel offers the most complete analogy to that of parts of the
   narrative of the same Gospel and to that of the author of the epistles
   called John. We see that the author of the fourth Gospel, in writing
   these discourses, did not give his recollections, but the somewhat
   monotonous workings of his own thought. Quite a new mystical language
   is displayed in them, language characterised by the frequent employment
   of the words "world," "truth," "life," "light," "darkness," and which
   resembles much less that of the synoptics than that of the book of the
   sages--Philo and the Valentinians. If Jesus had ever spoken in that
   style, which is neither Hebraic nor Jewish, how does it come that,
   amongst the auditors, only a single one of the latter has kept the
   secret?

   For the rest, literary history offers one example which presents a
   certain analogy to the historic phenomenon we have just been
   describing, and which serves to explain it. Socrates, who, like Jesus,
   did not write, is known to us through two of his disciples, Xenophon
   and Plato; the former corresponding with the synoptics by reason of his
   compilation, at once consecutive, transparent and impersonal; the
   latter, by reason of his robust individuality, recalling the author of
   the fourth Gospel. In order to describe the Socratic teaching must we
   follow the "Dialogues" of Plato, or the "Discourses" of Xenophon? In
   such a case doubt is not possible; everyone sticks to the "Discourses"
   and not to the "Dialogues." Does Plato nevertheless teach us nothing
   concerning Socrates? In writing the biography of the latter, would it
   be good criticism to neglect the dialogues? Who would dare to maintain
   this?

   Without pronouncing upon the question, it is material to know as to
   what hand indited the fourth Gospel; even if we were persuaded it was
   not that of the son of Zebedee, we can at least admit that this work
   possesses some title to be called "the Gospel according to John." The
   historical sketch of the fourth Gospel is, in my opinion, the life of
   Jesus, such as it was known to the immediate circle of John. It is also
   my belief that this school was better acquainted with the different
   exterior circumstances of the life of the Founder than the group whose
   recollections go to make up the synoptic Gospels. Notably, in regard to
   the sojourns of Jesus at Jerusalem, it was in possession of facts that
   the other Gospels had not. Presbyteros Joannes, who is probably not a
   different person from the Apostle John, regarded, it is said, the
   narrative of Mark as incomplete and confused; he even had a theory
   which explained the omissions of the latter. Certain passages in Luke,
   which are a kind of echo of the Johannine traditions, prove, moreover,
   that the traditions preserved by the fourth Gospel were not to the rest
   of the Christian family something which was entirely unknown.

   These explanations will suffice, I think, to show the motives which in
   the course of my narrative have determined me to give the preference to
   this or that one of the four guides which we have for the life of
   Jesus. On the whole, I admit the four canonical Gospels to be important
   documents. All four ascend to the century which succeeded the death of
   Jesus; but their historic value is very diverse. Matthew evidently
   merits unlimited confidence in respect of the discourses; the latter
   are the Logia, the very notes which have been extracted from a clear
   and lively memory of the teaching of Jesus. A species of éclat at once
   mild and terrible, a divine force, if I may so speak, underlines these
   words, detaches them from the context, and to the critic renders them
   easily distinguishable. The person who undertakes the task of carving
   out of evangelical history a consecutive narrative possesses, in this
   regard, an excellent touchstone. The actual words of Jesus, so to
   speak, reveal themselves; as soon as we touch them in this chaos of
   traditions of unequal authority, we feel them vibrate; they translate
   themselves spontaneously and fit into the narrative naturally, where
   they constitute an unsurpassable relief.

   The narrative parts which are grouped in the first Gospel around this
   primitive nucleus do not possess the same authority. In them are to be
   found many silly enough legends, which proceeded from the piety of the
   second Christian generation. The accounts which Matthew gives in common
   with Mark present faults of transcription which prove a mediocre
   acquaintance with Palestine. Many of the episodes are repeated twice,
   several persons are duplicated, which shows that different sources have
   been utilised and largely amalgamated. The Gospel of Mark is much more
   firm, more precise, and less weighted with circumstances which have
   been added. Of the three synoptics it is the one which has remained the
   most primitive, the most original, the Gospel to which has been annexed
   the fewest posterior elements. Material details are given in Mark with
   a clearness which we should seek in vain for in the other evangelists.
   He delights to report certain sayings of Jesus in Syro-Chaldean. His
   observations are most minute, and come, no doubt, from an eyewitness.
   There is nothing to disprove that this eyewitness, who evidently had
   followed Jesus, who had loved him and observed him very closely, and
   who had preserved a lively image of him, was the Apostle Peter himself,
   as is maintained by Papias.

   As for the work of Luke, its historic value is sensibly more feeble. It
   is a document at second hand. Its manner of narration is more matured.
   The sayings of Jesus are there more reflective, more sententious. Some
   sentences are carried to excess and are false. Writing outside
   Palestine, and certainly after the siege of Jerusalem, the author
   indicates the places with less exactness than the two other synoptics;
   he is too fond of representing the temple as an oratory, where people
   go to do their devotions; he does not speak of the Herodians; he
   modifies details in order to bring the different narratives into closer
   agreement; he softens down passages which had become embarrassing
   because of the more exalted idea which people around him had attained
   to in regard to the divinity of Jesus; he exaggerates the marvellous;
   he commits errors of geography and of topography; he omits the Hebraic
   glosses; he appears to know little of Hebrew; he does not quote a word
   of Jesus in that language; he calls all the localities by their Greek
   names; he corrects at times in a clumsy manner the sayings of Jesus. We
   perceive in the author a compiler, a man who has not seen directly the
   witnesses, who labours at the texts, and permits himself to do them
   great violence in order to make them agree. Luke had probably under his
   eyes the original narrative of Mark and the Logia of Matthew. But he
   treats them with great freedom; at times he runs two anecdotes or two
   parables together to make one; sometimes he divides one in order to
   make two. He interprets the documents according to his own mind; he has
   not the absolute impassibility of Matthew and Mark. We might affirm
   this of his tastes and of his personal tendencies: he is a very exact
   devotee; he holds that Jesus has accomplished all the Jewish rites; he
   is a passionate democrat and Ebionite; that is to say, much opposed to
   property, and is persuaded that the poor will soon have their revenge;
   he is specially partial to the anecdotes which put into relief the
   conversion of sinners and the exaltation of the humble; he frequently
   modifies the ancient traditions so as to give them this acceptation. In
   his first pages he includes the legends touching the infancy of Jesus,
   related with the long amplifications, the canticles and the
   conventional proceedings which constitute the essential feature of the
   apocryphal Gospels. Finally, in the account of the last hours of Jesus,
   he introduces some circumstances which are full of a tender sentiment,
   as well as certain sayings of Jesus of rare beauty, which are not to be
   found in the more authentic narratives, and in which can be detected
   the hand of the legendary. Luke has probably borrowed them from a more
   recent collection, in which it is seen his chief aim was to excite
   sentiments of piety.

   A great reserve was naturally bespoken in regard to a document of this
   nature. It would have been as little scientific to neglect it as to
   employ it without discernment. Luke had under his eyes originals which
   we no longer have. He is less an evangelist than a biographer of Jesus,
   a "harmonist," a reviser, after the manner of Marcion and Tatian. But
   he is a biographer of the first century, a divine artist who,
   independently of the information he has extracted from more ancient
   sources, shows us the character of the Founder with a happiness of
   treatment, a uniformity of inspiration, and a clearness that the other
   two synoptic do not possess. His Gospel is the one the reading of which
   possesses most charm: for, not to mention the incomparable beauty of
   its common basis, he combines a degree of art and of skill in
   composition which singularly enhances the effect of the picture,
   without seriously marring its truthfulness.

   To sum up, we are warranted in saying that the synoptic compilation has
   passed through three stages: first, the original documentary stage
   (logia of Matthew, lechthenta e prachthenta of Mark), primary
   compilations no longer in existence; second, the simple amalgamation
   stage, in which the original documents were thrown together without any
   regard to literary form, and without any personal traits on the part of
   the authors becoming manifest (the present Gospels of Matthew and
   Mark); third, the combination stage, that of careful composition and
   reflection, in which we are conscious of an effort made to reconcile
   the different versions (the Gospel of Luke, the Gospels of Marcion,
   Tatian, &c.). The Gospel of John, as we have above said, is a
   composition of another order and altogether distinct.

   It will be observed that I have not made any use of apocryphal Gospels.
   In no sense ought these compositions to be placed on the same footing
   as the canonical Gospels. They are tiresome and puerile amplifications,
   having almost entirely the canonicals for a basis, and adding almost
   nothing to them of any particular value. Contrariwise, I have been most
   careful in collecting the shreds which have been preserved by the
   Fathers of the Church, by the ancient Gospels which formerly existed
   simultaneously with the canonicals, but which are now lost, such as the
   Gospel according to the Hebrews, the Gospel according to the Egyptians,
   the Gospels attributed to Justin, Marcion, and Tatian. The first two
   possess a peculiar importance, inasmuch as they were indited in Aramean
   like the Logia of Matthew; as they appear to have formed a version of
   the Gospel attributed to that apostle, and as they were the Gospel of
   Ebionim, that is to say, of those small Christian sects of Batanea who
   preserved the use of the Syro-Chaldean tongue, and appear to have
   continued, to some extent, in the footsteps of Jesus. But it most be
   owned that, in the condition they have come down to us, these Gospels
   are inferior, for the purposes of criticism, to the edition of the
   Gospel of Matthew which we possess.

   It will now, I presume, be understood what sort of historic value I put
   upon the Gospels. They are neither biographies after the manner of
   Suetonius, nor fictitious legends, after the manner of Philostratus;
   they are legendary biographies. I place them at once alongside of the
   legends of the saints, the lives of Plotinus, Proclus, Isidore, and
   other compositions of the same sort, in which historical truth and the
   desire to present models of virtue are combined in divers degrees.
   Inexactitude, a trait common to all popular compositions, makes itself
   particularly felt in them. Let us suppose that fifteen or twenty years
   ago three or four old soldiers of the Empire had individually set
   themselves to write a life of Napoleon from recollections of him. It is
   clear that their narratives would present numerous errors, great
   discordances. One of them would place Wagram before Marengo; another
   would boldly state that Napoleon ousted the government of Robespierre
   from the Tuileries; a third would omit expeditions of the highest
   importance. But one thing, possessing a great degree of truthfulness,
   would certainly result from these simple narratives--that is, the
   character of the hero, the impression he made around him. In this sense
   such popular narratives would be worth more than a solemn and official
   history. The same can also be said of the Gospels. Bent solely on
   bringing out strongly the excellency of the master, his miracles, his
   teaching, the evangelists manifest entire indifference to everything
   that is not of the very spirit of Jesus. The contradictions in respect
   of time, place, and persons were regarded as insignificant; for just as
   the greater the degree of inspiration that is attributed to the words
   of Jesus, so the less was granted to the compilers themselves. The
   latter looked upon themselves as simple scribes, and cared only for one
   thing--to omit nothing they knew. [2]

   Without doubt some certain preconceived ideas must have been associated
   with such recollections. Several narratives, especially in Luke, are
   invented in order to bring out more vividly certain traits of the
   personality of Jesus. This personality itself underwent alteration each
   day. Jesus would be a unique phenomenon in history if, with the part
   which he played, he had not soon become imbued with it. The legend
   respecting Alexander was concocted before the generation of his
   companions in arms was extinct; that respecting St. Francis d'Assisi
   began in his lifetime. A rapid work of transformation went on in the
   same manner in the twenty or thirty years which followed the death of
   Jesus, and imposed upon his biography the absolute traits of an ideal
   legend. Death makes perfect the most perfect man; it renders him
   faultless to those who have loved him. At the same time, the wish to
   paint the Master created likewise the desire to explain him. Many
   anecdotes were concocted in order to prove that the prophecies regarded
   as Messianic had been fulfilled in him. But this procedure, the
   importance of which is undeniable, would not suffice to explain
   everything. No Jewish work of the time gives a series of prophecies
   declaring formally what the Messiah was to accomplish. Many of the
   Messianic allusions referred to by the evangelists are so subtle, so
   indirect, that it is impossible to believe they all had relation to a
   generally admitted doctrine. Sometimes they reasoned thus: "The Messiah
   was to do such a thing; now Jesus is the Messiah; therefore Jesus has
   done such a thing." Sometimes they reasoned inversely: "Such a thing
   has happened to Jesus; now Jesus is the Messiah; therefore such a thing
   was to happen to the Messiah." [3] Explanations which are too simple
   are always false when it is a question of analysing the tissues of
   those profound creations of popular sentiment which baffle all science
   by their fulness and infinite variety.

   It is scarcely necessary to say that with such documents, in order to
   present only what is incontestable, we must confine ourselves to
   general lines. In almost all ancient histories, even in those which are
   much less legendary than these, details give rise to infinite doubts.
   When we have two accounts of the some fact, it is extremely rare that
   the two accounts are in accord. Is not this a reason, when we are
   confronted with but one perplexity, for falling into many? We may say
   that amongst the anecdotes, the discourses, the celebrated sayings
   reported by the historians, there is not one strictly accurate. Were
   there stenographers to take down these fleeting words? Was there an
   annalist always present to note the gestures, the conduct, the
   sentiments, of the actors? Let any one essay to attain to the truth as
   to the manner in which such or such a contemporary fact took place; he
   will not succeed. Two accounts of the same event given by two
   eyewitnesses differ essentially. Must we, hence, reject all the
   colouring of the narratives, and confine ourselves to recording the
   bare facts only? That would be to suppress history. Certainly I think,
   however, that if we except certain short and almost mnemonic axioms,
   none of the discourses reported by Matthew are textual; there is hardly
   one of our stenographic reports which is so. I willingly admit that
   that admirable account of the Passion embraces a multitude of trifling
   inaccuracies. Would it, however, be writing the history of Jesus to
   omit those sermons which exhibit to us in such a vivid manner the
   nature of his discourses, and to limit ourselves to saying, with
   Josephus and Tacitus, "that he was put to death by the order of Pilate"
   at the instigation of the priests"? That would be, in my opinion, a
   kind of inexactitude worse than that to which one exposes himself when
   admitting the details supplied by the texts. These details are not true
   to the letter, but they are rendered true by a superior truth; they are
   more true than the naked truth, in the sense that they are truths
   rendered expressive and articulate and raised to the height of an idea.

   I beg those who think that I have placed an exaggerated confidence in
   narratives which are in great part legendary to take note of the
   observation I have just made. To what would the life of Alexander be
   reduced if it were limited to that which is materially certain? Even
   partly erroneous traditions contain a portion of truth which history
   may not pass over. No one has reproached M. Sprenger for having, in
   writing the life of Mahomet, set much store by the hadith or oral
   traditions concerning the prophet, and for often having imputed to his
   hero words which are only known through this source. The traditions
   respecting Mahomet, nevertheless, do not have a superior historical
   character to the discourses and narratives which compose the Gospels.
   They were written between the year 50 and the year 140 of the Hegira.
   When the history of the Jewish schools in the ages which immediately
   preceded and followed the birth of Christianity shall be written, no
   one will make any scruple of attributing to Hillel, Shammai, Gamaliel,
   the maxims imputed to them by the Mishna and the Gemara, although these
   great compilations were written many centuries after the time of the
   doctors just mentioned.

   Contrariwise, those who believe that history ought to consist of a
   reproduction without comments of the documents which have come down to
   us, I beg them to take notice that such a course is not allowable. The
   four principal documents are in flagrant contradiction with one
   another; Josephus, moreover, sometimes rectifies them. It is necessary
   to make a choice. To allege that an event cannot take place in two ways
   at once, or in an absurd manner, is not to impose à priori philosophy
   upon history. Because he possesses several different versions of the
   same fact, or because credulity has mixed with all these versions
   fabulous circumstances, the historian most not conclude that the fact
   is not a fact; but he ought, in such a case, to be very cautious,--to
   examine the texts, and to proceed by induction. There is one class of
   narratives especially, apropos of which this principle must necessarily
   be applied--narratives of the supernatural. To seek to explain these
   narratives, or to transform them into legends, is not to mutilate facts
   in the name of theory; it is to begin with the observation of the very
   facts themselves. None of the miracles with which the old histories are
   filled took place under scientific conditions. Observation, which has
   not once been falsified, teaches us that miracles never take place save
   in times and countries in which they are believed, and in presence of
   persons disposed to believe them. No miracle ever took place in
   presence of an assembly of men capable of testing the miraculous
   character of the event. Neither common people nor men of the world are
   equal to the latter. It requires great precautions and long habit of
   scientific research. In our own days, have we not seen the great
   majority of people become dupes of the grossest frauds or of puerile
   illusions! Marvellous facts, attested by the populations of small
   towns, have, thanks to closer investigation, been condemned. [4] Since
   it is proved that no contemporary miracle will bear discussion, is it
   not probable that the miracles of the past, which have all been
   performed in popular gatherings, would equally present their share of
   illusion, if It were possible to criticise them in detail?

   It is not, then, in the name of this or that philosophy, but in the
   name of unbroken experience, that we banish the miracle from history.
   We do not say, "The miracle is impossible." We say, "So far, a miracle
   has never been proved." If to-morrow a thaumaturgist were to come
   forward with credentials sufficiently important to be discussed; if he
   were to announce that he was able, say, to raise the dead; what would
   be done? A commission, composed of physiologists, physicists, chemists,
   persons accustomed to historical criticism, would be named. That
   commission would choose a corpse, would assure itself that the death
   was indeed real, would designate the room in which the experiment
   should be made, would arrange a whole series of precautions, so as to
   leave no chance of doubt. If, under such conditions, resuscitation were
   effected, a probability, almost equal to certainty, would be
   established. As, however, it ought always to be possible to repeat an
   experiment--to do over again that which has been done once--and as, in
   the case of miracle, there can be no question of facility or
   difficulty, the thaumaturgist would be invited to reproduce his
   marvellous feat under different circumstances, upon other corpses, in
   another place. If the miracle was repeated each time, two things would
   be proved: first, that supernatural facts take place in the world;
   second, that the power of producing them belongs, or is delegated to,
   certain individuals. But who does not perceive that a miracle never
   took place under these conditions? that hitherto the thaumaturgist has
   always chosen the subject of the experiment, chosen the spot, chosen
   the public; that, moreover, it is the people themselves who most often,
   in consequence of the invincible desire to see something divine in
   great events and great men, create afterwards the marvellous legends?
   Until the order of things changes, we maintain it, then, as a principle
   of historical criticism, that a supernatural account cannot be admitted
   as such, that it always implies credulity or imposture, that it is the
   duty of the historian to explain it, and search out what share of
   truth, or of error, it may conceal.

   Such are the rules which have been adhered to in the composition of
   this narrative. In the reading of the texts, I have been able to
   combine with it an important source of information--the viewing of the
   places where the events occurred. The scientific mission, having for
   its object the exploration of ancient Phoenicia, which I directed in
   1860 and 1861, [5] led me to reside on the frontiers of Galilee, and to
   travel thither frequently. I have traversed, in every sense of the
   term, the country of the Gospels; I have visited Jerusalem, Hebron, and
   Samaria; scarcely any important locality in the history of Jesus has
   escaped me. All this history, which seems at a distance to float in the
   clouds of an unreal world, took thus a form, a solidity, which
   astonished me. The striking agreement of the texts and the places, the
   marvellous harmony of the evangelical idea, and of the country which
   served it as a framework, were to me a revelation. Before my eyes I had
   a fifth Gospel, disfigured though still legible, and from that time, in
   the narratives of Matthew and Mark, I saw instead of an abstract being,
   who could be said never to have existed, an admirable human figure
   living and moving. During the summer, having to go up to Ghazir, in
   Lebanon, to take a little repose, I fixed, in rapid sketches, the
   picture as it had appeared to me, and from them resulted this history.
   When a cruel affliction came to hasten my departure, I had only a few
   pages to write. In this manner the book was almost entirely composed
   near the very places where Jesus was born and lived. Since my return, I
   have laboured unceasingly to complete and arrange in detail the rough
   sketch which I had hastily written in a Maronite cabin, with five or
   six volumes around me.

   Many will perhaps regret the biographical form which my work has thus
   taken. When, for the first time, I conceived the idea of writing a
   history of the origins of Christianity, my intention was, in fact, to
   produce a history of doctrines, in which men and their actions would
   have hardly had a place. Jesus was scarcely to be named; I was
   especially bent on showing how the ideas which, under cover of his
   name, were produced, took root and covered the world. But I have since
   learned that history is not a simple game of abstractions; that men are
   more important than doctrines. It was not a certain theory in regard to
   justification and redemption which caused the Reformation; it was
   Luther and Calvin. Parseeism, Hellenism, Judaism, might have been able
   to combine under all forms; the doctrines of the Resurrection and of
   the Word might have gone on developing for ages without producing that
   grand, unique, and fruitful fact, which is called Christianity. That
   fact is the work of Jesus, of St. Paul, and of the apostles. To write
   the history of Jesus, of St. Paul, and of the apostles, is to write the
   history of the origins of Christianity. The anterior movements do not
   belong to our subject except as serving to explain the characters If
   these extraordinary men, who, naturally, could not be severed from that
   which preceded them.

   In such an effort, to make the great souls of the past live again, some
   degree of divination and of conjecture must be permitted. A great life
   is an organic whole which cannot be exhibited by the mere agglomeration
   of small facts. It requires a profound sentiment to embrace the whole,
   and to make it a perfect unity. The artist method in such a subject is
   a good guide; the exquisite tact of a Goethe would discover how to
   apply it. The essential condition of the creations of art is to form a
   living system of which all the parts are mutually dependent and
   connected. In histories of this kind, the great indication that we hold
   to the truth is to have succeeded in combining the texts in such a
   fashion that they shall constitute a logical and probable narrative, in
   which nothing shall be out of tune. The secret laws of life, of the
   progression of organic products, of the action of minute particles,
   ought to be consulted at each moment; for what is required to be
   reproduced is not the material circumstance, which it is impossible to
   verify; it is the soul itself of history; what most be sought after is
   not the petty certainty of minutiæ, it is the correctness of the
   general sentiment, the truthfulness of the colouring. Each detail which
   departs from the rules of classic narration ought to warn us to be on
   our guard; for the fact which requires to be related has been confined
   to the necessities of things, natural and harmonious. If we do not
   succeed in rendering it such by our narrative, it is only because we
   have not attained to seeing it aright. Suppose that, in restoring the
   Minerva of Phidias according to the texts, we produced an ensemble at
   once dry, jarring artificial; what must we conclude? Only one thing:
   the texts lack an appreciative interpretation; we must inquire into
   them calmly until they can be made to approximate and furnish a whole
   in which all the parts are happily blended. Should we then be sure of
   having feature for feature of the Greek statue? No; but we should not,
   at least, have the caricature of it; we should have the general spirit
   of the work--one of the forms in which it might have existed.

   This sentiment of a living organism we have not hesitated to take as
   our guide in the general arrangement of the narrative. The reading of
   the Gospels would be sufficient to prove that the authors, although
   conceiving a very true idea of the Life of Jesus, have not been guided
   by very rigorous chronological data; Papias, moreover, expressly
   teaches this, and bases his opinion upon evidence which seems to
   emanate from the Apostle John himself. The expressions, "At this time
   . . . after that . . . then . . . and it came to pass . . ." &c., are
   the simple transitions designed to connect different narratives with
   each other. To leave all the information furnished by the Gospels in
   the disorder in which tradition gives it, would no more be writing the
   history of Jesus than it would be writing the history of a celebrated
   man to give pell-mell the letters and anecdotes of his youth, his old
   age, and of his maturity. The Koran, which presents to us, in the
   loosest manner possible, fragments of the different epochs in the life
   of Mahomet, has discovered its secret to ingenious criticism; the
   chronological order in which the fragments were composed has been hit
   upon in such a way as to leave little room for doubt Such a
   re-arrangement is much more difficult in the Gospel, owing to the
   public life of Jesus having been shorter and less eventful than the
   life of the founder of Islamism. Nevertheless, the attempt to find a
   thread which shall serve as a guide through this labyrinth, ought not
   to be taxed with gratuitous subtlety. There is no great abuse of
   hypothesis in premising that a religious founder commences by attaching
   himself to the moral aphorisms which are already in circulation, and to
   the practices which are in vogue; nor, as he advances and gets full
   possession of his idea, that he delights in a kind of calm and poetical
   eloquence, remote from all controversy, sweet and free as pure feeling;
   nor, as he gradually warms, that he is animated by opposition, and
   finishes by polemics and strong invectives. Such are the periods which
   are plainly distinguishable in the Koran. The order which, with
   extremely fine tact, is adopted by the synoptic, supposes an analogous
   progress. If we read Matthew attentively, we shall find, in the
   arrangement of the discourses, a gradation greatly analogous to that
   just indicated. We may observe also the studied turns of expression
   which are made use of when it is desired to show the progress of the
   ideas of Jesus. The reader may, if he prefers, see in the divisions
   adopted in this respect, only the breaks indispensable for the
   methodical exposition of a profound and complicated thought.

   If love for a subject can assist in the understanding of it, it will
   also, I hope, be recognised that I have not been wanting in this
   condition. To construct the history of a religion, it is necessary
   first to have believed it (without this, we should not be able to
   understand why it has charmed and satisfied the human conscience); in
   the second place, to believe it no longer in an absolute manner, for
   absolute faith is incompatible with sincere history. But love exists
   apart from faith. In order not to attach one's self to any of the forms
   which captivate the adoration of men, one need not renounce the
   appreciation of that which they contain of good and of beautiful. No
   transitory apparition exhausts the Divinity; God was revealed before
   Jesus--God will reveal Himself after him. Profoundly unequal, and so
   much the more Divine, because they are grander and more spontaneous,
   the manifestations of God which are hidden in the depths of the human
   conscience are all of the same order. Jesus cannot then belong solely
   to those who call themselves his disciples. He is the common honour of
   him who carries a human heart. His glory does not consist in being
   banished from history; we render him a truer worship in showing that
   all history is incomprehensible without him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] See Volume VIII. of this series, which contains the author's notes
   of the whole seven volumes of the series, together with a complete
   index.--Ed.

   [2] See the passage from Papias, before cited.

   [3] See, for example, John xix. 23, 24.

   [4] See the Gazette des Tribunaux, 10th Sept, and 11th Nov., 1851; 28th
   May, 1857.

   [5] The work which will contain the results of this mission is in the
   press.
     __________________________________________________________________

                               THE LIFE OF JESUS.

CHAPTER I.

  PLACE OF JESUS IN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD.

   The chief event in the world's history is the revolution by which the
   noblest portions of humanity passed from the ancient religions
   comprised under the name of Paganism to a religion based on the divine
   unity, the trinity, and the incarnation of the Son of God. It took
   nearly a thousand years to make this conversion. The new religion
   itself was three hundred years in forming. But the revolution in
   question had its origin in the reigns of Augustus and Tiberius. There
   lived then a superior person, who, through his daring originality and
   the love he could inspire, created the object and fixed the point of
   departure of the future faith of humanity.

   Man, since he distinguished himself from the animal, has been
   religious: we mean, he sees something in nature beyond appearances, and
   in himself something beyond death. This sentiment, for thousands of
   years, was debased in the most singular manner. With many races it went
   no further than a belief in sorcerers, under the gross form in which it
   is still to be found in certain parts of Oceania. With other peoples
   the religious sentiment degenerated into the hideous scenes of butchery
   which characterised the ancient religion of Mexico. In other countries,
   Africa in particular, it did not get beyond Fetichism: we mean the
   adoration of a material object to which were attributed supernatural
   powers. Like the instinct of love, which at moments elevates the most
   vulgar man above himself, it sometimes takes the form of perversion and
   ferocity; similarly, this divine faculty of religion had for a long
   time the appearance of a cancer, which it was necessary to extirpate
   from the human species, the source of errors and of crimes which it was
   the duty of wise men to seek to suppress.

   The brilliant civilisations developed at a remote period in China, in
   Babylonia, and in Egypt, were the cause of a certain progress in
   religion. China attained early to a sort of good common sense, which
   prevented her from going wildly astray. She was cognisant neither of
   the advantages nor the abuses of the religious spirit. At all events,
   she had in this instance no influence in directing the great current of
   human thought. The religions of Babylonia and Syria never disengaged
   themselves from a substratum of strange sensuality; those religions
   continued to be, until their extinction in the fourth and fifth
   centuries of our era, schools of immorality from which, at times,
   thanks to a kind of poetical instinct, glimpses of the divine world
   emanated. Egypt, in spite of an apparent kind of Fetichism, was able
   very early to embrace metaphysical dogmas and a lofty symbolism. But
   these interpretations of a refined theology were unquestionably not
   intuitive. Man, when possessed of a clear idea, has never amused
   himself by clothing it in symbols; most often it is the result of long
   reflection, and the impossibility felt by the human mind of giving
   itself up to the absurd, that we seek for ideas whose meaning is lost
   to us behind ancient mystic images. It is not from Egypt, moreover,
   whence has come the faith of humanity. The elements in the Christian
   religion which, after undergoing a thousand transformations, came from
   Egypt and Syria, are exterior forms of little consequence, or of dross
   such as is always retained in the purest worships. The grand defect of
   the religions in question was their superstitious character; they only
   threw into the world millions of amulets and charms. No great moral
   thought could emanate from races debased by a secular despotism and
   accustomed to institutions which prevented almost any exercise of
   individual liberty.

   The poetry of the soul, faith, liberty, sincerity, devotion, appeared
   simultaneously in the world with the two great races which, in a sense,
   have made humanity; we refer to the Indo-European and the Semitic
   races. The first religious intuitions of the Indo-European race were
   essentially naturalistic. But it was a profound and moral naturalism,
   an amorous embrace of nature by man, a delicious poetry, full of the
   sentiment of the infinite; the principle, in a word, of all that which
   the Germanic and Celtic genius, of that which, in later times, a
   Shakespeare and a Goethe, should express. This was neither religion nor
   moral reflection; it was melancholy, tenderness, and imagination; above
   all, it was extreme earnestness--that is to say, the essential
   condition of morals and religion. The faith of mankind, nevertheless,
   could not issue thence, for the reason that these old religions had
   much difficulty in detaching themselves from polytheism, and could not
   attain to a very distinct symbolism. Brahmanism has survived to our day
   only by virtue of the astonishing conservatism which India seems to
   possess. Buddhism has been stranded in all its attempts to reach the
   West. Druidism was an exclusively national form, and without universal
   application. The Greek attempts at reform, Orpheism, the Mysteries,
   were not able to give solid nourishment to the soul. Persia alone
   attained to the making of a dogmatic religion, which was almost
   monotheistic, besides being skilfully organised; but it is very
   possible that this organisation itself was only an imitation or
   borrowed. In any case, Persia has not converted the world; on the
   contrary, she was converted when she saw the flag of the divine unity
   proclaimed by Islam appear on her frontiers.

   It is the Semitic race whose glory it is to have founded the religion
   of humanity. Away beyond the confines of history, the Bedouin
   patriarch, resting under his tent and free from the disorders of an
   already corrupted world, prepared the faith of humanity. His
   superiority consisted in his strong antipathy against the voluptuous
   religions of Syria, a marked simplicity of ritual, a complete absence
   of temples, and the idol reduced to insignificant theraphim. Amongst
   all the tribes of the nomadic Semites that of the Beni-Israel was
   already marked out for a great future. From its ancient relations with
   Egypt there resulted impressions whose extent it would be difficult to
   determine, but this only served to enhance its hatred for idolatry. A
   "Law," or Thora, written in very ancient times on tables of stone,
   which they attributed to Moses, their great liberator, was already the
   code of monotheism, and contained, when compared with the institutions
   of Egypt and Chaldea, powerful germs of social equality and of
   morality. A portable ark, surmounted by a sphinx, with staples on the
   two sides through which to pass poles, constituted all their religious
   matériel; all the sacred books of the nation were collected, its
   relics, its souvenirs, and, finally, the "book," the journal of the
   tribe, which was always open, but in which entries were made with great
   discretion. The family charged with holding the poles and keeping watch
   over these portable archives, being near and having control of the
   book, acquired very soon some importance. The institution, however,
   which was to determine the future did not proceed thence. The Hebrew
   priest differed little from other priests of ancient times. The
   character which essentially distinguishes Israel among theocratic
   peoples is, that sacerdotalism has always been subordinated to
   individual inspiration. Besides its priests, each nomadic tribe had its
   nabi, or prophet, a sort of living oracle, who was consulted upon
   obscure questions, the solution of which presupposed the gift of
   clairvoyance in a high degree. The nabis of Israel, who were formed
   into groups or schools, possessed great superiority. Defenders of the
   ancient democratic spirit, enemies of the rich, opposed to all
   political organisation and to whatever might attract Israel into the
   paths of other nations, they were the true agents of the religious
   pre-eminence of the Jewish people. Very early they held forth boundless
   hopes, and when the people, victims to some extent of their impolitic
   counsels, were crushed by the might of Assyria, they proclaimed that an
   endless reign was in store for Judah, that Jerusalem would one day be
   the capital of the whole world, and that the human race would be made
   Jews. Jerusalem, with its temple, appeared to them as a city placed
   upon the summit of a mountain, towards which all peoples should turn,
   as an oracle whence universal law should issue, as the centre of an
   ideal kingdom, where the human race, pacified by Israel, should find
   once more the delights of Eden.

   Obscure utterances began already to be heard, which extolled the
   martyrdom and celebrated the power, of "the Man of Sorrows." Apropos of
   one of these sublime sufferers, who, like Jeremiah, were to dye the
   streets of Jerusalem with their blood, one of the inspired composed a
   song upon the sufferings and the triumph of the "servant of God," in
   which all the prophetic force of the genius of Israel seemed
   concentrated.

     " For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant and as a root
     out of a dry ground; he hath no form nor comeliness. He is despised
     and rejected of men; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he
     was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our
     grief, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken,
     smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
     transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement
     of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All
     we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own
     way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was
     oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is
     brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
     shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. And he made his grave
     with the wicked. When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin,
     he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure
     of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." [Isaiah lii. 13 et seq., and
     liii. entirely.]

   Great alterations were made at the same time in the Thora. New texts,
   such as Deuteronomy, assuming to represent the true law of Moses, were
   produced, which inaugurated in reality a spirit very different from
   that of the old nomads. An ardent fanaticism was the dominant
   characteristic of this spirit. Infatuated believers provoked incessant
   persecutions against all who strayed from the worship of Jehovah; a
   code of blood, prescribing the penalty of death for religious
   derelictions, was successfully established. Piety almost always brings
   in its train the singular contradictions--vehemence and gentleness.
   This zeal, unknown to the coarser simplicity of the age of the Judges,
   inspired tones of eager prophecy and of tender unction of which the
   world until now had never heard. A strong tendency towards social
   questions already made itself felt. Utopias, dreams of a perfect
   society, were admitted to the code. The Pentateuch, a mélange of
   patriarchal morality and of ardent devotion, primitive intuitions and
   pious subtleties, like those with which the souls of Hezekiah, Josiah,
   and Jeremiah were charged, was thus determined in its present form, and
   was for ages the absolute rule of the national mind.

   This great book once created, the history of the Jewish people
   developed with an irresistible force The great empires which succeeded
   each other in Western Asia, in destroying the hope of a terrestrial
   kingdom, threw them into religious dreams, which they cherished with a
   kind of sombre passion. Caring little for the national dynasty or for
   political independence, they accepted all governments which permitted
   them to practise freely their worship and to follow their usages.
   Israel will no longer have other guidance than that of its religious
   enthusiasts, other enemies than those of the Divine unity, other
   country than its Law.

   And this Law, it must be remarked, was entirely social and moral. It
   was the work of men penetrated with a high ideal of the present life,
   who believed they had found the best means of realising it. The general
   conviction was that the Thora, closely followed, could not fail to give
   perfect felicity. This Thora has nothing in common with the Greek or
   Roman "Laws," which are cognisant of little else than abstract right,
   and entered little into the questions of private happiness and
   morality. We feel beforehand that the results which will proceed from
   the Jewish Law will be of a social, and not of a political order, that
   the work at which this people labours is a kingdom of God, not a civil
   republic; a universal institution, not a nationality or a country.

   Despite numerous failures, Israel admirably sustained this vocation. A
   series of pious men, Ezra, Nehemiah, Onias, the Maccabees, eaten up
   with zeal for the Law, succeeded each other in the defence of the
   ancient institutions. The idea that Israel was a holy people, a tribe
   chosen by God and bound to Him by a covenant, took more and more a firm
   root. A great expectation filled their souls. The whole of the
   Indo-European antiquity had placed paradise in the beginning; its
   poets, who had wept a golden age, had passed away. Israel placed the
   age of gold in the future. The perennial poesy of religious souls, the
   Psalms, with their divine and melancholy harmony, blossomed from this
   exalted piety. Israel became actually and par excellence the people of
   God, while around it the Pagan religions were more and more reduced; in
   Persia and Babylonia to an official charlatanism, in Egypt and Syria to
   a gross idolatry, and in the Greek and Roman world to parade. That
   which the Christian martyrs did in the first centuries of our era; that
   which the victims of persecuting orthodoxy have done, even in the bosom
   of Christianity, up to our time, the Jews did during the two centuries
   which preceded the Christian era. They were a living protest against
   superstition and religious materialism. An extraordinary activity of
   ideas, terminating in the most opposite results, made of them, at this
   epoch, a people the most striking and original in the world. Their
   dispersion along the whole Mediterranean littoral, and the use of the
   Greek language, which they adopted when out of Palestine, prepared the
   way for a propagandism of which ancient societies, broken up into small
   nationalities, had not yet presented an example.

   Up to the time of the Maccabees, Judaism, in spite of its persistence
   in announcing that it would one day be the religion of the human race,
   had had the characteristic of all the other worships of antiquity--it
   was a worship of the family and the tribe. The Israelite thought,
   indeed, that his worship was the best, and spoke with contempt of
   strange gods. Nevertheless, he believed also that the religion of the
   true God had only been made for himself. One embraced the religion of
   Jehovah when one entered the Jewish family; not otherwise. No Israelite
   dreamed of converting the stranger to a worship which was the patrimony
   of the sons of Abraham. The development of the pietistic spirit,
   beginning with Ezra and Nehemiah, led to a much firmer and more logical
   conception. Judaism became, in a more absolute manner, the true
   religion; the right of entering it was given to him who wished it; soon
   it became a work of piety to bring into it the greatest number
   possible. True, the generous sentiment which elevated John the Baptist,
   Jesus, and St. Paul above the petty ideas of race did not yet exist;
   for, by a strange contradiction, these converts (proselytes) were
   little respected, and were even treated with disdain. But the idea of
   an exclusive religion, the idea that there was something in the world
   superior to country, to blood, to laws, the idea which was to make
   apostles and martyrs, was founded. A profound pity for the Pagans,
   however brilliant might be their worldly fortune, was henceforward the
   sentiment of every Jew. By a series of legends, destined to furnish
   established models (Daniel and his companions, the mother of the
   Maccabees and her seven sons, the romance of the racecourse of
   Alexandria), the guides of the people sought above all to inculcate
   this idea--that virtue consists in a fanatical attachment to fixed
   religious institutions.

   The persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes made of this idea a passion,
   almost a frenzy. It was something very analogous to what happened under
   Nero two hundred and thirty years later. Rage and despair threw
   believers into the world of visions and of dreams. The first
   apocalypse, "The Book of Daniel," appeared. It was like a revival of
   prophecy, though under a very different form from the ancient one, and
   with a much larger conception of the destinies of the world. The Book
   of Daniel gave, in a manner, to the Messianic hopes their last
   expression. The Messiah was no longer a king, after the manner of David
   and Solomon, a theocratic and Mosaic Cyrus; he was a "Son of man"
   appearing in the clouds, a supernatural being, invested with human
   form, charged to rule the world, and to preside over the golden age.
   Perhaps the Sosiosch of Persia, the great prophet who was to come,
   charged with preparing the reign of Ormuzd, furnished some features for
   this new ideal. The unknown author of the Book of Daniel had, in any
   case, a decisive influence on the religious event which was going to
   transform the world. He devised the mise-en-scène, and the technical
   terms of the new Messianism; and it might be applied to him what Jesus
   said of John the Baptist,--"Before him, the prophets; after him, the
   kingdom of God." A few years later the same ideas were reproduced under
   the name of the patriarch Enoch. Essenism, which seems to have been in
   direct relationship with the apocalyptic school, was created about the
   same time, and offered a first rough sketch of the grand discipline
   which was soon to constitute the education of humanity.

   It must not, however, be supposed that this movement, so profoundly
   religious and soul-stirring, had particular dogmas to give it impulse,
   as was the case in all the conflicts which have broken out in the bosom
   of Christianity. The Jew of this time had as little of the theologian
   about him as may be. He did not speculate upon the essence of the
   Divinity; the beliefs about angels, about the end of man, about the
   Divine hypostasis, of which the first germs might already be perceived,
   were quite optional--they were meditations, which each one cherished
   according to the turn of his mind, but of which a great number of men
   had never heard. Those who did not share in these particular imaginings
   were even the most orthodox, and who adhered to the simplicity of the
   Mosaic law. No dogmatic power, analogous to that which orthodox
   Christianity has given to the Church, then existed. It was not until
   the beginning of the third century, when Christianity had fallen into
   the hands of reasoning races, crazy about dialectics and metaphysics,
   that that fever for definitions commenced which made the history of the
   Church the history of a great controversy. There were disputes also
   among the Jews; some ardent schools brought opposite solutions to
   almost all the questions which were agitated; but in these contests,
   the principal details of which are preserved in the Talmud, there is
   not a single word of speculative theology. Observe and maintain the
   Law, because the Law was just, and because, in being well observed, it
   gave happiness; this was the whole of Judaism. No credo, no theoretical
   symbol. A disciple of the boldest Arabic philosophy, Moses Maimonides,
   succeeded in becoming the oracle of the synagogue, because he was a
   well-informed canonist.

   The reigns of the last Asmoneans, and that of Herod, saw the excitement
   grow still stronger. They were filled with an uninterrupted series of
   religious movements. In proportion as that power became secularised,
   and passed into the hands of unbelievers, the Jewish people lived less
   and less for the earth, and allowed themselves to become more and more
   absorbed by the strange force which was operating in their midst. The
   world, distracted by other spectacles, knew nothing of what was passing
   in this forgotten corner of the East. The minds in touch with their age
   were, however, better informed. The tender and prescient Virgil seems
   to respond, as by a secret echo, to the second Isaiah; the birth of a
   child throws him into dreams of a universal palingenesis. These dreams
   were general, and formed a species of literature which was indicated by
   the name Sibylline. The quite recent formation of the empire exalted
   the imagination; the great era of peace on which it entered, and that
   impression of melancholy sensibility which souls experience after long
   periods of revolution, gave rise everywhere to boundless hopes.

   In Judæa expectation was at its zenith. Holy persons, such as old
   Simeon, who, legend tells us, held Jesus in his arms; Anna, daughter of
   Phanuel, regarded as a prophetess, passed their life about the temple,
   fasting and praying, that it might please God not to withdraw them from
   the world until they should see the fulfilment of the hopes of Israel.
   They felt a powerful presentiment of the approach of something unknown.

   This confused mixture of clear views and of dreams, this alternation of
   deceptions and of hopes, these ceaseless aspirations, which were driven
   back by an odious reality, found at last their expression in the
   incomparable man, to whom the universal conscience has most justly
   decreed the title of Son of God, because he has given to religion a
   direction which no other can or probably ever will be able to emulate.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  INFANCY AND YOUTH OF JESUS--HIS FIRST IMPRESSIONS.

   Jesus was born at Nazareth, a small town of Galilee, which until his
   time had no celebrity. During the whole of his life he was designated
   by the name of "the Nazarene," and it is only by a puzzling enough
   evasion that, in the legends concerning him, it can be shown that he
   was born at Bethlehem. We shall see later on the motive for this
   supposition, and how it was the necessary consequence of the Messianic
   character attributed to Jesus. The precise date of his birth is not
   known. It took place during the reign of Augustus, about 750 of the
   Roman year, that is to say, some years before the first of that era
   which all civilised nations date from--the day on which it is believed
   he was born.

   The name of Jesus, which was given him, is an alteration from Joshua.
   It was a very common name; but people naturally sought later on to
   discover some mystery in it, as well as an allusion to his character of
   Saviour. Perhaps Jesus himself, like all mystics, exalted himself in
   this respect. It is thus that more than one great vocation in history
   has been caused by a name given to a child without premeditation.
   Ardent natures never can bring themselves to admit chance in anything
   that concerns them. God has ordained everything for them, and they see
   a sign of the supreme will in the most insignificant circumstances.

   The population of Galilee, as the name indicates, was very mixed. This
   province reckoned amongst its inhabitants, in the time of Jesus, many
   who were not Jews (Phoenicians, Syrians, Arabs, and even Greeks). The
   conversions to Judaism were not rare in mixed countries like this. It
   is therefore impossible to raise any question of race here, or to try
   to discover what blood flowed in the veins of him who has most of any
   contributed to efface the distinctions of blood in humanity.

   He sprang from the ranks of the people. His father Joseph and his
   mother Mary were of humble position, artisans living by their work, in
   that condition which is so common in the East, and which is neither
   ease nor poverty. The extreme simplicity of life in such countries, by
   dispensing with the need of modern comforts, renders the privileges of
   the wealthy almost useless, and makes every one voluntarily poor. On
   the other hand, the total absence of taste for art and for that which
   tends to the elegance of material life, gives a naked aspect to the
   house of the man who otherwise wants for nothing. If we take into
   account the sordid and repulsive features which Islamism has carried
   into the Holy Land, the town of Nazareth, in the time of Jesus, did not
   perhaps much differ from what it is to-day. The streets where he played
   as a child we can see in the stony paths or in the little cross-ways
   which separate the dwellings. The house of Joseph no doubt closely
   resembled those poor shops, lighted by the door, which serve at once as
   workshop, kitchen, and bedroom, the furniture consisting of a mat, some
   cushions on the ground, one or two earthenware pots, and a painted
   chest.

   The family, whether it proceeded from one or several marriages, was
   rather numerous. Jesus had brothers and sisters, of whom he seems to
   have been the eldest. All have remained obscure, for it appears that
   the four personages who are given as his brothers--one of whom at
   least, James, had acquired great importance in the earliest years. of
   the development of Christianity--were his cousins-german. Mary, in
   fact, had a sister also named Mary, who married a certain Alpheus or
   Cleophas (these two names appear to designate the same person), and was
   the mother of several sons, who played a considerable part among the
   first disciples of Jesus. These cousins-german, who adhered to the
   young Master, while his own brothers opposed him, took the title of
   "brothers of the Lord." The real brothers of Jesus, as well as their
   mother, had no notoriety until after his death. Even then they do not
   appear to have equalled in importance their cousins, whose conversion
   had been more spontaneous, and whose characters seem to have had more
   originality. Their names were unknown to the extent that, when the
   evangelist put in the mouth of the men of Nazareth the enumeration of
   the brothers according to natural relationship, the names of the sons
   of Cleophas first presented themselves to him.

   His sisters were married at Nazareth, and he spent there the first
   years of his youth. Nazareth was a small town situated in a hollow,
   opening broadly at the summit of the group of mountains which close the
   plain of Esdraelon on the north. The population is now from three to
   four thousand, and it can never have varied much. The cold is keen
   there in winter, and the climate very healthy. Nazareth, like all the
   small Jewish towns at this period, was a heap of huts built without
   plan, and would exhibit that withered and poor aspect which
   characterise villages in Semitic countries. The houses, as it would
   seem, did not differ much from those cubes of stone, without exterior
   or interior elegance, which cover to-day the richest parts of the
   Lebanon, and which, surrounded with vines and fig-trees, are far from
   being disagreeable. The environs, moreover, are charming; and no place
   in the world was so well adapted for dreams of absolute happiness. Even
   to-day Nazareth is a delightful abode, the only place, perhaps, in
   Palestine in which the soul feels itself relieved from the burden which
   oppresses it in the midst of this unequalled desolation. The people are
   amiable and cheerful; the gardens fresh and green. Anthony the Martyr,
   at the end of the sixth century, gives an enchanting picture of the
   fertility of the environs, which he compares with paradise. Some
   valleys on the western side fully bear out his description. The
   fountain, where formerly the life and gaiety of the little town were
   concentrated, is destroyed; its broken channels contain now only a
   muddy stream. But the beauty of the women who meet there in the
   evening,--that beauty which was already remarked in the sixth century,
   and which was looked upon as a gift of the Virgin Mary,--is still most
   strikingly preserved. It is the Syrian type in all its grace, so full
   of languor. There is no doubt that Mary was there almost every day, and
   took her place with her jar on her shoulder in the file of her obscure
   companions. Anthony the Martyr remarks that the Jewish women, usually
   disdainful to Christians, were here very affable. At the present day
   religious animosity is less pronounced at Nazareth than elsewhere.

   The prospect from the town is limited; but if we ascend a little and
   reach the plateau, swept by a perpetual breeze, which overlooks the
   highest houses, the view is splendid. On the west are displayed the
   fine outlines of Carmel, terminated by an abrupt spur which seems to
   plunge into the sea. Next are spread out the double summit which
   dominates Megiddo; the mountains of the country of Shechem, with their
   holy places of patriarchal age; the hills of Gilboa, the small
   picturesque group to which are attached the graceful or terrible
   recollections of Shunem and of Endor; and Tabor, with its rounded form,
   which antiquity compared to a bosom. Through a crevice between the
   mountains of Shunem and Tabor are seen the valley of the Jordan and the
   high plains of Peræa, which on the east side form a continuous line. On
   the north, the mountains of Safed, in inclining towards the sea,
   conceal St.-Jean-d'Acre, but reveal the outline of the Gulf of Khaifa.
   Such was the country of Jesus. This enchanted circle, this cradle of
   the kingdom of God, was the world of Jesus for years. Even in his later
   life he did not depart much from the familiar scenes of his childhood.
   For, yonder northwards, a glimpse is caught, almost on the flank of
   Hermon, of Cæsarea-Philippi, the furthest point he had reached in the
   Gentile world; and southwards, the more sombre aspect of these
   Samaritan hills foreshadows the dreariness of Judea beyond, parched as
   by a scorching wind of desolation and death.

   If the world, should it remain Christian, though it should attain to a
   better idea of the esteem in which the origins of its religion should
   be held, ever wishes to replace by authentic holy places the mean and
   apocryphal sanctuaries to which the piety of dark ages attached itself,
   it is upon this ground of Nazareth that it will rebuild its temple.
   There, at the spot where Christianity was born, and at the centre of
   the activity of its Founder, the great church ought to be raised in
   which all Christians might worship. There, also, on the spot where
   sleep Joseph the carpenter and thousands of forgotten Nazarenes, who
   never passed beyond the outskirts of their valley, would be a better
   station than any in the world for the philosopher to contemplate the
   course of human events, to console himself for the disappointments
   which those inflict upon our most cherished instincts, and to reassure
   himself as to the divine end which the world pursues through endless
   falterings, and in spite of the universal vanity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  EDUCATION OF JESUS.

   Nature here, at once smiling and grand, was the whole education of
   Jesus. He learnt to read and to write, no doubt, according to the
   Eastern method, which consisted in putting into the hands of the child
   a book, which he repeated rhythmically with his little comrades, until
   he knew it by heart. It is doubtful, however, whether he understood the
   Hebrew writings in their original tongue. His biographers make him
   quote them according to the translations in the Aramean language; and
   his methods of exegesis, as far as we can make them out from his
   disciples, much resembled those which were then common, and which form
   the spirit of the Targummim and the Midraschim.

   The schoolmaster in the small Jewish towns was the hazzan, or reader in
   the synagogues. Jesus frequented little the higher schools of the
   scribes or sopherim (Nazareth had perhaps none of them), and he had not
   any of those titles which confer, in the eyes of the vulgar, the
   privileges of knowledge. It would, nevertheless, be a great error to
   imagine that Jesus was what we call an ignoramus. Scholastic education
   among us draws a great distinction, in respect of personal worth,
   between those who have received and those who have been deprived of it.
   It was different in the East, and in the good old days. The rude state
   in which among us the person remains who has not passed through the
   schools--in consequence of our isolated and entirely individual
   life--was unknown in those societies where moral culture, and, above
   all, the general spirit of the age, was transmitted by the constant
   intercourse between men of all kinds. The Arab, who has never had a
   teacher, is, notwithstanding that, a decidedly superior man; for the
   tent is a sort of academy, always open, where, from meeting with
   well-educated people, very considerable intellectual and even literary
   activity is produced. Refinement of manners and acuteness of intellect
   have, in the East, nothing in common with what we call education. The
   men of the schools, on the contrary, are those who pass for pedantic
   and badly-trained people. In this social state, ignorance, which among
   us at once relegates a man to an inferior grade, is the condition of
   great things and of great originality.

   It is not at all likely that Jesus knew Greek. This language had spread
   only to a small extent in Judæa beyond the classes who participated in
   the government, and the towns which were inhabited by Pagans, like
   Cæsarea. The mother tongue of Jesus was the Syrian dialect mixed with
   Hebrew, which was spoken in Palestine at that time. There is even
   greater reason to conclude that he knew nothing of Greek culture. This
   culture was indeed proscribed by the doctors of Palestine, who included
   in the same malediction "the man who breeds swine, and the person who
   teaches his son Greek science." At all events, it had not penetrated to
   little towns such as Nazareth. Notwithstanding the anathema of the
   doctors, some Jews, it is true, had already embraced the Hellenic
   culture. Without speaking of the Jewish school of Egypt, in which the
   attempts to amalgamate Hellenism and Judaism had been in operation
   nearly two hundred years, a Jew, Nicholas of Damascus, had become, even
   at this time, one of the most distinguished men, one of the best
   informed, and one of the most respected of his age. Josephus was
   destined soon to furnish another example of a Jew completely
   Grecianised. But Nicholas was only a Jew in blood. Josephus declares
   that he himself was an exception among his contemporaries; and the
   whole schismatic school of Egypt was detached to such a degree from
   Jerusalem that we do not find the least allusion to it either in the
   Talmud or in Jewish tradition. At Jerusalem itself Greek was very
   little studied: indeed, Greek studies were considered to be dangerous,
   and even servile; at the best they were held to be only an effeminate
   accomplishment. The study of the Law stood alone as "liberal," and
   worthy of a thoughtful man. When he was asked as to the time when it
   would be right to teach children "Greek wisdom," a learned Rabbi
   replied: "At the time which is neither day nor night; for it is written
   of the Law, Thou shalt study it day and night."

   It seems clear, therefore, that neither directly nor indirectly did any
   element of "profane" culture reach Jesus. He knew nothing beyond
   Judaism; his mind preserved that free innocence which is invariably
   weakened by an extended and varied culture. In the very bosom of this
   Judaism he remained a stranger to many efforts somewhat parallel to his
   own. On the one hand, the asceticism of the Essenes or Therapeutæ did
   not seem to have had any direct influence upon him; on the other, the
   fine efforts of religious philosophy made by the Jewish school of
   Alexandria, of which Philo, his contemporary, was the ingenious
   interpreter, were unknown to him. The frequent resemblances which may
   be discovered between himself and Philo, those excellent maxims
   concerning the love of God, of charity, and rest in God, which sound
   like an echo between the Gospel and the writings of the illustrious
   Alexandrian thinker, arise from the common tendencies which the demands
   of the age inspired in all lofty minds.

   Happily for him, he was also ignorant of the strange scholasticism
   which was taught at Jerusalem, and which soon was to form the Talmud.
   If some Pharisees had already brought it into Galilee, Jesus did not
   associate with them, and when later he met this silly casuistry face to
   face, it only inspired him with disgust. We may believe, however, that
   the principles of Hillel were not unknown to him. This Rabbi, fifty
   years before him, had uttered certain aphorisms which were almost
   analogous to his own. By his poverty so meekly borne, by the sweetness
   of his character, by his antagonism to priests and hypocrites, Hillel
   was the true master of Jesus, if it may be allowed that one should
   speak of a master in connection with such a lofty genius as his.

   The perusal of the books of the Old Testament made a deep impression on
   Jesus. The canon of the holy books was composed of two principal
   parts--the Law, that is to say, the Pentateuch, and the Prophets, such
   as we possess them now. An extensive and allegorical method of
   interpretation was applied to all these books; and the attempt was made
   to draw from them what was a response to the aspirations of the age.
   The Law, which did not represent the ancient laws of the country, but
   Utopias--the factitious laws, and the pious frauds of the pietistic
   kings--had become, since the nation had ceased to govern itself, an
   inexhaustible theme of subtle interpretations. As to the Prophets and
   the Psalms, the popular persuasion was that almost all the somewhat
   mysterious details that were in these books had reference to the
   Messiah, and it was sought to find there the type of him who should
   realise the hopes of the nation. Jesus participated in the liking which
   every one had for these allegorical interpretations. But the true
   poetry of the Bible which escaped the doctors of Jerusalem disclosed
   itself most fully to the fine genius of Jesus. The Law does not seem to
   have had much charm for him; he believed he could accomplish better
   things. But the religious poetry of the Psalms discovered a wonderful
   agreement with his own lyrical soul; and they remained, during his
   whole life, his nourishment and support. The prophets, especially
   Isaiah and the writer who continued his record of the times of the
   captivity, with their brilliant dreams of the future, their impetuous
   eloquence, and their invectives mingled with enchanting pictures, were
   his true masters. He, doubtless, also read many apocryphal
   works--somewhat modern writings, whose authors, in order to give their
   productions an authority which would not be granted except to very
   ancient scriptures, had invested themselves with the names of prophets
   and patriarchs. One of these books above all others moved him; that was
   the book of Daniel. This work, composed by an enthusiastic Jew of the
   time of Antiochus Epiphanes, and headed by the name of an ancient sage,
   was the resumé of the spirit of these later days. Its author, a true
   creator of the philosophy of history, was the first who had been bold
   enough to see in the onward march of the world and the succession of
   empires only a series of facts subordinated to the destinies of the
   Jewish people. Jesus was at an early age penetrated by these high
   hopes. Perhaps, moreover, he had read the books of Enoch, then regarded
   with equal reverence as the holy books, and the other writings of the
   same class, which kept up so much excitement in the popular
   imagination. The advent of the Messiah, with its glories and terrors,
   the nations falling to pieces one after another, the cataclysm of
   heaven and earth, were the familiar food of his imagination; and, as
   these revolutions were believed to be so close at hand that numbers of
   people sought to calculate their exact dates, the supernatural state
   into which men are led by such visions appeared to Jesus from the first
   quite simple and perfectly natural.

   That he had no acquaintance with the general condition of the world is
   a fact which is seen in each feature of his best authenticated
   discourses. The earth to him appeared as still divided into kingdoms
   making war upon each other; he seemed to ignore the "Roman peace," and
   the new state of society which its age inaugurated. He had no exact
   idea of the Roman power; the name of "Cæsar" was all that had reached
   him. He saw being built, in Galilee or its neighbourhood, Tiberias,
   Julias, Diocæsarea, Cæsarea--splendid works of the Herods, who sought
   by these magnificent structures to prove their admiration for Roman
   civilisation, and their devotion to the members of the family of
   Augustus; and the names of these places, although strangely altered,
   now serve to designate, as by a caprice of fate, miserable hamlets of
   Bedouins. Jesus probably also saw Sebaste, a work of Herod the Great, a
   showy city, whose ruins would make one believe that it had been
   transported there ready made, like some machine which had only to be
   set up in its place. This ostentatious piece of architecture was
   shipped to Judæa in portions; the hundreds of columns, all of the same
   diameter, the ornament of some insipid "Rue de Rivoli"--these were what
   he called "the kingdoms of the world and all the glory of them." But
   this luxury of power, this administrative and official art, displeased
   him. What he really loved were his Galilean villages, a confused
   mixture of huts, of nests and holes cut in the rocks, of wells, of
   tombs, of fig-trees and olives. He always clung closely to nature. The
   courts of kings constantly presented to him the idea of places where
   men wear fine clothes. The charming impossibilities with which his
   parables abound, when he brings kings and mighty ones on the stage,
   prove that he never had any conception of aristocratic society except
   as a young villager who sees the world through the prism of his own
   simplicity.

   Jesus was still less acquainted with the new idea, created by Grecian
   science, which is the basis of all philosophy and which modern science
   has largely confirmed, viz., the exclusion of the supernatural forces
   to which the simple faith of the ancient times attributed the
   government of the universe. Almost a century before him, Lucretius had
   expressed, in an admirable manner, the unchangeableness of the general
   system of nature. The negation of miracle -- the idea that everything
   in the world happens by laws in which the personal intervention of
   superior beings has no share--was universally admitted in the great
   schools of all the countries which had accepted Grecian science.
   Perhaps even Babylon and Persia were not strangers to it. Jesus knew
   nothing of this progress. Although born at a time when the principle of
   positive science was already proclaimed, he lived entirely in the
   supernatural. Never, perhaps, had the Jews been more possessed with the
   thirst for the marvellous. Philo, who lived in a great intellectual
   centre, and who had received a very complete education, possessed only
   a chimerical and inferior knowledge of science.

   Jesus on this point differed in no respect from his companions. He
   believed in the devil, whom he regarded as a kind of evil genius, and
   he imagined, like all the world, that nervous maladies were produced by
   demons who possessed the patient and agitated him. The marvellous was
   not the exceptional to him; it was his normal state. The idea of the
   supernatural, with its impossibilities, does not arise except with the
   birth of the experimental science of nature. The man who is a stranger
   to all idea of physical law, and who believes that by prayer he can
   alter the path of the clouds, can arrest disease and even death, finds
   nothing extraordinary in miracle, inasmuch as the whole course of
   things is for him the result of the freewill of the Divinity. This
   intellectual condition was always that of Jesus. But in his great soul
   such a belief produced effects altogether opposed to those wrought on
   the vulgar. Among the latter, faith in the special action of God led to
   a foolish credulity, and deceptions on the part of charlatans. With him
   it led to a profound idea of the familiar relations of man with God,
   and to an exaggerated belief in the power of man--beautiful errors
   which were the secret of his influence; for, if they became one day the
   means of putting him in a position of error in the eyes of the natural
   philosopher and the chemist, they gave him, over his own age, a power
   which no individual has ever possessed before or since.

   At an early age his extraordinary character revealed itself. Legend
   delights to show him even in his infancy in revolt against parental
   authority, and deviating from the common lines to follow his vocation.
   It is at least certain that for the relations of kinship he cared
   little. His family do not seem to have loved him, and more than once he
   appears to have been severe towards them. Jesus, like all men
   exclusively preoccupied by an idea, came to think little of the ties of
   blood. It is the bond of thought alone which natures like his
   recognise. "Behold my mother and my brethren," said he, extending his
   hand towards his disciples; "he that doeth the will of my Father, the
   same is my brother and sister." The simple people did not understand
   this view of things, and one day a woman who was passing near him cried
   out, "Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that thou hast
   sucked!" But he replied, "Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the
   word of God and keep it!" Soon, in his daring revolt against nature, he
   went still further; we shall soon see him trample under foot everything
   that is human--blood, love, country--preserving soul and mind simply
   for the idea which presented itself to him in the guise of absolute
   goodness and truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV.

  THE ORDER OF THOUGHT FROM WHOSE CENTRE JESUS WAS DEVELOPED.

   As the cooled earth no longer permits us to comprehend the phenomena of
   primitive creation, because the fire which once penetrated it is
   extinct, so deliberate explanations contain always something
   insufficient, when the question is one of applying our timid methods of
   analysis to the revolutions of the creative epochs which have decided
   the fate of humanity. Jesus lived at one of those epochs when the game
   of public life is freely played, when the stake of human activity is
   increased a hundredfold. Every great part, then, entails death; for
   such movements suppose liberty and an absence of preventive measures,
   which could not exist without a terrible alternative. In the present
   day, man risks little and gains little. In the heroic periods of human
   activity, man risked all and gained all. The good and the wicked, or at
   least those who believe themselves and are believed to be such, form
   opposing armies. The apotheosis is attained by the scaffold; characters
   have distinctive features, which engrave them as eternal types in the
   memory of men. Except in the French Revolution, no historical centre
   was as appropriate as that in which Jesus was formed, for developing
   those hidden forces which humanity holds as in reserve, and which are
   not seen except in days of excitement and peril.

   If the government of the world were a speculative problem, and the
   greatest philosopher was the man best fitted to tell his fellow-men
   what they ought to believe, it would be from calmness and reflection
   that those great moral and dogmatic truths which we call religions
   would proceed. But it is nothing of the kind. If we except Sakya-Mouni,
   the great religious founders have not been metaphysicians. Buddhism
   itself, which is based on pure thought, has conquered one-half of Asia
   by motives wholly political and moral. As for the Semitic religions,
   they are as little philosophical as it is possible to be. Moses and
   Mahomet were not speculators: they were men of action. It was by
   proposing action to their fellow-countrymen, and to their
   contemporaries, that they governed humanity. Jesus, in like manner, was
   not a theologian or a philosopher, having a more or less
   well-constructed system. To be a disciple of Jesus, it was not
   necessary to sign any formulary, or to repeat any confession of faith;
   one thing only was necessary--to attach oneself to him, to love him. He
   never disputed about God, for he felt Him directly in himself. The rock
   of metaphysical subtleties, against which Christianity has dashed since
   the third century, was in no wise erected by the founder. Jesus had
   neither dogma nor system; he had a fixed personal resolution, which,
   exceeding in intensity every other created will, directs to this hour
   the destinies of humanity.

   The Jewish people have had the advantage, from the Babylonian captivity
   up to the Middle Ages, of being always in a state of extreme tension.
   This is why the interpreters of the spirit of the nation, during this
   long period, seem to have written under the action of a violent fever,
   which placed them constantly either above or under reason, rarely in
   its middle pathway. Never did man seize the problem of the future and
   of his own destiny with a more desperate courage, or was more
   determined to go to extremes. Not separating the fate of humanity from
   that of their little race, the Jewish thinkers were the first who
   sought to discover a general theory of the progress of our species.
   Greece, always confined within itself, and only concerned with its
   petty provincial quarrels, has had admirable historians. Stoicism had
   enounced the highest maxims upon the duties of man considered as a
   citizen of the world and as a member of a great brotherhood; but
   previous to the Roman period it would be a vain attempt to discover in
   classic literature a general system of the philosophy of history,
   embracing all humanity. The Jew, on the contrary, thanks to a sort of
   prophetic sense, has made history enter into religion. Possibly he owes
   a little of this spirit to Persia, which, from an ancient date,
   conceived the history of the world as a series of evolutions, over
   which a prophet presided.

   Each prophet had his reign of a thousand years, and out of those
   successive ages, analogous to the millions of ages devolved to each
   Buddha of India, was composed the train of events which prepared the
   reign of Ormuzd. At the end of the time when the circle of the
   revolutions shall be completed, the perfect Paradise will appear. Men
   will then live happily: the earth will be like a great plain; there
   will be only one language, one law, and one government for all men. But
   this advent is to be preceded by terrible calamities. Dahak (the Satan
   of Persia) will break his chains and fall upon the world. Two prophets
   will then come to comfort mankind, and to prepare for the great advent.

   These ideas ran through the world, and penetrated even to Rome, where
   they inspired a cycle of prophetic poems, whose fundamental ideas were
   the division of the history of humanity into periods, the succession of
   the gods representing these epochs, a complete renewal of the world,
   and the final coming of a golden age. The book of Daniel, certain parts
   of the book of Enoch, and the Sibylline books are the Jewish expression
   of the same theory. It was certainly not the case that these thoughts
   were universal. They were, on the contrary, embraced at first only by
   some people of vivid imaginations and readily impressed by strange
   doctrines. The dry and narrow author of the book of Esther never
   thought of the rest of the world except to despise it and to wish it
   evil. The sated and undeceived Epicurean who writes Ecclesiastes thinks
   so little of the future that he considers it even useless to work for
   his children. In the eyes of this egotistical celibate, the highest
   advice of wisdom is to find one's chief good in mis-spent money. But
   great achievements made by any people are generally the work of the
   minority. In spite of all their defects, hard, egotistical, scoffing,
   cruel, narrow, subtle, sophistical, the Jews are nevertheless the
   authors of the finest movement of disinterested enthusiasm of which
   history speaks. Opposition always makes the glory of a country. In one
   sense, the greatest men of a nation are often those whom it puts to
   death. Socrates honoured the Athenians, who would not suffer him to
   live. Spinoza was the greatest modern Jew, and the synagogue expelled
   him with ignominy. Jesus was the glory of the people of Israel, and
   they crucified him.

   A gigantic dream haunted for centuries the Jewish people, constantly
   renewing its youth in its decrepitude. A stranger to the theory of
   individual recompenses which Greece had spread under the name of
   immortality of the soul, Judæa concentrated on her national future all
   her power of love and longing. She believed herself to possess divine
   promises of a boundless future; and as the bitter reality which, from
   the ninth century before our era, gave the domination of the world more
   and more to physical force brutally crushed these aspirations, she took
   refuge in the union of the most impossible ideas, and attempted the
   strangest gyrations. Before the captivity, when all the earthly future
   of the nation disappeared in consequence of the separation of the
   northern tribes, they had dreamt of the restoration of the house of
   David, the reconciliation of the two divisions of the people, and the
   triumph of theocracy and the worship of Jehovah over idolatrous
   systems. At the time of the captivity, a poet full of harmony foresaw
   the splendour of a future Jerusalem, to which the nations and distant
   isles should be tributaries, under colours so charming that it teemed a
   glance from the eyes of Jesus had leached him from a distance of six
   centuries.

   The victories of Cyrus at one time appeared to realise all that had
   been hoped for. The grave disciples of the Avesta and the adorers of
   Jehovah believed themselves brothers. Persia had begun by banishing the
   multiple dévas and by transforming them into demons (divs), to draw
   from the old Arian imagination, which was essentially naturalistic, a
   species of monotheism. The prophetic tone of many of the teachings of
   Iran resemble greatly certain compositions of Hosea and Isaiah. Israel
   reposed under the Achemenidæ, and under Xerxes (Ahasuerus) made itself
   feared by the Iranians themselves. But the triumphant and often cruel
   entrance of Greek and Roman civilisation into Asia, threw it back upon
   its dreams. More than ever it invoked the Messiah as the judge and
   avenger of the nations. In fact, there was a complete renovation--a
   revolution which should take hold of the world by its roots, and shake
   it from top to bottom--in order to satisfy the fearful longing for
   vengeance excited in Israel by the consciousness of its superiority and
   the sight of its humiliations.

   If Israel had possessed the doctrine called spiritualism, which divides
   man into two parts--the body and the soul--and finds it quite natural
   that while the body decays the soul survives, this paroxysm of rage and
   of energetic protestation would have had no raison d'être. But such a
   doctrine, proceeding from the Grecian philosophy, was not in the
   traditions of the Jewish mind. The ancient Hebrew writings contain no
   trace of future rewards or punishments. Whilst the idea of the
   solidarity of the tribe existed, it was natural that a strict
   retribution according to individual merits should not be thought of. So
   much the worse for the pious man who happened to live in a time of
   impiety; he suffered like the rest the public misfortunes consequent on
   the general irreligion. This doctrine, bequeathed by the sages of the
   patriarchal era, produced day by day unsustainable contradictions.
   Already at the time of Job it was much shaken; the old men of Teman who
   professed it were considered behind the age, and the young Elihu, who
   intervened in order to combat them, dared to utter as his first thesis
   this essentially revolutionary sentiment, "Great men are not always
   wise; neither do the aged understand judgment." With the complications
   which had taken place in the world since the time of Alexander, the old
   Temanite and Mosaic principle became still more intolerable. Never had
   Israel been more faithful to the Law, and yet it was subjected to the
   atrocious persecution of Antiochus. Only a declaimer, accustomed to
   repeat old phrases denuded of sense, would dare to assert that these
   evils proceeded from the unfaithfulness of the people. What! these
   victims who died for their faith, these heroic Maccabees, this mother
   with her seven sons, will Jehovah forget them eternally? Will he
   abandon them to the corruption of the grave? Worldly and incredulous
   Sadduceeism might possibly not recoil before such a consequence, and a
   consummate sage, like Antigonus of Soco, might indeed maintain that we
   must not practise virtue like a slave in expectation of a
   recompense--that we must be virtuous without hope. But the mass of the
   nation could not be contented with that. Some, attaching themselves to
   the principle of philosophical immortality, imagined the righteous
   living in the memory of God, glorious for ever in the remembrance of
   men, and judging the wicked who had persecuted them. "They live in the
   sight of God; . . . they are known of God." That was their reward.
   Others, especially the Pharisees, had recourse to the doctrine of the
   resurrection. The righteous will live again in order to participate in
   the Messianic reign. They will live again in the flesh, and for a world
   of which they will be the kings and the judges; they will be present at
   the triumph of their ideas and at the humiliation of their enemies.

   We find among the ancient people of Israel only very indecisive traces
   of this fundamental dogma. The Sadducee, who did not believe it, was in
   reality faithful to the old Jewish doctrine; it was the Pharisee, the
   believer in the resurrection, who was the innovator. But in religion it
   is always the zealous sect which innovates, which progresses, and which
   has influence. Besides this, the resurrection, an idea totally
   different from that of the immortality of the soul, proceeded very
   naturally from the anterior doctrines and from the position of the
   people. Perhaps Persia also furnished some of its elements. In any
   case, combining with the belief in the Messiah, and with the doctrine
   of a speedy renewal of all things, the dogma of the resurrection formed
   those apocalyptic theories which, without being articles of faith (the
   orthodox Sanhedrim of Jerusalem does not seem to have adopted them),
   pervaded all imaginations, and produced an extreme fermentation from
   one end of the Jewish world to the other. The total absence of dogmatic
   rigour caused very contradictory notions to be admitted at one time,
   even upon so primary a point. Sometimes the righteous were to await the
   resurrection; sometimes they were to be received at the moment of death
   into Abraham's bosom; sometimes the resurrection was to be general;
   sometimes it was to be reserved only for the faithful; sometimes it
   presupposed a new earth and a new Jerusalem; sometimes it implied a
   previous annihilation of the universe.

   Jesus, from the moment he began to think, entered into the burning
   atmosphere which had been created in Palestine by the ideas we have
   just referred to. These ideas were taught in no school; but they were
   "in the air" around him, and his soul was early penetrated by them. Our
   hesitations and doubts never reached him. On this summit of the hill of
   Nazareth, where no man of the present day can sit without an uneasy,
   although frivolous, feeling as to his own destiny, Jesus sat habitually
   without a doubt. Free from selfishness, the source of our troubles, he
   thought of nothing but his work, his race, and humanity at large. Those
   mountains, that sea, that azure sky, those high plains in the horizon,
   were for him not the melancholy vision of a soul which interrogates
   nature upon her fate, but the certain symbol, the transparent shadow of
   an invisible world and a new heaven.

   He never attached much importance to the political events of his time,
   and he was probably badly informed regarding them. The dynasty of the
   Herods lived in a world so different from his own that he doubtless
   only knew it by name. Herod the Great died about the year in which
   Jesus was born, leaving imperishable memories--monuments which must
   compel the most malevolent posterity to associate his name with that of
   Solomon; his woks, nevertheless, was incomplete, and could not be
   continued. Profanely ambitious, lost in a maze of religious
   controversies, this astute Idumean had the advantage which coolness and
   judgment, stripped of morality, give one in the midst of passionate
   fanatics. But his conception of a secular kingdom of Israel, even if it
   had not been an anachronism in the state of the world in which it was
   conceived, would have miscarried, like the similar project which
   Solomon formed, in consequence of the difficulties arising from the
   peculiar character of the nation. His three sons were nothing but
   lieutenants of the Romans, analogous to the rajahs of India under the
   English Government. Antipater, or Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee and
   Peræa, whose subject Jesus was all his life, was an idle and empty
   prince, a favourite and flatterer of Tiberius, and too often misled by
   the evil influence of his second wife Herodias. Philip, Tetrarch of
   Gaulonitis and Batanea, into whose territories Jesus made frequent
   journeys, was a much better sovereign. As to Archelaus, Ethnarch of
   Jerusalem, he could not have known him. Jesus was about ten years of
   age when this man, weak and characterless, although sometimes violent,
   was deposed by Augustus. The last trace of self-government was, in this
   way, lost to Jerusalem. United to Samaria and Idumea, Judæa formed a
   kind of dependency of the province of Syria, in which the senator
   Publius Sulpicius Quirinius, a well-known consular personage, was the
   imperial legate. A series of Roman procurators, subordinate in affairs
   of importance to the imperial legate of Syria--Coponius, Marcus
   Ambivius, Annius Rufus, Valerius Gratus, and lastly (in the 26th year
   of our era) Pontius Pilate--followed each other, and were incessantly
   occupied in extinguishing the volcano which was rumbling beneath their
   feet.

   Continual seditions, excited by the zealots of Mosaism, were constantly
   during this period agitating Jerusalem. The death of the seditious was
   certain; but death, when the matter concerned the integrity of the Law,
   was sought for with avidity. To overturn the Roman eagles, to destroy
   the works of art raised by the Herods, in which the Mosaic regulations
   were not always respected, to rebel against the votive escutcheons
   raised by the procurators, and whose inscriptions seemed to them
   tainted by idolatry, were perpetual temptations to fanatics who had
   reached that degree of exaltation which removes all regard for life.
   Thus it was that Judas, son of Sariphea, and Matthias, son of
   Margaloth, two greatly celebrated doctors of the Law, formed against
   the established order a party of bold aggression, which continued after
   their execution. The Samaritans were agitated by movements of the same
   kind. The Law seems never to have counted more impassioned votaries
   than at this period, when there already lived that man who, by the full
   authority of his genius and of his great soul, was about to abrogate
   it. The "zelotes" (kanaïm) or "sicarii," pious assassins, who imposed
   on themselves the task of killing whoever in their estimation broke the
   Law, began to appear. Representatives of a totally different spirit,
   the Thaumaturges, considered as in some measure divine, found credence
   in consequence of the imperious necessity which the age expressed for
   the supernatural and the divine.

   A movement which had much more influence on Jesus was that of Judas,
   the Gaulonite or Galilean. Of all the constraints to which countries
   newly conquered by Rome were subjected, the census was the most
   unpopular. This measure, which always irritates nations little
   accustomed to the responsibilities of great central administrations,
   was specially odious to the Jews. Already, under David, we see how a
   numbering of the people provoked violent recriminations, and the
   threatenings of the prophets. The census, in fact, was the basis of
   taxation. Now, taxation, in the estimation of a pure theocracy, was
   almost an impiety. God being the sole Master whom man ought to
   recognise, to pay tithe to a secular sovereign was, in a manner, to put
   him in the place of God. Completely ignorant of the idea of the State,
   the Jewish theocracy only acted up to its logical induction -- the
   negation of civil society and of all government. The money in the
   public treasury was regarded as stolen. The census ordered by Quirinius
   (in the sixth year of the Christian era) powerfully awakened these
   ideas, and caused a tremendous ferment. A disturbance broke out in the
   northern provinces. One Judas, of the town of Gamala, on the eastern
   shore of the lake of Tiberias, and a Pharisee named Sadoc, by denying
   the lawfulness of the impost, created a numerous party, which soon
   broke out into open revolt. The fundamental maxims of this school were
   that liberty was better than life, and that no man ought to be called
   "master," this title belonging to God alone. Judas had, doubtless, many
   other principles, which Josephus, always careful not to compromise his
   co-religionists, designedly suppresses; for it is impossible to
   understand how, for so simple an idea, the Jewish historian should give
   him a place among the philosophers of his nation, and should regard him
   as the founder of a fourth school, equal to those of the Pharisees, the
   Sadducees, and the Essenes. Judas was evidently the chief of a Galilean
   sect, which was imbued with Messianic ideas, and became a political
   movement. The procurator, Coponius, crushed the sedition of the
   Gaulonite; but the party survived and preserved its chiefs. Under the
   leadership of Menahem, son of its founder, and of one Eleazar, his
   kinsman, we find it again very active in the last struggles of the Jews
   with the Romans. Jesus, it may be, saw this Judas, who had conceived a
   Jewish revolution of a kind so different from his own ideal; at all
   events, he knew the opinions of his school, and it was probably by a
   reaction against his mistake that he pronounced the axiom upon the
   "penny" of Cæsar. Wisely standing aloof from all sedition, Jesus
   profited by the fault of his predecessor, and dreamed of another
   kingdom and of another deliverance.

   Galilee was thus a vast furnace, in which the most diverse elements
   were heaving to a boiling point. An extraordinary contempt for life,
   or, to speak more correctly, a kind of longing for death, was the
   result of these agitations. Experience counts for nothing in great
   fanatical movements. Algeria, in the first days of the French
   occupation, saw arise, each springtime, inspired men who declared that
   they were invulnerable and were sent by God to expel the infidels; the
   following year their death was forgotten, and their successors found an
   undiminished credence. Very stern on the one hand, the Roman power was
   not at all meddlesome, and permitted much liberty. These great
   brute-force despotisms, terrible in repression, were not so suspicious
   as powers which have some dogma to uphold. They allowed everything to
   be done up to the point at which they thought they ought to use
   vigorous measures. In his wandering career, Jesus does not appear to
   have been once annoyed by the civil authorities. Such a liberty, and
   above all the happiness which Galilee enjoyed in being much less
   restrained by the bonds of Pharisaic pedantry, gave to this province a
   real advantage over Jerusalem. The revolution, or, in other words, the
   Messianic expectations, caused a general mental fermentation here. Men
   believed that they were on the eve of beholding the great renovation;
   the Scriptures, tortured into a variety of meanings, became food for
   the most colossal hopes. In each line of the simple writings of the Old
   Testament they saw the assurance, and, in a certain sense, the
   programme of the future reign, which should bring peace to the
   righteous, and seal for ever the work of God.

   From all time this division into two parties, opposed to each other in
   interest and spirit, had been for the Hebrew people a principle which
   had been fertile in moral growth. Every nation called to high destinies
   ought to form a complete little world, including within it the opposite
   poles. Greece presented, a few leagues apart, Sparta and Athens, the
   two antipodes to a superficial observer, but in reality rival sisters,
   each necessary to the other. It was the same with Judæa. Less brilliant
   in one sense than the development of Jerusalem, that of the north was
   on the whole much more fruitful; the noblest works of the Jewish people
   have always proceeded thence. A complete absence of the love of nature,
   almost amounting to something dry, narrow, and even ferocious, has
   stamped upon all purely Jerusalemitish works a character grand indeed,
   but sad, arid, and repulsive. With its solemn doctors, its insipid
   canonists, its hypocritical and atrabilious devotees, Jerusalem could
   not conquer humanity. The north has given to the world the simple
   Shulamite, the humble Canaanite, the passionate Magdalene, the good
   foster-father Joseph, and the Virgin Mary. It is the north alone which
   has made Christianity; Jerusalem, on the contrary, is the true home of
   that obstinate Judaism which, founded by the Pharisees and fixed by the
   Talmud, has traversed the Middle Ages and come down to us.

   A beautiful aspect of nature contributed to the formation of this less
   austere, though less sharply monotheistic spirit, if I may venture so
   to call it, which impressed all the dreams of Galilee with a charming
   and idyllic character. The region round about Jerusalem is, perhaps,
   the gloomiest country in the world. Galilee, on the contrary, was
   exceedingly verdant, shady, smiling, the true home of the Song of Songs
   and the Canticles of the well-beloved. During the two months of March
   and April the country is a carpet of flowers, with an incomparable
   variety of colouring. The animals are small and extremely
   gentle,--delicate and lively turtle-doves, blue-birds so light that
   they rest on a blade of grass without bending it; crested larks which
   advance nearly under the very feet of the traveller; little
   river-tortoises with sweet and lively eyes, and also storks with grave
   and modest mien, which, dismissing all timidity, allow themselves to be
   approached quite closely, and seem almost to invite the companionship
   of men. In no country in the world do the mountains spread themselves
   out with more harmony, or inspire loftier thought. Jesus seems to have
   specially loved them. The most important acts of his career took place
   on mountains. It was there he was the most inspired; it was there he
   held secret communings with the ancient prophets; it was there he
   showed himself transfigured before the eyes of his disciples.

   This lovely country, which at the present day has become (through the
   woful impoverishing influence which Islamism has wrought on human life)
   so sad and wretched, but where everything that man cannot destroy
   breathes still an air of freedom, sweetness, and tenderness, overflowed
   with happiness and joy at the time of Jesus. The Galileans were
   reckoned brave, energetic and laborious. If we except Tiberias, built
   by Antipas in the Roman style, in honour of Tiberius (about the year
   15), Galilee had no large towns. The country was nevertheless covered
   with small towns and large villages well peopled, and cultivated with
   skill in every direction. From the ruins of its ancient splendour which
   survive we can trace an agricultural people in no way gifted in art,
   caring little for luxury, indifferent to the beauties of form, and
   exclusively idealistic. The country abounded in fresh streams and
   fruits; the large farms were shaded with vines and fig-trees; the
   gardens were a mass of apple and walnut trees, and pomegranates. The
   wine was excellent, if it may be judged from what the Jews still obtain
   at Safed, and they drank freely of it. This contented and easily
   satisfied life did not at all resemble the gross materialism of our
   peasantry, or the coarse happiness of agricultural Normandy, or the
   heavy mirth of the Flemings. It spiritualised itself in mysterious
   dreams, in a kind of poetical mysticism, blending heaven and earth.
   Leave the austere John Baptist in his desert of Judæa, to preach
   penitence, to inveigh unceasingly, and to live on locusts in the
   company of jackals! Why should the companions of the bridegroom fast
   while the bridegroom is with them? Joy will be a part of the kingdom of
   God. Is she not the daughter of the humble in heart, of the men of
   goodwill?

   The entire history of infant Christianity is in this sense a delightful
   pastoral. A Messiah at the marriage supper, the courtesan and the good
   Zaccheus called to his feasts, the founders of the kingdom of heaven
   like a bridal procession;--this is what Galilee has dared to offer, and
   what the world has really accepted. Greece has drawn admirable pictures
   of human life in sculpture and poetry, but always without backgrounds
   or receding perspectives. Here were wanting the marble, the practised
   workmen, the exquisite and refined language. But Galilee has created
   for the popular imagination the most sublime ideal; for behind its
   idyll the fate of humanity moves, and the light which illumines its
   picture is the sun of the kingdom of God.

   Jesus lived and grew up amidst those elevating surroundings. From his
   infancy, he went almost every year to the feast at Jerusalem. The
   pilgrimage was for the provincial Jews a solemnity of sweet
   associations. Several entire series of psalms were consecrated to
   celebrate the happiness of thus journeying in family society during
   several days in springtime across the hills and valleys, all having in
   prospect the splendours of Jerusalem, the solemnities of the sacred
   courts, and the joy of brethren dwelling together. The route which
   Jesus usually followed in these journeys was that which is taken in the
   present day, through Ginæa and Shechem. From Shechem to Jerusalem
   travelling is very toilsome. But the neighbourhood of the old
   sanctuaries of Shiloh and Bethel, near which the pilgrim passes, keeps
   the mind awake with interest. Ain-el-Haramié, the last halting-place,
   is a melancholy and yet charming spot; and few impressions equal that
   which one feels when encamping there for the night. The valley is
   narrow and sombre, while a dark stream issues from the rocks full of
   tombs, which form its banks. It is, I believe, "the valley of tears,"
   or of dropping waters, which is sung of as one of the stations on the
   way in the delightful eighty-fourth Psalm; and it became, to the sweet
   and sad mysticism of the Middle Ages, the emblem of life. The next day,
   at an early hour, the travellers would be at Jerusalem; this
   expectation, even at the present day, sustains the caravan, rendering
   the night short and slumber light.

   These journeys, during which the assembled nation exchanged its ideas,
   and which created annually in the capital centres of great excitement,
   placed Jesus in contact with the mind of his countrymen, and doubtless
   inspired him from his youth with a lively antipathy to the defects of
   the official representatives of Judaism. It is observable that very
   early the desert had been for him like a school, and to this he had
   made prolonged visits. But the God he found there was not his God. It
   was emphatically rather the God of Job, severe and terrible, and who is
   accountable to none. Sometimes Satan came to tempt him. He then
   returned from these sojourns into his beloved Galilee, and found again
   his heavenly Father, in the midst of the green hills and the clear
   fountains--among the crowds of women and children who, with joyous soul
   and the song of the angels in their hearts, waited for the salvation of
   Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V.

  THE FIRST SAYINGS OF JESUS--HIS IDEAS OF A "FATHER-GOD" AND OF A PURE
  RELIGION--FIRST DISCIPLES.

   Joseph died before his son had assumed any public position. Mary
   remained, in a manner, the head of the family; and this explains why
   Jesus, when it was desired to distinguish him from others of the same
   name, was most frequently called "the son of Mary." It would seem that
   having, through her husband's death, become friendless in Nazareth, she
   retired to Cana, which was probably her native place. Cana was a little
   town about two or two and a half hours' journey from Nazareth, at the
   base of the hills which bound the plain of Asochis on the north. The
   prospect, less grand than that at Nazareth, extends over the whole
   plain, and is bounded in the most picturesque manner by the mountains
   of Nazareth and the hills of Sepphoris. Jesus appears to have resided
   in this place for some time. There he probably passed a part of his
   youth, and his first manifestations were made at Cana.

   He followed the same occupation as his father--that of a carpenter.
   This was no humiliating or vexatious circumstance. The Jewish custom
   demanded that a man devoted to intellectual work should assume a
   handicraft. The most celebrated doctors had their trades; it was thus
   that St. Paul, whose education was so elaborate, was a tent-maker, or
   upholsterer. Jesus never married. All his power of loving expended
   itself on what he considered his heavenly vocation. The extremely
   delicate sentiment which one observes in his manner towards women did
   not interfere with the exclusive devotion he cherished for his idea.
   Like Francis d'Assisi and Francis de Sales, he treated as sisters the
   women who threw themselves into the same work as he did; he had his
   Saint Clare, and his Françoise de Chantals. However, it is probable
   that they loved himself better than his work; he was certainly more
   beloved than loving. As happens frequently in the case of very lofty
   natures, his tenderness of heart transformed itself into an infinite
   sweetness, a vague poetry, a universal charm. His relations, free and
   intimate, but of an entirely moral kind, with women of doubtful
   character, are also explained by the passion which attached him to the
   glory of his Father, and which made him jealously anxious for all
   beautiful creatures who could contribute to it.

   What was the progress of thought in Jesus during this obscure period of
   his life? Through what meditations did he enter upon his prophetic
   career? We cannot tell, his history having come to us in the shape of
   scattered narratives and without exact chronology. But the development
   of living character is everywhere the same, and it cannot be doubted
   that the growth of a personality so powerful as that of Jesus obeyed
   very rigorous laws. An exalted conception of the Divinity--which he did
   not owe to Judaism, and which appears to have been in all its parts the
   creation of his great intellect--was in a manner the source of all his
   power. It is essential here that we put aside the ideas familiar to us,
   and the discussions in which little minds exhaust themselves. In order
   properly to understand the precise character of the piety of Jesus, we
   must forget all that is placed between the gospel and ourselves. Deism
   and Pantheism have become the two poles of theology. The paltry
   discussions of scholasticism, the dryness of spirit of Descartes, the
   deep-rooted irreligion of the eighteenth century, by lessening God, and
   by limiting Him, in a manner, by the exclusion of everything which is
   not His very self, have stifled in the breast of modern rationalism all
   fertile ideas of the Divinity. If God, in fact, is a fixed entity
   outside of us, he who believes himself to have peculiar relations with
   God is a "visionary," and, as the physical and physiological sciences
   have shown us that all supernatural visions are illusions, the logical
   Deist finds it impossible to understand the great beliefs of the past.
   Pantheism, on the other hand, in suppressing the Divine personality, is
   as far as it can be from the living God of the ancient religions. Were
   the men who have best comprehended God--Sakya-Mouni, Plato, St. Paul,
   St. Francis d'Assisi, and St. Augustine (at some periods of his
   fluctuating life)--Deists or Pantheists? Such a question has no
   meaning. The physical and metaphysical proofs of the existence of God
   were quite indifferent to them. They felt the Divine within themselves.

   We must place Jesus in the first rank of this great family of the true
   sons of God. Jesus had no visions; God did not speak to him as to one
   outside of himself; God was in him; he felt himself with God, and he
   drew from his own heart all he said of his Father. He lived in the
   bosom of God by an unceasing communication; he did not see Him, but he
   understood Him, without need of the thunder or the burning bush of
   Moses, of the revealing tempest of Job, of the oracle of the old Greek
   sages, of the familiar genius of Socrates, or of the angel Gabriel of
   Mahomet. The imagination and the hallucination of a Saint Theresa, for
   example, are valueless here. The intoxication of the Soufi proclaiming
   himself identical with God is also a totally different thing. Jesus
   never once announced the sacrilegious theory that he was God. He
   believed himself to be in direct communication with God--he believed
   himself to be the Son of God. The highest consciousness of God which
   has existed in the bosom of humanity is that of Jesus.

   We understand, on the other hand, that Jesus, commencing his work with
   such a disposition of mind, could never be a speculative philosopher
   like Sakya-Mouni. Nothing is further from scholastic theology than the
   Gospel. The speculations of the Greek doctors on the Divine essence
   proceed from an entirely different spirit. God, conceived simply as
   Father, was all the theology of Jesus. And this was not with him a
   theoretical principle, a doctrine more or less proved, which he sought
   to inculcate in others. He did not argue with his disciples; he
   demanded from them no effort of attention. He did not preach his
   opinions; he preached himself. Very great and very disinterested minds
   often present, associated with much elevation, that character of
   perpetual attention to themselves, and extreme personal susceptibility,
   which, in general, is peculiar to women. Their conviction that God is
   in them, and occupies Himself perpetually with them, is so strong that
   they have no fear of obtruding themselves upon others; our reserve, and
   our respect for the opinion of others, which is a part of our weakness,
   could not belong to them. This exaltation of self is not egotism; for
   such men, possessed by their idea, give their lives freely, in order to
   seal their work; it is the identification of self with the object it
   has embraced, carried to its utmost limit. It is regarded as vain glory
   by those who see in the new teaching only the personal phantasy of the
   founder; but it is the finger of God to those who see the result. The
   fool stands side by side here with the inspired man, only the fool
   never succeeds. It has not yet been given to mental aberration to
   influence seriously the progress of humanity.

   Jesus, no doubt, did not reach at one step this high assertion of
   himself. But it is probable that, from the first, he looked on himself
   as standing with God in the relation of a son to his father. This was
   his grand act of originality; there was nothing here in common with his
   race. Neither the Jew nor the Mussulman has understood this delightful
   theology of love. The God of Jesus is not the tyrannical master who
   kills, damns, or saves us, just as it pleases Him. The God of Jesus is
   our Father. We hear Him while listening to the gentle inspiration which
   cries within us--"Father." The God of Jesus is not the partial despot
   who has chosen Israel for His people, and protects them against all the
   world. He is the God of humanity. Jesus would not be a patriot like the
   Maccabees, or a theocrat like Judas the Gaulonite. Boldly elevating
   himself above the prejudices of his nation, he would establish the
   universal Fatherhood of God. The Gaulonite maintained that it was
   better for one to die than to give the title of "Master" to any other
   than God; Jesus would allow any man to take this name, but reserves for
   God a title dearer still. Yielding to the powerful of the earth, who
   were to him the representatives of force, a respect full of irony, he
   establishes the supreme consolation--the recourse to the Father whom
   each one has in heaven, and the true kingdom of God which every man
   carries in his heart.

   This expression--"the kingdom of God" or "the kingdom of heaven"--was
   the favourite term of Jesus to describe the revolution he was bringing
   into the world. Like nearly all the terms relating to the Messiah, it
   came from the book of Daniel. According to the author of that
   extraordinary book, the four profane empires destined to extinction
   would be succeeded by a fifth empire-- that of the saints, which should
   endure for ever. This reign of God upon earth naturally led to the most
   diverse interpretations. In the later days of his life Jesus believed
   that this reign would be realised in a material form by a sudden
   renovation of the world. But this was, doubtless, not his first idea.
   The admirable moral which he drew from the notion of the Father-God is
   not that of enthusiasts who believe the world to be nearly at an end,
   and who prepare themselves by asceticism for a chimerical catastrophe;
   it is that of a world which has lived and would live still. "The
   kingdom of God is within you," he said to those who cunningly sought
   for external signs. The realistic conception of the Divine Advent was
   only a cloud, a transient error, which his death has made us forget.
   The Jesus who founded the true kingdom of God, the kingdom of the meek
   and the humble, was the Jesus of early life, of those pure and
   cloudless days when the voice of his father re-echoed within his bosom
   in clearer tones. It was then for some months--a year perhaps--that God
   truly dwelt on earth. The voice of the young carpenter acquired all at
   once an extraordinary sweetness. An infinite charm was exhaled from his
   person, and those who had hitherto seen him recognised him as the same
   no longer. He had not as yet any disciples, and the group of people
   which gathered round him was neither a sect nor a school; but there was
   already felt among them a common spirit, and an influence both sweet
   and penetrating. His amiable character, and doubtless one of those
   exquisite faces which sometimes appear in the Jewish race, threw around
   him a fascination from which no one, in the midst of these kindly and
   fresh-minded peoples, could escape.

   Paradise would, in fact, have been brought to earth if the ideas of the
   young Master had not far transcended that level of ordinary goodness
   which the human race has found it hitherto impossible to pass. The
   brotherhood of men, as sons of God, and the moral consequences which
   have resulted from it, were deduced with exquisite feeling. Like all
   the rabbis of the period, Jesus little affected consecutive reasonings,
   but clothed his teaching in concise aphorisms, and in an expressive
   form, oft-times enigmatical and singular. Some of these maxims came
   from the books of the Old Testament. Others were the thoughts of more
   modern sages, especially of Antigonus of Soco, Jesus, son of Sirach,
   and Hillel, which had reached him, not through a course of learned
   study, but as oft-repeated proverbs. The synagogue was rich in very
   happily-expressed maxims, which formed a sort of current proverbial
   literature. Jesus adopted almost all this oral teaching, but imbued it
   with a superior spirit. Generally exceeding the duties laid down by the
   Law and the elders, he demanded perfection. All the virtues of
   humility, pardon, charity, abnegation, and self-denial--virtues which
   have been called with good reason Christian--if it is meant by this
   that they have been truly preached by Christ--were found in germ in
   this first declaration. As to justice, he contented himself with
   repeating the well-known axiom--"Whatsoever ye would that men should do
   unto you, do ye even so to them." But this old wisdom, selfish enough
   as it was, did not satisfy him. He went to excess,
   declaring--"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him
   the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away
   thy coat, let him have thy cloak also." "If thy right eye offend thee,
   pluck it out, and cast it from thee." "Love your enemies, do good to
   them that hate you; pray for them that persecute you." "Judge not, that
   ye be not judged." "Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven." "Be therefore
   merciful, as your Father also is merciful." "It is more blessed to give
   than to receive." "Whosoever shalt exalt himself shall be abased; and
   he that shall humble himself shall be exalted."

   In regard to alms, pity, good works, kindness, the desire for peace,
   and complete disinterestedness of heart, he had little to add to the
   teaching of the synagogue. But he stamped them with an emphasis full of
   unction, and thus gave novelty to those aphorisms which had long been
   current. Morality is not composed of principles more or less
   well-expressed. The poetry of the precept, which makes one love it, is
   more than the precept itself, viewed as an abstract truth. Now, it
   cannot be denied that these maxims, borrowed by Jesus from his
   predecessors, produce quite a different effect in the Gospel to that in
   the ancient Law, in the Pirké Aboth, or in the Talmud. It is neither
   the ancient Law nor the Talmud which has conquered and changed the
   world. Little original in itself--if it is meant by that that one might
   recompose it almost entirely by means of more ancient maxims--the
   morality of the Gospel remains no less the loftiest creation of the
   human conscience, the most beautiful code of perfect life which any
   moralist has traced.

   Jesus did not speak against the Mosaic law; but it is clear that he saw
   its insufficiency, and he let this be distinctly understood. He
   repeated constantly that more must be done than the ancient sages
   commanded. He forbade the least harsh word; he prohibited divorce, and
   all swearing; he censured revenge; he condemned usury; he held
   voluptuous desire to be as criminal as adultery. He demanded a
   universal forgiveness of injuries. The motive on which he grounded
   these maxims of exalted charity was always the same. . . . . "That ye
   may be the children of your Father which is in heaven; for He maketh
   His sun to rise on the evil and the good." "For if," he added, "ye love
   them that love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the
   same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others?
   do not even the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your
   Father which is in heaven is perfect."

   A pure worship, a religion without priests or external observances,
   resting entirely on the feelings of the heart, on the imitation of God,
   on the direct communication between the conscience and the heavenly
   Father, was the result of these principles. Jesus never shrank from
   this daring consequence, which made him, in the very centre of Judaism,
   a revolutionist of the first rank. Why should there be any
   intermediaries between man and his Father? As God only looks on the
   heart, of what use are these purifications--these observances which
   only relate to the body? Even tradition, a thing so sacred to the Jew,
   is nothing compared to a pure feeling. The hypocrisy of the Pharisees,
   who, in praying, turned their heads to see if they were observed, who
   gave alms with ostentation, and put on their garments marks by which
   they might be recognised as pious persons--all these grimaces of false
   devotion disgusted him. "They have their reward," said he; "but thou,
   when thou doest thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
   hand doeth, that thy alms may be in secret; and thy Father, which seeth
   in secret, Himself shall reward thee openly." "And thou, when thou
   prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray
   to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in
   secret, shall reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain
   repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they shall be heard
   for their much speaking. Your Father knoweth what things ye have need
   of before ye ask him."

   He did not affect any outward sign of asceticism, contenting himself
   with praying, or rather meditating, upon the mountains and in those
   solitary places where man has always sought God. This lofty idea of the
   relations of man with God, of which so few minds, even after him, have
   been capable, is summed up in a prayer which he compiled from some
   pious phrases already current amongst the Jews, and which he taught his
   disciples: --

   "Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom
   come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day
   our daily bread. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
   trespass against us. Lead us not into temptation; deliver us from the
   evil one." Jesus insisted particularly upon the idea that the heavenly
   Father knows better than we do what we need, and that we almost sin
   against Him in asking Him for this or that particular thing.

   Jesus did nothing more in this matter than to carry out the
   consequences of the great principles which Judaism had established, but
   which the official classes of the nation inclined more and more to
   despise. The Greek and Roman prayers were almost always full of
   egotism. Never had Pagan priest said to the faithful, "If thou bring
   thy offering to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath
   aught against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy
   way; first be reconciled with thy brother, and then come and offer thy
   gift." Alone in antiquity, the Jewish prophets, especially Isaiah, in
   their antipathy to the priesthood, had discovered a little of the true
   nature of the worship which man owes to God. "To what purpose is the
   multitude of your sacrifices unto me? I am full of the burnt-offerings
   of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of
   bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. Incense is an abomination unto
   me: for your hands are full of blood; cease to do evil, learn to do
   well, seek judgment, and then come." In later times such doctors as
   Simeon the Just, Jesus son of Sirach, and Hillel, almost reached this
   point, and declared that the sum of the Law was righteousness. Philo,
   in the Judæo-Egyptian world, attained at the same time as Jesus ideas
   of a high moral sanctity; and the consequence of this was a decreasing
   regard for the customs of the Law. Shemaïa and Abtalion also more than
   once showed themselves very liberal casuists. Rabbi Johanan ere long
   went so far as to place works of mercy above even the study of the Law!
   Jesus alone, however, proclaimed this principle in an effective manner.
   Never has any man been less a priest than Jesus, and never has there
   been a greater enemy of forms which stifle religion under the pretext
   of protecting it. In this way we are all his disciples and his
   successors; in this way he has laid the eternal foundation-stone of
   true religion; and if religion is the essential thing for humanity, by
   this he has merited the divine rank which men have awarded him. An
   absolutely new idea--the idea of a worship founded upon purity of heart
   and on human brotherhood--made, through him, its entrance into the
   world--an idea so elevated that the Christian Church ought by this fact
   to disclose exhaustively its design, but an idea which, in our days,
   only some minds are able to grasp.

   An exquisite sympathy with nature furnished Jesus with expressive
   images at every turn. Sometimes a wonderful ingenuity, which we call
   wit, adorned his aphorisms; at other times their vivacity consisted in
   the happy use of popular proverbs. "How wilt thou say to thy brother,
   Let me pull the mote out of thine eye; and behold, a beam is in thine
   own eye? Thou hypocrite; first cast out the beam out of thine own eye,
   and then thou shalt see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother's
   eye."

   These lessons, long concealed in the heart of the young Master, soon
   gathered round him a few disciples. The spirit of the age was in favour
   of small churches; it was the time of the Essenes or Therapeutæ.
   Certain Rabbis, each having his own distinctive teaching, Shemaïa,
   Abtalion, Hillel, Shammaï, Judas the Gaulonite, Gamaliel, and many
   others whose maxims form the Talmud, appeared on all sides. They wrote
   very little; the Jewish doctors of that age did not make books;
   everything was done by conversation and public lessons, to which it was
   sought to give a form easily remembered. The day when the youthful
   carpenter of Nazareth began openly to proclaim those maxims, for the
   most part already propagated, but which, thanks to him, have been able
   to regenerate the world, marked therefore no very startling event. It
   was only one Rabbi more (true, the most fascinating of them all), and
   around him a few young people, greedy to hear him and to search for the
   unknown. It requires time to awaken men from inattention. There was not
   as yet any Christian, though true Christianity was founded already, and
   doubtless it has never been more perfect than at this first period.
   Jesus added nothing more enduring to it afterwards. What do I say? In
   one sense he compromised it; for every idea, in order to prevail, must
   make sacrifices; we never come out of the battle of life unscathed.

   To conceive the good, in fact, is not enough; it is necessary to make
   it succeed amongst men. To this end, less pure paths must be followed.
   No doubt, if the Gospel were confined to some chapters of Matthew and
   Luke, it would be more perfect, and would certainly not be open now to
   so many objections; but without miracles would it have converted the
   world? If Jesus had died at the period of his career which we have now
   reached, there would not have been in, his life a single page that
   could wound us; but, although greater thus in the eyes of God, he would
   have remained unknown to men; he would have been lost in the crowd of
   great unknown spirits--himself the noblest of them all; the truth would
   not have been promulgated, and the world would not have profited by the
   immense moral superiority with which the Father had endowed him. Jesus,
   the son of Sirach, and Hillel had uttered aphorisms nearly as elevated
   as his own. Hillel, however, will never be reckoned as the true founder
   of Christianity. In morals, as in art, precept is nothing; practice is
   everything. The idea which lies hidden in a picture of Raphael is of
   small moment; it is the picture itself which is prized. In the same
   manner, in morals, truth is very little thought of when it only reaches
   the condition of being a mere feeling; it only attains its full value
   when it is realised in the world as a certain fact. Some men of
   mediocre morality have written a number of good maxims. Some very
   virtuous men, on the other hand, have done nothing to continue in the
   world the tradition of virtue. The palm is his who has been powerful
   both in words and deeds, who has discerned the good, and at the price
   of his blood, has made it triumph. Jesus, from this double point of
   view, is without equal; his glory remains entire, and will ever be
   renewed.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI.

  JOHN THE BAPTIST--VISIT OF JESUS TO JOHN, AND HIS ABODE IN THE DESERT OF
  JUDÆA--HE ADOPTS THE BAPTISM OF JOHN.

   An extraordinary man, whose position, in the absence of documents to
   describe it, remains to us in some measure enigmatical, appeared about
   this time, and was unquestionably connected to some extent with Jesus.
   This connection rather tended to make the young prophet of Nazareth
   deviate from his path; but it also suggested many important accessories
   to his religious institution, and, at all events, it furnished his
   disciples with a very strong authority to recommend their master in the
   eyes of a certain class of Jews.

   About the year 28 of our era (the fifteenth year of the reign of
   Tiberius), there spread through all Palestine the fame of a certain
   Johanan or John, a young ascetic full of zeal and enthusiasm. John was
   of the priestly race, and was born, it would seem, at Juttah, near
   Hebron, or at Hebron itself. This city, which may be called patriarchal
   beyond all others, situated a short distance from the desert of Judæa,
   and within a few hours' journey of the great desert of Arabia, was at
   that time what it is still to-day, one of the bulwarks of monotheism in
   its most austere form.

   From his infancy John was a Nazir--that is to say, subjected by vow to
   certain abstinences. The desert by which he was, so to speak,
   surrounded, attracted him from early life. He led there a life like
   that of a Yogui of India, clothed with skins or cloth of camel's hair,
   having for food only locusts and wild honey. A certain number of
   disciples were grouped around him, sharing his life or studying his
   severe doctrine. We might imagine ourselves transported to the banks of
   the Ganges, if special features had not revealed in this recluse the
   last descendant of the grand prophets of Israel.

   Since the Jewish nation had begun to reflect upon its destiny with a
   kind of despair, the imagination of the people had reverted with much
   complacency to the ancient prophets. Now, of all the personages of the
   past, the remembrance of whom came like the dreams of a troubled night
   to awaken and agitate the people, the greatest was Elias. This giant of
   the prophets and his rough solitude of Carmel, where he shared the life
   of wild beasts, dwelling in the hollows of the rocks, whence he issued
   like a thunderbolt to make and unmake kings, had become, by successive
   transformations, a sort of superhuman being, sometimes visible,
   sometimes invisible, and one who had not tasted of death. It was
   generally believed that Elias would return and restore Israel. The
   austere life which he had led, the terrible remembrances he had left
   behind him--the impression of which is still vivid in the East--that
   sombre portraiture which, even in our own days, causes trembling and
   death; all this mythology, full of vengeance and terrors, powerfully
   struck the public imagination and stamped, as with a birth-mark, all
   the creations of the popular mind. Whoever aspired to any great
   influence over the people must imitate Elias; and, as a solitary life
   had been the essential characteristic of that prophet, they were
   accustomed to think of "the man of God" as a hermit. They imagined that
   all holy personages would have their days of penitence, of solitary
   life, and of austerity. The retreat to the desert thus became the
   condition and the prelude of high destinies.

   There can be no doubt that this idea of imitation had occupied John's
   mind to a considerable degree. The anchorite life, so opposed to the
   spirit of the ancient Jewish people, and with which the vows, such as
   those of the Nazirs and the Rechabites, had no relation, pervaded all
   parts of Judæa. The Essenes were grouped near the birthplace of John,
   on the eastern shores of the Dead Sea. Abstinence from flesh, wine, and
   from sexual pleasures was regarded as the novitiate of the prophets.
   People imagined that the chiefs of any sect should be recluses, having
   their own rules and institutions, like the founders of religious
   orders. The teachers of the young were also at times a species of
   anchorites, resembling to some extent the gourous of Brahminism. In
   fact, might there not in this be a remote influence of the mounis of
   India? Perhaps, some of those wandering Buddhist monks who overran the
   world, as the first Franciscans did in later times, preaching by their
   actions and converting people who knew not their language, might have
   turned their steps towards Judæa, as they certainly did towards Syria
   and Babylon. On this point we have no certainty. Babylon had become for
   some time a true focus of Buddhism. Boudasp (Bodhisattva) was reputed a
   wise Chaldean, and the founder of Sabeism. Sabeism was, as its
   etymology indicates, baptism--that is to say, the religion of many
   baptisms--the origin of the sect still existing called "Christians of
   St. John," or Mendaites, which the Arabs call el-Mogtasila, "the
   Baptists." It is very difficult to unravel these vague analogies. The
   sects floating between Judaism, Christianity, Baptism, and Sabeism,
   which we find in the region beyond the Jordan during the first
   centuries of our era, present to criticism the most singular problem,
   in consequence of the confused accounts of them which have come down to
   us. We may believe, at all events, that many of the external practices
   of John, of the Essenes, and of the Jewish spiritual teachers of this
   time, were derived from influences then but recently received from the
   far East. The fundamental practice which gave to the sect of John its
   character, and which has given him his name, has always had its centre
   in lower Chaldea, and constitutes a religion which is practised there
   to this day.

   This practice was baptism, or total immersion. Ablutions were already
   familiar to the Jews, as they were to all the religions of the East.
   The Essenes had given them a peculiar extension. Baptism had become an
   ordinary ceremony at the introduction of proselytes into the bosom of
   the Jewish religion--a sort of initiatory rite. But never before the
   Baptist's time had there been given to immersion either this form or
   importance. John had fixed the scene of his labours in that part of the
   desert of Judæa which borders on the Dead Sea. At the periods when he
   administered baptism, he betook himself to the banks of the Jordan,
   either to Bethany or to Bethabara, on the eastern shore, probably
   opposite Jericho, or to a place called Ænon, or the Fountains, near
   Salim, where there was much water. There considerable crowds, mainly of
   the tribe of Judah, hastened to him to be baptized. In a few months he
   thus became one of the most influential men in Judæa, and all the
   multitude held him in high estimation.

   The people considered him a prophet, and many imagined that he was
   Elias who had risen from the dead. The belief in such resurrections was
   widely spread; it was thought that God would raise from their graves
   certain of the ancient prophets to serve as the leaders of Israel to
   its final destiny. Others took John for the Messiah himself, although
   he certainly made no such pretension. The priests and scribes, opposed
   to this revival of prophetism, and always antagonistic to enthusiasts,
   despised him. But the popularity of the Baptist awed them, and they
   dared not speak against him. It was a victory which the feeling of the
   vulgar gained over the priestly aristocracy. When the chief priests
   were obliged to explain their exact position on this point, they were
   much embarrassed.

   Baptism, however, was to John nothing more than a sign, destined to
   make an impression and to prepare men's minds for some great movement.
   There is no doubt that he was imbued in the highest degree with the
   Messianic expectations. "Repent," said he, "for the kingdom of heaven
   is at hand." He announced a "great wrath," that is to say, terrible
   calamities which were to come, and declared that the axe was already at
   the root of the tree, and that the tree would soon be cast into the
   fire. The Messiah he described had a fan in his hand, gathering in the
   wheat and burning the chaff. Repentance, of which baptism was the type,
   the giving of alms, and the reformation of manners, were to John's mind
   the great means of preparation for the coming events. We cannot
   discover in what light exactly he looked at these events. What we are
   sure of is that he preached with much power against the same
   adversaries as Jesus attacked later on, against the rich priests, the
   Pharisees, the doctors--in one word, against official Judaism; and
   that, like Jesus, he was specially welcomed by the despised classes. He
   reduced to a small value the title "son of Abraham," and declared that
   God could raise up children to Abraham from the stones on the ground.
   It does not seem that he possessed, even in germ, the great idea which
   led to the triumph of Jesus--the conception of a pure religion; but he
   powerfully served this idea by substituting a private rite for those
   legal ceremonies for which priests were required, just as the
   Flagellants of the Middle Ages were the precursors of the Reformation,
   by denying to the official clergy the monopoly of the sacraments and of
   absolution. The general tone of his sermons was severe and stern. The
   expressions he used against his adversaries appear to have been very
   violent. It was a harsh and continuous invective. It is probable that
   he did not remain a complete stranger to politics. Josephus, who was
   almost directly brought into connection with John through his teacher
   Banou, lets us understand this by his ambiguous words, and the
   catastrophe which put an end to the Baptist's life seems to imply that
   it was so. His disciples led a very austere life, fasted frequently,
   and affected a sad and anxious demeanour. We appear sometimes to
   discover the dawn of the theory of communism in goods--the tenet that
   the rich man is obliged to share what he possesses with the poor. The
   poor already appeared as the class who would benefit in the first
   instance by the kingdom of God.

   Although the centre of John's action was Judæa, his fame penetrated
   quickly to Galilee and reached Jesus, who, by his first discourses, had
   already gathered round him a little circle of hearers. Enjoying up to
   this point little authority, and doubtless impelled by the desire to
   see a teacher whose instructions had so much in them that was in
   sympathy with his own ideas, Jesus left Galilee and went with his small
   band of pupils to visit John. The new comers were baptized like every
   one else. John very warmly welcomed this group of Galilean disciples,
   and found nothing objectionable in their remaining distinct from his
   own followers. The two teachers were young; they had many ideas in
   common; they loved one another and vied with each other before the
   public in reciprocal kindness of expression. At the first glance, such
   a fact surprises us in John the Baptist, and we are tempted to call it
   in question. Humility has never been a feature of strong Jewish minds.
   It might have been expected that a character so stubborn, a sort of
   Lamennais, always irritated, would be very passionate, and suffer
   neither rivalry nor half adhesion. But this manner of viewing things
   rests upon a false conception of the person of John. We imagine him an
   old man; he was, on the contrary, of the same age as Jesus, and very
   young according to the ideas of the time. In mental development, he was
   the brother rather than the father of Jesus. The two young enthusiasts,
   full of the same hopes and the same hatreds, were able to make common
   cause, and mutually to support each other. Certainly an aged teacher,
   seeing a man without celebrity approach him, and maintain towards him
   an aspect of independence, would have rebelled; we have scarcely an
   example of a leader of a school receiving with eagerness his future
   successor. But youth is capable of all abnegations, and it may be
   readily admitted that these two young enthusiasts, full of the same
   hopes and the same hatreds, made common cause and mutually helped each
   other.

   These good relations became afterwards the starting-point of a whole
   system developed by the evangelists, which consisted in giving John's
   attestation as the primary basis of the Divine mission of Jesus. Such
   was the degree of authority attained by the Baptist that men thought it
   would be impossible to find in the world a better guarantee. But far
   from the Baptist having abdicated before Jesus, Jesus, during all the
   time he passed with him, recognised him as his superior, and only
   developed his own genius with timidity.

   It seems, indeed, that, notwithstanding his profound originality,
   Jesus, during some weeks or months, was the imitator of John. The way
   before him was yet obscure. At all times, moreover, Jesus yielded much
   to opinion, and adopted many things which were not in exact accordance
   with his own ideas, or for which he cared little, merely because they
   were popular; but these accessories never injured his principal idea,
   and were always subordinate to it. Baptism had been brought into great
   favour by John; Jesus thought himself obliged to follow his example;
   therefore he baptized, and his disciples also. No doubt they
   accompanied this ceremony with preaching similar to that of John. The
   river Jordan was thus covered on all sides by Baptists, whose
   discourses were more or less successful. The disciple soon equalled the
   master, and his baptism was much prized. There was on this subject some
   jealousy among the disciples; the pupils of John came to him to
   complain of the increasing success of the young Galilean, whose baptism
   would soon, they feared, supplant their own. But the two masters
   remained superior to these little jealousies. According to a tradition,
   it was in the school of John where was formed the most celebrated group
   of the disciples of Jesus. The superiority of John was, besides, too
   indisputable for Jesus (still little known) to think of contesting it.
   He desired only to increase under John's shadow, and considered himself
   obliged, in order to gain the multitude, to employ the external means
   which in the case of John had produced such astonishing success. When
   he began to preach again after John's arrest, the first words which are
   said to have been used by him are nothing but the repetition of one of
   the familiar phrases of the Baptist. Many other expressions of John are
   to be found verbally in his discourses. The two schools appear to have
   lived for a long time with a good mutual understanding, and, after
   John's death, Jesus, as his trusty friend, was one of the first to be
   informed of the event.

   John, in fact, was soon cut short in his prophetic career. Like the old
   Jewish prophets, he was, in the highest degree, a censurer of the
   established authorities. The extreme vivacity with which he expressed
   himself regarding them could not fail to draw him into an embarrassing
   position. In Judæa, John does not appear to have been disturbed by
   Pilate; but, in Perea, beyond the Jordan, he came into the territories
   of Antipas. This tyrant was uneasy at the political leaven which was
   thinly veiled by John in his preaching. The great assemblages of men,
   formed by religious and patriotic enthusiasm, which had gathered round
   the Baptist, had a suspicious aspect. An entirely personal grievance,
   besides, was added to these motives of state, and rendered the death of
   the austere censurer inevitable.

   One of the most strongly-marked characters in this tragical family of
   the Herods was Herodias, grand-daughter of Herod the Great. Violent,
   ambitious, and passionate, she detested Judaism, and despised its laws.
   She had been married, probably against her will, to her uncle, Herod,
   son of Mariamne, whom Herod the Great had disinherited, and who never
   had assumed any public part. The inferior position of her husband, in
   comparison with the other members of the family, allowed her no peace
   of mind; she resolved to be sovereign at any cost. Antipas was the
   instrument through which she acted. This weak man, having become
   desperately enamoured of her, promised to marry her and to repudiate
   his first wife, the daughter of Hâreth, king of Petra, and emir of the
   neighbouring tribes of Perea. The Arabian princess, having obtained a
   hint of this purpose, resolved to fly. Concealing her design, she
   pretended that she wished to make a journey to Machero, in her father's
   territory, and caused herself to be conducted by the officers of
   Antipas.

   Makaur, or Machero, was a colossal fortress built by Alexander Janneus,
   and rebuilt by Herod, in one of the most rugged wadys to the east of
   the Dead Sea. This was a wild and savage country, full of extraordinary
   legends, and was believed to be haunted by demons. The fortress was
   just on the boundary of the States of Hâreth and Antipas. At this
   period it was in the possession of Hâreth. Having been forewarned, the
   latter had prepared everything for the flight of his daughter, who was
   reconducted, from tribe to tribe, to Petra.

   The almost incestuous union of Antipas and Herodias then took place.
   The Jewish laws as to marriage were a constant rock of offence between
   the irreligious family of the Herods and the strict Jews. The members
   of this numerous and somewhat isolated dynasty being obliged to
   intermarry to a large extent, there frequently resulted violations of
   the limits prescribed by the Law. John was thus the echo of the general
   feeling when he rebuked Antipas. This was more than sufficient to
   decide the latter to follow up his suspicions. He caused the Baptist to
   be arrested and confined in the fortress of Machero, of which he had
   probably taken possession after the departure of the daughter of
   Hâreth.

   More timid than cruel, Antipas did not wish to put John to death.
   According to certain reports, he feared popular sedition. According to
   another version, he had taken pleasure in listening to his prisoner,
   and these interviews had thrown him into great perplexities. What is
   certain is, that the detention was prolonged, and that John preserved,
   even in prison, an extensive influence. He correspnded with his
   disciples, and we find him still in connection with Jesus. His faith in
   the near approach of the Messiah only became firmer; he attentively
   followed the movements outside, and sought to discover the signs that
   were favourable to the accomplishment of the hopes by which he was
   sustained.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII.

  DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEAS OF JESUS RELATIVE TO THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

   Up to the arrest of John, which may be dated approximately in the
   summer of the year 29, Jesus did not quit the neighbourhood of the Dead
   Sea and of the Jordan. A sojourn in the desert of Judæa was generally
   considered as the preparation for great things, as a sort of "retreat"
   before public acts. Jesus in this respect followed the example of
   others, and passed forty days in no other society than that of the wild
   beasts, maintaining a rigorous fast. The minds of the disciples were
   much exercised in regard to this sojourn. The desert was, according to
   popular belief, the abode of demons. There are to be found in the world
   few regions more desolate, more God-forsaken, more shut off from all
   outward life, than the rocky declivity which forms the western border
   of the Dead Sea. It was believed that, during the time Jesus passed in
   this frightful country, he had gone through terrible trials; that Satan
   had assailed him with his illusions or tempted him by seductive
   promises, and that finally, to reward him for his victory, angels had
   come and ministered to him.

   It was probably in returning from the desert that Jesus was informed of
   the arrest of John the Baptist. He had no further reason now to prolong
   his stay in a country which was comparatively strange to him. Perhaps
   he feared also being involved in the severities exercised towards John,
   and did not wish to expose himself at a time in which, seeing the
   little celebrity he had, his death could in no way serve the
   advancement of his ideas. He accordingly went back to Galilee, his true
   fatherland, ripened by an important experience, and having acquired,
   through contact with a great man very different from himself, a
   consciousness of his own originality.

   On the whole, the influence of John had been more harmful than useful
   to Jesus. It checked his development; for everything leads us to
   believe that when he went towards Jordan he had ideas superior to those
   of John, and it was out of a kind of concession that he inclined for a
   moment towards baptism. Probably if the Baptist, to whose authority it
   would have been difficult to submit himself, had remained at liberty,
   he would not have thought of casting off the yoke of rites and of
   materialistic practices, and henceforth might have remained an unknown
   Jewish sectary; for the world had not yet abandoned these practices for
   others. It is the charm of a religion stripped of all exterior forms
   that has attracted the most elevated minds to Christianity. The Baptist
   once imprisoned, his followers became rapidly fewer, and Jesus found
   himself at liberty to follow his own bent. The only things he was
   indebted in a sort of way to John for were instruction in the art of
   preaching and in attracting popularity. From that moment, in fact, he
   preached with much more force, and awed the multitude with his
   authority.

   It appears also that his close intercourse with John, not so much by
   the influence of the Baptist as by the natural development of his own
   mind, matured many of his ideas about the "kingdom of heaven." His
   watchword henceforth is "glad tidings;" and the announcement that the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand. Jesus is no longer a delightful moralist
   merely, aspiring to embody in a few vivid and concise aphorisms sublime
   lessons; he is a transcendental revolutionary who attempts to renovate
   the world from its very basis, and to found on earth the ideal which he
   has conceived. "The kingdom of God" is at hand is to be synonymous with
   being a disciple of Jesus. The phrase "kingdom of God" or "kingdom of
   Heaven," as we have already said, had been long familiar to the Jews.
   Jesus, however, gave to it a moral sense--a social application, that
   the author of the book of Daniel himself, in his enthusiastic
   apocalypse, dared hardly venture upon.

   In the world, as it is constituted, it is the evil that prevails. Satan
   is the "king of this world," and everything obeys him. The priests and
   the doctors do not the things which they order others to do. The just
   are persecuted, and the sole portion of the good is to weep. The
   "world" is a species of enemies of God and His saints; but God will
   reveal Himself and avenge His saints. The day is at hand; for
   abomination is rampant. The reign of justice is to have its turn.

   The advent of the reign of justice is to be a great and unexpected
   revolution. The world is to be turned upside down; the present state
   being bad, to represent the future, it is sufficient to conceive as
   near as may be the contrary of that which exists. The first shall be
   last. A new order will rule humanity. At present the good and the bad
   are mixed like wheat and tares in a field. The Master allows them to
   grow together; but the hour of abrupt separation is to come. The
   kingdom of God is to be like a great net, which gathers both good and
   bad fish; we put the good into vessels, and cast the bad away. The
   beginning of that great revolution will be hardly recognisable. It will
   be like the grain of mustard seed, which, though the least of all
   seeds, being cast into the earth, becomes a tree under the leaves of
   whose branches the birds come and repose; or again, it will be like the
   leaven, which, put into bread, leavens the whole lump. A series of
   often obscure parables was designed to express the surprises of that
   unexpected advent, its apparent injustices, its inevitable and definite
   character.

   Who is to establish this kingdom of God? Let us recall that the first
   thought of Jesus--a thought so deeply rooted in him that it was
   probably intuitive forming part of his very being--was that he was the
   son of God, the bosom friend of his father, the executor of His
   decrees. The response of Jesus to such a question could not then be
   doubtful. The persuasion that he should found the kingdom of God took,
   in the most absolute manner, possession of his mind. He looked upon
   himself as the universal reformer. Heaven, earth, all nature,
   depravity, disease, and death are only his instruments. In the glow of
   his heroic will, he believes himself to be all powerful. If the earth
   does not lend itself to this complete transformation, it will be broken
   up, purified by fire and by the breath of God. A new heaven will be
   created, and the whole earth peopled with the angels of God.

   A complete revolution, extending to nature itself --such was the
   fundamental idea of Jesus. Henceforth, it is certain, he renounced
   politics; the example of Judas the Gaulonite showed him the uselessness
   of popular seditions. He never dreamt of revolting against the Romans
   and the tetrarchs. The wild and anarchical principles of the Gaulonite
   found no favour with him. His submission to the powers that be,
   derisive at bottom no doubt, was outwardly complete. He paid tribute to
   Cæsar, to avoid trouble. Liberty and right do not belong to this world;
   why then trouble himself with vain susceptibilities? Despising the
   earth, convinced that the world did not merit solicitude, he sought
   refuge in his ideal kingdom; he established that great doctrine of
   transcendent contempt, the true doctrine of the freedom of mind which
   alone can bring peace. But so far he had not said. "My kingdom is not
   of this world." Much obscurity was mixed up with his most perfect
   views. Sometimes singular temptations crossed his mind. In the desert
   of Judæa, Satan proposed to give him the kingdoms of this world. Not
   knowing the power of the Roman Empire, he could, with the amount of
   enthusiasm there was in Judæa, resulting soon after in so terrible a
   military resistance, he could, I say, considering the daring and the
   numbers of his partisans, hope to establish a kingdom. Many times, no
   doubt, this was the supreme thought with him: The kingdom of God, is it
   to be realised by force or by gentleness, by revolt or by patience? One
   day, we are told that the common people of Galilee sought to carry him
   away and make him king; but Jesus fled into the mountains, and remained
   there for some time alone. His lofty nature shielded him from the error
   which would make him an agitator or a chief of rebels, a Theudas or a
   Barkokeba.

   The revolution that he sought to bring about was a moral revolution;
   but he had not yet reached the point of trusting to the angels and the
   last trumpet for its execution. It was only upon men and through men
   that he wished to act. A visionary, who had no other idea than the
   approximateness of the last judgment, would not have had this care for
   the amelioration of human souls, and would not have laid down the
   finest moral precepts humanity has ever received. There was no doubt
   still much vagueness in his ideas; and it was exalted sentiment rather
   than fixed design which urged him on to the sublime work he had
   conceived, though in a manner quite different from what he imagined.

   It is in fact the kingdom of God, I mean, the kingdom of mind, that he
   founded, and, if Jesus from the bosom of his father sees his work
   bearing fruit through the ages, he may indeed truly say: "This is what
   I wished." That which Jesus founded, and which will remain his to all
   eternity--deductions being made for the imperfections which enter into
   everything accomplished by mankind--is the doctrine of freedom of mind.
   Greece had already exalted ideas on the subject. Several stoics had
   discovered the means of being free under a tyrant. But, in general, the
   ancient world only understood liberty as attached to certain political
   forms; Harmodius and Aristogiton, Brutus and Cassius were concrete
   examples of such liberty. The true Christian is much more free from all
   restraints; here below he is a stranger; what boots it to him who is
   the temporary ruler of this earth, which is not his country? Liberty to
   him means truth. Jesus was not sufficiently acquainted with history to
   comprehend how opportune such a doctrine was--the very moment when
   republican liberty was expiring, and when the small municipal
   institutions of antiquity were being absorbed in the Roman Empire. But
   his admirable sound sense and the truly prophetic instinct that he had
   of his mission, guided him here with marvellous certainty. By these
   words: "Render unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar's, and unto God
   the things which are God's," he originated something unknown to
   politics--a refuge for souls in the midst of an empire of brute force.
   To be sure, such a doctrine had its dangers. To establish as a
   principle that to look at a coin was a symbol of the acknowledgment of
   legitimate authority, to proclaim that the perfect man contemptuously
   pays tribute without question, was to annihilate the ancient forms of
   republicanism and to encourage all kinds of tyranny. Christianity, in
   this sense, has contributed much to weaken the sense of duty in the
   citizen, as well as to place the world absolutely in the power of
   existing circumstances. But in constituting an immense free
   association, which, during three hundred years, eschewed politics,
   Christianity amply compensated for the wrong it had done to civic
   virtue. Thanks to him, the power of the State was limited to
   terrestrial things; the mind was freed, or at all events, the terrible
   sceptre of Roman authority was broken for ever.

   The man who is especially preoccupied with the duties of public life
   does not spare those who place some other object above his party
   strifes. He especially blames those who subordinate political to social
   questions, and profess for the former a sort of indifference. In one
   sense he is right; for exclusiveness is prejudicial to the good
   government of human affairs. But what have parties done to promote the
   general morality of our species? If Jesus, instead of founding his
   heavenly kingdom, had betaken himself to Rome, and had worn his life
   out in conspiring against Tiberius, or in regretting Germanicus, what
   would have become of this world? Neither as a stern republican nor as a
   zealous patriot could he have stemmed the great public current of his
   age, though in pooh-poohing politics he has revealed to the world the
   truth that country is not everything, and that the man is anterior and
   superior to the citizen.

   The principles of our positive science have been injured by the dreams
   embraced in the scheme of Jesus. We know the history of the world. The
   kind of revolutions expected by Jesus are only produced by geological
   or astronomical causes, and no one has ever been able to connect them
   with things moral. But to be just to great originators, they must not
   be fastened with the prejudices they only shared. Columbus discovered
   America, though he started out with the most erroneous ideas; Newton
   believed his silly explanation of the Apocalypse to be as certain as
   his theory of gravitation. Shall we place a mediocre man of our times
   above a Francis d'Assisi, a St. Bernard, a Joan of Arc, or a Luther,
   because he is exempt from the errors that these persons have taught?
   Ought we to measure men by the correctness of their ideas of physics,
   and by the more or less exact knowledge they possess of the true
   natural laws of the universe? Let us understand better the position of
   Jesus and whence he derived his power. The Deism of the eighteenth
   century and a certain kind of Protestantism have accustomed us to
   regard the founder of the Christian faith merely as a great moralist, a
   benefactor of mankind. We see no more in the gospel than good maxims;
   we throw a convenient veil over the strange intellectual state whence
   it had its origin. There are some people who regret even that the
   French Revolution departed more than once from principle, and that it
   was not brought about by wise and moderate men. Let us not impose our
   petty plans and commonplace notions on those extraordinary movements
   which are so far above our grasp! Let us continue to admire the
   "morality of the Gospel;" let us suppress in our religious teachings
   the chimera which was the soul of it, but do not let us imagine that
   with the simple ideas of happiness or of individual morality we can
   again move the world. The idea of Jesus was much more profound. His was
   the most revolutionary idea that human brain ever conceived. But the
   historian must take it in its entirety, and not with those timid
   suppressions which strip it of the very thing which has rendered it
   efficacious for the regeneration of humanity.

   At bottom, the ideal is always a Utopia. When we wish at the present
   time to represent the Christ of the modern conscience, the consoler,
   the judge of these times, what do we do? That which Jesus himself did
   over 1800 years ago. We suppose the conditions of the real world quite
   other than they are; we represent a moral liberator breaking without
   weapons the chains of the negro, bettering the condition of the common
   people, delivering oppressed nations. We forget that that implies the
   subversion of the world, the climate of Virginia and that of the Congo
   modified, the blood and the race of millions of men changed, our social
   complications restored to a chimerical simplicity, and the political
   stratifications of Europe displaced from their natural order. The
   "restitution of all things" desired by Jesus was not more difficult.
   That new earth, that new heaven, that new Jerusalem, which comes from
   above, this cry, "Behold I make all things new," are the
   characteristics common to reformers. The contrast of the ideal with the
   sad reality invariably produces in mankind those revolts against cold
   reason which mediocre minds consider as follies, until the day of their
   triumph arrives, and then those who have combated them are the first to
   acknowledge their great wisdom. That there may have been a
   contradiction between the belief in the approaching end of the world
   and the general moral system of Jesus, conceived in prospect of a
   permanent state of humanity, nearly analogous to that which now exists,
   no one will attempt to deny. It was exactly this contradiction that
   ensured the success of his work. The millenarian alone would have done
   nothing lasting; the moralist alone would have done nothing powerful.
   The millenarian gave the impulse, the moralist ensured the future.
   Hence Christianity united the two conditions of great success in this
   world--a revolutionary starting point and the possibility of vitality.
   Everything which is intended to succeed ought to respond to these two
   wants; for the world seeks both to change and to endure. Jesus, at the
   same time that he announced an unparalleled subversion in human
   affairs, proclaimed the principles upon which society has reposed for
   eighteen hundred years. That which, in fact, distinguishes Jesus from
   the agitators of his time and from those of all times is his perfect
   idealism. In some respects Jesus was an anarchist, for he had no notion
   of civil government. The latter seemed to him an abuse, pure and
   simple. He spoke of it in vague terms, after the manner of one of the
   commonalty who knows nothing of politics. Every magistrate appeared to
   him a natural enemy of the people of God; and he forewarned his
   disciples of conflicts with the civil powers without imagining for a
   moment that there was anything in this to be ashamed of. But the desire
   to supplant the rich and powerful never manifests itself in him. His
   aim is to annihilate wealth and power, but not to seize upon them. He
   prepares his disciples for persecutions and punishments, but in no
   single instance is the idea of armed resistance foreshadowed. The idea
   that man is all-powerful through suffering and resignation, that man
   triumphs over force through purity of heart, is an idea unique with
   Jesus. Jesus is not a spiritualist; for everything to him had a
   palpable realisation. But he is a thorough idealist, matter being for
   him but the symbol of the idea, and the real the vivid expression of
   that which does not manifest itself.

   To whom shall we apply, upon whom shall we rely, to found the kingdom
   of God? The opinion of Jesus never wavered upon this point. That which
   is cherished by man is an abomination in the sight of God. The founders
   of the kingdom of God are the weak and lowly. Neither the rich, the
   learned, nor the priests; but women, common people, the humble, little
   children. The grand distinguishing mark of the Messiah is:--"The poor
   have the gospel preached to them." The idyllic and gentle nature of
   Jesus here asserted its superiority. A great social revolution, in
   which rank should be levelled, in which all authority should be brought
   under, was his dream. The world will not believe him; the world will
   kill him. But his followers will not be of this world. They will be a
   small band of the lowly and humble, who will conquer the world by their
   very humility. The sentiment which made the "world" the antithesis of
   "Christian" has, in the mind of the Master, its full justification.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIII.

  JESUS AT CAPERNAUM.

   Haunted by a more and more imperious idea, Jesus, with a quiet
   determination, henceforth follows the path his extraordinary genius and
   the circumstances in which he lived have traced out for him. Till now,
   he had only communicated his thoughts to a few persons who had been
   secretly drawn towards him; henceforward his teaching was public and
   sought after. He was now about thirty years of age. The small group of
   hearers who went with him to John was undoubtedly increased, and
   perhaps he had been joined by some of the disciples of John. It was
   with this first nucleus of a church, on his return into Galilee, that
   he boldly proclaimed the "glad tidings of the kingdom of God." This
   kingdom was at hand; and it was he, Jesus, who was that "Son of Man,"
   whom Daniel in his vision had beheld as the divine herald of the final
   and supreme revelation.

   We must remember that in the Jewish ideas, which were averse to art and
   mythology, the simple form of man had a superiority over that of
   Cherubim, and of the fantastic animals which the imagination of the
   people, since it had been subjected to the influence of Assyria, had
   ranged around the Divine Majesty. Already in Ezekiel, the Being seated
   on the supreme throne, far above the monsters of the mysterious
   chariot, the great revealer of prophetic visions, had the figure of a
   man. In the book of Daniel, in the midst of the vision of the empires,
   represented by animals, at the moment when the great judgment
   commences, and when the books are opened, a Being, "like unto a Son of
   Man," advances towards the Ancient of days, who confers on him the
   power to judge the world, and to govern it for eternity. Son of Man, in
   the Semitic languages, especially in the Aramean dialects, is a simple
   synonym of man. But this chief passage of Daniel struck the mind; the
   words, Son of Man, became, at least in certain schools, one of the
   titles of the Messiah, regarded as judge of the world, and as king of
   the new era about to be inaugurated. The application which Jesus made
   of it to himself was therefore the proclamation of his Messiahship, and
   the affirmation of the coming catastrophe in which he was to figure as
   judge, clothed with the full powers which had been delegated to him by
   the Ancient of days.

   The success of the teaching of the new prophet was this time decisive.
   A group of men and women, all characterised by the same spirit of
   juvenile frankness and of simple innocence, adhered to him and said:
   "Thou art the Messiah!" As the Messiah was to be the Son of David, he
   was naturally conceded this appellation, which was synonymous with the
   former. Jesus accepted it with pleasure, although it might cause him
   some embarrassment, his origin being so well known. For himself, he
   preferred the title of "Son of Man," an apparently humble title, but it
   was connected directly with the Messianic hopes. That was the
   appellation by which he designated himself, although, in his mouth, the
   "Son of Man" was a synonym of the pronoun I, which he avoided using.
   But no one ever thus addressed him, doubtless because the name in
   question did not quite suit him, until the day of his coming advent.

   Jesus' centre of action, at this period of his life, was the little
   town of Capernaum--situated on the shore of the lake of Gennesareth.
   The name of Capernaum, into which enters the word caphar, village,
   seems to denote a small town of the old character, in contradistinction
   to the great towns built according to the Roman fashion, such as
   Tiberias. The name was so little known that Josephus, in one place in
   his writings, takes it for the name of a fountain, the fountain having
   more celebrity than the village close to it. Like Nazareth, Capernaum
   had no history, and had not participated in the profane movement
   favoured by the Herods. Jesus was much attached to this town, and made
   it a second home. Shortly after his return, he made an unsuccessful
   experiment upon Nazareth. One of his biographers naïvely remarks that
   he could work no miracle there. The knowledge that was possessed of his
   family--a family of little importance--destroyed his authority. People
   could not regard as the son of David one whose brother, sister, and
   sister-in-law they were seeing every day. Besides, it is to be remarked
   that his family were very decidedly opposed to him, refusing point
   blank to believe in his divine mission. At one time, his mother and his
   brothers maintained that he had lost his senses, and, treating him as
   an exalted idiot, attempted to put him under restraint. The Nazarenes,
   much more violent, desired, it is said, to kill him by throwing him
   down from a steep rock. Jesus pointedly retorted that this risk was
   common to all great men, and applied to himself the proverb--"A prophet
   hath no honour in his own country."

   This check was far from discouraging him. He returned to Capernaum,
   where he found the people much more favourably disposed to him, and
   from there he organised a series of missions into the small surrounding
   towns. The people of this beautiful and fertile country rarely
   assembled together except on the Sabbath. This was the day he selected
   for his teaching. Each town had then a synagogue or place of meeting.
   It was a rectangular room, not very large, with a portico, decorated in
   the Greek style. The Jews, not having any architecture of their own,
   never attempted to give to those edifices an original design. The
   remains of many ancient synagogues are still to be seen in Galilee.
   They have all been constructed of large and good materials; but their
   appearance is rather paltry, owing to the profusion of floral
   ornaments, foliage, and network which characterise Jewish edifices. In
   the interior there were benches, a pulpit for public reading, and a
   recess for holding the sacred rolls. These edifices, which had nothing
   of the temple about them, were the centres of Jewish life. There the
   people assembled on the Sabbath for prayer, and to listen to the
   reading of the Law and the Prophets. As Judaism, outside of Jerusalem,
   had, properly speaking, no clergy, the first to arrive stood up and
   read the lessons, paraschæ et haphtara, of the day, adding thereto an
   original, a personal midrasch, or commentary, in which he expounded his
   own views. This was the origin of the "homily," whose finished models
   we find in the smaller treatises of Philo. The auditors had a right to
   interrupt and to question the reader; thus, the meeting degenerated
   quickly into a kind of free discussion assembly. It had a president,
   "elders," a hazzan--a recognised reader or apparitor, "deputies"-- a
   sort of secretaries or messengers, who conducted the correspondence
   between the different synagogues--a shammasch or sacristan. The
   synagogues were thus really small independent republics; they had an
   extended jurisdiction, guaranteed enfranchisement, exercised an
   authority over the enfranchised. Like all the municipal corporations up
   to an advanced period of the Roman Empire, they issued honorary
   decrees, which had the force of law in the community, and pronounced
   sentences of corporal punishment, which were executed ordinarily by the
   hazzan.

   With the marked activity of mind that has always characterised the
   Jews, such an institution, despite the arbitrary restraints it
   tolerated, could not fail to give rise to very animated discussions.
   Thanks to the synagogues, Judaism has been able to pass unscathed
   through eighteen centuries of persecution. These were so many little
   separate worlds which at once conserved the national spirit, and
   offered a ready field for intestine struggles. Within the walls of the
   synagogues there was vented an enormous amount of passion. Disputes for
   precedence were keen. To have a reserved seat in the first row was the
   recompense for great piety, or the privilege of wealth which was the
   most envied. On the other hand, the liberty accorded to every one, of
   instituting himself reader and expounder of the sacred text, offered
   wonderful facilities for the propagation of new ideas. This was one of
   the great opportunities of Jesus, and the means he most often used in
   laying down his doctrines. He entered the synagogue and stood up to
   read; the hazzan gave him the scroll, which he unrolled, and from which
   he read the lesson of the day. From this reading he evolved some points
   bearing on his own ideas. As there were few Pharisees in Galilee, the
   discussion did not assume that degree of animation and that acrimonious
   tone of opposition which he would have encountered at the very first
   step at Jerusalem. These good Galileans had never heard a discourse so
   well adapted to their happy dispositions. They admired him, and they
   encouraged him; they found that he spoke well, and that his reasonings
   were convincing. He resolved the hardest questions without any
   difficulty; the charm of his speech and of his person captivated these
   ingenuous folk, whose minds had not yet been contaminated by the
   pedantry of the doctors.

   Thus, the authority of the young Master increased daily, and, as a
   matter of course, the more people believed in him the more he believed
   in himself. His sphere, however, was limited. It was confined to the
   basin of the lake of Tiberias, and even here there was one locality
   which he preferred. The lake is five or six leagues long and three or
   four broad; though it has the appearance of an all but perfect oval, it
   forms, from Tiberias to the mouth of the Jordan, a sort of gulf, whose
   curve measures about three leagues. This was the field in which the
   seed sown by Jesus found at length a congenial soil. Let us run over it
   step by step, and endeavour to raise the mantle of aridity and of
   desolation with which the demon of Islamism has covered it.

   The first objects we encounter on leaving Tiberias are steep rocks, a
   mountain which appears to roll into the sea. The mountains then
   gradually recede, and a plain (El Ghoueir), almost level with the sea,
   opens out. It is a charming grove of rich verdure, furrowed by the
   plentiful waters which issue partly from a great round reservoir of
   ancient construction (Aïn Medawara). On the verge of this plain, which
   is, strictly speaking, the country of Gennesareth, we find the
   miserable village of Medjdel. At the opposite side of the plain (always
   following the lake) we come upon the site of a town (Khan Minyeh) with
   charming streams (Aïn-et-Tin), a pretty road, narrow and deep, cut out
   of the rocks, which Jesus certainly often traversed, and which serves
   as an outlet into the plain of Gennesareth and to the northern slopes
   of the lake. A mile from this place the traveller crosses a stream of
   salt water (Aïn Tabiga), issuing from several large springs a few yards
   from the lake, and entering it through the middle of a dense mass of
   verdure. After a further journey of forty minutes over the bare slopes
   which stretch from Aïn Tabiga to the mouth of the Jordan, we at last
   find some huts and a collection of monumental ruins, called Tell-Houm.

   Five small towns (which will be as long spoken of by mankind as Rome or
   Athens) were in the time of Jesus scattered about the space which
   extends from the village of Medjdel to Tell-Houm. Of these five towns,
   Magdala, Dalmanutha, Capernaum, Bethsaida, and Chorazin, the first
   alone can to-day be identified with any certainty. The horrible village
   of Medjdel has doubtless retained the name and the situation of the
   little town that gave to Jesus his most faithful friend (Mary
   Magdalene); Dalmanutha is altogether unknown. Possibly Chorazin was a
   little more inland, on the north side. As for Bethsaida and Capernaum,
   conjecture has placed them at Tell-Houm, Aïn-et-Tin, Khan Minyeh, and
   at Aïn Medawara. In topography, as in history, it might indeed be said
   that a profound design has sought to conceal the traces of the great
   founder. It is doubtful whether, upon that wofully devastated soil, we
   shall ever succeed in fixing the spots whence mankind would gladly
   flock to kiss the imprints of his feet.

   The lake, the horizon, the shrubs, the flowers, are all that remain of
   the little canton, three or four leagues in extent, where Jesus began
   his Divine work. The trees have totally disappeared. In this country,
   where the vegetation was formerly so rich that Josephus saw in it a
   kind of miracle--Nature, according to him, being pleased to bring forth
   side by side the plants indigenous to cold countries, the products of
   the torrid zones, the trees of temperate climates, laden all the year
   round with flowers and fruits--in this country travellers are now
   obliged to calculate a day beforehand the place where they will on the
   morrow find a shady nook to sit down to lunch. The lake has become
   deserted. A solitary, dilapidated barque now ploughs the waves,
   formerly the scene of so much activity and of happiness. But the waters
   are still smooth and transparent. The coast, formed of rocks and
   pebbles, is indeed that of a small sea, not that of a mere pond, like
   the banks of Lake Huleh. It is clean, neat, mudless, always beaten on
   the same spot by the gentle waves. There are small clearly-defined
   promontories, covered with rose laurels, tamarisks, and prickly caper
   bushes; at two places especially, at the mouth of the Jordan near
   Tarichea and at the edge of the plain of Gennesareth, there are
   delightful parterres where the waves ebb and flow over masses of turf
   and flowers. The Aïn-Tabiga brook forms a little estuary, which is full
   of pretty shells. Flocks of aquatic birds cover the lake. The sky is
   dazzling with light. The empyrean blue waters, deeply embedded between
   glittering rocks, appear, when viewed from the summit of the mountains
   of Safed, to lie at the bottom of a cup of gold. To the north, the
   snowy ravines of Hermon are traced in white lines upon the sky; to the
   west, the high undulating plateaux of Gaulonitis and Peræa, absolutely
   barren and clothed by the sun with a kind of velvety atmosphere, form
   one compact mountain, or rather a long high terrace, which runs from
   Cæsarea-Philippi to the south as far as the eye can reach.

   The heat upon the shore is, in summer, very oppressive. The lake
   occupies a hollow which is over six hundred feet below the level of the
   Mediterranean, and thus is subjected to the torrid conditions of the
   Dead Sea. A luxurious vegetation tempered in former times these
   excessive heats. One can hardly understand that a furnace such as the
   whole lake basin now is, beginning with the month of May, had ever been
   the scene of marvellous activity. Josephus, however, found the climate
   very temperate. Undoubtedly, there has been here, as in the Campagna of
   Rome, some change of climate, attributable to historical causes. It is
   Islamism, and, above all, the Mussulman reaction against the crusades,
   which has withered, as with a blast of death, the region preferred by
   Jesus. The beautiful country of Gennesareth did not suspect that within
   the brain of this peaceful wayfarer were concealed its destinies.

   A dangerous compatriot indeed! He has ruined the country which had the
   insuperable honour of giving him birth. Coveted by two rival
   fanaticisms, after it had become the object of universal love or hate,
   Galilee, as the price of its glory, has been changed into a desert. But
   who will say that Jesus would have been happier if he had lived in
   obscurity in his own village until he had reached the age of mature
   manhood? and as for the ungrateful Nazarenes, who would ever think of
   them if one of their number had not, at the risk of compromising the
   future prosperity of their town, discovered his Father and proclaimed
   himself the Son of God ?

   At the time of which we speak, four or five large villages, situated
   about half an hour's walk from one another, formed the little world of
   Jesus. He seems never to have visited Tiberias, a heathen city, peopled
   for the most part by Pagans, and the permanent residence of Antipas.
   Sometimes, however, he wandered forth of his favourite region. For
   instance, he went by boat along the eastern shore to Gergesa. In the
   north, we find him at Paneas, or Cæsarea-Philippi, at the foot of Mount
   Hermon. Moreover, he finally made a journey to Tyre and Sidon, a
   country which at that time must have been in an exceedingly flourishing
   condition. In all these countries he was surrounded with Paganism. At
   Cæsarea he saw the celebrated grotto of Panium, which was considered
   the source of the Jordan, and around which popular belief had entwined
   many strange legends; he could admire the marble temple that Herod had
   erected near there in honour of Augustus; he stopped probably before
   the numerous votive statues erected to Pan, to the Nymphs, to the Echo
   of the Grotto, which piety had already accumulated in this beautiful
   spot. The rationalistic Jew, accustomed to look on strange gods for
   deified men or for demons, had come to consider all these symbolical
   representations as idols. The attractions of naturalistic worship,
   which carried away the more sanguine races, did not move him. It is
   undoubted that he had no knowledge of what the ancient sanctuary of
   Melkarth at Tyre might still contain of a primitive worship more or
   less analogous to that of the Jews. Paganism, which, in Phoenicia, had
   raised on every hill a temple and a sacred grove--outward evidences of
   great industry and vulgar riches--hardly elicited a smile from him.
   Monotheism takes away the capacity for understanding Pagan religions. A
   Mussulman suddenly introduced into polytheistic countries seems to have
   no eyes. Certainly, Jesus learned little or nothing in these journeys.
   He always came back to his beloved shores of Gennesareth. His thoughts
   were centred there, and there he found faith and love.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX.

  THE DISCIPLES OF JESUS.

   In this earthly paradise, which the great historic revolutions had, up
   till then, affected but little, there lived a people in perfect harmony
   with the country itself--active, honest, light and tender-hearted. The
   lake of Tiberias is one of the best fishing-grounds in the world. Very
   productive fisheries had been established, particularly at Bethsaida
   and Capernaum, and had created a certain opulence. These fisherman
   families formed a gentle and peaceable society, extending, by means of
   numerous ties of relationship, over the whole lake region we have
   named. Their comparatively idle lives left their imagination quite
   free. The ideas concerning the kingdom of God found, amongst these
   small coteries of good people, more credence than anywhere else.
   Nothing that we call civilisation, in the Greek or worldly sense, had
   yet penetrated into their midst. Nor had they any of our German and
   Celtic earnestness; but although their goodness was often, perhaps,
   wholly superficial, their manners were quiet, and they had a certain
   amount of intelligence and shrewdness. We can imagine them as being
   somewhat similar to the better population of the Lebanons, but with the
   faculty, which the latter lacked, of producing great men. Jesus met
   there his true kindred. He installed himself as one of them. Capernaum
   became "his own city," and, in the midst of the little circle which
   adored him, he forgot his sceptical brothers, ungrateful Nazareth and
   its mocking incredulity.

   One house especially, at Capernaum, offered him an agreeable asylum and
   devoted disciples. It was that of two brothers, sons of one Jonas, who
   was probably dead at the time when Jesus came to fix his abode upon the
   banks of the lake. These two brothers were Simon, surnamed in
   Syro-Chaldaic Cephas, in Greek Petros, "the Stone," or Peter, and
   Andrew. Born at Bethsaida, they had established themselves at Capernaum
   when Jesus entered on public life. Peter was married and had children,
   and his mother-in-law lived with him Jesus loved that house, and
   resided there constantly. Andrew appears to have been a disciple of
   John the Baptist, and Jesus had probably become acquainted with him on
   the banks of the Jordan. The two brothers, even at the time when it
   seemed they were most occupied with their Master, continued always to
   follow the calling of fishermen. Jesus, who delighted in playing upon
   words, said sometimes that he would make them fishers of men. In fact,
   among all his disciples, none of them were more firmly attached to him.
   It would seem that John, like Andrew, had known Jesus in the school of
   John the Baptist. The two families of Jonas and Zebedee appear to have
   been very closely related.

   Another family, that of Zabdia or Zebedee, a well-to-do fisherman and
   the owner of several boats, extended to Jesus a hearty welcome. Zebedee
   had two sons; James, who was the elder, and a younger son, John, who
   later on was destined to play so important a part in the history of
   infant Christianity. Both were zealous disciples. Salome, wife of
   Zebedee, was also strongly attached to Jesus, and accompanied him till
   his death.

   The women, in fact, received him very gladly. He had in their society
   those reserved manners which render a very agreeable union of ideas
   between the two sexes possible. The separation of men and women which
   has checked all refined development among the peoples of the East was,
   undoubtedly, then, as in our day, much less rigorous in the country and
   in the villages than in the large towns. Three or four devoted Galilean
   women always accompanied the young Master, and disputed among
   themselves for the pleasure of listening to him and of attending on him
   in turn. These women imported into the new sect an enthusiastic
   element, as well as something of the marvellous, the importance of
   which was already felt. One of them, Mary Magdalene, who has made the
   name of her poor native town so celebrated in the world, appears to
   have been a very excitable person. In the language of the time, she had
   been possessed of seven devils: that is to say, she had been afflicted
   with nervous and apparently inexplicable maladies. Jesus, by his
   unspotted and gentle loveliness, soothed that excitable organisation.
   The Magdalene remained faithful to him even to Golgotha, and on the day
   but one following his death played a most important part, for, as we
   shall see later on, she was the principal medium through which was
   established faith in the resurrection. Joanna, wife of Chuza, one of
   the attendants of Antipas, Susannah, and others whose names are
   unknown, accompanied him constantly and ministered unto him. Some of
   them were rich, and, placing their fortunes at the disposal of the
   young Prophet, put him in a position to live without having to follow
   the occupation to which he had been brought up.

   There were still many others who followed him habitually and recognised
   him as their Master:-- one Philip of Bethsaida, Nathaniel, son of
   Tolmai or Ptolemy, of Cana, perhaps a disciple of the first period; and
   Matthew, probably the person who was the Xenophon of infant
   Christianity. He had, according to tradition, been a publican, and, as
   such, handled with greater facility the kalam than the others. It was
   then probably that he began to think of writing those memoirs which are
   the bases of that which we know of the teachings of Jesus. Others of
   the disciples were Thomas or Didymus, who, though he doubted sometimes,
   was warm-hearted, and a man of generous impulses; one Lebbæus or
   Thaddeus; Simon the Zelot, who was, perhaps, a disciple of Judas the
   Gaulonite, belonging to the party of the Kenaim, which was formed at
   that time, and which was soon to play so great a part in the affairs of
   the Jewish nation; lastly Joseph Barsaba, surnamed Justus; Matthias; a
   personage conjectured to be named Ariston; Judas, son of Simon, of the
   city of Kerioth, who was the black sheep of the faithful flock, and who
   acquired such unenviable renown. He was, it appears, the only one of
   them who was not a Galilean. Kerioth was a town at the extreme south of
   the tribe of Judah, a day's journey beyond Hebron.

   We have seen that the family of Jesus was in general little predisposed
   towards him. Nevertheless, James and Jude, his cousins, by Mary
   Cleophas, became from that time his disciples, and Mary Cleophas
   herself was of the number of those persons who followed him to Calvary.
   At this period we do not read of his mother being with him. It is only
   after the death of Jesus that Mary becomes of great importance, and
   that the disciples seek to attach her to themselves. It is then, too,
   that the members of the family of the founder, under the appellation of
   brothers of the Lord, form an influential group, which for long was at
   the head of the Church at Jerusalem, and which after the sack of the
   city sought refuge in Batanea. The simple fact of having been on terms
   of intimacy with him became a decided advantage, just as, after the
   death of Mahomet, the wives and daughters of the prophet, who were of
   no account during his life-time, became great authorities.

   In this friendly throng Jesus had avowedly his favourites, and a select
   circle of confidants. The two sons of Zebedee, James and John, appear
   to have taken the front rank in that small council. They were full of
   fire and passion. Jesus had uniquely designated them "sons of thunder,"
   on account of their excessive zeal, a zeal which, if it had had the
   control of the thunder, would have made too frequent use of it. John,
   in particular, appears to have been on a certain footing of familiarity
   with Jesus. Perhaps the numerous and active school which later on
   attached itself to the second of the sons of Zebedee, and who wrote, it
   appears, his recollections in a manner which did not sufficiently
   conceal the interests of the school, the records of which are to be
   found in his recollections (souvenirs), has exaggerated the warm
   attachment that the Master bore for him. But what is more significant
   is, that in the synoptical Gospels, Simon Barjona, or Peter, James, son
   of Zebedee, and John his brother, formed a sort of inner council, which
   Jesus called together at certain times when he had reason to challenge
   the faith and the intelligence of the others. It appears, besides, that
   all three were associated as fishermen. The affection of Jesus for
   Peter was deep. The character of that disciple --upright, sincere,
   impulsive--pleased Jesus, who sometimes allowed himself to smile at his
   eager manner. Peter, who was not much of a mystic, communicated to the
   Master his simple doubts, his dislikes, his human weaknesses, with an
   honest unreserve that recalls that of Joinville towards St. Louis.
   Jesus, full of confidence and esteem, reproved him in a friendly
   manner. As regards John, his youth, his exquisite tenderness of heart,
   and his lively imagination, must have possessed a great charm. The
   individuality of that extraordinary man did not develop itself till
   afterwards. If he is not the author of the bizarre Gospel which bears
   his name, and which, although the character of Jesus is misrepresented
   in it in many particulars, embraces such precious teachings, it is at
   least possible that he had been the occasion of it. Accustomed to
   ponder over his recollections with the feverish restlessness of an
   excited mind, he transformed his Master in wishing to describe him, and
   has furnished to the skilful forgers the pretext of a narrative in the
   compilation of which it does not appear that perfect good faith was the
   guiding principle.

   No hierarchy, strictly speaking, existed in this infant sect. They were
   to call each other "brothers," and Jesus absolutely proscribed titles
   of superiority, such as rabbi, "master," "father," he alone being
   Master, and God alone being Father. The greatest was to be the servant
   of the others. Nevertheless, Simon Barjona distinguished himself among
   his fellows by a certain personal importance. Jesus lived with him and
   discoursed from his boat; his house was the head-quarters of
   evangelical preaching. In public, he was regarded as chief of the band,
   and it was to him that the superintendent of the tax collectors
   addressed himself for payment of the taxes due by the sect. Simon was
   the first to acknowledge Jesus to be the Messiah. In a moment of
   unpopularity, when Jesus demanded of his disciples: "Will ye also go
   away?" Simon answered: "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words
   of eternal life." At various times Jesus conferred on him in his Church
   a certain priority, and interpreted his Syriac surname of Képha
   (stone), wishing to signify thereby that he would make him the
   corner-stone of the new building. At one time, he seems to promise him
   "the keys of the kingdom of Heaven," and to accord him the right of
   pronouncing upon earth decisions to be ratified always in eternity.

   No doubt this preference given to Peter excited not a little jealousy.
   In view of the future, particularly, was this jealousy kindled--in view
   of that kingdom of God, in which all the disciples would be seated on
   thrones, at the right and the left of the Master, in order to judge the
   twelve tribes of Israel. They demanded of him who should then be the
   nearest to the "Son of Man," acting in some sort as his first minister
   and assessor. The two sons of Zebedee aspired to these positions.
   Filled with such a thought they induced their mother, Salome, who one
   day took Jesus apart, and solicited him for the two highest places for
   her sons. Jesus evaded the request by repeating his habitual maxim that
   he who exalteth himself shall be brought low, and that the kingdom of
   heaven will be possessed by the meek and lowly. This created some stir
   in the band: and there was ill-feeling manifested against James and
   John. The same rivalry is frequently seen in the Gospel of John, in
   which the writer is never tired of declaring himself to be "the beloved
   disciple," and the one to whom the Master in dying confided the care of
   his mother, who seeks to place himself near Simon Peter--nay, sometimes
   before him--in the important situations in which the older evangelists
   omitted to mention him.

   Among the persons above mentioned, every one of them, of which we know
   anything, commenced life as a fisherman. In a country of simple
   manners, in which every one labours, this profession was not so
   degrading as the declamations of preachers would have us believe, in
   order the better to magnify the miraculous origins of Christianity. At
   all events, none of them belonged to a socially elevated class. Matthew
   or Levi, son of Alphæus, alone had been a publican. But those to whom
   that name was given in Judæa were not the farmers-general [of taxes],
   who were men of exalted rank (always Roman patricians), and called at
   Rome publicani. They were the agents of the farmers-general,
   subordinate servants, simple customs officers. The great route from
   Acre to Damascus, one of the most ancient routes in the world, which
   traversed Galilee skirting the lake, increased greatly the number of
   this class of employés there. At Capernaum, which was probably on the
   line of the route, there was a numerous staff. That occupation has
   never been popular; but amongst the Jews it was regarded as wholly
   criminal. Taxation, which was new to them, was the symbol of their
   vassalage. One school, that of Judas the Gaulonite, maintained that to
   pay taxes was an act of Paganism. The customs officers, moreover, were
   abhorred by the zealots of the Law. They were only spoken of in
   conjunction with assassins, highway robbers, and people of infamous
   character. Jews who accepted such positions were excommunicated and
   rendered incapable of making a will; their money was accursed, and the
   casuists forbade its being exchanged. These poor people, placed under
   the ban of society, lived by themselves apart. Jesus accepted an
   invitation to dine at the house of Levi, at which were present,
   according to the language of the times, "many publicans and sinners."
   That was a great scandal. In those proscribed houses one ran the risk
   of meeting wicked society. We shall often see him in this
   position--careless in regard to shocking the prejudices of
   well-disposed persons, seeking to elevate the ignorant classes by means
   of the orthodox, and thus exposing himself to the most cutting
   reproaches of the zealots. Pharisaism, in addition to a sort of
   external respectability, made infinite observances the test of
   salvation. The true moralist--who proclaimed only that God required but
   one thing--to wit, rectitude of sentiment--came to be welcomed by all
   who were not imbued with the official hypocrisy.

   Jesus owed these numerous conquests to an infinite charm of person and
   of speech. One penetrating word, one look falling upon a simple
   conscience, which was only waiting to be aroused, made such a one an
   ardent disciple. Sometimes Jesus made use of an innocent artifice,
   which was also employed at a later period by Joan of Arc. He pretended
   to have an intimate knowledge of something affecting the person he
   wished to gain over, or he would recall some circumstance dear to that
   person's heart. It was in this manner, it is said, that he touched
   Nathaniel, Peter, and the Samaritan woman. Dissimulating the real
   source of his power--I mean his superiority to his surroundings--he
   allowed it to be believed, in order to satisfy the aspirations of the
   times--aspirations, moreover, which he fully shared--that a revelation
   from on high had disclosed to him the secrets and the workings of
   hearts. Everybody imagined that he moved in a higher sphere than that
   of mankind. It was said that he spoke with Moses and Elias upon the
   mountains; it was believed that in those moments of solitude the angels
   came and ministered unto him, and established a supernatural
   intercourse between him and heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER X.

  PREACHINGS ON THE LAKE.

   Such was the group which, on the banks of the Lake of Tiberias,
   surrounded Jesus. The aristocracy was represented there by a
   customs-officer and the wife of a steward. The rest were composed of
   fishermen and common people. They were extremely ignorant; their
   intellect was feeble. They believed in apparitions and ghosts. Not one
   particle of Greek culture had penetrated this chief circle. Moreover,
   their Jewish instruction was very imperfect, but they were full of
   heart and good will. The beautiful climate of Galilee rendered the
   existence of these honest fishermen a perpetual enjoyment. They were a
   true prelude to the kingdom of God--simple, good, happy--rocked gently
   on their charming little lake, or sleeping at night on its banks. One
   cannot realise the intoxication of a life which thus glides away under
   the canopy of heaven; the feelings, now gentle, now ardent, produced by
   this continual contact with nature; the dreams of those starry nights,
   under the infinite expanse of the azure dome. It was during such a
   night that Jacob, with his head resting on a stone, beheld in the stars
   the promise of an innumerable posterity, and the mysterious ladder
   reaching from earth to heaven, by which the Elohim ascended and
   descended. At the time of Jesus heaven was not shut nor the earth grown
   cold. The cloud still opened above the Son of Man; the angels ascended
   and descended upon his head; visions of the kingdom of God were
   reported everywhere, for the reason that man carried them in his heart.
   The clear and mild eyes of those simple souls contemplated the universe
   in its mythic origin. The world probably discovered its secret to the
   divinely enlightened consciences of these happy children, whose purity
   of heart merited that one day they should see God.

   Jesus lived with his disciples almost always in the open air. Sometimes
   he entered a boat and taught the multitudes assembled on the shore.
   Sometimes he sat upon the mountains which skirted the lake, where the
   air was so pure and the sky so luminous. The faithful band led thus a
   gay and roaming life, receiving the inspirations of the Master fresh
   from his lips. An innocent doubt was now and then started, some mildly
   sceptical question raised. A smile or a look from Jesus sufficed to
   silence the objection. At each step--in the passing cloud, in the
   sprouting seed, in the ripening corn--they descried a sign of the
   kingdom which was at hand. They believed they were about to see God,
   and to become the masters of the world. Tears were turned into joy--it
   was the advent of "peace on earth" (universelle consolation).
   "Blessed," said the Master, "are the poor in spirit for theirs is the
   kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be
   comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
   Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
   they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain
   mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed
   are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
   Blessed are they which, are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for
   theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. v. 3-10).

   His preaching was unimpassioned and pleasing, redolent of nature and of
   the perfume of the fields. He loved the flowers, and drew from them his
   most charming lessons. The birds of the air, the sea, the mountains,
   the frolics of children, were introduced by turn into his discourses.
   His style had nothing of the Greek period about it, but resembled much
   more the turn of the Hebrew parabolists, and in particular the
   sentences of the Jewish doctors, his contemporaries, which are to be
   found in the Pirke Aboth. His expositions were not very extended; they
   formed a species of sorites after the manner of the Koran, which, being
   put together, constituted later on those long discourses which were
   written by Matthew. No note of transition linked together these diverse
   fragments. In general, however, the same inspiration pervaded them all
   and gave them unity. It was in the parable, especially, that the Master
   excelled. Nothing in Judaism could have served him as a model for that
   charming style. It was a creation of his. No doubt there are to be
   found in Buddhist books some parables precisely of the same tone and of
   the same form as the Gospel parables. But it is hard to allow that a
   Buddhist influence had any effect on them. The spirit of meekness and
   of deep sentiment which animated equally primitive Christianity and
   Buddhism is sufficient to explain these similarities.

   A total indifference to exterior things, and for vain superfluities as
   regards manners and customs, which our colder climates render
   imperative, were the outcome of the innocent and sweet lives passed in
   Galilee. Cold climates, by bringing man and the outer world into
   perpetual conflict, have caused too much store to be set by researches
   after comfort and luxury. On the other hand, the climates which awaken
   fewer desires are the countries of idealism and of poetry. The
   accessories of life are there insignificant as compared to the pleasure
   of living. The adornment of dwellings is there superfluous, for people
   remain within doors as little as possible. The strong and
   regularly-served food of less generous climates would be looked upon as
   heavy and disagreeable. And, as for the luxury of clothing, what can
   equal that which God has given to the earth and to the birds of the
   air? Labour, in climates of this description, seems useless; what it
   affords is not worth what it costs. The animals of the field are better
   clothed than the most opulent of men, and they toil not. This contempt,
   when it does not proceed from idleness, greatly assists to elevate the
   souls of men, and inspired Jesus with some charming apologues. "Lay not
   up for yourselves," said he, "treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
   doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; for where your
   treasure is, there will your heart be also. No man can serve two
   masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he
   will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and
   Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what
   ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye
   shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than
   raiment? Behold the fowls of the air; for they sow not, neither do they
   reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are
   ye not much better than they? Which of you by taking thought can add
   one cubit unto his stature? And why take ye thought for raiment?
   Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither
   do they spin: And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his
   glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so clothe
   the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the
   oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?
   Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we
   drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed ? (For after all these
   things do the Gentiles seek): for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye
   have need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God,
   and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.
   Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take
   thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
   thereof" (Matt. vi. 19-34).

   This essentially Galilean sentiment had a decisive influence upon the
   destinies of the primitive sect. The happy band, trusting to its
   Heavenly Father to supply its wants, held, as a fundamental principle,
   the cares of life to be an evil, which extinguished in man the germ of
   all that was good. Each day it asked of God the bread for the morrow.
   Wherefore lay up treasure? The kingdom of God is at hand. "Sell that ye
   have and give alms," said the Master; "provide yourselves bags which
   wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not." What more
   nonsensical than for one to heap up treasures for heirs one shall never
   see! As an example of human folly, Jesus loved to cite the case of a
   man who, when he had enlarged his barns and laid up goods for many
   years, died before having enjoyed them. Brigandage, which was deeply
   rooted in Galilee, added much force to this point of view. The poor,
   who could not suffer from it, came to regard themselves as the favoured
   of God, whilst the rich, whose possessions were so unsafe, were the
   people actually disinherited. In our communities, established upon a
   very rigorous idea in regard to property, the position of the poor is
   wretched; they have not the right to a spot under the sun. There are no
   flowers, no grass, no shade except for the one who possesses the earth.
   In the Orient these are the gifts of God, which belong to no one. The
   landlord has but a slender privilege; nature is the patrimony of all.

   Further, primitive Christianity in those things was only following in
   the footsteps of the Jewish sects who practised the monastic life. A
   communistic element pervaded all those sects (Essenians, Therapeutæ),
   which were looked upon with disfavour equally by Pharisees and
   Sadducees. The Messianic beliefs, which among the orthodox Jews wore a
   wholly political aspect, had for the two sects just named a purely
   social meaning. By means of an easy, regulated, and contemplative mode
   of life, leaving to each individual freedom of action, these small
   churches, which were supposed (not wrongly, perhaps) to be an imitation
   of the neo-pythagorian institutes, thought to inaugurate on earth the
   kingdom of Heaven. Dreams of a blessed life, founded upon the
   fraternity of man and the worship of the true God, engrossed exalted
   intellects, which resulted in bold and sincere attempts being made
   everywhere, but to no purpose.

   Jesus, whose relations with the Essenes it is very difficult to make
   out (resemblances in history do not always imply relations), was in
   this unquestionably at one with them. Community of goods was for some
   time the rule in the new society. Avarice was the cardinal sin. Now, it
   is necessary to remark that the sin of "avarice," against which moral
   Christianity has been so severe, was then the mere attachment to
   property. The first condition of being a perfect disciple of Jesus was
   to sell one's property and give the proceeds to the poor. Those who
   recoiled from that step were not admitted into the community. Jesus
   often repeated that he who finds the kingdom of God must buy it at the
   sacrifice of all his goods, and that in doing so he makes an
   advantageous exchange. "Again: The kingdom of heaven is like unto
   treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth,
   and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that
   field. Again: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant-man seeking
   goodly pearls: who, when he hath found one pearl of great price, he
   went and sold all that he had, and bought it" (Matt. xiii. 44-46). But,
   alas! The inconveniences of this method were not long in making
   themselves felt. A treasurer was required. Judas of Kerioth was chosen
   for the office. Rightly or wrongly, he was accused of stealing from the
   common purse; a great antipathy was raised against him--he came to a
   bad end. Sometimes the Master, better versed in things pertaining to
   Heaven than in those belonging to earth, taught a political economy yet
   more remarkable. In a fanciful parable, a steward is praised for having
   made friends amongst the poor at the expense of the rich, so that the
   poor in turn might introduce him into the kingdom of Heaven. The poor,
   in fact, having become the dispensers of this kingdom, would not admit
   anyone to it unless those who had given them something. A discreet man,
   thinking of the future, had, therefore, to seek to win their favour.
   "And the Pharisees, also, who were covetous," says the Evangelist,
   "heard all these things; and they derided him." Did they also hear the
   remarkable parable which follows?--"There was a certain rich man, which
   was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day:
   and there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his
   gate full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell
   from the rich man's table; moreover, the dogs came and licked his
   sores. And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the
   angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried;
   and in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham
   afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom: and he cried and said, Father
   Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of
   his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this
   flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
   receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now
   he is comforted, and thou art tormented" (Luke xvi. 19-25). What could
   be more just? Later on this was denominated the parable of the "wicked
   rich man." But it is purely and simply the parable of the rich man. He
   is in hell because he is rich, because he does not give his goods to
   the poor, because he dines well, whilst others at his door fare badly.
   Finally, Jesus, in a less extravagant moment, does not insist on the
   obligation of selling one's goods and of giving them to the poor,
   except as suggesting perfection; but he nevertheless makes this
   terrible declaration:--"It is easier for a camel to go through the eye
   of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."

   In all this a very admirable sentiment dominated the mind of Jesus as
   well as the minds of the band of joyous children which accompanied him,
   and made him the true source of the peace of the soul for eternity, and
   the grand consoler of life. In disengaging men from what he called "the
   cares of this world," Jesus may have gone to excess, and struck at the
   conditions essential to human society; but he founded that high
   spirituality which has during centuries filled souls with joy in
   passing through this vale of tears. He saw quite clearly that man's
   inattention, his want of philosophy and morality, proceeded most often
   from the amusements he indulges in, from the cares which assail him,
   and which are multiplied beyond measure by civilisation. The Gospel, in
   some sort, has been the supreme remedy for the weariness of ordinary
   life, a perpetual sursum corda, a powerful distraction from the
   miserable cares of the world, a gentle appeal like that of Jesus to the
   ear of Martha: "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about
   many things; but one thing is needful." Thanks to Jesus, existence the
   most gloomy, the most absorbed by sad and humiliating duties, has been
   cheered by a glimpse of heaven! In our troublous civilisations, the
   recollection of the free life led in Galilee is like perfume from
   another world, like the "dew of Hermon," which has prevented barrenness
   and vulgarity from pervading entirely the field of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XI.

  THE KINGDOM OF GOD CONCEIVED AS THE INHERITANCE OF THE POOR.

   These maxims--good for a country in which life is nurtured by the air
   and the light, and that delicate communism of a band of children of
   God, leaning with confidence on the bosom of their Father--might suit a
   simple sect which was firmly of the belief that its dreams were about
   to be realised. But it is evident that such principles did not satisfy
   the whole of the society. Jesus, in fact, soon perceived that the
   official world would on no account tolerate his kingdom. He therefore
   took his resolution with extreme boldness. Putting the world, with its
   unfeeling heart and its narrow prejudices, on one side, he turned
   towards the common people. A great substitution of one class for
   another must take place. The kingdom of God is made: first, for
   children and for those who resemble them; second, for the outcast of
   this world, victims of that social arrogance which repels the good
   though humble man; third, for heretics and schismatics, publicans,
   Samaritans, and Pagans of Tyre and Sidon. A forcible parable explained
   and justified that appeal to the people. A king prepares a wedding
   feast, and sends his servants to seek out those that are invited. Each
   one of the invited excuses himself; some even maltreat the messengers.
   The king thereupon takes firm measures. The fashionable people have
   rejected his invitation. Be it so; he will have the first comers
   instead, the people collected from the highways and byeways, the poor,
   the beggars, the lame; it matters not; the room must be filled. "I say
   unto you," said the king, "that none of those men which were bidden
   shall taste of my supper."

   Pure Ebionism, that is to say, the doctrine that the poor (ebionim)
   alone shall be saved, that the kingdom of the poor is at hand, was,
   hence, the doctrine of Jesus. "Woe unto you that are rich," said he,
   "for ye have received your consolation. Woe unto you that are full, for
   ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and
   weep" (Luke vi. 24, 25). "Then said he also to him that bade him, When
   thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy
   brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also
   bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a
   feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shalt
   be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be
   recompensed at the resurrection of the just" (Luke xiv. 12-14). It is,
   in an analogous sense, perhaps, that he often repeated, "Be good
   bankers"--that is to say, make good investments for the kingdom of God,
   in giving your wealth to the poor, conformably to the old proverb, "He
   that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord" (Prov. xix. 17).

   But this was no new fact. The most exalted democratic movement, the
   memory of which has been preserved by mankind (the only one, also, that
   has succeeded, for it alone has maintained itself in the domain of pure
   thought) had agitated for a long time the Jewish race. The idea that
   God is the avenger of the poor and of the weak against the rich and
   powerful is found in every page of the books of the Old Testament. The
   history of Israel is, of all histories, that in which the popular
   notions have most certainly predominated. The prophets, the truest, and
   in a sense the boldest tribunes, had thundered incessantly against the
   great, and had established a close relation between the terms "rich,
   impious, violent, wicked," on the one hand, and between "poor, gentle,
   humble, pious," on the other. Under the Seleucidæ, the aristocracy
   having almost all apostatised and gone over to Hellenism, these
   associations of ideas were but strengthened. The Book of Enoch contains
   even fiercer maledictions against the world, the rich, and the powerful
   than those of the Gospels. In this book luxury is held up as a crime.
   "The Son of Man," in that fantastic apocalypse, dethrones kings, tears
   them away from their voluptuous life and plunges them into hell. The
   initiation of Judæa into profane life, the recent introduction of an
   exclusively worldly element of luxury and of comfort, provoked a
   violent reaction in favour of patriarchal simplicity. "Woe unto you who
   despise the humble dwelling and inheritance of your fathers? Woe unto
   you who build your palaces with the sweat of others! Each stone, each
   brick of which it is built is a sin." The word "poor" (ebion) had
   become a synonym of "saint," of "friend of God." This was the
   appellation the Galilean disciples of Jesus loved to give one another:
   it was for a long time the designation of the Judaising Christians of
   Batanea, and of the Hauran (Nazarenes, Hebrews) who remained faithful
   to the language as well as to the earlier teachings of Jesus, and who
   boasted of having amongst them the descendants of his family. At the
   end of the second century, these devout sectaries, who had lived
   outside the path of the great current that had carried away the other
   churches, were treated as heretics (Ebionites), and in order to explain
   their name a pretended heresiarch, Ebion, was invented.

   We may see, at a glance, that this exaggerated taste for poverty could
   not be very durable. It was one of those Utopian elements which always
   mingle in the origin of great movements, and which time rectifies.
   Thrown into the centre of human society, Christianity very easily
   consented to receive rich men into her bosom, just as Buddhism,
   exclusively monastical in its origin, soon began, as conversions
   multiplied, to admit the laity. But the mark of origin is ever
   preserved. Although it quickly passed away and was forgotten, Ebionism
   left a leaven in the whole history of Christian institutions which has
   not been lost. The collection of the principal Logia, or discourses, of
   Jesus was made in the Ebionitish centre of Batanea. "Poverty" remained
   an ideal from which the true followers of Jesus were never after
   separated. To possess nothing was the truly evangelical state;
   mendicancy became a virtue, a holy condition. The great Umbrian
   movement of the thirteenth century, which is, among all the attempts at
   religious construction, that which most resembles the Galilean
   movement, took place entirely in the name of poverty. Francis d'Assisi,
   the man who, more than any other, by his exquisite goodness, by his
   delicate, pure, and tender communion with universal life, most
   resembled Jesus, was a poor man. The mendicant orders, the innumerable
   communistic sects of the middle ages (Pauvres de Lyon, Bégards,
   Bons-Hommes, Fratricelles, Humiliés, Pauvres évangéliques, &c.) grouped
   under the banner of the "Everlasting Gospel," pretended to be, and in
   fact were, the true disciples of Jesus. But even in this instance the
   most impracticable dreams of the new religion were fruitful in results.
   Pious mendicity, so impatiently borne by our industrial and
   well-organised communities, was in its day, and in a suitable climate,
   full of charm. It offered to a multitude of mild and contemplative
   souls the only condition suited to them. To have made poverty an object
   of love and desire, to have raised the beggar to the altar, and to have
   sanctified the coat of the poor man, was a master-stroke which
   political economy may not appreciate, but in the presence of which the
   true moralist cannot remain indifferent. Humanity, in order to bear its
   burden, needs to believe that it is not paid entirely by wages. The
   greatest service which can be rendered to it is to repeat often that it
   lives not by bread alone.

   Like all great men, Jesus loved the people, and felt himself at home
   with them. The Gospel, in his idea, is made for the poor; it is to them
   he brings the glad tidings of salvation. All the despised ones of
   orthodox Judaism were his favourites. Love of the people and pity for
   its weakness (the sentiment of the democratic chief, who feels the
   spirit of the multitude live in him, and recognises him as its natural
   interpreter) shine forth at each moment in his acts and discourses.

   The chosen flock presented, in fact, a very mixed character, and one
   likely to astonish rigorous moralists. It counted in its fold men with
   whom a Jew, respecting himself, would not have associated. Perhaps
   Jesus found in this society, unrestrained by ordinary rules, more mind
   and heart than in a pedantic and formal middle-class, proud of its
   apparent morality. The Pharisees, exaggerating the Mosaic
   prescriptions, had come to believe themselves defiled by contact with
   men less strict than themselves; in their meals they almost rivalled
   the senseless distinctions of caste in India. Jesus, despising these
   miserable aberrations of the religious sentiment, loved to eat with
   those who suffered on account of them; by his side at table were to be
   found persons said to lead wicked lives, perhaps solely from the fact
   that they did not share the follies of the false devotees. The
   Pharisees and the doctors cried out against the scandal. "See," said
   they, "with what men he eats!" Jesus returned apt answers, which
   exasperated the hypocrites: "They that be whole need not a physician."
   Or again: "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of
   them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go
   after that which is lost until he find it? And when he hath found it he
   layeth it on his shoulders rejoicing." Or again, "The Son of man is
   come to save that which was lost." Or, once more: "I am not come to
   call the righteous, but sinners." Lastly, that delightful parable of
   the prodigal son, in which he who has fallen is represented as having a
   sort of privilege of love over him who has always been just. Weak or
   guilty women, surprised at so much that was charming, and perceiving,
   for the first time, the great attractions of contact with virtue,
   approached him freely. People were astonished that he did not repulse
   them. "Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake
   within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have
   known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she
   is a sinner." Jesus rejoined with the parable of a creditor who
   forgives his debtors' unequal debts, and he did not hesitate to prefer
   the lot of him to whom was remitted the greater debt. He appreciated
   conditions of soul only in proportion to the love contained therein.
   Women, with sorrowful hearts, and disposed on account of their sins to
   feelings of humility, were nearer to his kingdom than ordinary natures,
   who often are deserving of little credit for not having fallen. On the
   other hand, we can conceive that these tender souls, finding in their
   conversion to the sect an easy means of rehabilitation, would
   passionately attach themselves to him.

   Far from seeking to allay the murmurs raised by his disdain for the
   social susceptibilities of the time, he seemed to take pleasure in
   exciting them. Never did any one avow more loftily this contempt for
   the "world," which is the first condition of great things and of great
   originality. He pardoned the rich man only when the rich man, because
   of some prejudice, was disliked by society. He much preferred people of
   questionable lives and who had little consideration in the eyes of the
   orthodox leaders. "The publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of
   God before you. For John came unto you and ye believed him not: but the
   publicans and the harlots believed him." We can understand how galling
   the reproach of not having followed the good example set by prostitutes
   would be to men making a profession of seriousness and of rigid
   morality.

   He had no outward affectation or any show of austerity. He did not
   eschew pleasure; he went willingly to marriage feasts. One of his
   miracles was performed to enliven a wedding feast at a small town. In
   the East, weddings take place in the evening. Each person carries a
   lamp; and the lights coming and going produce a very agreeable effect.
   Jesus liked these gay and animated scenes and drew parables from them.
   Such levity, compared with that of John the Baptist, gave offence. One
   day, when the disciples of John and the Pharisees were observing the
   fast, it was asked, "Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees
   fast, but thy disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto them, Can the
   children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
   As long as they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast. But the
   days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and
   then they shall fast in those days." His sweet gaiety found expression
   in lively reflections and amiable pleasantries "But whereunto," said
   he, "shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children sitting in
   the markets, and calling unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped
   unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have
   not lamented. For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say,
   He hath a devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say,
   Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
   sinners. But Wisdom is justified of her children."

   He thus traversed Galilee in the midst of a continual feast. He rode on
   a mule (which in the East is a good and safe mode of travelling), whose
   large black eyes, shaded by long eye-lashes, give it an expression of
   gentleness. His disciples sometimes disposed themselves around him with
   a kind of rustic pomp, at the expense of their garments, which they
   used as carpets. They placed them on the mule which carried him, or
   spread them on the earth in his path. When he entered a house it was
   considered a joy and a blessing. He halted in the villages and at the
   large farms, where he received open hospitality. In the East, when a
   stranger enters a house it becomes at once a public place. All the
   village assembles there; the children invade it; they are put out by
   the servants, but always return. Jesus could not suffer these innocent
   auditors to be treated harshly; he caused them to be brought to him and
   embraced them. The mothers, encouraged by such treatment, brought him
   their children in order that he might touch them. Women came to pour
   oil upon his head, and perfumes on his feet. His disciples sometimes
   repulsed them as importunates; but Jesus, who loved ancient usages, and
   everything that indicated simplicity of heart, rectified the ill done
   by his too zealous friends. He protected those who wished to honour
   him. In this way children and women came to adore him. The reproach of
   alienating from their families these gentle creatures, always ready to
   be led astray, was one of the most frequent charges of his enemies.

   The nascent religion was thus in many respects confined to women and
   children. The latter were like a young guard around Jesus for the
   inauguration of his innocent royalty, and made him little ovations
   which much pleased him, calling him "son of David," crying Hosanna, and
   bearing palms around him. Jesus, like Savonarola, perhaps made them
   serve as instruments for pious missions; he was very glad to see these
   young apostles, who did not compromise him, rush to the front and give
   him titles which he dared not take himself. He let them speak, and when
   he was asked if he heard, he replied evasively that the praise which
   fell from young lips was the most agreeable to God.

   He lost no opportunity of repeating that the little ones are sacred
   beings, that the kingdom of God belongs to children, that we must
   become children to enter there, that we ought to receive it as a child,
   that the heavenly Father hides his secrets from the wise, and reveals
   them to babes. The notion of disciples in his mind is almost synonymous
   with that of children. Once, when they had one of those quarrels for
   precedence which were not uncommon, Jesus took a little child, placed
   him in their midst, and said to them, "Whosoever therefore shall humble
   himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of
   heaven."

   It was infancy, in fact, in its divine freshness, in its simple
   bewilderments of joy, which took possession of the earth. Every one
   believed that the kingdom so much desired might appear at any moment.
   Each one already saw himself seated on a throne beside the master. They
   divided the places amongst themselves; they strove to reckon the
   precise date of its advent. The latter was called the "Glad Tidings;"
   the doctrine had no other name. An old word, "paradise," which the
   Hebrew, like all the languages of the East, had borrowed from the
   Persian, and which at first designated the parks of the Achæmenidæ
   kings, summed up the general dream; a delightful garden, in which the
   charming life led here below would be continued for ever. How long did
   this intoxication last? We do not know. No one, during the course of
   this magical apparition, measured time any more than we measure a
   dream. Duration was suspended; a week was as an age. But, whether it
   filled years or months, the dream was so beautiful that humanity has
   lived upon it ever since, and it is still our consolation to gather its
   weakened perfume. Never did so much joy fill the bosom of man. For one
   moment humanity, in the most vigorous effort she ever made to rise
   above the world, forgot the leaden weight which pressed her to earth
   and the sorrows of the life below. Happy the one who has been able to
   behold this divine unfolding, and to enjoy, though but for one day,
   this unexampled illusion! But more happy still, Jesus would say to us,
   is he who, freed from all illusion, shall reproduce in himself the
   celestial vision, and, with no millenarian dream, no chimerical
   paradise, no signs in the heavens, but by the uprightness of his
   motives and the poetry of his soul, shall be able to create anew in his
   heart the true kingdom of God!
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XII.

  EMBASSY TO JESUS FROM JOHN IN PRISON--DEATH OF JOHN--THE RELATIONS OF HIS
  SCHOOL WITH THAT OF JESUS.

   Whilst joyous Galilee was celebrating in feasts the coming of the
   well-beloved, the disconsolate John, in his prison of Machero, was
   pining away with expectation and desire. The success of the young
   master whom he had seen some months before as his auditor had reached
   him. It was said that the Messiah predicted by the prophets, he who was
   to re-establish the kingdom of Israel, had come, and was making known
   his presence in Galilee by marvellous works. John wished to inquire
   into the truth of this rumour, and, as he was allowed to communicate
   freely with his disciples, he chose two of them to go to Jesus in
   Galilee.

   The two disciples found Jesus at the height of his fame. The appearance
   of happiness which reigned around him surprised them. Accustomed to
   fasts, to earnest prayer, and to a life full of aspirations, they were
   astonished to see themselves transported suddenly into the midst of
   welcome rejoicings. They told Jesus their message: "Art thou he that
   should come? Or do we look for another?" Jesus, who from that time
   hesitated no longer respecting his peculiar character as Messiah,
   enumerated to them the works which ought to characterise the coming of
   the kingdom of God--such as the healing of the sick, and the glad
   tidings of a salvation near at hand preached to the poor. He had done
   all these works. "And blessed is he," said Jesus, "whosoever shall not
   be offended in me."

   We do not know whether this answer reached John the Baptist, or into
   what temper it threw the austere ascetic. Did he die consoled and
   certain that he whom he had announced already lived, or did he retain
   some doubts as to the mission of Jesus? There is nothing to inform us.
   Seeing, however, that his school continued to exist a considerable time
   side by side with the Christian churches, we are constrained to believe
   that, notwithstanding his regard for Jesus, John did not regard him as
   the one who was to realise the divine promises. Death came, moreover,
   to end his perplexities. The untamable freedom of the ascetic was to
   crown his restless and troubled career by the only end which was worthy
   of it.

   The indulgence which Antipas had at first shown towards John was not of
   long duration. In the conversations which, according to the Christian
   tradition, John had had with the tetrarch, he did not cease repeating
   to him that his marriage was unlawful, and that he ought to send
   Herodias away. We can easily imagine the hatred which the
   grand-daughter of Herod the Great must have engendered against this
   importunate counsellor. She only waited an opportunity to ruin him.

   Her daughter, Salome, by her first marriage, and like her ambitious and
   dissolute, entered into her designs. That year (probably the year 30)
   Antipas was at Machero on the anniversary of his birthday. Herod the
   Great had caused to be constructed in the interior of the fortress a
   magnificent palace, in which the tetrarch frequently resided. He gave a
   great feast there, during which Salome executed one of those character
   dances which were not considered in Syria as unbecoming a distinguished
   person. Antipas, being greatly delighted, asked the dancer what she
   most desired, who, at the instigation of her mother, replied, "Give me
   here John Baptist's head in a charger." Antipas was sorry, but he could
   not refuse. A guard took the charger, went and cut off the head of the
   prisoner, and brought it.

   The disciples of the Baptist obtained his body and placed it in a tomb.
   The people were much offended. Six years later, Hâreth having attacked
   Antipas, in order to recover Machero and avenge the dishonour of his
   daughter, Antipas was completely beaten; and his defeat was generally
   regarded as a punishment for the murder of John.

   The news of John's death was brought to Jesus by the disciples of the
   Baptist. The last step John had taken in regard to Jesus had succeeded
   in establishing between the two schools the most intimate bonds. Jesus,
   fearing an increase of ill-will on the part of Antipas, took the
   precaution to retire to the desert. Many people followed him thence.
   Thanks to a strict frugality, the holy band succeeded in living there,
   and in this there was naturally seen a miracle From that time Jesus
   always spoke of John with redoubled admiration. He declared
   unhesitatingly that he was more than a prophet, that the Law and the
   ancient prophets had force only until he came, that he had abrogated
   them, but that the kingdom of heaven in turn had superseded him. In
   fine, he assigned him a special place in the economy of the Christian
   mystery, which constituted him the link of union between the Old
   Testament and the advent of the new reign.

   The prophet Malachi, whose opinion in this matter was soon brought to
   bear, had persistently declared a precursor of the Messiah, who was to
   prepare men for the final renovation, a messenger who should come to
   make straight the paths before the elected of God. This messenger was
   none other than the prophet Elias, who, according to a widely-spread
   belief, was soon to descend from heaven, whither he had been carried,
   in order to prepare men by repentance for the great advent, and to
   reconcile God with His people. Sometimes they associated with Elias
   either the patriarch Enoch, to whom for one or two centuries they had
   been attributing high sanctity; or Jeremiah, whom they regarded as a
   sort of protecting genius of the people, constantly occupied in praying
   for them before the throne of God. This idea, of two of the old
   prophets rising again, to act as precursors to the Messiah, is
   discovered in so striking a form in the doctrine of the Parsees that we
   feel much inclined to believe that it comes from that source. Be that
   as it may, it formed at the time of Jesus an integral portion of the
   Jewish theories in regard to the Messiah. It was admitted that the
   appearance of "two faithful witnesses," clothed in garments of
   repentance, would be the preamble of the great drama about to be
   unfolded, to the astonishment of the universe.

   We can understand that, with these ideas, Jesus and his disciples could
   not hesitate about the mission of John the Baptist. When the scribes
   raised the objection that it could not yet be a question of the
   Messiah, inasmuch as Elias had not yet appeared, they replied that
   Elias had come, that John was Elias raised from the dead. By his manner
   of life, by his opposition to the established political authorities,
   John recalled, in fact, that strange figure in the ancient history of
   Israel. Nor was Jesus silent in regard to the merits and excellences of
   his forerunner. He said that among the children of men none greater had
   been born. He vehemently blamed the Pharisees and the doctors for not
   having accepted his baptism, and for not being converted at his voice.

   The disciples of Jesus were faithful to these principles of their
   master. Respect for John was an unquestioned tradition during the whole
   of the first Christian generation. He was supposed to be a relative of
   Jesus. His baptism was regarded as the most important fact, and, in
   some sort, as the prefatory obligation of all gospel history. In order
   to establish the mission of the son of Joseph upon testimony admitted
   by all, it was stated that John, at the first sight of Jesus,
   proclaimed him the Messiah; that he recognised himself his inferior,
   unworthy to unloose the latchets of his shoes; that he refused at first
   to baptize him, and maintained that it was he who ought to be baptized
   by Jesus. These were exaggerations, which are sufficiently refuted by
   the doubtful form of John's last message. But, in a more general sense,
   John remains in the Christian legend that which he was in reality,--the
   austere forerunner, the gloomy preacher of repentance before the joy on
   the arrival of the bridegroom, the prophet who announces the kingdom of
   God and dies before beholding it. This giant in primitive Christianity,
   this eater of locusts and wild honey, this rugged redresser of wrongs,
   was the absinthe which prepared the lip for the sweetness of the
   kingdom of God. His beheading by Herodias inaugurated the era of
   Christian martyrs; he was the first witness for the new faith. The
   worldly, who regarded him their true enemy, could not permit him to
   live; his mutilated corpse, extended on the threshold of Christianity,
   indicated the bloody path in which so many others were to follow.

   The school of John did not die with its founder. It existed some time
   distinct from that of Jesus, and from the first on good terms with the
   latter. Many years after the death of the two masters, people were
   still baptized with the baptism of John. Certain persons were members
   of the two schools at the same time,--for example, the celebrated
   Apollos, the rival of St. Paul (about the year 54), and a goodly number
   of the Christians of Ephesus. Josephus entered in the year 53 the
   school of an ascetic named Banou, who presents a striking resemblance
   to John the Baptist, and who was perhaps of his school. This Banou
   lived in the desert, and was clothed with the leaves of trees. His only
   nourishment was wild plants and fruits, and he baptized himself
   frequently, both day and night, in cold water, in order to purify
   himself. James, who was called the "brother of the Lord," practised a
   similar asceticism. Later, about the year 80, Baptism was in conflict
   with Christianity, especially in Asia Minor. The author of the writings
   attributed to John the evangelist appears to combat it in an indirect
   manner. One of the Sibylline poems seems to proceed from this school.
   As to the sects of Hemerobaptists, Baptists, and Elchasaïtes (Sabiens,
   Mogtasila of the Arabian writers), who in the second century filled
   Syria, Palestine, and Babylonia, and whose representatives still exist
   in our days among the Mendaites, called "Christians of St. John," they
   had the same origin as the movement of John the Baptist rather than
   being an authentic descent from him. The true school of John, half
   Christian in its character, became a small Christian sect, and died out
   in obscurity. John had distinctly foreseen the destiny of the two
   schools. If he had yielded to a pitiful rivalry, he would to-day be
   forgotten in the crowd of sectaries of his time. By his
   self-abnegation, he has attained a glorious and unique position in the
   religious pantheon of humanity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIII.

  FIRST ATTEMPTS ON JERUSALEM.

   Jesus went almost every year to Jerusalem for the feast of the
   passover. The particulars of these journeys are meagre, for the
   synoptics do not speak of them, and the remarks in the fourth Gospel
   are on this point very confused. It was, it would seem, in the year 31,
   and certainly after the death of John, that the most important of the
   visits of Jesus to Jerusalem took place. Several of the disciples
   followed him. Although Jesus attached at that time little value to the
   pilgrimage, he conformed himself to it in order not to offend Jewish
   opinion, with which he had not yet broken. These journeys besides were
   essential to his design; for he felt already that, in order to play a
   leading part, he must go from Galilee, and attack Judaism in its
   stronghold, which was Jerusalem.

   The little Galilean community was here by no means at home. Jerusalem
   was then nearly what it is to-day, a city of pedantry, acrimony,
   disputes, hatreds, and littleness of mind. Its fanaticism was extreme,
   and religious seditions were very frequent. The Pharisees were
   dominant; the study of the Law, pushed to the most insignificant
   minutiae, and reduced to questions of casuistry, was the only study.
   This exclusively theological and canonical culture contributed in
   nowise to refine the intellect. It was something analogous to the
   barren doctrine of the Mussulman fakir, to that empty science debated
   round the mosques, which is a great expenditure of time and a pure
   waste of dialectical skill, without aiding the right discipline of the
   mind. The theological education of the modern clergy, although very
   dry, can give us no idea of this, for the Renaissance has introduced
   into all our teachings, even the most extravagant, something of belles
   lettres and of method, the consequence of which is that scholasticism
   has taken a taint, more or less, of the humanities. The science of the
   Jewish doctor, of the sofer, or scribe, was purely barbarous, absurd
   beyond measure, and stripped of all moral element. To cap the evil, it
   filled with ridiculous pride those who had wearied themselves in
   acquiring it. Proud of the pretended knowledge which had cost him so
   much trouble, the Jewish scribe had the same contempt for Greek culture
   as the learned Mussulman of our time has for European civilisation, as
   the old catholic theologian had for the knowledge of men of the world.
   The tendency of this scholastic culture was to turn the mind against
   all that was refined, to create esteem only for those childish
   difficulties on which they had wasted their lives, and which were
   regarded as the natural occupation of persons making a profession of
   seriousness.

   This odious society could not but weigh very heavily on the tender and
   susceptible northern mind. The contempt of the Jerusalemites for the
   Galileans rendered the separation still more complete. In that
   beautiful temple, the object of all their desires, they often only
   experienced insult. A verse of the pilgrim's psalm, "I had rather be a
   doorkeeper in the house of my God," seemed expressly made for them. A
   contemptuous priest-hood laughed at their simple devotion, just as
   formerly in Italy the clergy, familiarised with the sanctuaries,
   witnessed coldly and almost jestingly the fervour of the pilgrim
   arriving from afar. The Galileans spoke a rather corrupt dialect, their
   pronunciation was faulty; they confounded diverse aspirates which led
   to mistakes that were much laughed at. In religion, they were regarded
   as ignorant and not very orthodox; the expression "foolish Galileans"
   had become proverbial. It was believed (not without reason) that they
   were not of pure Jewish blood, and it was held, as a matter of course,
   that Galilee could not produce a prophet. Placed thus on the confines
   of Judaism, nay almost outside of it, the poor Galileans had only one
   badly interpreted passage in Isaiah on which to build their hopes.
   "Land of Zebulon, and land of Naphtali, way of the sea, Galilee of the
   nations! The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light:
   they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the
   light shined." The reputation of the native city of Jesus was
   particularly bad. It was a popular proverb, "Can there any good thing
   come out of Nazareth?"

   The great barrenness of nature in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem must
   have added to the dislike Jesus had for the place. The valleys are
   without water; the soil is arid and stony. Casting the eye into the
   valley of the Dead Sea, the view is somewhat striking; elsewhere it is
   monotonous. The hill of Mizpeh, around which clusters the most ancient
   historical remembrances of Israel, alone relieves the eye. The city
   presented, at the time of Jesus, nearly the same aspect that it does
   now. It had very few ancient monuments, for until the time of the
   Asmoneans the Jews had remained strangers to all the arts. John
   Hyrcanus had begun to embellish it, and Herod the Great had made it one
   of the most magnificent cities of the East. The Herodian constructions,
   by their grand character, perfection of execution, and beauty of
   material, may dispute superiority with the most finished works of
   antiquity. A great number of superb tombs, displaying original taste,
   were erected at the same time in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem. The
   style of these monuments was Grecian, but appropriate to the customs of
   the Jews, and considerably modified in accordance with their
   principles. The ornamental sculptures of the human figure which the
   Herods had sanctioned, to the great disgust of the purists, were
   discarded and superseded by floral decorations. The taste of the
   ancient inhabitants of Phoenicia and Palestine for monoliths cut out of
   the solid rock seemed to be revived in these singular tombs cut in the
   rock, and in which Grecian orders are so strangely applied to an
   architect of troglodytes. Jesus, who regarded works of art as a pompous
   display of vanity, viewed these monuments with displeasure. His
   absolute spiritualism, and his settled conviction that the form of the
   old world was about to pass away, left him only a taste for things
   belonging to the heart.

   The temple, at the time of Jesus, was quite new, while its exterior
   works were not yet completed. Herod had begun its reconstruction in the
   year 20 or 21 before the Christian era, in order to make it uniform
   with his other edifices. The main body of the temple was finished in
   eighteen months; the porticoes took eight years; and the accessory
   portions were raised slowly, and were only finished a short time before
   the taking of Jerusalem. Jesus probably saw the work progressing, not
   without a degree of secret vexation. These hopes of a long future
   seemed an insult to his approaching advent. Clearer-sighted than the
   unbelievers and the fanatics, he foresaw that these superb edifices
   would have but a short duration.

   The temple, nevertheless, formed a marvellously imposing whole, of
   which the present haram, in spite of its beauty, can scarcely give us
   any idea. The courts and the porticoes served as the daily rendezvous
   for a considerable gathering, so much so that this great space was at
   once temple forum, tribunal, and university. All the religious
   discussions of the Jewish schools, all the canonical instruction, even
   the legal processes and civil causes, all the activity of the nation,
   in short, was concentrated there. It was a place where arguments were
   perpetually clashing, a battle-field of disputes, resounding with
   sophisms and subtle questions. The temple thus resembled much a
   Mahometan mosque. At this period the Romans treated all strange
   religions with the greatest respect, provided they were kept within
   proper limits, and carefully refrained from entering the sanctuary;
   Greek and Latin inscriptions marked the point up to which those who
   were not Jews were permitted to advance. But the tower of Antonia, the
   headquarters of the Roman forces, commanded the whole enclosure, and
   enabled them to see all that passed therein. The guarding of the temple
   belonged to the Jews; its superintendence was entrusted to a captain,
   who caused the gates to be opened and shut, prohibited any one from
   crossing the enclosure with a stick in his hand, or with dusty shoes,
   or when carrying parcels, or to take a near cut. They were especially
   scrupulous in watching that no one entered within the inner gates in a
   state of legal impurity. The women had an entirely separate court.

   It was in the temple that Jesus passed his days, whilst he remained at
   Jerusalem. The period of the feasts attracted to the city extraordinary
   affluence. Lodged in parties of ten to twenty persons in one chamber,
   the pilgrims invaded every quarter and lived in that huddled state in
   which Orientals delight. Jesus was lost in the crowd, and his poor
   Galileans who grouped around him were of small account. He probably
   felt that there he was in a hostile world which would receive him only
   with disdain. Everything he saw he disapproved of. The temple, like all
   much-frequented places of devotion, presented a not very edifying
   spectacle. The service of this entailed a multitude of repulsive enough
   details, especially of mercantile operations, in consequence of which
   actual shops were established within the sacred enclosure. There people
   sold beasts for the sacrifices; there one found tables for the exchange
   of money; at times it seemed as if one were in a bazaar. The inferior
   officers of the temple fulfilled, doubtless, their functions with the
   irreligious vulgarity characteristic of the sacristans of all ages.
   This profane and indifferent air in the handling of holy things wounded
   the religious sentiment of Jesus, sometimes leading him to excess. He
   said that they had made the house of prayer a den of thieves. One day,
   in fact, it is said, that, carried away by his anger, he scourged the
   vendors with a "scourge of small cords," and overturned their tables.
   In general, he cared little for the temple. The worship that he had
   conceived for his Father had nothing to do with scenes of butchery. All
   these old Jewish institutions displeased him, and he was pained in
   being obliged to conform to them. Thus, neither the temple nor its site
   inspired pious sentiments in the bosom of Christianity, except in the
   case of the Judaising Christians. The true proselytes had an aversion
   to this ancient sanctuary. Constantine and the first Christian emperors
   left the Pagan constructions of Hadrian standing there. It was the
   enemies of Christianity, such as Julian, who remembered the temple.
   When Omar entered Jerusalem, the site of the temple was designedly
   polluted in hatred of the Jews. It was Islamism, that is to say, a sort
   of resurrection of Judaism, in its most Semitic form, which rendered it
   honours The place has always been antichristian.

   The pride of the Jews completed the discontent of Jesus, and rendered
   his sojourn in Jerusalem painful. In proportion as the great ideas of
   Israel ripened, the priesthood were debased. The institution of
   synagogues had given to the interpreter of the Law, to the doctor, a
   great superiority over the priest. There were no priests except at
   Jerusalem, and even there, reduced to entirely ritual functions,
   almost, like our parish priests, excluded from preaching, they were
   surpassed by the orator of the synagogue, the casuist, the sofer or
   scribe, though the latter was but a layman. The celebrated men of the
   Talmud were not priests; they were learned men according to the ideas
   of the time. The high priesthood of Jerusalem held, it is true, a very
   elevated rank in the nation; but it was by no means at the head of the
   religious movement. The sovereign pontiff, whose dignity had already
   been degraded by Herod, became more and more a Roman functionary, who
   was frequently removed in order that others might share the profits of
   the office. Opposed to the Pharisees, who were important lay zealots,
   the priests were almost all Sadducees, that is to say, members of that
   unbelieving aristocracy which had been formed around the temple, lived
   by the altar, though they saw the vanity of it. The sacerdotal caste
   was separated to such a degree from the national sentiment and from the
   great religious movement which urged the people on, that the name of
   "Sadducee" (sadoki), which at first simply designated a member of the
   sacerdotal family of Sadok, had become synonymous with "Materialist"
   and with "Epicurean."

   An element worse still had begun, since the reign of Herod the Great,
   to corrupt the high-priesthood. Herod having fallen in love with
   Mariamne, daughter of a certain Simon, son of Boëthus of Alexandria,
   and having wished to marry her (about the year 28 J.C.), saw no other
   means of ennobling his father-in-law and raising him to his own rank
   than by making him high-priest. This intriguing family remained
   masters, almost without interruption, of the sovereign pontificate for
   thirty-five years. Closely allied to the reigning family, it did not
   lose the office until after the deposition of Archelaus, and recovered
   it (the year 42 of our era) after Herod Agrippa had for some time
   recommenced the work of Herod the Great. Under the name of Boëthusim, a
   new sacerdotal nobility was formed, which was very worldly, being
   little devotional, and closely allied to the Sadokites. The Boëthusim,
   in the Talmud and the rabbinical writings, are depicted as a kind of
   unbelievers, and always reproached as Sadducees. From all this there
   resulted a kind of "court of Rome" around the temple, living by
   politics, little carried away by excess of zeal, even rather fearing
   them, not wishing to hear of holy personages or of innovators, for this
   "court" derived profit from the established routine. These epicurean
   priests had not the violence of the Pharisees; they only wished for
   quietness; it was their moral indifference, their cold irreligion,
   which revolted Jesus. Although quite distinct, the priests and the
   Pharisees were thus confounded in his antipathies. But being a
   stranger, and without influence, he was long compelled to restrain his
   displeasure within himself, and only to communicate his sentiments to
   the intimate friends who accompanied him.

   Before his last stay, much more protracted than any he had made at
   Jerusalem, and which was terminated by his death, Jesus endeavoured,
   however, to make himself heard. He preached; people spoke of him; and
   they conversed upon certain acts of his which were looked upon as
   miraculous. But from all that there resulted neither an established
   church at Jerusalem, nor a group of Jerusalemite disciples. The
   charming lawgiver, who forgave everyone provided they but loved him,
   could not find much response in this sanctuary of vain disputes and of
   obsolete sacrifices. The sole result was that he formed some valuable
   friendships, the advantage of which he reaped afterwards. He does not
   appear at that time to have made the acquaintance of the family of
   Bethany, which, amidst the trials of the latter months of his life,
   brought him so much consolation. But perhaps he had relations with that
   Mary, mother of Mark (whose house became some years later the
   rendezvous of the apostles), and with Mark himself. But very early he
   attracted the attention of a certain Nicodemus, a rich Pharisee, a
   member of the Sanhedrim, and a man highly considered in Jerusalem. This
   man, who appears to have been upright and sincere, felt himself drawn
   towards the young Galilean. Not wishing to compromise himself, he came
   to see Jesus by night, and had a long conversation with him. He
   undoubtedly preserved a favourable impression of him, for later on he
   defended Jesus against the prejudices of his colleagues, and, at the
   death of Jesus, we find him tending with pious care the corpse of the
   master. Nicodemus did not become a Christian; he had too much regard
   for his position to take part in a revolutionary movement which as yet
   numbered no men of note amongst its adherents. But he evidently had
   much friendship for Jesus, and rendered him service, though powerless
   to rescue him from a death which even at this period was all but
   decreed.

   As to the celebrated doctors of the time, Jesus does not appear to have
   had any connection with them. Hillel and Shammai were dead; the
   greatest authority of the day was Gamaliel, grandson of Hillel. He had
   a liberal mind, was a man of the world, open to secular opinions, and
   rendered tolerant by his intercourse with good society. Differing from
   the very strict Pharisees, who walked veiled or with closed eyes, he
   gazed even upon Pagan women. The sectaries excused this, as well as a
   knowledge of Greek in him, because he had access to the court. After
   the death of Jesus he expressed very moderate views in regard to the
   new sect. St. Paul sat at his feet, but it is highly improbable that
   Jesus ever entered his school.

   One idea, at least, which Jesus carried away from Jerusalem, and which
   henceforth appeared to be rooted in his mind, was that there was no
   union possible between him and the ancient Jewish religion. The
   abolition of the sacrifices, which had caused him so much disgust, the
   suppression of an impious and haughty priesthood, and, in a general
   sense, the abrogation of the Law, appeared to him an absolute
   necessity! From this moment he is no longer a Jewish reformer, but it
   is as a destroyer of Judaism that he poses. Some advocates of the
   Messianic notions had already admitted that the Messiah would bring a
   new law, which should be common to all people. The Essenes, who were
   scarcely Jews, appear also to have been indifferent to the temple and
   to the Mosaic observances. But these were only isolated or unavowed
   instances of boldness. Jesus was the first who dared to say that from
   his time, or rather from that of John, the Law was abolished. If
   sometimes he used more guarded terms it was in order not to shock too
   violently existing prejudices. When he was driven to extremities he
   lifted the veil entirely, and declared that the Law had no longer any
   force. On this subject he used striking comparisons. "No man putteth a
   piece of new cloth into an old garment, neither do men put new wine
   into old bottles." Herein lies his chief characteristic as teacher and
   originator. The temple excluded all except Jews from its enclosure by
   scornful placards. Jesus did not approve this. That narrow, hard, and
   uncharitable Law was only made for the children of Abraham. Jesus
   maintained that every well-disposed man, every man who received and
   loved him, was a son of Abraham. The pride of blood appeared to him the
   chief enemy that he had to combat. In other words, Jesus was no longer
   a Jew. He was in the highest degree revolutionary; he called all men to
   a worship founded solely on the fact of their being children of God. He
   proclaimed the rights of man, not the rights of the Jew; the religion
   of man, not the religion of the Jew; the deliverance of man, not the
   deliverance of the Jew. Ah! how far removed was this from a Gaulonite
   Judas or a Matthias Margaloth, preaching revolution in the name of the
   Law! The religion of humanity was thus established, not upon blood, but
   upon the heart. Moses was superseded, the temple was rendered useless,
   and was irrevocably condemned.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIV.

  RELATIONS OF JESUS WITH THE PAGANS AND THE SAMARITANS.

   As a consequence of these principles, Jesus contemned all religion
   which was not of the heart. The foolish practices of the devotees, the
   exterior rigorism, which trusted to formality for salvation, had in him
   a mortal enemy. He cared little for fasting. He preferred forgiving an
   injury to sacrifice. The love of God, charity and reciprocal
   forgiveness, were his whole law. Nothing could be less priestly. The
   priest, by virtue of his office, ever advocates public sacrifice, of
   which he is the appointed minister; he discourages private prayer,
   which is a means of dispensing with his office. We should seek in vain
   in the Gospel for one religious rite recommended by Jesus. Baptism to
   him was only of secondary importance; and as to prayer, he prescribes
   nothing, except that it must come from the heart. As is always the
   case, many thought to substitute the good-will of feeble souls for
   genuine love of goodness, and imagined they could gain the kingdom of
   heaven by saying to him, "Rabbi, Rabbi," but he rebuked them, and
   proclaimed that his religion consisted in doing good. He often quoted
   the passage in Isaiah, "This people honour me with their lips, but
   their heart is far from me."

   The Sabbath was the principal point upon which was raised the whole
   edifice of Pharisaic scruples and subtleties. This ancient and
   excellent institution had become a pretext for the miserable disputes
   of casuists, and a source of a thousand superstitious beliefs. It was
   believed that nature observed it; all intermittent sources were
   accounted "Sabbatical." This was, moreover, the point upon which Jesus
   most delighted in defying his adversaries. He openly violated the
   Sabbath, and only replied by subtle raillery to the reproaches that
   were heaped upon him. For a still stronger reason he despised a host of
   modern observances, which tradition had added to the Law, and which on
   that very account were dearer than any other to the devotees.
   Ablutions, and the too subtle distinctions between things pure and
   impure, found in him a pitiless opponent. "There is nothing from
   without a man," said he, "that entering into him can defile him: but
   the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man."
   The Pharisees, who were the propagators of these mummeries, were the
   target for all his attacks. He accused them of exceeding the Law, of
   inventing impracticable precepts, in order to create occasions of sin
   in man: "Blind leaders of the blind," said he, "take care lest ye also
   fall into the ditch." "O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil,
   speak good things for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
   speaketh."

   He was not sufficiently acquainted with the Gentiles to think of
   founding anything lasting upon their conversion. Galilee contained a
   great number of Pagans, but, as it appears, no public and organised
   worship of false gods. Jesus could see this worship displayed in all
   its splendour in the country of Tyre and Sidon, at Cæsarea Philippi and
   in the Decapolis, but he paid little attention to it. In him we never
   find the wearisome Jewish pedantry of his time, nor those declamations
   against idolatry so familiar to his co-religionists from the time of
   Alexander, and which fill, for instance, the book of "Wisdom." That
   which struck him in the Pagans was not their idolatry, but their
   servility. The young Jewish democrat agreeing on this point with Judas
   the Gaulonite, admitting no master but God, was hurt at the honours
   with which they surrounded the persons of sovereigns, and the
   mendacious titles frequently given to them. With this exception, in the
   greater number of instances in which he comes in contact with Pagans,
   he shows towards them great indulgence; sometimes he professes to
   conceive more hope of them than of the Jews. The kingdom of God is to
   be transferred to them. "When the lord, therefore, of the vineyard
   cometh, what will he do unto these husbandmen? He will miserably
   destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vine-yard unto other
   husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons." Jesus
   adhered so much the more to this idea, as the conversion of the
   Gentiles was, according to Jewish notions, one of the surest signs of
   the advent of the Messiah. In his kingdom of God he represents, as
   seated at a feast, by the side of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, men come
   from the four winds of heaven, whilst the lawful heirs of the kingdom
   are rejected. Sometimes, it is true, there is to be found, in the
   commands he gives to his disciples, an entirely contrary tendency: he
   seems to recommend them to preach salvation to the orthodox Jews only;
   he speaks of Pagans in a manner conformable to the prejudices of the
   Jews. But we must remember that the disciples, whose narrow minds did
   not lend themselves to this supreme indifference for the privileges of
   the sons of Abraham, may have given the instruction of their master the
   bent of their own ideas. Besides, it is very possible that Jesus may
   have vacillated on this point; just as Mahomet speaks of the Jews in
   the Koran, sometimes in the most honourable manner, sometimes with
   extreme harshness, according as he hoped or not to win their favour.
   Tradition, in fact, ascribes to Jesus two entirely opposite rules of
   proselytism, which he may have practised in turn: "He that is not
   against us is on our part." "He that is not with me is against me."
   Impassioned contention involves almost necessarily these sorts of
   contradictions.

   It is certain that he numbered amongst his disciples many men whom the
   Jews designated "Hellenes." This term had in Palestine divers meanings.
   Sometimes it designated the Pagans; sometimes the Greek-speaking Jews
   dwelling among the Pagans; sometimes men of Pagan origin converted to
   Judaism. It was probably in this last category of Hellenes that Jesus
   found sympathy. The affiliation with Judaism had numerous degrees; but
   the proselytes always remained in a state of inferiority as compared
   with the Jew by birth. The former were called "proselytes of the gate,"
   or "men fearing God," and were subject to the precepts of Noah, and not
   to those of Moses. This very inferiority was unquestionably the cause
   which drew them to Jesus, and gained them his favour.

   It was in the same manner that he treated the Samaritans. Surrounded
   like a small island, by the two great provinces of Judaism (Judæa and
   Galilee), Samaria formed in Palestine a kind of enclosure in which was
   preserved the ancient worship of Gerizim, closely related and rivalling
   that of Jerusalem. This poor sect, which had neither the genius nor the
   perfect organisation of Judaism, properly so called, was treated by the
   Jerusalemites with extreme harshness. They placed them on the same
   footing with Pagans, but hated them more. Jesus, from a spirit of
   opposition, was well disposed towards them. He often preferred the
   Samaritans to the orthodox Jews. If, on the other hand, he seems to
   forbid his disciples from going to preach to them, reserving his gospel
   for the Israelites proper, this was no doubt a precept dictated by
   special circumstances, to which the apostles have attached too absolute
   a meaning. Sometimes, in fact, the Samaritans received him badly,
   because they supposed him to be imbued with the prejudices of his
   co-religionists; in like manner as in our days the European
   free-thinker is regarded as an enemy by the Mussulman, who always
   believes him to be a fanatical Christian. Jesus knew how to rise above
   these misunderstandings. He had many disciples at Shechem, and he
   passed there at least two days. On one occasion he meets with gratitude
   and true piety from a Samaritan only. One of his most beautiful
   parables is that of the man injured on the way to Jericho. A priest
   passes by and sees him, but goes on his way; a Levite also passes, but
   does not stop; a Samaritan has compassion on him, approaches, and pours
   oil into his wounds, and binds them up. Jesus argues hence that true
   brotherhood is established amongst men by charity, and not by religious
   tenets. The "neighbour" who in Judaism was limited to the
   co-religionist was in his estimation the man who has pity on his fellow
   without distinction of sect. Human brotherhood in its widest sense
   abounds in all his teaching.

   These ideas, which beset Jesus on his leaving Jerusalem, found vivid
   expression in an anecdote which has been preserved in regard to his
   return. The route from Jerusalem into Galilee passes Shechem at a
   distance of about half an hour's walk, at the opening of the valley
   commanded by Mounts Ebal and Gerizim. This route was in general shunned
   by the Jewish pilgrims, who preferred journeying by the long detour
   through Peræa rather than expose themselves to the ill-treatment of the
   Samaritans, or have to ask anything of them. It was forbidden to eat
   and drink with them; for it was an axiom of certain casuists that "a
   piece of Samaritan bread is the flesh of swine." When they followed
   this route, provisions were always laid up beforehand; yet it was
   rarely they could avoid scuffles and ill-treatment. Jesus shared
   neither these scruples nor these fears. Arrived, by this route, at the
   point whence the valley of Shechem opens on the left, he felt fatigued,
   and stopped near a well. The Samaritans were then as now in the habit
   of giving to the different spots of their valley names drawn from
   patriarchal reminiscences. They called this well the well of Jacob; it
   was probably the same that is called even up to this day Bir-Iakoub.
   The disciples entered the valley and went to the city to buy
   provisions; Jesus sat by the side of the well, having Gerizim in front
   of him.

   It was about noon, and a woman of Shechem came to draw water. Jesus
   asked of her to drink. which excited great astonishment in the woman,
   the Jews generally forbidding all intercourse with the Samaritans. Won
   by the conversation of Jesus, the woman recognising in him a prophet,
   and anticipating reproaches about her worship, she took up speech
   first. "Sir," said she, "our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and
   ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Jesus
   saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh when ye shall
   neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. But
   the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship
   the Father in spirit and in truth."

   The day on which he uttered this saying, he was in reality Son of God.
   He uttered for the first time the sentence upon which will repose the
   edifice of eternal religion. He founded the pure worship, of all ages,
   of all lands, that which all elevated souls will embrace until the end
   of time. Not only was his religion on this day the best religion of
   humanity, it was the absolute religion; and if other planets have
   inhabitants endowed with reason and morality, their religion cannot be
   different from that which Jesus proclaimed near Jacob's well. Man has
   not been able to hold to it; for we can attain the ideal but for a
   moment. This sentiment of Jesus has been a bright light amidst gross
   darkness; it has taken eighteen hundred years for the eyes of mankind
   (I ought rather to say for an infinitely small portion of mankind) to
   become accustomed to it. But the light will grow into the full day,
   and, after having traversed all the circles of error, mankind will come
   back to this sentiment and regard it as the immortal expression of its
   faith and its hopes.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XV.

  COMMENCEMENT OF THE LEGEND OF JESUS--HIS OWN IDEA OF HIS SUPERNATURAL
  CHARACTER.

   Jesus, having completely lost his Jewish faith, and being filled with
   revolutionary ardour, returned to Galilee. His ideas are now expressed
   with perfect clearness. The simple aphorisms of the first part of his
   prophetic career, borrowed in part from the Jewish rabbis anterior to
   him, and the beautiful moral teachings of his second period, are
   discarded for a decided policy. The Law must be abolished; and it is to
   be abolished by him. The Messiah has come, and he it is who is the
   Messiah. The kingdom of God is soon to be revealed; and it is he who
   will reveal it. He knows well that he will suffer for his boldness; but
   the kingdom of God cannot be conquered without violence; it is by
   crises and commotions that it is to be established. The Son of man
   after his death will return in glory, accompanied by legions of angels,
   and those who have rejected him will be confounded.

   The boldness of such a conception ought not to surprise us. Long before
   this Jesus regarded his relation to God as that of a son to his father.
   That which in others would be insupportable pride ought not in him to
   be treated as presumption.

   The title of "Son of David" was the first that he accepted, probably
   without his being implicated in the innocent frauds by which it was
   sought to secure it to him. The family of David had, as it appears,
   been long extinct; nor did the Asmoneans, who were of priestly origin,
   nor Herod, nor the Romans dream for a moment that any representative
   whatever of the ancient dynasty existed in their midst. But from the
   close of the Asmonean dynasty the dream of an unknown descendant of the
   ancient kings, who should avenge the nation of its enemies, worked in
   every brain. The universal belief was that the Messiah would be son of
   David, and, like him, would be born at Bethlehem. The first thought of
   Jesus was not this exactly. The remembrance of David, which was
   uppermost in the minds of the majority of the Jews, had nothing in
   common with his heavenly reign. He believed himself the Son of God, and
   not the son of David. His kingdom, and the deliverance which he
   meditated, were of quite another order. But opinion on this point made
   him do himself a sort of violence. The immediate consequence of the
   proposition, "Jesus is the Messiah," was this other proposition, "Jesus
   is the son of David." He allowed a title to be given him without which
   he could not hope for success. And in the end he appears to have taken
   pleasure in it, inasmuch as he performed most willingly the miracles
   which were asked of him by those who used this title in addressing him.
   In this, as in many other circumstances of his life, Jesus yielded to
   the notions which were current in his time, although they were not
   precisely his own. He associated with his doctrine of the "kingdom of
   God" all that could stimulate the heart and the imagination. Hence it
   is that we have seen him adopt the baptism of John, although it could
   not be of much importance to him.

   One great difficulty presented itself, to wit, his birth at Nazareth,
   which was of public notoriety. We do not know whether Jesus endeavoured
   to remove this objection. Perhaps it did not present itself in Galilee,
   where the idea that the son of David should be a Bethlehemite was less
   spread. To the Galilean idealist, moreover, the title of "son of David"
   was sufficiently justified, if he to whom it was given should retrieve
   the glory of his race, and bring back the great days of Israel. Did
   Jesus, by his silence, assent to the fictitious genealogies which his
   partisans invented in order to prove his royal descent? Did he know
   anything of the legends invented to prove that he was born at
   Bethlehem; and particularly of the attempt to connect his Bethlehemite
   origin with the census which had taken place by order of Quirinius, the
   imperial legate. We cannot tell. The inexactitude and the
   contradictions of the genealogies lead to the belief that they were the
   result of popular notions operating at various points, and that none of
   them was sanctioned by Jesus. Never with his own lips does he designate
   himself son of David. His disciples, much less enlightened than he,
   some-times magnified what he said of himself; but very often he knew
   nothing of these exaggerations. And we must add that, during the first
   three centuries, considerable portions of Christendom obstinately
   denied the royal descent of Jesus and the authenticity of the
   genealogies.

   The legend about him was thus the result of a great and entirely
   spontaneous conspiracy, and began to surround him during his lifetime.
   There has been no great event in history which has not given rise to a
   series of fables; and Jesus could not, even had he wished, put a stop
   to these popular creations. Doubtless a sagacious observer would have
   detected in them the germ of the narratives which were to ascribe to
   him a supernatural birth, either by reason of the idea, very prevalent
   in ancient times, that the incomparable man could not be born of the
   ordinary relations of the two sexes; or for the purpose of fulfilling
   the requirements of an imperfectly understood chapter of Isaiah, which
   was believed to foretell that the Messiah should be born of a virgin;
   or, lastly, as the result of a belief that the "breath of God," already
   regarded as a divine hypostasis, was a principle of fecundity. There
   was by this time, no doubt, more than one current anecdote regarding
   his infancy, conceived for the purpose of showing in his biography the
   accomplishment of the Messianic ideal, or rather the prophetic, that
   the allegorical exigences of the times reputed to the Messiah. A
   generally admitted idea was that the Messiah should be announced by a
   star, that messengers from far countries should come soon after his
   birth to render him homage, and to bring presents to him. It was
   alleged that the oracle was accomplished through the pretended Chaldean
   astrologers who should arrive about that time at Jerusalem. At other
   times he was connected from his birth with celebrated men, such as John
   the Baptist, Herod the Great, and two aged persons, Simeon and Anna,
   who had left memories of great sanctity. A rather loose chronology
   characterised these combinations, which for the most part were founded
   on a travesty of real facts. But a singular spirit of gentleness and
   goodness, an intensely popular sentiment, permeated all these fables,
   and made them a supplement to his preaching. It was especially after
   the death of Jesus that such narratives received their development. We
   can, however, believe that they were circulated during his life even,
   exciting no more than pious credulity and simple admiration.

   That Jesus never dreamt of passing himself for an incarnation of the
   true God, there can be no doubt. Such an idea was quite foreign to the
   Jewish mind; and there is no trace of it in the three first gospels; we
   only find it alluded to in portions of the fourth, which cannot be
   accepted as reflecting the thoughts of Jesus. Sometimes Jesus even
   seems to take precautions to repress such a doctrine. The accusation
   that he made himself God, or the equal of God, is presented, even in
   the fourth Gospel, as a calumny of the Jews. In the latter Gospel he
   declares himself less than his Father. Elsewhere he avows that the
   Father has not revealed everything to him. He believes himself to be
   more than an ordinary man, but separated from God by an infinite
   distance. He is Son of God, but all men are or may become so, in divers
   degrees. Every one each day ought to call God his father; all who are
   raised again will be sons of God. The divine son-ship was attributed in
   the Old Testament to beings who, it was by no means pretended, were
   equal with God. The word "son" has in the Semitic tongues and in the
   New Testament the widest meaning. Besides, the idea Jesus had of man
   was not that low idea which a cold Deism has introduced. In his poetic
   conception of nature, one breath alone pervades the universe: the
   breath of man is that of God; God dwells in man, and lives by man, the
   same as man dwells in God, and lives by God. The transcendent idealism
   of Jesus never permitted him to have a very clear notion of his own
   personality. He is his Father, his Father is he. He lives in his
   disciples; he is everywhere with them; his disciples are one, as he and
   his Father are one. The idea to him is everything; the body, which
   makes the distinction of individuals, is nothing.

   The title "Son of God," or simply "Son," became thus for Jesus a title
   analogous to "Son of man," with the sole difference that he called
   himself "Son of man," and does not seem to have made the same use of
   the phrase, "Son of God." The title, Son of man, expressed his
   character as judge; that of Son of God, participation in the supreme
   designs and his power. This power had no limits. His Father had given
   him all power. He had the right to alter even the Sabbath. No one could
   know the Father but through him. The Father had delegated to him the
   right to judge. Nature obeyed him: but she obeys also all who believe
   and pray, for faith can do everything.

   We must bear in mind that no idea of the laws of nature marked, either
   in his own mind or in that of his hearers, the limit of the impossible.
   The witnesses of his miracles thanked God "for having given such power
   unto men." He pardoned sins; he is superior to David, to Abraham, to
   Solomon, to the prophets. We do not know in what form, nor to what
   extent, these affirmations of himself were made. Jesus ought not to be
   judged by the rule governing our petty conventionalities. The
   admiration of his disciples overwhelmed and carried him away. It is
   evident that the title of Rabbi, with which he was at first contented,
   no longer satisfied him; the title even of prophet or messenger of God
   responded no longer to his ideas. The position which he assigned
   himself was that of a superhuman being, and he wished to be regarded as
   having a higher relationship with God than other men. But it must be
   observed that these words, "superhuman" and "supernatural," borrowed
   from our pitiful theology, had no meaning in the exalted religious
   consciousness of Jesus. To him nature and the development of humanity
   were not limited kingdoms outside of God--paltry realities subject to
   the laws of a desperate rigorism. There was no supernatural for him,
   for the reason that there was no nature. Intoxicated with infinite
   love, he forgot the heavy chain which holds the spirit captive; he
   cleared at one bound the abyss, impossible to most, which the weakness
   of the human faculties has formed between God and man.

   We cannot mistake in these affirmations of Jesus the germ of the
   doctrine which was, later on, to make of him a divine hypostasis, in
   identifying him with the Word, or "second God," or eldest Son of God,
   or Angel Metathronas, which Jewish theology created apart from him. A
   sort of necessity produced this theology, in order to correct the
   extreme rigour of the old Monotheism, to place near God a vicegerent,
   to whom the eternal Father is supposed to delegate the government of
   the universe. The belief that certain men are incarnations of divine
   faculties or "powers" was wide-spread; the Samaritans possessed about
   the same time a thaumaturgus, which they identified with the "great
   power of God." For nearly two centuries, the speculative minds of
   Judaism had yielded to the tendency of personifying the divine
   attributes, and certain expressions which were connected with the
   Divinity. Thus, the "breath of God," which is often referred to in the
   Old Testament, is considered as a separate being, the "Holy Spirit" In
   like manner, the "Wisdom of God" and the "Word of God" became distinct
   existing entities. This was the germ of the process which has
   engendered the Sephiroth of the Cabbala, the Æons of Gnosticism, the
   hypostasis of Christianity, and all that dry mythology, consisting of
   personified abstractions, to which Monotheism is obliged to resort when
   it wishes to pluralise the Deity.

   Jesus appears to have remained a stranger to these hair-splittings of
   theology, which were soon to fill the world with barren disputes. The
   meta-physical theory of the Word, such as we find it in the writings of
   his contemporary Philo, in the Chaldæan Targums, and even in the book
   of "Wisdom," is neither seen in the Logia of Matthew, nor in general in
   the synoptics, the most authentic interpreters of the words of Jesus.
   The doctrine of the Word, in fact, had nothing in common with
   Messianism. The "Word" of Philo, and of the Targums, is in no sense the
   Messiah. It was later that Jesus came to be identified with the Word,
   and when, in starting from that principle, there was created quite a
   new theology, very different from that of the "kingdom of God." The
   essential character of the Word was that of Creator and of Providence.
   Now, Jesus never pretended to have created the world, nor to govern it.
   His office was to judge it, to renovate it. The position of president
   at the final assizes of humanity, was the function which Jesus attached
   to himself, and the office which all the first Christians attributed to
   him. Until the great day he sits at the right hand of God, as His
   Metathronos, His first minister, and His future avenger. The superhuman
   Christ of the Byzantine absides, seated as judge of the world, in the
   midst of the apostles in the same rank with him, and superior to the
   angels who only assist and serve, is the identical representation of
   that conception of the "Son of man" of which we find the first features
   so strongly indicated in the book of Daniel.

   In any case, the rigour of scholastic rejection had no place in such a
   world. All the collection of ideas we have just stated formed in the
   mind of the disciples a theological system so little settled that the
   Son of God, this kind of duplication of the Divinity, is made to act
   purely as man. He is tempted--he is ignorant of many things--he
   corrects himself--he changes his opinion--he is cast down,
   discouraged--he asks his Father to spare him trials--he is submissive
   to God as a son. He who must judge the world does not know the date of
   the day of judgment. He takes precautions for his safety. Immediately
   after his birth he has to be concealed to escape from powerful men who
   wish to kill him. All this is simply the work of a messenger of God--of
   a man protected and favoured by God. We must not ask here for logic or
   sequence. The need Jesus had of obtaining credence, and the enthusiasm
   of his disciples, piled up contradictory notions. To those who believed
   in the coming of the Messiah, and to the enthusiastic readers of the
   books of Daniel and of Enoch, he was the Son of man; to the Jews
   holding the common faith, and to the readers of Isaiah and Micah, he
   was the Son of David; to the disciples he was the Son of God, or simply
   the Son. Others, without being blamed by the disciples, took him for
   John the Baptist risen from the dead, for Elias, for Jeremiah,
   conformable to the popular belief that the ancient prophets were about
   to reappear, in order to prepare the way of the Messiah.

   An absolute conviction, or rather the enthusiasm which freed him from
   the possibility of doubt, shrouded all this boldness. We, with our cold
   and scrupulous natures, little understand how any one can be so
   entirely possessed by the idea of which he has made himself the
   apostle. To us, the deeply earnest races, conviction signifies to be
   sincere with one's self. But sincerity to one's self has not much
   meaning to Oriental peoples, little accustomed to the subtleties of the
   critical spirit. Honesty and imposture are words which, in our rigid
   consciences, are opposed as two irreconcilable terms. In the East they
   are connected by a thousand subtle links and windings. The authors of
   the Apocryphal books (of "Daniel" and of "Enoch" for instance), men
   highly exalted, in order to aid their cause, committed, without a
   shadow of scruple, an act which we should term a fraud. The literal
   truth has little value to the Oriental; he sees everything through the
   medium of his ideas, his interests, and his passions.

   History is impossible if we do not fully admit that there are many
   standards of sincerity. Faith knows no other law than the interest in
   that which it believes to be true. The aim which it pursues being for
   it, absolutely holy, it makes no scruple about introducing bad
   arguments into a thesis where good ones do not succeed. If such a proof
   is not sound, how many others are? If such a prodigy is not real, how
   many others have been so? How many pious men, convinced of the truth of
   their religion, have sought to conquer the obstinacy of other men, by
   the use of means the weakness of which they could clearly apprehend?
   How many stigmatics, fanatics, and occupants of convents have been
   carried away by the influence of the world in which they lived, and by
   their individual beliefs in feigned acts, either for the purpose of not
   being considered as beneath others, or to sustain the cause when in
   danger! All great things are done through the people; now we can only
   lead the people by adapting ourselves to their ideas. The philosopher
   who, knowing this, isolates and intrenches himself in his nobleness, is
   highly praiseworthy. But he who takes humanity with its illusions, and
   seeks to act with it and upon it, cannot be blamed. Cæsar knew well
   that he was not the son of Venus; France would not be what it is if it
   had not for a thousand years believed in the Holy Ampulla of Rheims. It
   is, of course, easy for us, who are so powerless, to call this
   falsehood, and, proud of our feeble honesty, to treat with contempt the
   heroes who have accepted the battle of life under other conditions.
   When we have effected by our scruples what they accomplished by their
   falsehoods, we shall have the right to be severe upon them. At least,
   we must make a marked distinction between societies like our own, where
   everything takes place in the full light of reflection, and simple and
   credulous societies, in which the beliefs that have governed ages have
   been born. Nothing great has been established which does not rest on a
   legend. The only culprit in such cases is the humanity which is willing
   to be deceived.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVI.

  MIRACLES.

   Two means of proof, miracles and the accomplishment of prophecies,
   could alone, in the opinion of the contemporaries of Jesus, establish a
   supernatural mission. Jesus, and above all his disciples, employed
   these two processes of demonstration in perfect good faith. For a long
   time Jesus had been convinced that the prophets had written only in
   reference to him. He recognised himself in their sacred oracles; he
   regarded himself as the mirror in which all the prophetic spirit of
   Israel had read the future. The Christian school, perhaps even in the
   lifetime of its founder, endeavoured to prove that Jesus answered
   perfectly to all that the prophets had predicted of the Messiah. In
   many cases these comparisons were quite superficial, and are hardly
   appreciable by us. They were most frequently fortuitous or
   insignificant circumstances in the life of the master which recalled to
   the disciples certain passages of the Psalms and the Prophets, in
   which, in consequence of their constant preoccupation, they saw images
   of what was passing before their eyes. The exegesis of the time
   consisted thus almost entirely in a play upon words, and in quotations
   made in an artificial and arbitrary manner. The synagogue had no
   officially settled list of the passages which related to the future
   reign. The Messianic references were very freely applied, and
   constituted artifices of style rather than serious argument.

   As to miracles, at that time they were regarded as the indispensable
   mark of the divine, and as the sign of the prophetic vocation. The
   legends of Elijah and Elisha were full of them. It was understood that
   the Messiah would perform many. In Samaria, a few leagues from where
   Jesus was, there was a magician named Simon, who acquired an almost
   divine character by his illusions. Afterwards, when it was sought to
   establish the reputation of Apollonius of Tyana, and to prove that his
   life had been the sojourn of a god upon the earth, it was not thought
   possible to succeed therein except by inventing a vast cycle of
   miracles. The Alexandrian philosophers themselves, Plotinus and others,
   were supposed to have performed several. Jesus was, therefore, obliged
   to choose between these two alternatives--either to renounce his
   mission or to become a thaumaturgist. It must be borne in mind that all
   antiquity, with the exception of the great scientific schools of Greece
   and their Roman disciples, believed in miracles; and that Jesus not
   only believed in them, but also had not the least idea of an order of
   nature regulated by laws. His knowledge on this point was not at all
   superior to that of his contemporaries. Nay, more, one of his most
   deeply rooted opinions was that by faith and prayer man had entire
   power over nature. The faculty of performing miracles was held to be a
   privilege regularly conferred by God upon men, and there was nothing
   surprising in it.

   The lapse of time has changed that which constituted the power of the
   great founder of Christianity into something offensive to our ideas,
   and, if ever the worship of Jesus loses its hold upon humanity, it will
   be precisely on account of those acts which originally inspired belief
   in him. Criticism experiences no embarrassment in presence of this kind
   of historical phenomenon. A thaumaturgist of our days, unless of an
   extreme simplicity, like that manifested by certain stigmatics of
   Germany, is odious; for he performs miracles without believing in them;
   he is a mere charlatan. But, if we take a Francis d'Assisi, the
   question becomes altogether different; the cycle of miracles attending
   the origin of the order of St. Francis, far from offending us, affords
   us real pleasure. The founders of Christianity lived in at least as
   complete a state of poetic ignorance as did St. Clair and the tres
   socii. The disciples deemed it quite natural that their master should
   have interviews with Moses and Elias, that he should command the
   elements, and that he should heal the sick. We must remember, besides,
   that every idea loses something of its purity as soon as it aspires to
   realise itself. Success is never attained without some injury being
   done to the sensibility of the soul. Such is the feebleness of the
   human mind that the best causes are ordinarily gained only by bad
   arguments. The demonstrations of the primitive apologists of
   Christianity were based upon very poor reasonings. Moses, Christopher
   Columbus, Mahomet, have only triumphed over obstacles by constantly
   making allowance for the weakness of men, and by not always giving the
   true reasons for the truth. It is probable that those about Jesus were
   more struck by his miracles than by his eminently divine discourses.
   Let us add that doubtless popular rumour, both before and after the
   death of Jesus, enormously exaggerated the number of occurrences of
   this kind. The types of the gospel miracles, in fact, do not present
   much variety; they are repetitions of each other, and seem fashioned
   from a very small number of models, accommodated to the taste of the
   country.

   It is impossible, amongst the miraculous narratives so tediously
   enumerated in the Gospels, to distinguish the miracles attributed by
   common consent to Jesus from those in which he consented to play an
   active part. It is especially impossible to ascertain whether the
   offensive circumstances attending them, the groanings, the strugglings,
   and other features savouring of jugglery, are really historical, or
   whether they are the fruit of the belief of the compilers, strongly
   prepossessed with theurgy, and living, in this connection, in a world
   analogous to that of the spiritualists of our days. Popular opinion, in
   fact, insisted that the divine virtue was in man thus an epileptic and
   convulsive principle. Almost all the miracles that Jesus believed he
   performed appear to have been miracles of healing. Medicine was at that
   period in Judæa what it still is in the East, that is to say, far from
   being scientific, and absolutely dependent upon individual inspiration.
   The scientific school of medicine, founded by Greece five centuries
   before, was at the time of Jesus unknown to the Jews of Palestine. In
   such a state of knowledge, the presence of a superior man, treating the
   sick with gentleness, and giving him by some tangible signs the
   assurance of his recovery, is often a decisive remedy. Who would dare
   to say that in many cases, excepting, of course, certain peculiar
   injuries, the touch of a superior being is not equal to all the
   resources of pharmacy? The mere pleasure of seeing such a one, cured.
   He gives what he can--a smile, a hope, and these are not in vain.

   Jesus had no more idea than the majority of his countrymen of a
   rational medical science; he shared the general belief that healing was
   to be effected by religious practices, and such a belief was perfectly
   consistent. From the moment that disease was regarded as the punishment
   of sin, or as the act of a demon, and in no way as the result of
   physical causes, the best physician was the holy man who had power in
   the supernatural world. Healing was regarded as a moral act; Jesus, who
   was conscious of moral power, would believe himself specially gifted to
   heal. Convinced that the touching of his robe, the imposition of his
   hands, the application of his saliva, benefited the sick, he would have
   been hard-hearted if he had refused to those who suffered, a solace
   which it was in his power to bestow. The healing of the sick was
   considered as one of the signs of the kingdom of God, and was always
   associated with the emancipation of the poor. Both were the signs of
   the great revolution that was to culminate in the relief of all
   infirmities. The Essenians, who had so many ties of relationship with
   Jesus, passed also for very powerful spiritual physicians.

   One of the species of cure which Jesus most frequently performed was
   exorcism, or the casting out of devils. A strange disposition to
   believe in demons pervaded all minds. It was a universal opinion, not
   only in Judæa, but everywhere, that demons took possession of the
   bodies of certain persons and made them act contrary to their will. A
   Persian div, often named in the Avesta, Aeschmadaëva, the "div of
   concupiscence," adopted by the Jews under the name of Asmodeus, became
   the cause of all the hysterical afflictions of women. Epilepsy, in
   mental and nervous maladies, when the patient seems no longer to belong
   to himself, and in infirmities the cause of which is not apparent, such
   as deafness and dumbness, were explained in the same manner. The
   admirable treatise, "On Sacred Disease," by Hippocrates, which set
   forth the true principles of medicine on this subject, four centuries
   and a half before Jesus, had not banished from the world so great an
   error. It was supposed that there were processes more or less
   efficacious for driving away the demons; and the occupation of exorcist
   was a regular profession like that of physician. There is no doubt that
   Jesus had in his lifetime the reputation of possessing the greatest
   secrets of this art. There were then many lunatics in Judæa, doubtless
   the result of the great mental excitement. These fools, who were
   permitted to roam about, as they still are in the same districts,
   inhabited the abandoned sepulchral caves, which were the ordinary
   retreat of vagrants. Jesus had much control over these unfortunates. A
   thousand singular stories are related in connexion with his cures, in
   which the credulity of the time had full scope. Nevertheless these
   difficulties must not be exaggerated. The disorders which were regarded
   as "possessions" were often very slight. In our times, in Syria, people
   are regarded as mad or possessed by a demon (these two ideas were
   expressed by the same word, medjnoun) who are only somewhat eccentric.
   A gentle word often suffices in such cases to drive away the demon.
   Such were doubtless the means employed by Jesus. Who knows if his
   celebrity as an exorcist was not spread almost without his own
   knowledge? Persons who reside in the East are occasionally surprised to
   find themselves, after some time, in possession of a great reputation,
   as doctors, sorcerers, or discoverers of treasures, without being able
   to account to themselves for the facts which have given rise to these
   fancies.

   Many circumstances, moreover, seem to indicate that Jesus only became a
   thaumaturgist late in life and against his inclination. He often
   performs his miracles only after he has been besought to do so, and
   with a degree of reluctance, reproaching those who asked them for their
   hardness of heart. One singularity, apparently inexplicable, is the
   care he takes to perform his miracles in secret, and the request he
   addresses to those whom he heals to tell no one. When the demons wish
   to proclaim him the Son of God, he forbids them to open their mouths;
   but they recognise him in spite of himself. These traits are especially
   prominent in Mark, who is pre-eminently the evangelist of miracles and
   exorcisms. It seems that the disciple, who has furnished the
   fundamental teachings of this Gospel, importuned Jesus with his
   admiration for prodigies, and that the master, wearied of a reputation
   which weighed upon him, had often said to him, "See thou say nothing to
   any man." Once this discordance evoked a singular outburst, a fit of
   impatience, in which the annoyance of these perpetual demands of weak
   minds caused Jesus to break forth. One would say, at times, that the
   character of thaumaturgist was disagreeable to him, and that he sought
   to give as little publicity as possible to the marvels which, in a
   manner, grew under his feet. When his enemies asked a miracle of him,
   especially a celestial miracle, a "sign from heaven," he obstinately
   refused. It is, therefore, permissible to believe that his reputation
   of thaumaturgist was imposed upon him, that he did not resist it much,
   but also that he did nothing to aid it, and that, at all events, he
   felt the vanity of public opinion on this point.

   We should be lacking in historical method if we listened here too much
   to our repugnances. The essential condition of the true critic is to
   comprehend the diversity of times, and to divest himself of instinctive
   habits, which are the results of a purely rational education. In order
   to meet the objections which might be raised against the character of
   Jesus, we must not suppress facts which, in the eyes of his
   contemporaries, were considered of the greatest importance, It would be
   convenient to say that these are the additions of disciples much
   inferior to their Master, who, not being able to conceive his true
   grandeur, have sought to magnify him by illusions unworthy of him. But
   the four narrators of the life of Jesus are unanimous in extolling his
   miracles; one of them, Mark, interpreter of the Apostle Peter, insists
   so much on this point that, if we trace the character of Christ only
   according to this Gospel, we should represent Jesus as an exorcist in
   possession of charms of rare efficacy, as a very potent sorcerer, who
   inspired fear, and whom the people wished to get rid of. We will admit,
   then, without hesitation, that acts which would now be considered as
   acts of illusion or folly held a large place in the life of Jesus. Must
   we sacrifice to these uninviting features the sublimity of such a life?
   God forbid. A mere sorcerer would not have brought about a moral
   revolution like that effected by Jesus. If the thaumaturgist had
   effaced in Jesus the moralist and the religious reformer, there would
   have proceeded from him a school of theurgy, and not Christianity.

   The problem, moreover, presents itself in the same manner with respect
   to all saints and religious founders. Things now considered morbid,
   such as epileptic visions, were formerly principles of power and
   greatness. Physicians know the name of the disease which made the
   fortune of Mahomet. Almost in our own day, the men who have done the
   most for their kind (the excellent Vincent de Paul himself!) were,
   whether they wished it or not, thaumaturgists. If we set out with the
   principle that every historical personage to whom acts have been
   attributed, which we in the nineteenth century hold to be irrational or
   savouring of quackery, was either a madman or a charlatan, all
   criticism is falsified. The school of Alexandria was a noble school,
   but, nevertheless, it gave itself up to the practices of an extravagant
   theurgy. Socrates and Pascal were not exempt from hallucinations. Facts
   ought to explain themselves by proportionate causes. The weaknesses of
   the human mind only engender weakness; great things have always great
   causes in the nature of man, although they are often produced amidst a
   crowd of littlenesses which, to superficial minds, eclipse their
   grandeur.

   In a general sense, it is therefore true to say that Jesus was only
   thaumaturgist and exorcist in spite of himself. Miracles are ordinarily
   the work of the public much more than of him to whom they are
   attributed. Jesus persistently shunned the performance of the prodigies
   which the multitude would have created for him; the greatest miracle
   would have been his refusal to perform any; never would the laws of
   history and popular psychology have suffered so great a derogation. He
   was no more able than St. Bernard, or Francis d'Assisi, to moderate the
   avidity of the multitude and of his own disciples for the marvellous.
   The miracles of Jesus were a violence done to him by his age, a
   concession forced from him by a passing necessity. The exorcist and the
   thaumaturgist have alike passed away; but the religious reformer will
   live eternally.

   Even those who did not believe in him were struck with these acts, and
   sought to be witnesses of them. The Pagans, and persons unacquainted
   with him, experienced a sentiment of fear, and sought to remove him
   from their district. Many thought perhaps to abuse his name by
   connecting it with seditious movements. But the purely moral and in no
   respect political tendency of the character of Jesus saved him from
   these entanglements. His kingdom was in the circle of disciples, whom a
   like freshness of imagination and the same foretaste of heaven had
   grouped and retained around him.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVII.

  DEFINITE FORM OF THE IDEAS OF JESUS IN RESPECT OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

   We suppose that this last phase of the activity of Jesus continued
   about eighteen months, reckoning from the time of his return from the
   Passover of the year 31 to his journey to the feast of tabernacles of
   the year 32. During that interval the mind of Jesus does not appear to
   have been enriched by any new element; but all that was in him
   developed and grew with ever-increasing power and boldness.

   The fundamental idea of Jesus from the first was the establishment of
   the kingdom of God. But this kingdom of God, as we have already said,
   appears to have been understood by Jesus in very different senses. At
   times he might be taken for a democratic leader desiring only the reign
   of the poor and the disinherited. At other times the kingdom of God is
   the literal accomplishment of the apocalyptic visions of Daniel and
   Enoch. Finally, the kingdom of God is often a spiritual kingdom, and
   the near deliverance is a deliverance of the spirit. The revolution
   then desired by Jesus was that which has actually taken place; the
   establishment of a new worship, purer than that of Moses. All these
   thoughts appear to have been coexistent in the mind of Jesus. The
   first, however--that of a temporal revolution--does not appear to have
   had much hold on him; Jesus never regarded the earth or the riches of
   the earth, or material power as a thing worth caring for. He had no
   exterior ambition. Sometimes, by a natural consequence, his great
   religious importance was on the point of being changed into mere social
   importance. Men came requesting him to judge and arbitrate on questions
   which affected their interests. Jesus rejected these proposals with
   scorn, treating them as insults. Full of his heavenly ideal, he never
   abandoned his disdainful poverty. As to the other two conceptions of
   the kingdom of God, Jesus appears always to have held them
   simultaneously. If he had been only an enthusiast, led away by the
   apocalypses on which the popular imagination fed, he would have
   remained an obscure sectary, inferior to those whose ideas he followed.
   If he had been only a puritan, a sort of Channing or "Savoyard vicar,"
   he would undoubtedly have been unsuccessful. The two parts of his
   system, or, rather, his two conceptions of the kingdom of God, rest one
   on the other, and this reciprocal support has been the cause of his
   incomparable success. The first Christians were visionaries living in a
   circle of ideas which we should term reveries; but, at the same time,
   they were the heroes of that social war which has resulted in the
   enfranchisement of the conscience, and in the establishment of a
   religion from which the pure worship, proclaimed by the founder, will
   eventually proceed.

   The apocalyptic ideas of Jesus, in their most complete form, may thus
   be summed up:

   The existing order of humanity is approaching its termination. This
   termination will be an immense revolution, "an anguish" similar to the
   pains of child-birth; a palingenesis, or, in the words of Jesus
   himself, a "new birth," preceded by dark calamities and heralded by
   strange phenomena. In the great day there will appear in the heavens
   the sign of the Son of man; it will be a startling and luminous vision
   like that of Sinai, a great storm rending the clouds, a fiery meteor
   flashing rapidly from east to west. The Messiah will appear in the
   clouds, clothed in glory and majesty, to the sound of trumpets and
   surrounded by angels. His disciples will sit by his side upon thrones.
   The dead will then arise, and the Messiah will proceed to judgment.

   At this judgment men will be divided into two classes according to
   their works. The angels will be the executors of the sentences. The
   elect will enter into a delightful abode which has been prepared for
   them from the foundation of the world; there they will be seated,
   clothed with light, at a feast presided over by Abraham, the
   patriarchs, and the prophets. They will be the smaller number. The rest
   will depart into Gehenna. Gehenna was the western valley of Jerusalem.
   There the worship of fire had been practised at various times, and the
   place had become a kind of sewer. Gehenna was, therefore, in the mind
   of Jesus a gloomy, filthy valley, full of fire. Those excluded from the
   kingdom will there be burnt and eaten by the never-dying worm, in
   company with Satan and his rebel angels. There, there will be wailing
   and gnashing of teeth. The kingdom of heaven will be as a closed room,
   lighted from within, in the midst of a world of darkness and torments.

   This new order of things will be eternal. Paradise and Gehenna will
   have no end. An impassable abyss separates the one from the other. The
   Son of man, seated on the right hand of God, will preside over this
   final condition of the world and of humanity.

   That all this was taken literally by the disciples and by the master
   himself at certain moments appears clearly evident from the writings of
   the time. If the first Christian generation had one profound and
   constant belief, it was that the world was near its end, and that the
   great "revelation" of Christ was soon to take place. The startling
   proclamation, "The time is at hand," which commences and closes the
   Apocalypse; the incessantly reiterated appeal, "He that hath ears to
   hear let him hear!" were the cries of hope and encouragement for the
   whole apostolic age. A Syrian expression, Maranatha, "Our Lord cometh!"
   became a sort of password, which the believers used amongst themselves
   in order to strengthen their faith and their hope. The Apocalypse,
   written in the year 68 of our era, fixed the end at three years and a
   half. The "Ascension of Isaiah" adopts a calculation closely
   approaching this.

   Jesus never indulged in such precision. When he was interrogated as to
   the time of his advent he always refused to reply; once even he
   declared that the date of this great day was known only by the Father,
   who had revealed it neither to the angels nor to the Son. He said that
   the time when the kingdom of God was most anxiously expected was just
   that in which it would not appear. He constantly repeated that it would
   be a surprise, as in the times of Noah and of Lot; that we must be on
   our guard, always ready to depart; that each one must watch and keep
   his lamp trimmed as for a wedding procession, which arrives unforeseen;
   that the Son of man would come like a thief, at an hour when he would
   not be expected; that he would appear as a flash of lightning, running
   from one end of the heavens to the other. But his declarations as to
   the proximity of the catastrophe leave no room for any equivocation.
   "This generation," said he, "shall not pass till all these things be
   fulfilled. There be some standing here which shall not taste of death
   till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom." He reproaches
   those who do not believe in him for not being able to read the signs of
   the future kingdom. "When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair
   weather; for the sky is red. And in the morning, It will be foul
   weather to-day; for the sky is red and lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye
   can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of
   the times?" By an illusion common to all great reformers, Jesus
   imagined the end to be much nearer than it really was; he did not take
   into account the slowness of the movements of humanity; he thought to
   realise in one day that which, eighteen centuries later, has still to
   be accomplished.

   These formal declarations preoccupied the Christian family for nearly
   seventy years. It was believed that some of the disciples would see the
   day of the final revelation before dying. John, in particular, was
   considered as being of this number; many believed that he would never
   die. Perhaps this was a later opinion suggested towards the end of the
   first century, by the advanced age which John seems to have reached;
   this age having given occasion to the belief that God wished to prolong
   his life indefinitely until the great day, in order to realise the
   words of Jesus. When he died in turn, the faith of many was shaken, and
   his disciples attached to the prediction of Christ a more subdued
   meaning.

   At the same time that Jesus fully admitted the Apocalyptic beliefs,
   such as we find them in the apocryphal Jewish books, he admitted the
   dogma which is the complement, or rather the condition of them all,
   namely, the resurrection of the dead. This doctrine, as we have already
   said, was still somewhat new in Israel; a number of people either did
   not know it, or did not believe in it. It was the faith of the
   Pharisees, and of the fervent adherents of the Messianic beliefs. Jesus
   accepted it unreservedly, but always in the most idealistic sense. Many
   imagined that in the resuscitated world they would eat, drink, and
   marry. Jesus, indeed, admits into his kingdom a new passover, a table,
   and a new wine; but he expressly excludes marriage from it. The
   Sadducees had on this subject an apparently gross argument, but at
   bottom quite conformable with the old theology. It will be remembered
   that, according to the ancient sages, man survived only in his
   children. The Mosaic code had consecrated this patriarchal theory by a
   strange institution, the levitical law. The Sadducees drew thence
   subtle deductions against the resurrection. Jesus escaped them by
   formally declaring that in the life eternal there would no longer exist
   differences of sex, and that men would be like the angels. Sometimes he
   seems to promise resurrection only to the just, the punishment of the
   wicked consisting in complete annihilation. Oftener, however, Jesus
   declares that the resurrection shall bring eternal confusion to the
   wicked.

   It will be seen that nothing in all these theories was absolutely new.
   The Gospels and the writings of the apostles scarcely contain anything
   as regards apocalyptics but what might be found already in "Daniel,"
   "Enoch," the "Sibylline Oracles," and the assumption of Moses, which
   are of Jewish origin. Jesus accepted these ideas, which were generally
   received among his contemporaries. He made them his basis of action, or
   rather one of his bases; for he had too profound an idea of his true
   work to establish it solely upon such fragile principles, so liable to
   receive from facts a crushing refutation.

   It is evident, indeed, that such a doctrine, taken by itself in a
   literal manner, had no future. The world, in continuing to endure,
   entirely disproves it. One generation of man at the most, was reserved
   for it. The faith of the first Christian generation is intelligible,
   but the faith of the second generation is no longer so. After the death
   of John, or of the last survivor, whoever he might be, of the group
   which had seen the master, the word of Jesus was convicted of
   falsehood. If the doctrine of Jesus had been simply belief in an
   approaching end of the world, it would certainly now be sleeping in
   oblivion. What is it, then, that has saved it? The great breadth of the
   Gospel conceptions, which has permitted doctrines suited to very
   different intellectual conditions to be found under the same creed. The
   world has not ended, as Jesus announced, and as his disciples believed.
   But it has been renewed, and in one sense renewed as Jesus desired. It
   is because his thought was two-sided that it has been fruitful. His
   chimera has not had the fate of so many others which have crossed the
   human mind, because it concealed a germ of life which having been
   introduced, thanks to a covering of fable, into the bosom of humanity,
   has thus brought forth eternal fruits.

   And let us not say that this is a benevolent interpretation, imagined
   in order to clear the honour of our great master from the cruel
   contradiction inflicted on his dreams by reality. No, no; this true
   kingdom of God, this kingdom of the spirit, which makes each one, king
   and priest; this kingdom which, like the grain of mustard-seed, has
   become a tree which overshadows the world, and under whose branches the
   birds have their nests, was understood, wished for, and founded by
   Jesus. By the side of the false, cold, and impossible idea of an
   ostentatious advent, he conceived the real city of God, the true
   "renaissance," the Sermon on the Mount, the apotheosis of the weak, the
   love of the people, regard for the poor, and the re-establishment of
   all that is humble, true, and simple. This rehabilitation he has
   depicted as an incomparable artist, by features which will last
   eternally. Each of us owes that which is best in himself to him. Let us
   pardon him his hope of a vain apocalypse, of a second coming in great
   triumph upon the clouds of heaven. Perhaps these were the errors of
   others rather than his own; and if it be true that he himself shared
   the general illusion, what matters it, since his dream rendered him
   strong against death, and sustained him in a struggle to which he might
   otherwise have been unequal? We must, then, attach several meanings to
   the divine city conceived by Jesus. If his only thought had been that
   the end of time was near, and that we must prepare for it, he would not
   have surpassed John the Baptist. To renounce a world ready to crumble,
   to detach one's self gradually from the present life, and to aspire to
   the kingdom about to come; such would have been the essence of his
   preaching. The teaching of Jesus had always a much larger scope. He
   proposed to himself to create a new state of humanity, and not merely
   to prepare the end of that which did exist. Elias or Jeremiah,
   reappearing in order to prepare men for the supreme crisis, would not
   have preached as he did. This is so true that this morality, attributed
   to the latter days, is found to be the eternal morality, that which has
   saved humanity. Jesus himself in many cases makes use of modes of
   speech which do not enter at all into a material kingdom. He often
   declares that the kingdom of God has already begun; that every man
   bears it within himself, and can, if he be worthy, enjoy it; that each
   one silently creates this kingdom by the true conversion of the heart.
   The kingdom of God at such times is only the highest form of good; a
   better order of things than that which exists, the reign of justice,
   which the faithful, according to their ability, ought to help in
   establishing; or, again, the liberty of the soul, something analogous
   to the Buddhist "deliverance," the result of isolation. These truths,
   which to us are pure abstractions, were living realities to Jesus.
   Everything in his mind was concrete and substantial. Jesus was the man
   who believed most thoroughly in the reality of the ideal.

   In accepting the Utopias of his time and his race, Jesus, thanks to the
   fruitful misconceptions of their import, thus knew how to elevate them
   into great truths. His kingdom of God was no doubt the approaching
   apocalypse, which was about to be unfolded in the heavens. But it was
   still, and probably above all, the kingdom of the soul, founded on
   liberty and on the filial sentiment which the virtuous man feels when
   resting on the bosom of his Father. It was a pure religion, without
   forms, without temple and without priest; it was the moral judgment of
   the world, delegated to the conscience of the just man, and to the arm
   of the people. This is what was destined to live; this is what has
   lived. When, at the end of a century of vain expectation, the
   materialistic hope of a near end of the world was exhausted, the true
   kingdom of God became apparent. Complaisant explanations drew a veil
   over the real kingdom, which did not come. The Apocalypse of John, the
   first book, properly speaking, of the New Testament, being too formally
   tied to the idea of an immediate catastrophe, was rejected by the
   second plan, held to be unintelligible, and tortured in a thousand
   ways. At least, its accomplishment was adjourned to an indefinite
   future. Some poor benighted ones who, in a fully enlightened age, still
   preserved the hopes of the first disciples, became heretics (Ebionites,
   Millenarians) lost in the shallows of Christianity. Mankind had passed
   to another kingdom of God. The degree of truth contained in the thought
   of Jesus had prevailed over the chimera which obscured it.

   Let us not, however, despise this chimera, which has been the thick
   rind of the sacred fruit on which we live. This fantastic kingdom of
   heaven, this endless pursuit after a city of God, which has constantly
   preoccupied Christianity during its long career, has been the principle
   of that great instinct of futurity which has animated all reformers,
   persistent believers in the Apocalypse, from Joachim of Flora down to
   the Protestant sectary of our days. This impotent effort to establish a
   perfect society has been the source of the extraordinary tension which
   has always made the true Christian an athlete struggling against the
   present. The idea of the "kingdom of God," and the Apocalypse, which is
   the complete image of it, are thus, in a sense, the highest and most
   poetic expressions of human progress. No doubt they must also have
   given rise to great errors. The end of the world, suspended as a
   perpetual menace over mankind, was, by the periodical panics which it
   caused during centuries, a great hindrance to all secular development.
   Society, being no longer certain of its existence, contracted therefrom
   a degree of trepidation, and those habits of servile humility which
   rendered the Middle Ages so inferior to ancient and modern times. A
   profound change had also taken place in the mode of regarding the
   coming of Christ. When it was first announced to mankind that the end
   of the world was at hand, like the infant which receives death with a
   smile, it experienced the greatest access of joy that it has ever felt.
   But in growing old, the world became attached to life. The day of
   grace, so long expected by the simple souls of Galilee, became to these
   iron ages a day of wrath: Dies iræ, dies illa! But even in the midst of
   barbarism, the idea of the kingdom of God continued fruitful. "At the
   approach of the end of the world . . . "are the charters of
   enfranchisement. In spite of the feudal church, of sects, and of
   religious orders, holy persons continued to protest, in the name of the
   Gospel, against the iniquity of the world. Even in our days, troubled
   days, in which Jesus has no more authentic followers than those who
   seem to deny him, the dreams of an ideal organisation of society, which
   have so much analogy with the aspirations of the primitive Christian
   sects, are only in one sense the blossoming of the same idea, one of
   the branches of that immense tree in which germinates all thought of a
   future, and of which the "kingdom of God" will be eternally the root
   and stem. All the social revolutions of humanity will be grafted on
   this phrase. But, tainted by a coarse materialism, and aspiring to the
   impossible, that is to say, to found universal happiness upon political
   and economical measures, the "socialist" attempts of our time will
   remain unfruitful, until they take as their rule the true spirit of
   Jesus; I mean absolute idealism--the principle that in order to possess
   the world we must renounce it.

   The phrase "kingdom of God," on the other hand, expresses also very
   happily the want which the soul experiences of a supplementary destiny,
   of a compensation for the present life. Those who do not accept the
   definition of man as a compound of two substances, and who regard the
   deistical dogma of the immortality of the soul as in contradiction with
   physiology, love to fall back upon the hope of a final reparation,
   which under an unknown form shall satisfy the wants of the heart of
   man. Who knows if the highest term of progress after millions of ages
   may not evoke the absolute conscience of the universe, and in this
   conscience the awakening of all that has lived? A sleep of a million of
   years is not longer than the sleep of an hour. St. Paul, on this
   hypothesis, was right in saying, In ictu oculi! It is certain that
   moral and virtuous humanity will have its reward, that one day the
   ideas of the poor but honest man will judge the world, and that on that
   day the ideal figure of Jesus will be the confusion of the frivolous
   man who has not believed in virtue and of the egotist who has not been
   able to attain to it. The favourite phrase of Jesus continues,
   therefore, full of an eternal beauty. A sort of grandiose divinity
   seems in this to have guided the incomparable master, and to have held
   him in a vague sublimity, embracing at the same time various orders of
   truths.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVIII.

  INSTITUTIONS OF JESUS.

   That which proves, moreover, that Jesus was never entirely absorbed in
   his apocalyptic ideas is that, at the very time he was most preoccupied
   with them, he laid with rare foresight the basis of a church destined
   to endure. It is scarcely possible to doubt that he himself only chose
   from among his disciples those who were pre-eminently called the
   "apostles," or the "twelve," since on the day after his death we find
   them forming a distinct body, and filling up by election the vacancies
   that had been produced in their midst. They were the two sons of Jonas;
   the two sons of Zebedee; James, son of Alphæus; Philip; Nathaniel
   bar-Tolmai; Thomas; Matthew; Simon Zelotes; Thaddeus or Lebbæus; and
   Judas of Kerioth. It is probable that the idea of the twelve tribes of
   Israel had had something to do with the choice of this number. The
   "twelve," at all events, formed a group of privileged disciples, among
   whom Peter maintained a fraternal priority, and to them Jesus confided
   the propagation of his work. There was nothing, however, which
   suggested a regularly organised sacerdotal school. The lists of the
   "twelve," which have been preserved, present many uncertainties and
   contradictions; two or three of those who figure in them have remained
   completely obscure. Two, at least, Peter and Philip, were married and
   had children.

   Jesus evidently confided secrets to the twelve, which he forbade them
   to communicate to the world. It seems sometimes as if his intentions
   had been to surround his person with some mystery, to postpone the most
   important testimony till after his death, and to reveal himself clearly
   only to his disciples, confiding to them the care of demonstrating him
   afterwards to the world. "What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in
   light; and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops."
   He was thus spared the necessity of too precise declarations, and
   created a kind of medium between the public and himself. What is
   certain is that there were teachings reserved to the apostles, and that
   he explained many parables to them, the meaning of which was ambiguous
   to the multitude. An enigmatical form and a degree of oddness in
   connecting ideas were customary in the teachings of the doctors, as may
   be seen in the sentences of the Pirké Aboth. Jesus explained to his
   disciples whatever was peculiar in his apothegms or in his apologues,
   and showed them his meaning stripped of the wealth of illustration
   which sometimes obscured it. Many of these explanations appear to have
   been carefully preserved.

   During the lifetime of Jesus the apostles preached, but without ever
   departing far from him. Their preaching, moreover, was confined to the
   announcement of the speedy coming of the kingdom of God. They went from
   town to town, receiving hospitality, or rather taking it themselves,
   according to custom. The guest in the East has much authority; he is
   superior to the master of the house; the latter places the greatest
   confidence in him. This fireside preaching is well suited to the
   propagation of new doctrines. The hidden treasure is communicated, and
   payment is thus made for what is received; politeness and good feeling
   lend their aid; the household is touched and converted. Remove Oriental
   hospitality, and it would be impossible to explain the propagation of
   Christianity. Jesus, who adhered strongly to the good old customs,
   encouraged his disciples to make no scruple of profiting by this
   ancient public right, probably abolished already in the great towns
   where there were hostelries. "The labourer," said he, "is worthy of his
   hire!" Once installed in the house of any one they were to remain
   there, eating and drinking what was offered them as long as their
   mission lasted.

   Jesus desired that, by imitating his example, the messengers of the
   glad tidings should render their preaching agreeable by kindly and
   polished manners. He directed that, on entering a house, they should
   give the host the salaam--wish him happiness. Some hesitated; the
   salaam being then, as now, in the East, a sign of religious communion,
   which is not risked with persons of a doubtful faith. "Fear nothing,"
   said Jesus; "if no one in the house is worthy of your salute, it will
   return unto you." Sometimes, in fact, the apostles of the kingdom of
   God were badly received, and came to complain to Jesus, who generally
   sought to conciliate them. Some of them, persuaded of the omnipotence
   of their master, were hurt at this forbearance. The sons of Zebedee
   wanted him to call down fire from heaven upon the inhospitable towns.
   Jesus answered these outbursts with a fine irony, and stopped them by
   saying, " The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
   save them."

   He sought in every way to establish as a principle that his apostles
   were as himself. It was believed that he had communicated his
   marvellous virtues to them. They cast out demons, prophesied, and
   formed a school of renowned exorcists, although certain cases were
   beyond their power. They also made cures, either by the imposition of
   hands or by the unction of oil, one of the fundamental processes of
   Oriental medicine. Lastly, like the Psylli, they could handle serpents
   and drink with impunity deadly potions. The further we get from Jesus
   this theurgy becomes more and more offensive. But there is no doubt
   that it was a common practice in the primitive Church, and that it held
   a chief place in the estimation of the world around. Charlatans, as
   generally happens, exploited this movement of popular credulity. Even
   in the lifetime of Jesus many, without being his disciples, cast out
   demons in his name. The true disciples were much hurt at this, and
   sought to prevent them. Jesus, who saw in this a homage to his renown,
   did not manifest much severity towards them. It must be observed,
   moreover, that these supernatural gifts had, if I may say so, become a
   trade. Carrying the logic of absurdity to the extreme, certain men cast
   out demons by Beelzebub, the prince of demons. They imagined that this
   sovereign of the infernal regions must have entire authority over his
   subordinates, and that in acting through him they were certain to make
   the intruding spirit depart. Some even sought to buy from the disciples
   of Jesus the secret of the miraculous powers which had been conferred
   upon them.

   The germ of a church began from this time to appear. This fertile idea
   of the power of men in association (ecclesia) seemed indeed an idea of
   Jesus. Full of the purely idealistic doctrine that it is the union of
   love which brings souls together, he declared that whenever men
   assembled in his name, he would be in their midst. He confided to the
   Church the right to bind and to unbind (that is to say, to render
   certain things lawful or unlawful), to remit sins, to reprimand, to
   warn with authority, and to pray with the certainty of being heard. It
   is possible that many of these sayings may have been attributed to the
   master, so as to give a foundation to the collective authority by which
   subsequently it was sought to replace that of Jesus. At all events, it
   was only after his death that particular churches were seen to be
   constituted, and even this first constitution was made purely and
   simply on the model of the synagogues. Many personages who had loved
   Jesus much, and had founded great hopes upon him, such as Joseph of
   Arimathea, Lazarus, Mary Magdalen, and Nicodemus, did not, it seems,
   enter these churches, but clung to the tender or respectful memory
   which they had preserved of him.

   Moreover, there is no trace, in the teaching of Jesus, of an applied
   morality or of a canonical law, ever so slightly defined. Once only,
   respecting marriage, he spoke with decision, and forbade divorce.
   Neither was there any theology or creed. There were hardly any opinions
   respecting the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, from which, afterwards,
   were drawn the Trinity and the Incarnation, but they still remained in
   a state of indeterminate imagery. The later books of the Jewish canon
   recognised already in the Holy Spirit a sort of divine hypostasis,
   sometimes identified with Wisdom or the Word. Jesus insisted upon this
   point, and pretended to give to his disciples a baptism by fire and by
   the Spirit, as much preferable to that of John. For Jesus, this Holy
   Spirit, was not distinct from the inspiration emanating from God the
   Father in a continuous manner. People then speculated. It was pretended
   that Jesus had promised his disciples to send them after his death, to
   replace him, a Spirit who should teach them all things and bear witness
   to the truths he himself had promulgated. One day the apostles believed
   they had received the baptism of this spirit in the form of a great
   wind and tongues of fire. In order to designate this Spirit, people
   made use of the word Paraklit, which the Syro-Chaldaic had borrowed
   from the Greek (parakletos), and which appears to have had in this case
   the meaning of "advocate," "counsellor," and sometimes that of
   "interpreter of celestial truths," and of "teacher charged to reveal to
   men the hitherto hidden mysteries." It is very doubtful whether Jesus
   made use of this word. It was in this case an application of the
   process which the Jewish and Christian theologies would follow during
   centuries, and which was to produce a whole series of divine assessors,
   the Metathronos, the sunadelphos or Syndelphon, and all the
   personifications of the Cabala. Still, in Judaism, these creations were
   to remain free and individual speculations, whilst in Christianity,
   commencing with the fourth century, they were to form the very essence
   of orthodoxy and of the universal dogma.

   It is needless to remark how remote from the thought of Jesus was the
   idea of a religious book, containing a code and articles of faith. Not
   only did he not write, but it was contrary to the spirit of the nascent
   sect to produce sacred books. They believed themselves on the eve of
   the great final catastrophe. The Messiah came to put the seal upon the
   Law and the Prophets, not to promulgate new texts. Further, with the
   exception of the Apocalypse, which was in one sense the only revealed
   book of the primitive Christianity, the writings of the apostolic age
   were works arising from circumstances, making no pretentions to furnish
   a completely dogmatic whole. The Gospels had at first an entirely
   personal character, and much less authority than tradition.

   Had not the sect, however, some sacrament, some rite, some rallying
   point? It had the one which all tradition ascribes to Jesus. One of the
   favourite notions of the master was that he was the new bread, a bread
   very superior to manna, and on which mankind was to live. This notion,
   the germ of the Eucharist, took in his mouth at times singularly
   concrete forms. On one occasion especially, in the synagogue of
   Capernaum, he took a bold step, which cost him several of his
   disciples. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that
   bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from
   heaven." And he added, "I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me
   shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me shall never thirst."
   These words excited deep murmurings. The Jews then murmured at him
   because he said, "I am the bread which came down from heaven. And they
   said, is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we
   know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven?" But
   Jesus, insisting with still more force, said, "I am that bread of life;
   your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness and are dead. This is the
   bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not
   die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven; if any man eat
   of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give
   is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." The
   ill-feeling was now at its height: "How can this man give us his flesh
   to eat?" Jesus, going still further, said, "Verily, verily, I say unto
   you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
   have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath
   eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is
   meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and
   drinketh my blood dwelleth in me, and I in him. As the living Father
   has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he
   shall live by me. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not
   as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this
   bread shall live for ever." Such paradoxical obstinacy offended several
   of his disciples, who ceased to follow him. Jesus did not retract; he
   only added: "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth
   nothing. The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are
   life." The twelve remained faithful, despite this odd preaching. It
   gave to Cephas, in particular, an opportunity of showing his absolute
   devotion and of proclaiming once more, "Thou art that Christ, the Son
   of the living God."

   It is probable that henceforward in the common repasts of the sect,
   there was established some custom which from the discourse was badly
   received by the men of Capernaum. But the apostolic traditions on this
   subject are very divergent and probably intentionally incomplete. The
   synoptical gospels, whose account is confirmed by St. Paul, suppose
   that a unique sacramental act served as basis to the mysterious rite,
   and refer it to "the last supper." The fourth gospel, which has
   accurately preserved to us the incident at the synagogue of Capernaum,
   does not speak of such an act, although it describes the last supper at
   great length. Elsewhere we see Jesus recognised in the breaking of
   bread, as if this act had been to those who associated with him the
   most characteristic of his person. When he was dead, the form under
   which he appeared to the pious memory of his disciples was that of
   chairman of a mysterious banquet, taking the bread, blessing it,
   breaking and giving it to those present. It is probable that this was
   one of his habits, and that at such times he was particularly amiable
   and tender. One material circumstance, the presence of fish upon the
   table (a striking indication, which proves that the rite was instituted
   on the shore of Lake Tiberias), was itself almost sacramental, and
   became a necessary part of the conceptions of the sacred feast.

   Their repasts had become the sweetest moments of the infant community.
   At these times they all assembled; the master spoke to each one, and
   kept up a charming and lively conversation. Jesus loved these seasons,
   and was pleased to see his spiritual family thus grouped around him.
   The participation of the same bread was considered as a kind of
   communion, a reciprocal bond. The master used, in this respect,
   extremely strong terms, which were afterwards taken in a very literal
   sense. Jesus was, at once, very idealistic in his conceptions and very
   materialistic in his expression of them. Wishing to express the thought
   that the believer lives only by him, that altogether (body, blood, and
   soul) he was the life of the truly faithful, he said to his disciples,
   "I am your nourishment,"--a phrase which, turned in figurative style,
   became, "My flesh is your bread, my blood your drink." Then the modes
   of speech employed by Jesus, always strongly subjective, carried him
   yet further. At table, pointing to the food, he said, "I am here,"
   holding the bread; "this is my body; holding up the wine, "This is my
   blood,"--all modes of speech which were equivalent to, "I am your
   nourishment."

   This mysterious rite obtained in the lifetime of Jesus great
   importance. It was probably established some time before the last
   journey to Jerusalem, and it was the result of a general doctrine much
   more than a determinate act. After the death of Jesus, it became the
   great symbol of Christian communion, and it is to the most solemn
   moment of the life of the Saviour that its establishment is referred.
   It was wished to be shown in the consecration of bread and wine, a
   farewell memorial which Jesus, at the moment of quitting life, had left
   to his disciples. They recognised Jesus himself in this sacrament. The
   wholly spiritual idea of the presence of souls, which was one of the
   most familiar to the master, which made him say, for instance, that he
   was personally with his disciples when they were assembled in his name,
   rendered this easily admissible. Jesus, we have already said, never had
   a very clear idea of that which constitutes individuality. In the
   degree of exaltation to which he had attained, the ideal surpassed
   everything to such an extent that the body counted for nothing. We are
   one when we love one another, when we live in dependence on each other;
   it was thus that he and his disciples were one. His disciples adopted
   the same language. Those who for years had lived with him had seen him
   constantly take the bread and the cup "between his holy and venerable
   hands," and thus offer himself to them. It was he whom they ate and
   drank; he became the true passover, the former one having been
   abrogated by his blood. It is impossible to translate into our
   essentially hard and fast tongue, in which a rigorous distinction
   between the material and the metaphorical must always be observed,
   habits of style whose essential character is to attribute to metaphor,
   or rather to the idea it represents, a complete reality.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIX.

  INCREASING PROGRESSION OF ENTHUSIASM AND OF EXALTATION.

   It is clear that such a religious society, founded exclusively on the
   expectation of the kingdom of God, must be in itself very incomplete.
   The first Christian generation lived almost entirely upon expectations
   and dreams. On the eve of seeing the world come to an end, it regarded
   as useless everything which served but to prolong the world. The desire
   to possess property was regarded as reprehensible. Everything which
   attaches man to earth, everything which draws him aside from heaven,
   was to be avoided. Although several of the disciples were married,
   there was, it seems, to be no more marriage after one became a member
   of the sect. The celibate was greatly preferred. At one time the master
   seems to approve of those who should mutilate themselves in view of the
   kingdom of God. In this he acted up to his precept. "If thy hand or thy
   foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee; it is better
   for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two
   hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine eye
   offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; it is better for thee
   to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast
   into hell-fire." The cessation of generation was often considered as
   the symbol and condition of the kingdom of God.

   We can perceive that this primitive Church never could have formed a
   durable society but for the great variety of germs embraced in the
   teaching of Jesus. It required more than another century for the true
   Christian Church--that which has converted the world--to disengage
   itself from this small sect of "latter-day saints," and to become a
   framework applicable to the whole of human society. The same thing,
   moreover, took place in Buddhism, which at first was founded only for
   monks. The same thing would have happened in the order of St. Francis,
   if that order had succeeded in its attempt to become the rule of the
   whole of human society. Being Utopian in their origin, and succeeding
   by their very exaggeration, the great systems of which we have just
   been speaking have only spread over the world after being profoundly
   modified, and after abandoning their excesses. Jesus did not overstep
   this first and entirely monachal period, in which it was believed that
   the impossible could be attempted with impunity. He did not make any
   concession to necessity. He boldly preached war against nature and a
   total rupture with the ties of blood. "Verily I say unto you," said he,
   "there is no man that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or
   wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive
   manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life
   everlasting."

   The instruction which Jesus is alleged to have given to his disciples
   breathes the same exaltation. He who was so lenient with the outside
   world, he who contented himself sometimes with formal adhesions,
   exercised towards his own an extreme rigour. He would have no "all
   buts." We should call it an "order," founded upon the most austere
   rules. Wrapped up in his idea that the cares of life trouble and debase
   man, Jesus required of his companions a complete detachment from the
   earth, an absolute devotion to his work. They ought not to carry with
   them either money or provisions for the way, not even a scrip, or a
   change of raiment. They ought to practise absolute poverty, live on
   alms and hospitality. "Freely ye have received, freely give," said he,
   in his beautiful language. Arrested and arraigned before the judges,
   they were not to prepare their defence; the heavenly advocate would
   inspire them as to what they should say. The Father would confer upon
   them His spirit from on high. This spirit would regulate all their
   acts, direct their thoughts, and guide them through the world. If
   chased from one town, they were to cast at it the dust from their
   shoes, and that none might plead ignorance, declaring always the
   proximity of the religion of God. "Ye shall not have gone over the
   cities of Israel," added he, "till the Son of man shall have appeared."

   A strange ardour animates all these discourses, which may in part be
   the creation of the enthusiasm of his disciples, but which even in that
   case came indirectly from Jesus, since such enthusiasm was his work.
   Jesus informed those who wanted to follow him that they would be
   subjected to severe persecutions and the hatred of mankind. He sent
   them forth as lambs in the midst of wolves. They would be scourged in
   the synagogues, and dragged to prison. Brother should deliver up
   brother to death, the father the son. When they were persecuted in one
   country, they were to flee to another. "The disciple," said he, "is not
   above his master, nor the servant above his lord. Fear not them which
   kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Are not two sparrows
   sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground
   without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
   Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows."
   "Whosoever, therefore," continued he, "shall confess me before men, him
   will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever
   shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
   is in heaven."

   In these fits of severity he went the length of suppressing the desires
   of the flesh. His requirements had no longer any bounds. Despising the
   healthy limits of man's nature, he demanded that the latter should
   exist only for him, that he should love him alone. "If any man come to
   me," said he, "and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
   children, and brethren, and sisters, and his own life also, he cannot
   be my disciple. So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not
   all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." There was something
   strange and more than human thus mixed up in his speech; it was like a
   fire consuming light to its root, and reducing everything to a
   frightful wilderness. The harsh and gloomy sentiment of distaste for
   the world, and of the excessive self-abnegation which characterises
   Christian perfection, was for the founders not the refined and cheerful
   moralist of his earlier days, but the sombre giant whom a kind of
   presentiment was withdrawing, more and more without the pale of
   humanity. We should even say that, in these moments, when warring
   against the most legitimate cravings of the heart, Jesus had forgotten
   the pleasure of living, of loving, of seeing, and of feeling. Employing
   more unmeasured language, he dared to say, "If any man will come after
   me, let him deny himself and follow me. He that loveth father or mother
   more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter
   more than me is not worthy of me. He that findeth his life shall lose
   it, and he that loseth his life for my sake and the Gospel's shall find
   it. What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
   his own soul?" Two anecdotes of the kind we cannot accept as
   historical, which were intended to be an exaggeration of a trait of
   character, clearly illustrating this defiance of nature. He said to one
   man, "Follow me!"-- But he said, "Lord, suffer me first to go and bury
   my father." Jesus answered, "Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou
   and preach the kingdom of God." Another said to him, "Lord I will
   follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home
   at my house." Jesus replied, "No man, having put his hand to the plough
   and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." An extraordinary
   assurance, and at times accents of singular sweetness, reversing all
   our ideas of him, made these exaggerations acceptable. "Come unto me,"
   cried he, "all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
   rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me: for I am meek and lowly
   in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy,
   and my burden is light."

   A great danger might result in the future from this exalted memory,
   which was expressed in hyperbolical language and with a terrible
   energy. By thus detaching man from earth, the ties of life were
   severed. The Christian would be praised for being a bad son, or a bad
   patriot, if it was for Christ that he resisted his father and fought
   against his country. The ancient city, the parent republic, the state,
   or the law common to all, were thus placed in hostility with the
   kingdom of God. A fatal germ of theocracy was introduced into the
   world.

   From this point another consequence may be perceived. This morality,
   invented for a time of crisis, being transported into a peaceful
   country, into the bosom of a society assured of its own duration, must
   seem impossible. The Gospel was thus destined to become for Christians
   a Utopia, which very few would give themselves the trouble to inquire
   into. These terrible maxims, for the greater number sunk into profound
   oblivion, were encouraged by the clergy itself; the Gospel man was a
   dangerous man. The most selfish, proud, hard, and worldly of all human
   beings, a Louis XIV., for instance, found priests to persuade him, in
   spite of the Gospel, that he was a Christian. But, on the other hand,
   there have always been holy men who accepted the sublime paradoxes of
   Jesus literally. Perfection being placed beyond the ordinary conditions
   of society, a complete Gospel life could only be led away from the
   world, and thus the principle of asceticism and of monasticism was
   established. Christian societies would have two moral rules; the one
   moderately heroic for common men, the other exalted in the extreme for
   the perfect man; and the perfect man would be the monk, subjected to
   rules which professed to realise the Gospel ideal. It is certain that
   this ideal, were it only on account of the celibacy and poverty it
   imposed, could not become the common law. The monk would thus, in some
   respects, be the only true Christian. Ordinary common sense revolts at
   these excesses; and to believe in the latter is to believe that the
   impossible is a mark of weakness and error. But ordinary common sense
   is a bad judge where the question at issue has reference to great
   things. To obtain little from humanity, we must ask much. The immense
   moral progress due the Gospel is the result of its exaggerations. It is
   thus that it has been, like stoicism, but with infinitely greater
   fulness, a living argument for the divine powers, which are, in man, an
   exalted monument of the potency of the will.

   We may readily imagine that to Jesus, at this period of his life,
   everything which did not belong to the kingdom of God had absolutely
   disappeared. He was, if we may say so, totally outside nature: family,
   friendship, country, had no longer any meaning for him. He, no doubt,
   from this moment, had already sacrificed his life. At times, we are
   tempted to believe that, seeing in his own death a means of founding
   his kingdom, he conceived the purpose of allowing himself to be killed.
   At other times, although such a thought was only afterwards erected
   into a doctrine, death presented itself to him as a sacrifice, destined
   to appease his Father and to save mankind. A singular taste for
   persecution and torments possessed him. His blood appeared to him as
   the water of a second baptism with which he ought to be saturated, and
   he seemed possessed by a strange haste to anticipate this baptism,
   which alone could quench his thirst.

   The grandeur of his views upon the future was at times surprising. He
   did not deceive himself as to the terrible storm he was about to cause
   in the world. "Think not," said he, boldly and beautifully, "that I am
   come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.
   There shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two
   against three. I am come to set a man at variance against his father,
   and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against
   her mother-in-law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own
   household." "I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if
   it be already kindled?" "They shall put you out of the synagogues," he
   continued; "yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think
   that he doeth God service." "If the world hate you, ye know that it
   hated me before it hated you. Remember the word that I said unto you:
   The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me,
   they will also persecute you."

   Carried away by this fearfully increasing enthusiasm, and governed by
   the necessities of a preaching more and more exalted, Jesus was no
   longer free; he belonged to his mission, and, in one sense, to mankind.
   Sometimes it might have been averred that his reason was disturbed. He
   suffered great mental anguish and agitation. The great vision of the
   kingdom of God, dangling constantly before his eyes, bewildered him. It
   must be remembered that, at times, those about him believed him to be
   mad, while his enemies declared him to be possessed. His excessively
   impassioned temperament carried him incessantly beyond the bounds of
   human nature. His work not being a work of the reason, jeering at all
   the laws of the human mind, that which he most imperiously required was
   "faith." This was the word most frequently repeated in the little
   guest-chamber. It is the watchword of all popular movements. It is
   clear that none of these movements would take place, if it were
   necessary that their author should gain his disciples one by one by
   force of logic. Reflection leads only to doubt, and if the authors of
   the French Revolution, for instance, had had to be previously convinced
   by lengthened meditations, they would all have become old without
   accomplishing anything. Jesus, in like manner, aimed less at convincing
   his hearers than at exciting their enthusiasm. Urgent and imperative,
   he suffered no opposition: men must be converted, nothing less would
   satisfy him. His natural gentleness seemed to have abandoned him; he
   was sometimes harsh and capricious. His disciples at times did not
   understand him, and experienced in his presence a feeling akin to fear.
   Sometimes his displeasure at the slightest opposition led him to commit
   inexplicable and apparently absurd acts.

   It was not that his virtue deteriorated; but his struggle in the cause
   of the ideal against the reality became insupportable. Contact with the
   world pained and revolted him. Obstacles irritated him. His notion of
   the Son of God became disturbed and exaggerated. One is such at certain
   times, through sudden illuminations, and is lost in the midst of long
   obscurities. Divinity has its intermittencies; one is not the Son of
   God all his life and in consecutive manner. The fatal law which
   condemns an idea to decay as soon as it seeks to convert men, was
   applicable to Jesus. Contact with men degraded him to their level. The
   tone he had adopted could not be sustained beyond a few months; it was
   time that death came to liberate him from an endurance strained to the
   utmost, to remove him from the impossibilities of an interminable path,
   and by delivering him from a trial in danger of being too prolonged,
   introduce him henceforth sinless into celestial peace.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XX.

  OPPOSITION TO JESUS.

   During the early period of his career, Jesus does not appear to have
   encountered any serious opposition. His preaching, thanks to the
   extreme liberty which was enjoyed in Galilee, and to the great number
   of teachers who arose on all sides, made no noise outside a somewhat
   restricted circle of persons. But when Jesus entered upon a career
   brilliant with prodigies and public successes, the storm began to howl.
   More than once he was obliged to conceal himself and fly. Antipas,
   however, never interfered with him, although Jesus expressed himself
   sometimes very severely respecting him. At Tiberias, his usual
   residence, the Tetrarch was only one or two leagues distant from the
   district chosen by Jesus for the field of his activity; he was told of
   his miracles, which he doubtless took to be clever tricks, and desired
   to see them. The incredulous were at that time very curious about this
   sort of illusions. With his ordinary tact, Jesus refused to gratify
   him. He took care not to be led astray by an irreligious world, which
   wished to extort from him some idle amusement; he aspired only to gain
   the people; he reserved for the simple, means suitable to them alone.

   Once the report was spread that Jesus was no other than John the
   Baptist risen from the dead. Antipas became anxious and uneasy; he
   employed artifice to rid his dominions of the new prophet. Certain
   Pharisees, under the pretence of being interested in Jesus, came to
   tell him that Antipas was seeking to kill him. Jesus, despite his great
   simplicity, saw the snare, and did not depart. His wholly pacific
   attractions, and his remoteness from popular agitation, ultimately
   reassured the Tetrarch and dissipated the danger.

   The new doctrine was by no means received with equal favour in all the
   towns of Galilee. Not only did incredulous Nazareth continue to reject
   him who was to become her glory; not only did his brothers persist in
   not believing in him, but also the cities of the lake themselves, in
   general well-disposed, were not wholly converted. Jesus often
   complained of the incredulity and hardness of heart which he
   encountered, and although it is natural in such reproaches to make
   allowance for a certain kind of exaggeration of the preacher, although
   we are sensible of that kind of convicium seculi which Jesus affected
   in imitation of John the Baptist, it is clear that the country was far
   from yielding itself entirely to the kingdom of God. "Woe unto thee,
   Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida!" cried he; "for if the mighty
   works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they
   would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto
   you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of
   judgment than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto
   heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works, which
   have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
   until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for
   the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee." "The queen of
   the south," added he, "shall rise up in the judgment against the men of
   this generation, and shall condemn it; for she came from the uttermost
   parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater
   than Solomon is here. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with
   this generation, and shall condemn it: because they repented at the
   preaching of Jonas; and behold, a greater than Jonas is here." His
   roaming life, at first so full of charm, now began to weigh upon him.
   "The foxes," said he, "have holes, and the birds of the air have nests;
   but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." He accused
   unbelievers of not yielding to evidence.

   Jesus, in fact, could not withstand opposition with the coolness of the
   philosopher, who, understanding the reason of the various opinions
   which divide the world, finds it quite natural that all should not be
   of his opinion. One of the principal defects of the Jewish race is its
   harshness in controversy, and the abusive tone which it almost always
   infuses into it. There never were in the world such bitter quarrels as
   those of the Jews among themselves. It is the sentiment of nice
   discernment which makes the polished and moderate man. Now, the lack of
   this feeling is one of the most constant features of the Semitic mind.
   Refined works, such as the dialogues of Plato, for example, are
   altogether foreign to these nations. Jesus, who was exempt from almost
   all the defects of his race, and whose dominant quality was precisely
   an infinite delicacy, was led in spite of himself to make use of the
   general style in polemics. Like John the Baptist, he employed very
   harsh terms against his adversaries. Of an exquisite gentleness with
   the simple, he was irritated in presence of incredulity, however little
   aggressive. He was no longer the mild teacher who delivered the "Sermon
   on the Mount," who as yet had met with neither resistance nor
   difficulty. The passion that underlay his character led him to make use
   of the keenest invectives. This singular mixture ought not to surprise
   us. A man of our own times, M. de Lamennais, has forcibly presented the
   same contrast. In his beautiful book, "The Words of a Believer," the
   most immoderate anger and the sweetest relentings alternate, as in a
   mirage. This man, who was extremely kind in the intercourse of life,
   became foolishly intractable toward those who did not think as he did.
   Jesus, in like manner, applied to himself, not without reason, the
   passage from Isaiah: "He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any
   man hear his voice in the streets. A bruised reed shall he not break,
   and smoking flax shall he not quench." And yet many of the
   recommendations which he addressed to his disciples contain the germs
   of a real fanaticism, germs which the Middle Ages were to develop in a
   cruel manner. Must we reproach him for this? No revolution can be
   effected without some harshness. If Luther, or the actors in the French
   Revolution, had had to observe the rules of politeness, neither the
   Reformation nor the Revolution would have taken place. Let us
   congratulate ourselves in like manner that Jesus encountered no law
   which punished the outrageous denunciation of one class of citizens.
   The Pharisees in such a case would have been inviolate. All the great
   things of humanity have been accomplished in the name of absolute
   principles. A critical philosopher would have said to his disciples:
   Respect the opinion of others, and believe that no one is so completely
   right that his adversary is completely wrong. But the action of Jesus
   has nothing in common with the disinterested speculation of the
   philosopher. To say that we have touched the ideal for a moment, and
   have been deterred by the wickedness of a few, is a thought
   insupportable to an ardent soul. What must it have been for the founder
   of a new world?

   The invincible obstacle to the designs of Jesus came in particular from
   orthodox Judaism, represented by the Pharisees. Jesus drifted away more
   and more from the ancient Law. Now, the Pharisees were the backbone of
   Judaism. Although this party had its centre at Jerusalem, it had,
   nevertheless, adherents either established in Galilee or who often came
   to the North. They were, in general, men of a narrow mind, giving much
   attention to externals; with a devoutness that was haughty, formal, and
   self-satisfied. Their manners were ridiculous, and excited the smiles
   of even those who respected them. The epithets which the people gave
   them, and which savour of caricature, prove this. There was the
   "bandy-legged Pharisee" (Nikfi), who walked in the streets dragging his
   feet and knocking them against the stones; the "bloody-browed Pharisee"
   (Kizai), who went with his eyes shut in order not to see the women, and
   dashed his head so much against the walls that it was always bloody;
   the "pestle Pharisee" (Medoukia), who kept himself bent double like the
   handle of a pestle; the "Pharisee of strong shoulders" (Schikmi), who
   walked with his back bent as if he carried on his shoulders the whole
   burden of the Law; the "What-is-there-to-do?-I-do-it Pharisee," always
   on the outlook for a precept to fulfil. To these we must add the "dyed
   Pharisee," whose whole outward devotion was but a varnish of hypocrisy.
   This rigourism was, in fact, often only apparent, and concealed in
   reality great moral laxity. The people, nevertheless, were duped by it.
   The people, whose instinct is always right, even when it goes furthest
   astray on the question of individuals, is very easily deceived by false
   devotees. That which it loves in them is good and worthy of being
   loved; but it has not sufficient penetration to distinguish the
   appearance from the reality.

   The antipathy which, in such an impassioned state of society, would
   necessarily break out between Jesus and persons of this character is
   easy to understand. Jesus sought only the religion of the heart; the
   religion of the Pharisees consisted almost exclusively in observances.
   Jesus sought after the humble and all kinds of outcasts; the Pharisees
   saw in this an insult to their religion of respectability. The Pharisee
   was an infallible and impeccable man, a pedant always certain of being
   in the right, taking the first place in the synagogue, praying in the
   street, giving alms to the sound of a trumpet, and watching to see
   whether people saluted him. Jesus maintained that each one ought to
   await the judgment of God with fear and trembling. The bad religious
   tendency represented by Pharisaism by no means reigned without
   opposition. Many men before or during the time of Jesus, such as Jesus,
   son of Sirach (one of the real ancestors of Jesus of Nazareth),
   Gamaliel, Antigonus of Soco, and especially the gentle and noble
   Hillel, had taught much more elevated and almost Gospel doctrines. But
   these good seeds had been choked. The beautiful maxims of Hillel,
   summing up the whole Law as equity, and those of Jesus, son of Sirach,
   making worship consist in the pursuit of the good, were forgotten or
   anathematised. Shammai, with his narrow and exclusive mind, had
   prevailed. An enormous mass of "traditions" had stifled the Law, under
   the pretext of protecting and interpreting it. No doubt these
   conservative measures had their useful side; it is well that the Jewish
   people loved its Law even to madness, inasmuch as this frantic love in
   saving Mosaism under Antiochus Epiphanes and under Herod, preserved the
   leaven necessary for the production of Christianity. But taken by
   themselves, these obsolete precautions we speak of were only puerile.
   The synagogue, which was the depository of them, was no more than a
   parent of error. Its reign was ended; and yet to ask for its abdication
   was to ask for that which an established power has never done or been
   able to do.

   The conflicts of Jesus with official hypocrisy were continual. The
   ordinary tactics of the reformers who appeared in the religious state
   which we have just described, and which might be called "traditional
   formalism," were to oppose the "text" of the sacred books to
   "traditions." Religious zeal is always an innovator, even when it
   pretends to be in the highest degree conservative. Just as the
   neo-Catholics of our days are getting further and further away from the
   Gospel, so the Pharisees, at each step, got further away from the
   Bible. This is why the Puritan reformer is as a rule essentially
   "biblical," setting out with the unchangeable text in order to
   criticise the current theology, which has changed from generation to
   generation. Thus acted later the Karaites and the Protestants. Jesus
   applied the axe to the root of the tree much more energetically. True,
   we see him sometimes quoting texts against the false masores or
   traditions of the Pharisees. But, in general, he set little store by
   exegesis; it was the conscience to which he appealed. With the same
   stroke he cut through both text and commentaries. He showed indeed to
   the Pharisees that by their traditions they seriously perverted
   Mosaism, but he by no means pretended himself to return to Mosaism. His
   goal was the future, not the past. Jesus was more than the reformer of
   an obsolete religion; he was the founder of the eternal religion of
   humanity.

   Disputes broke out, especially in regard to a number of external
   practices introduced by tradition, a tradition which neither Jesus nor
   his disciples observed. The Pharisees reproached him sharply for this.
   When he dined with them he scandalised them greatly by not going
   through the customary ablutions. "Give alms," said he, "of such things
   as ye have; and behold, all things are clean unto you." That which in
   the highest degree wounded his sensitive nature was the air of
   assurance which the Pharisees carried into religious matters; their
   contemptible devotion which ended in a vain seeking after precedents
   and titles, and not the improvement of their hearts. An admirable
   parable expressed this thought with infinite charm and justice. "Two
   men," said he, "went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee,
   and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with
   himself, God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
   extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast
   twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.' And the
   publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto
   heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
   sinner. I tell you this man went down to his house justified rather
   than the other."

   A hatred which death alone could assuage was the consequence of these
   struggles. John the Baptist had previously provoked enmities of the
   same kind. But the aristocrats of Jerusalem, who despised him, had
   allowed simple men to regard him as a prophet. In this case, however,
   the war was to the death. It was a new spirit that had appeared in the
   world, which shattered all that had preceded it. John the Baptist was a
   thorough Jew: Jesus was scarcely one at all. Jesus always addressed
   himself to refined moral sentiment. He was only a disputant when he
   argued against the Pharisees, his opponents forcing him, as almost
   always happens, to adopt their tone. His exquisite irony, his stinging
   remarks, always went to the heart. They were everlasting stings, and
   have remained festering in the wound. This Nessus-shirt of ridicule
   which the Jew, son of the Pharisees, has dragged in tatters after him
   during eighteen centuries, was woven by Jesus with a divine skill.
   Masterpieces of fine raillery, their features are written in lines of
   fire upon the flesh of the hypocrite and the false devotee.
   Incomparable traits worthy of a Son of God! A god alone knows how to
   kill in this way. Socrates and Molière only grazed the skin. The former
   carried fire and rage to the very marrow.

   But it was also just that this great master of irony should pay for his
   triumph with his life. Even in Galilee the Pharisees sought to kill
   him, and employed against him the manoeuvre which ultimately succeeded
   at Jerusalem. They endeavoured to interest in their quarrel the
   partisans of the new political order which was established. The
   facilities Jesus found for escaping into Galilee, and the weakness of
   the government of Antipas, baffled these attempts. He exposed himself
   to danger of his own free will. He saw clearly that his action, if he
   remained interned in Galilee, was necessarily limited. Judea attracted
   him as by a charm; he wished to put forth a last effort to gain over
   the rebellious city, and seemed anxious to undertake the task of
   fulfilling the proverb--that a prophet must not die outside Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXI.

  LAST JOURNEY OF JESUS TO JERUSALEM.

   For a long time Jesus had been conscious of the dangers which
   surrounded him. During a period which we may estimate at eighteen
   months, he avoided going on a pilgrimage to the holy city. At the feast
   of Tabernacles of the year 32 (according to the hypothesis we have
   adopted), his relations, always malevolent and incredulous, persuaded
   him to go there. The evangelist seems to insinuate that there was some
   hidden project to ruin him in this invitation. "Depart hence, and go
   into Judea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest.
   For there is no man that doeth anything in secret, and he himself
   seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, show thyself to
   the world." Jesus, suspecting some treachery, at first refused; but
   when the caravan of pilgrims had set out, he started on the journey,
   unknown to every one, and almost alone. It was the last farewell which
   he bade to Galilee. The feast of Tabernacles fell at the autumnal
   equinox. Six months had still to run before the fatal denouement. But,
   during this interval, Jesus did not again see his beloved provinces of
   the north. The pleasant days are passed; he must now traverse, step by
   step, the sorrowful path which will terminate in the anguish of death.

   His disciples and the pious women who ministered to him found him again
   in Judea. But how much everything else was changed for him! Jesus was a
   stranger at Jerusalem. He felt that there was a wall of resistance he
   could not pierce. Surrounded by snares and obstacles, he was
   unceasingly pursued by the ill-will of the Pharisees. In place of that
   illimitable faculty of belief, the happy gift of youthful natures,
   which he found in Galilee--instead of those good and gentle people,
   amongst whom opposition (always the fruit to some extent of ill-will
   and indocility) had no existence, he encountered there at each step an
   obstinate incredulity, upon which the policy that had succeeded so well
   in the north had little effect. His disciples were despised as being
   Galileans. Nicodemus, who, on one of his former journeys, had had a
   conversation with him by night, almost compromised himself with the
   Sanhedrim, by having sought to defend him. "Art thou also of Galilee
   they said to him. "Search and look: for out of Galilee ariseth no
   prophet."

   The city, as we have already said, was disliked by Jesus. Until then he
   had always eschewed great centres, preferring to pursue his avocation
   in the country and the towns of small importance. Many of the precepts
   which he had given to his apostles were absolutely inapplicable outside
   a simple society of humble men. Having no idea of the world, and
   accustomed to the amiable communism of Galilee, remarks continually
   escaped him, the simplicity of which at Jerusalem would appear very
   singular. His imagination and his love of nature found themselves
   restrained within these walls. True religion does not proceed from the
   tumult of towns, but from the tranquil serenity of the fields.

   The arrogance of the priests rendered the precincts of the temple
   disagreeable to him. One day some of his disciples, who were better
   acquainted with Jerusalem than he, wished to draw his attention to the
   beauty of the buildings of the temple, the admirable choice of
   materials, and the richness of the votive offerings that covered the
   walls. "Seest thou these buildings?" said he; "there shall not be left
   one stone upon another." He refused to admire anything, unless it was a
   poor widow who passed at that moment, and threw a small coin into the
   box. "She has cast in more than they all," said he; "for all these have
   of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of God: but she of her
   penury hath cast in all the living that she had." This manner of
   regarding critically all that was going on at Jerusalem, of extolling
   the poor who gave little, of slighting the rich who gave much, and of
   blaming the opulent priesthood who did nothing for the good of the
   people, naturally exasperated the sacerdotal caste. The seat of a
   conservative aristocracy, the temple, like the Mussulman karam which
   succeeded it, was the last place in the world whence revolution could
   succeed. Imagine for a moment an innovator in our days going to preach
   the overturning of Islamism round the mosque of Omar! Jerusalem,
   however, was the centre of the Jewish life, the point where it was
   necessary to conquer or die. On this Calvary, where Jesus certainly
   suffered more than at Golgotha, his days passed away in disputation and
   bitterness, in the midst of tedious controversies as to canonical law
   and exegesis, for which his great moral elevation served him to little
   purpose--nay, placed him rather at a disadvantage.

   In the midst of this troubled life, the sensitive and kindly heart of
   Jesus succeeded in creating a refuge, where he enjoyed much soft
   contentment. After having passed the day disputing in the temple,
   towards evening Jesus descended into the valley of Kedron, and took a
   little repose in the orchard of a farming establishment (probably for
   the making of oil) named Gethsemane (which was used as a pleasure
   resort by the inhabitants), after which he proceeded to pass the night
   upon the Mount of Olives, which limits on the east the horizon of the
   city. This side is the only one, in the environs of Jerusalem, which
   presents an aspect somewhat pleasing and verdant. The plantations of
   olives, figs, and palms were numerous around the villages, farms, or
   enclosures of Bethphage, Gethsemane, and Bethany. There were upon the
   Mount of Olives two great cedars, the recollection of which was long
   preserved amongst the dispersed Jews; their branches served as an
   asylum to clouds of doves, and under their shade were established small
   bazaars. All this precinct was in a manner the abode of Jesus and his
   disciples; we can see that they knew it almost field by field and house
   by house.

   The village of Bethany, in particular, situated at the summit of the
   hill, upon the incline which commands the Dead Sea and the Jordan, at a
   journey of an hour and a half from Jerusalem, was the place preferred
   by Jesus. He made there the acquaintance of a family consisting of
   three persons, two sisters and a third member, whose friendship had a
   great charm for him. Of the two sisters, the one, named Martha, was an
   obliging, kind, and bustling person; the other, named Mary, on the
   contrary, pleased Jesus by a sort of languor, and by her
   strongly-developed speculative instincts. Often, when seated at the
   feet of Jesus, she forgot, in listening to him, the duties of real
   life. Her sister, upon whom fell all the duty at such times, gently
   complained. "Martha, Martha," said Jesus to her, "thou art troubled,
   and carest about many things; now, one thing only is needful. Mary has
   chosen the better part, which will not be taken away." A certain Simon,
   the leper, who was the owner of the house, appears to have been the
   brother of Martha and Mary, or, at least, to have formed part of the
   family. It was there, in the midst of a pious friendship, that Jesus
   forgot the vexations of public life. In this tranquil abode he consoled
   himself for the bickerings with which the Pharisees and the scribes
   unceasingly irritated him. He often sat on the Mount of Olives, facing
   Mount Moriah, having beneath his view the splendid perspective of the
   terraces of the temple, and its roofs covered with glittering plates of
   metal. This view struck strangers with admiration. At the rising of the
   sun, especially, the sacred mountain dazzled the eyes, and appeared
   like a mass of snow and of gold. But a profound feeling of sadness
   poisoned for Jesus the spectacle that filled all other Israelites with
   joy and pride. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets,
   and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
   gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens
   under her wings, and ye would not."

   It was not that many good people here, as in Galilee, were not touched.
   But such was the power of the dominant orthodoxy that very few dared to
   confess it. They feared to discredit themselves in the eyes of the
   Jerusalemites by placing themselves in the school of a Galilean. They
   would have risked being driven from the synagogue, which, in a mean and
   bigoted society, was the greatest affront. Excommunication, besides,
   carried with it the confiscation of all possessions. By ceasing to be a
   Jew a man did not become a Roman; he remained without protection in the
   power of a theocratic legislation of the most atrocious severity. One
   day the inferior officers of the temple, who had assisted at one of the
   discourses of Jesus, and had been enchanted with it, came to confide
   their doubts to the priests. "Have any of the rulers or of the
   Pharisees believed on him?" was the reply to them; " but this people
   who knoweth not the Law are cursed." Jesus remained thus at Jerusalem,
   a provincial, admired by provincials like himself, but spurned by all
   the aristocracy of the nation. The chiefs of the school were too
   numerous for any one to be stirred by seeing one more appear. His voice
   made little noise in Jerusalem. The prejudices of race and of sect, the
   direct enemies of the spirit of the Gospel, were too deeply rooted
   there.

   The teaching of Jesus in this new world necessarily became much
   modified. His beautiful discourses, the effect of which was always
   calculated upon when addressed to youthful imaginations and consciences
   morally pure, here fell upon stone. He who was so much at his ease on
   the shores of his charming little lake felt constrained and not at home
   in the company of pedants. His perpetual self-assertion appeared
   somewhat fastidious. He was obliged to become controversialist, jurist,
   exegetist, and theologian. His conversations, generally so full of
   charm, became a rolling fire of disputes, an interminable train of
   scholastic battles. His harmonious genius was wasted in insipid
   argumentations upon the Law and the prophets, in which case we should
   have preferred not seeing him sometimes play the part of aggressor. He
   lent himself with a condescension which wounds us to the captious
   criticisms to which the merciless cavillers subjected him. In general,
   he extricated himself from difficulties with much finesse. His
   reasonings, it is true, were often subtle (simplicity of mind and
   subtlety touch each other; when simplicity reasons, it is often a
   little sophistical); we find that sometimes he courted misconceptions,
   and prolonged them intentionally; his argumentation, judged according
   to the rules of Aristotelian logic, was very feeble. But when the
   unequalled charm of his mind could be displayed, he was triumphant. One
   day it was intended to embarrass him by presenting to him an adulteress
   and asking him what was to be done to her. We know the admirable answer
   of Jesus. The fine raillery of a man of the world, tempered by a divine
   goodness, could not be expressed in a more exquisite manner. But the
   wit which is allied to moral grandeur is that which fools forgive the
   least. In pronouncing this sentence of so just and pure a taste, "He
   that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her,"
   Jesus pierced hypocrisy to the heart, and with the same stroke sealed
   his own death-warrant.

   It is probable, in fact, that but for the exasperation caused by so
   many bitter retorts, Jesus might long have remained unnoticed, and have
   been lost in the dreadful storm which was soon about to overwhelm the
   whole Jewish nation. The high priesthood and Sadducees treated him
   rather with disdain than hatred. The great sacerdotal families, the
   Boethusim, the family of Hanan, were only fanatical in their
   conservatism. The Sadducees, like Jesus, rejected the "traditions" of
   the Pharisees. By a very strange singularity, it was these unbelievers
   who, denying the resurrection, the oral Law, and the existence of
   angels, were the true Jews. Or rather, as the old Law in its simplicity
   no longer satisfied the religious wants of the time, those who strictly
   adhered to it, and rejected modern inventions, were regarded by the
   devotees as impious, just as an evangelical Protestant of the present
   day is regarded as an unbeliever in orthodox countries. At all events,
   from such a party no very strong reaction against Jesus could proceed.
   The official priesthood, with its eyes turned towards political power,
   and intimately connected with it, did not comprehend these enthusiastic
   movements. It was the middle-class Pharisees, the innumerable soferim,
   or scribes, living on the science of "traditions," who took the alarm,
   and whose prejudices and interests were in reality threatened by the
   doctrine of the new teacher.

   One of the most constant efforts of the Pharisees was to draw Jesus
   into the discussion of political questions, and to compromise him as
   being connected with the party of Judas the Gaulonite. Their tactics
   were clever; for it required all the great ingenuity of Jesus to avoid
   conflict with the Roman authority, whilst he was proclaiming the
   kingdom of God. They sought to break through this ambiguity, and compel
   him to explain himself. One day, a group of Pharisees, and of those
   politicians named "Herodians" (probably some of the Boethusim),
   approached him, and, under pretence of pious zeal, said unto him,
   "Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in
   truth, neither carest thou for any man. Tell us, therefore, what
   thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar, or not?" They
   hoped for an answer, which would give them a pretext for delivering him
   up to Pilate. The reply of Jesus was admirable. He made them show him
   the image of the coin. "Render," said he, "unto Cæsar the things which
   are Cæsar's; and unto God the things that are God's." Sage words, which
   have decided the future of Christianity! Words of a perfected
   spiritualism, and of marvellous justness, which have established the
   separation between the spiritual and the temporal, and laid the basis
   of true liberalism and true civilisation!

   His gentle and penetrating genius inspired him when he was alone with
   his disciples, with accents full of tenderness! "Verily, verily, I say
   unto you, he that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but
   climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he
   that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. The sheep
   hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them
   out. He goeth before them, and the sheep follow him; for they know his
   voice. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to
   destroy. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own
   the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and
   fleeth. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of
   mine; and I lay down my life for the sheep." The idea that the crisis
   of humanity was close at hand frequently recurred to him. "Now," said
   he, "learn a parable of the fig-tree: When his branch is yet tender,
   and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh. Lift up your
   eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest."

   His powerful eloquence found expression always when contending with
   hypocrisy. "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat. All,
   therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do
   not ye after their works: for they say and do not. For they bind heavy
   burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but
   they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

   "But all their works they do to be seen of men; they make broad their
   phylacteries, enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the
   uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and
   greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. Woe
   unto them! . . . . . .

   "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye have taken
   away the key of knowledge, shut up the kingdom of heaven against men!
   For ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are
   entering to go in. Woe unto you, for ye devour widows' houses, and for
   a pretence, make long prayers: therefore ye shall receive the greater
   damnation. Woe unto you, for ye compass sea and land to make one
   proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of
   hell than yourselves! Woe unto you, for ye are as graves which appear
   not; and the men that walk over them are not aware of them.

   "Ye fools, and blind! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin,
   and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and
   faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
   Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel! Woe unto
   you!

   "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the
   outside of the cup and of the platter; but within they are full of
   extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is
   within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

   "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto
   whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
   within full of dead men's bones and of all uncleannesss. Even so ye
   also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of
   hypocrisy and iniquity.

   Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the
   tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, and
   say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been
   partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.' Wherefore, ye be
   witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which
   killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.
   Therefore, also,' said the Wisdom of God, I will send unto you
   prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and
   crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and
   persecute them from city to city. That upon you may come all the
   righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel
   unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Bacharias, whom ye slew between the
   temple and the altar.' Verily, I say unto you, all these things shall
   come upon this generation."

   His terrible dogma of the substitution of the Gentiles,--the idea that
   the kingdom of God was going to be transferred to others, because those
   for whom it was destined would not receive it, is used as a fearful
   menace against the aristocracy, and his title "Son of God," which he
   openly assumed in striking parables, wherein his enemies appeared as
   murderers of the heavenly messengers, was an open defiance of legal
   Judaism. The bold appeal he addressed to the poor was still more
   seditious. He declared that he had "come that they which see not might
   see, and that they which see might be made blind." One day, his dislike
   of the temple forced from him an imprudent speech: "I will destroy this
   temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build
   another made without hands." We do not know what meaning Jesus attached
   to this phrase, in which his disciples sought for allegories. But as
   only a pretext was wanted, this sentence was quickly laid hold of. It
   reappeared in the preamble of his death-warrant, and rang in the ears
   amidst his last agonies of Golgotha. These irritating discussions
   always ended in tumult. The Pharisees threw stones at him; in doing
   which they only fulfilled an article of the Law, which commanded that
   every prophet, even a thaumaturgist, who should turn the people from
   the ancient worship, be stoned without a hearing. At other times they
   called him mad, possessed, Samaritan, or even sought to kill him. These
   words were taken note of in order to invoke against him the laws of an
   intolerant theocracy, which the Roman government had not yet abrogated.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXII.

  MACHINATIONS OF THE ENEMIES OF JESUS.

   Jesus passed the autumn and a part of the winter at Jerusalem. This
   season is there rather cold. The portico of Solomon, with its covered
   aisles, was the place where he habitually walked. This portico, the
   only portion of the ancient temple which remained, consisted of two
   galleries, formed by two rows of columns, by the wall which overlooked
   the valley of Kedron, which was doubtless less covered with debris than
   it is at the present time. The depth of the ravine could not be
   measured from the height of the portico; and it seemed, in consequence
   of the angle of the slopes, as if an abyss opened immediately beneath
   the wall. The other side of the valley even at that time was adorned
   with sumptuous tombs. Some of the monuments, which may be seen at the
   present day, were perhaps those cenotaphs in honour of ancient prophets
   which Jesus pointed out, when, seated under the portico, he denounced
   the official classes, who covered their hypocrisy or their vanity by
   these colossal piles.

   At the end of the month of December he celebrated at Jerusalem the
   feast established by Judas Maccabeus in memory of the purification of
   the temple after the sacrileges of Antiochus Epiphanes. It was also
   called the "Feast of Lights," because, during the eight days of the
   feast, lamps were kept lighted in the houses. Jesus soon after
   undertook a journey into Perea and to the banks of the Jordan, --that
   is to say, into the same country he had visited some years previously,
   when he belonged to the school of John, and where he himself had
   administered baptism. He seems to have reaped some consolation from
   this journey, specially at Jericho. This city, either as the terminus
   of several important routes, or on account of its gardens of spices and
   its rich cultivation, was a customs station of some importance. The
   chief receiver, Zaccheus, a rich man, desired to see Jesus. As he was
   of small stature, he mounted a sycamore tree near the road which the
   procession had to pass. Jesus was touched with this condescension in a
   person of consideration, and at the risk of giving offence he went to
   the house of Zaccheus. There was much murmuring at his thus honouring
   the house of a sinner by a visit. In parting, Jesus described his host
   as a good son of Abraham; and, as if to add to the vexation of the
   orthodox, Zaccheus became a Christian; he gave, it is said, the half of
   his goods to the poor, and restored fourfold to those whom he might
   have wronged. Further, this was not the only pleasure Jesus experienced
   there. On leaving the town, the beggar Bartimeus pleased him much by
   persistently calling him "son of David," although he was enjoined to be
   silent. The cycle of Galilean miracles appeared for a time to
   recommence in this country, a country similar in many respects to the
   provinces of the north. The delightful oasis of Jericho, at that time
   well watered, must have been one of the most beautiful places in Syria.
   Josephus speaks of it with the same admiration as of Galilee, and calls
   it, like the latter province, a "divine country."

   After Jesus had completed this kind of pilgrimage to the scenes of his
   earliest prophetic activity, he returned to his beloved abode in
   Bethany. That which most pained the faithful Galileans at Jerusalem was
   that he had not done any miracles there. Grieved at the cold reception
   which the kingdom of God found in the capital, the friends of Jesus
   wished, it seems, for a great miracle which should strike powerfully
   the incredulity of the Jerusalemites. A resurrection of a man known at
   Jerusalem appeared to them the most likely to carry conviction. It is
   to be supposed that Martha and Mary had spoken to Jesus on the subject.
   We must bear in mind that the essential condition of true criticism is
   to understand the diversity of times, and to rid ourselves of the
   instinctive repugnances which are the fruit of a purely rational
   education. We must also remember that in this dull and impure city of
   Jerusalem Jesus was no longer himself. Not by any fault of his own, but
   by that of others, his conscience had lost something of its originate
   purity. Desperate, and driven to extremity, he was no longer his own
   master. His mission overwhelmed him, and he yielded to the torrent. As
   always happens in the lives of great and inspired men, he suffered the
   miracles opinion demanded of him rather than performed them. At this
   distance of time, and with only a single text, bearing evident traces
   of artifices of composition, it is impossible to decide whether in this
   instance the whole is fiction, or whether a real fact which happened at
   Bethany has served as basis to the rumours which were spread about it.
   It must be acknowledged, however, that the way John narrates the
   incident differs widely from those descriptions of miracles, the
   offspring of the popular imagination, which fill the synoptics. Let us
   add that John is the only evangelist who has a precise knowledge of the
   relations of Jesus with the family of Bethany, and that it is
   impossible to believe that a mere creation of the popular mind could
   exist in a collection of remembrances so entirely personal. "If one was
   raised from the dead, perhaps the living would repent," was no doubt
   the remark made by the pious sisters. "No," was the response of Jesus;
   "even though one rose from the dead, they would not be persuaded;"
   recalling next a story which was familiar to him--that of the pious
   beggar, covered with sores, who died and was carried by angels to
   Abraham's bosom. "Even should Lazarus return," he might have added,
   "they would not be persuaded." Later on this subject was treated with
   singular levity. The hypothesis became a fact. People spoke of the
   resurrected Lazarus, and of the unpardonable obstinacy which could
   resist such testimony. The "sores" of Lazarus and the "leprosy" of
   Simon the leper were confounded, and it was admitted in one part of the
   tradition that Mary and Martha had a brother named Lazarus, whom Jesus
   had raised from the dead. When we know that such inaccuracies, such
   cock-and-bull stories, form the gossip of an Eastern city, we cannot
   regard it as impossible that a rumour of that kind had spread to
   Jerusalem of the life of Jesus, and the consequences of which were
   fatal to him.

   Certain notable indications, in fact, lead us to the belief that some
   of the reports received from Bethany had the effect of hastening the
   death of Jesus. At times we are led to suppose that the family of
   Bethany were guilty of some indiscretions or plunged into an excess of
   zeal. It was probably the ardent desire of closing the mouth of those
   who vigorously denied the divine mission of their friend which carried
   these passionate persons beyond all reasonable limits. It must be
   remembered that in this impure and inanimate city of Jerusalem Jesus
   was not quite himself His conscience, through a fault of the people and
   not his own, had lost something of his primordial sincerity. Desperate
   and pressed to extremes, he no longer was master of himself. His
   mission had been imposed on him, and he pursued it fearlessly. Death
   would in a few days restore him his divine liberty, and wrench him away
   from the fatal necessities of a position which each day was becoming
   more exacting and more difficult to sustain.

   The contrast between his always increasing exaltation and the
   indifference of the Jews became more and more marked. The power of the
   State, at the same time, became more bitter against him. From the
   beginning of February to the commencement of March a council had been
   assembled by the chief priests, and in that council the question had
   been pointedly put, "Can Jesus and Judaism exist together?" To raise
   the question was to reserve it; and, without being a prophet, as
   thought by the evangelist, the high priest could easily pronounce his
   cruel axiom, "It is expedient that one man should die for the people."

   "The high priest of that same year," to use an expression of the fourth
   Gospel, which shows clearly the state of abasement to which the
   sovereign pontificate was reduced, was Joseph Kaïapha, appointed by
   Valerius Gratus, and entirely devoted to the Romans. From the time that
   Jerusalem had been under procurators, the office of high priest had
   been a temporary one; removals had taken place nearly every year.
   Kaïapha, however, held it longer than any one else. He had assumed his
   office in the year 25, and he did not lose it till the year 36. We know
   nothing of his character; but many circumstances lead to the belief
   that his power was only nominal. Another personage is always seen in
   conjunction with him, who appears to have exercised at the decisive
   moment we have now reached, a preponderating power.

   This personage was Hanan or Annas, son of Seth, and father-in-law of
   Kaïpha, who was formerly the high priest, and had in reality preserved
   amidst the numerous changes of the pontificate all the authority of the
   office. Hanan had received the high priesthood from the legate
   Quirinius, in the year 7 of our era. He lost his function in the year
   14, on the accession of Tiberius; but he continued to be much
   respected. He was still called "high priest," although he was out of
   office, and was consulted upon all important matters. During fifty
   years the pontificate continued in his family almost uninterruptedly;
   five of his sons successively sustained this dignity, without counting
   Kaïapha, who was his son-in-law. His was called the "priestly family,"
   as if the priesthood had become hereditary in it. The chief offices of
   the temple almost all devolved upon them. Another family, that of
   Boëthus, alternated, it is true, with that of Hanan's in the
   pontificate. But the Boethusim, whose fortunes were of not very
   honourable origin, were much less esteemed by the pious middle class.
   Hanan was then in reality the chief of the sacerdotal party. Kaïapha
   did nothing without him; it was the custom to associate their names,
   and Hanan's was always put first. It will be understood, in fact, that
   under this régime of an annual pontificate, changed according to the
   caprice of the procurators, an old high priest, who had preserved the
   secret of the traditions, who had seen many younger than himself
   succeed each other, and who had retained sufficient influence to get
   the office delegated to persons who were subordinate to him in family
   rank, must have been a very important personage. Like all the
   aristocracy of the temple, he was a Sadducee, "a sect," says Josephus,
   "particularly severe in its judgments." All his sons were moreover
   violent persecutors. One of them, named like his father, Hanan, caused
   James, the brother of the Lord, to be stoned, under circumstances not
   unlike those connected with the death of Jesus. The temper of the
   family was haughty, bold, and cruel; it had that particular kind of
   proud and sullen wickedness which characterises Jewish politicians.
   Thus, upon this Hanan and his family must rest the responsibility of
   all the acts which followed. It was Hanan (or if you like the party he
   represented) who killed Jesus. Hanan was the principal actor in the
   terrible drama, and far more than Kaïapha, far more than Pilate, ought
   to bear the weight of the maledictions of mankind.

   It is in the mouth of Kaïapha that the evangelist puts the decisive
   words which led to the sentence of death being passed on Jesus. It was
   supposed that the high priest possessed a certain gift of prophecy; his
   words thus became an oracle full of profound meaning to the Christian
   community. But such a sentence, whoever he might be that pronounced it,
   expressed the feeling of the whole sacerdotal party. This party was
   much opposed to popular seditions. It sought to put down religious
   enthusiasts, rightly foreseeing that by their excited preachings they
   would lead to the total ruin of the nation. Although the excitement
   created by Jesus had nothing temporal about it, the priests saw, as an
   ultimate consequence of this agitation, an aggravation of the Roman
   yoke and the overturning of the temple, the source of their riches and
   honours. Certainly the causes which, thirty-seven years after, were to
   effect the ruin of Jerusalem, did not proceed from infant Christianity.
   We cannot, say, however, that the motive alleged in this circumstance
   by the priests was so improbable that we must necessarily regard it as
   insincere. In a general sense, Jesus, if he had succeeded, would have
   really effected the ruin of the Jewish nation. According to the
   principles universally admitted by all ancient polity, Hanan and
   Kaïapha were right in saying, "Better the death of one man than the
   ruin of a people!" In our opinion this reasoning is detestable. But his
   reasoning has been that of conservative parties from the commencement
   of all human society. The "party of order" (I use this expression in
   its mean and narrow sense) has ever been the same. Deeming the highest
   duty of government to be the prevention of popular disturbances, it
   believes it performs an act of patriotism in preventing, by judicial
   murder, the tumultuous effusion of blood. Little thoughtful of the
   future, it does not dream that by declaring war against all
   innovations, it incurs the risk of crushing ideas destined one day to
   triumph. The death of Jesus was one of the thousand illustrations of
   this policy. The movement he directed was entirely spiritual, but it
   was still a movement; hence the men of order, persuaded that it was
   essential for humanity not to be disturbed, felt themselves bound to
   prevent the new movement from extending itself. Never was seen a more
   striking example of how much such conduct defeats its own object. Left
   alone, Jesus would have exhausted himself in a desperate struggle with
   the impossible. The unintelligent hate of his enemies determined the
   success of his work, and sealed his divinity.

   The death of Jesus was thus resolved upon in the month of February or
   March. But he escaped yet for a short time. He withdrew to a town
   called Ephraim or Ephron, in the direction of Bethel, a short day's
   journey from Jerusalem near the border of the desert. He spent a few
   days there with his disciples, allowing the storm to pass over. But the
   order to arrest him as soon as he appeared at Jerusalem was given. The
   solemnity of the Passover was drawing nigh, and it was thought that
   Jesus, according to his custom, would come to celebrate it at
   Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIII.

  LAST WEEK OF JESUS.

   Jesus set out in fact, in the train of his disciples, to see again, and
   for the last time, the unbelieving city. The hopes of his followers
   were more and more exalted. All believed that in his going up to
   Jerusalem, the kingdom of God was about to be manifested there. The
   impiety of men was at its height, and this was regarded as a great sign
   that the consummation was near. The belief in this was such that they
   already disputed for precedence in the kingdom. This was, it is said,
   the moment chosen by Salome to demand on behalf of her sons the two
   seats on the right and left of the Son of man. The master, for his
   part, was beset by grave thoughts. Sometimes he allowed a gloomy
   resentment against his enemies to appear; he related the parable of a
   nobleman, who went to take possession of a kingdom in a far country;
   but hardly had he set out when his fellow-citizens wished to rid
   themselves of him. The king returned, and commanded that those who had
   conspired against him should be brought before him, and he had them all
   put to death. At other times he peremptorily destroyed the illusions of
   the disciples. As they walked along the stony roads to the north of
   Jerusalem, Jesus pensively preceded the group of his companions. All
   regarded him in silence, experiencing a sentiment of fear, and not
   daring to interrogate him. He had already spoken to them on various
   occasions of his future sufferings, and they had listened reluctantly.
   Jesus at length spoke out, and, no longer concealing from them his
   presentiments, discoursed on his approaching end. There was great
   sadness in the whole band. The disciples were expecting soon to see the
   sign appear in the clouds. The inaugural cry of the kingdom of God,
   "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord," resounded already
   in joyous accents through the company of Jesus. The sanguinary prospect
   troubled them. At each step of the fatal road, the kingdom of God
   became nearer or more remote in the mirage of their dreams. For
   himself, he was confirmed in the idea that he was about to die, but
   that his death would save the world. The misunderstanding between him
   and his disciples became more intense at each moment.

   The custom was to go Jerusalem several days before the Passover, in
   order to prepare for the feast. Jesus was the last to arrive, and at
   one time his enemies believed they were frustrated in the hope that
   they had formed of seizing him. The sixth day before the feast
   (Saturday, 8th of Nisan, the 28th of March) he at length reached
   Bethany. He entered, according to his custom, the house of Lazarus,
   Martha, and Mary, or of Simon the leper, thence they gave him a grand
   reception. There was a dinner at Simon the leper's, at which many
   persons assembled, attracted by the desire of seeing him, and also, it
   is said, of seeing Lazarus. Simon the leper, who was seated at the
   table, passed already, perhaps, in the eyes of many, as the person who
   had been resurrected, and attracted much attention. Martha, as was her
   wont, served. It seems that they sought, by an increased show of
   respect, to overcome the coolness of the public, and to assert strongly
   the high dignity of the guest whom they received. Mary, in order to
   give to the feast a greater appearance of festivity, entered during the
   dinner, carrying a vase of perfume, which she poured upon the feet of
   Jesus. She afterwards broke the vase, following an ancient custom of
   breaking the vessel that had been used in the entertainment of a
   stranger of distinction. Finally, pushing the evidences of her cult to
   a point hitherto unheard of, she prostrated herself, and wiped with her
   long hair the feet of the master. The house was filled with the odour
   of the perfume, to the great delight of every one except the avaricious
   Judas of Kerioth. If we consider the economical habits of the
   community, this was certainly prodigality. The greedy treasurer
   reckoned up immediately how much the perfume might have been sold for,
   and what it would have realised for the poor-box. This not very
   affectionate feeling, which seemed to place something above him,
   dissatisfied Jesus. He loved honours, for honours furthered his aim and
   established his title of Son of David. So, when they spoke to him of
   the poor, he replied somewhat sharply, "Ye have the poor always with
   you; but me ye have not always." And, rising to the occasion, he
   promised immortality to the woman who in this critical moment gave him
   a token of love.

   The next day (Sunday, 9th of Nizan) Jesus descended from Bethany to
   Jerusalem. When, at a bend of the road, upon the summit of the Mount of
   Olives, he saw the city spread out before him, it is said he wept over
   it, and addressed to it a last appeal. At the base of the mountain, a
   few steps from the gate, on entering the adjoining portion of the
   eastern wall of the city, which was called Bethphage, on account, no
   doubt, of the fig-trees with which it was planted, Jesus had once more
   a moment of human satisfaction. His arrival was noised abroad. The
   Galileans who had came to the feast were highly elated, and prepared a
   little triumph for him. An ass was brought to him, followed, according
   to custom, by its colt. The Galileans spread their finest garments upon
   the back of this humble animal as saddle-cloths, and seated him
   thereon. Others, however, spread their garments upon the road, and
   strewed it with green branches. The multitude which preceded and
   followed him, carrying palms, cried, "Hosanna to the son of David!
   Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord!" Some persons even
   gave him the title of king of Israel. "Master, rebuke thy disciples,"
   said the Pharisees to him. "If these should hold their peace, the
   stones would immediately cry out," replied Jesus, and he entered into
   the city. The Jerusalemites, who hardly knew him, asked who he was. "It
   is Jesus, the prophet of Nazareth, in Galilee," was the reply.
   Jerusalem was a city of about 50,000 souls. A trifling event, like the
   entrance of a stranger, however little celebrated, or the arrival of a
   band of provincials, or a movement of people to the avenues of the
   city, could not fail, under ordinary circumstances, to be quickly
   noised about. But at the time of the feast the confusion was extreme.
   Jerusalem on these occasions was taken possession of by strangers.
   Again, it was amongst the latter that the excitement appears to have
   been most lively. Some Greek-speaking proselytes, who had come to the
   feast, were piqued with curiosity, and wished to see Jesus. They
   addressed themselves to his disciples; but we do not know much of the
   result of the interview. Jesus, according to his custom, went to pass
   the night at his beloved village of Bethany. The three following days
   (Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday) he descended regularly to Jerusalem;
   after the setting of the sun he reascended either to Bethany or to the
   farms on the western side of the Mount of Olives, where he had many
   friends.

   A deep melancholy appears during these last days to have filled his
   soul, which was generally so gay and so serene. All the narratives
   agree in attributing to him before his arrest that he had a short
   experience of doubt and trouble; a kind of anticipated agony. According
   to some, he cried out suddenly, "Now is my soul troubled. O Father,
   save me from this hour." It was believed that a voice from heaven was
   heard at this moment: others said that an angel came to console him.
   According to one widely-spread version this occurred to him in the
   garden of Gethsemane. Jesus, it was said, went about a stone's throw
   from his sleeping disciples, taking with him only Peter and the two
   sons of Zebedee, then fell on his face and prayed. His soul was sad
   almost to death; a terrible anguish pressed upon him; but resignation
   to the divine will sustained him. This scene, owing to the instinctive
   art which regulated the compilation of the synoptics, and often led
   them in the arrangement of the narrative to study adaptability and
   effect, has been given as occurring on the last night of the life of
   Jesus, and at the precise moment of his arrest. If such a version be
   the true one, we should scarcely understand why John, who had been the
   intimate witness of so touching an episode, should not mention it to
   his disciples, and that the compiler of the fourth Gospel should not
   allude to it in the very circumstantial narrative which he has
   furnished of the evening of the Thursday. That which is certain is
   that, during his last days, the enormous weight of the mission he had
   undertaken pressed cruelly upon Jesus. Human nature asserted itself for
   a time. Perhaps he began to hesitate about his work. Terror and doubt
   seized upon him, and threw him into a state of exhaustion worse than
   death. The man who sacrifices his repose, and the legitimate rewards of
   life, to a great idea, always experiences a moment of sad revulsion
   when the image of death presents itself to him for the first time, and
   seeks to persuade him that everything is vanity. Perhaps some of those
   touching reminiscences which the strongest souls retain, and which at
   times pierce like a sword, seized upon him at this moment. Did he
   recall the clear fountains of Galilee, where he might have refreshed
   himself; the vine and the fig-tree under which he sat down, and the
   young maidens who, perhaps, might have consented to love him? Did he
   curse the hard destiny which had denied him the joys conceded to all
   others? Did he regret his too lofty nature, and (a victim of his
   greatness) did he grieve that he had not remained a simple artizan of
   Nazareth? We do not know, for all these internal troubles were
   evidently to his disciples a sealed letter. They understood nothing of
   them, supplying by simple conjectures that which, in the great soul of
   their Master, was obscure to them. It is certain, at least, that his
   divine nature soon regained its supremacy. He might still have avoided
   death; but he would not. Love for his work prevailed. He elected to
   drink the cup even to the dregs. Henceforth in fact we find Jesus
   entirely himself, wholly unclouded. The subtleties of the polemic, the
   credulity of the thaumaturgist and of the exorcist, are forgotten.
   There remains only the incomparable hero of the Passion, the founder of
   the rights of free conscience, and the perfect model which all
   suffering souls will contemplate in order to fortify and console
   themselves.

   The triumph of Bethphage, that audacious act of the provincials in
   celebrating at the very gates of Jerusalem the advent of their
   Messiah-King, completed the exasperation of the Pharisees and the
   aristocracy of the temple. A new council was held on the Wednesday
   (12th of Nisan) at the house of Joseph Kaïapha. The immediate arrest of
   Jesus was resolved upon. A great idea of order and of conservative
   policy presided over all their plans. The question was how to avoid a
   scene. As the feast of the Passover, which commenced that year on the
   Friday evening, was a time of bustle and excitement, it was resolved to
   anticipate it. Jesus was popular; they feared an outbreak. Although it
   was customary to relieve the solemnities in which the whole nation
   joined by the execution of individual rebels to the priestly
   authorities--a species of religious murder designed to inculcate on the
   people a religious terror--it was, however, arranged that such
   executions should not fall upon the holy days. The arrest was therefore
   fixed for the next day, Thursday. It was resolved, further, not to
   seize him in the temple, where he came every day, but to observe his
   habits, in order to capture him in some retired place. The agents of
   the priests sounded his disciples, hoping to obtain some information by
   playing upon their weakness or their simplicity. They found what they
   sought in Judas of Kerioth. This wretched creature, from motives
   impossible to explain, betrayed his Master, gave all the particulars
   necessary, and even undertook himself (although such an excess of
   baseness is hardly credible) to conduct the force which was to make the
   arrest. The recollection of horror which the folly or the wickedness of
   this man has left in the Christian tradition must have been the cause
   of some exaggeration on this point. Judas up to this time had been a
   disciple like the others; he had even the title of apostle; he had
   driven out demons. Legend, which always employs highly coloured
   language, will not admit in the supper-room more than eleven saints and
   one reprobate. Reality does not proceed by such absolute categories.
   Avarice, which the synoptics give as the motive of the crime in
   question, does not suffice to explain it. It would be singular if a man
   who kept the purse, and who knew what he would lose by the death of his
   chief, were to exchange the profits of his occupation for a very small
   sum of money. Had the self-love of Judas been wounded by the rebuff he
   received at the dinner at Bethany? Even that would not suffice to
   explain his conduct. The fourth evangelist would like to make him out a
   thief, an unbeliever from the beginning, for which, however, there is
   no justification. We would prefer to attribute it to some feeling of
   jealousy, or to some intestine dissension. The peculiar hatred which is
   manifested towards Judas in the gospel attributed to John confirms this
   hypothesis. Less pure in heart than the others, Judas had imbibed,
   without knowing it, the narrow-mindedness of his office. By a caprice
   very common in active life he had come to regard the interests of the
   purse as superior even to those of the work for which it was destined.
   The administrator had overcome the apostle. The murmurings which
   escaped him at Bethany seem to suggest that sometimes he considered
   that the Master cost his spiritual family too much. No doubt this mean
   economy had been the occasion of many other collisions in the little
   society.

   Without denying that Judas of Kerioth may have contributed to the
   arrest of his Master, we yet believe that the curses with which he is
   loaded are somewhat unjust. There was, perhaps, in what he did more
   awkwardness than perversity. The moral conscience of the man of the
   people is quick and correct, but unstable and inconsequent. It cannot
   resist the impulse of the moment. The secret societies of the
   republican party were characterised by much earnestness and sincerity,
   and yet their denouncers were very numerous. A trifling spite sufficed
   to convert a partisan into a traitor. But, if the foolish desire for a
   few pieces of silver turned the head of poor Judas, he does not seem to
   have lost the moral sentiment completely, since, on seeing the
   consequences of his fault, he repented, and, it is said, killed
   himself.

   Each minute, at this crisis, was solemn, and counted more than whole
   ages in the history of humanity. We have reached Thursday, 13th of
   Nisan (2nd April). The evening of the next day was the beginning of the
   festival of the Passover, begun by the feast at which the Paschal lamb
   was eaten. The feast continued for seven days, during which unleavened
   bread was eaten. The first and the last of these seven days were of a
   peculiarly solemn character. The disciples were already occupied with
   preparations for the feast. As for Jesus, we are led to believe that he
   was cognisant of the treachery of Judas, and that he was suspicious of
   the fate that awaited him. In the evening he took with his disciples
   his last repast. It was not the ritual feast of the Passover, as was
   afterwards supposed, owing to an error of a day in reckoning; but for
   the primitive church this supper of the Thursday was the true Passover,
   the seal of the new covenant. Each disciple connected with it his most
   cherished recollections, and a multitude of touching traits of the
   Master which each one preserved were associated with this repast, which
   became the cornerstone of Christian piety, and the starting-point of
   the most important institutions.

   Doubtless the tender love which filled the heart of Jesus for the
   little church which surrounded him overflowed at this moment. His
   serene and strong soul became gay under the weight of the gloomy
   preoccupations that beset him. He had a word for each of his friends;
   John and Peter especially were the objects of tender marks of
   attachment. John reclined on the divan, by the side of Jesus, with his
   head resting upon the breast of the Master. Towards the end of the
   repast, the secret which weighed upon the heart of Jesus nearly escaped
   him: he said, "Verily I say unto you that one of you shall betray me."
   This was for these simple men a moment of anguish; they looked at each
   other, and each questioned himself. Judas was present; perhaps Jesus,
   who had had for some time reasons to distrust him, sought by this
   remark to draw from his looks or from his embarrassed manner the avowal
   of his fault. But the unfaithful disciple did not lose countenance; he
   even dared, it is said, to ask with the others, "Master, is it I ?"

   Meanwhile, the good and upright soul of Peter was in torture. He made a
   sign to John to endeavour to ascertain of whom the Master was speaking.
   John, who could converse with Jesus without being heard, asked him the
   meaning of this enigma. Jesus, having only suspicions, did not wish to
   give any name: he only told John to observe him to whom he was going to
   offer the unleavened bread. At the same time he soaked a mouthful and
   offered it to Judas. John and Peter alone were cognisant of the fact.
   Jesus addressed to Judas some words containing a bitter reproach, which
   were not understood by those present. They thought that Jesus was
   simply giving him orders for the morrow's feast, and he left the room.

   At the time this repast struck no one; and apart from the apprehensions
   which the Master confided to his disciples, who only half understood
   them, nothing extraordinary took place. But after the death of Jesus
   they attached to this evening a singularly solemn meaning, and the
   imagination of believers spread over it a colouring of sweet mysticism.
   The last hours of a dear friend are those we best remember. By an
   inevitable illusion, we attribute to the conversations we have then had
   with him a sense that death only gives to them; we concentrate into a
   few hours the memories of many years. The majority of the disciples did
   not after the supper of which we have just spoken see their Master
   again. It was the farewell banquet. In this repast, as well as in many
   others, Jesus practised his mysterious rite of the breaking of bread.
   As it was believed from the earliest years of the Church that the
   repast in question took place on the day of the Passover, and was the
   Paschal feast, the idea naturally arose that the Eucharistic
   institution was established at this supreme moment. Starting from the
   hypothesis that Jesus knew in advance the precise moment of his death,
   the disciples were led to suppose that he reserved for his last hours a
   number of important acts. As, moreover, one of the fundamental ideas of
   the first Christians was that the death of Jesus had been a sacrifice,
   replacing all those of the ancient Law, the "Last Supper," which was
   supposed to have taken place, once for all, on the eve of the Passion,
   became the chief sacrifice, the act which constituted the new alliance,
   the sign of the blood shed for the salvation of all. The bread and
   wine, placed in juxtaposition with death itself, were thus the image of
   the new testament that Jesus had sealed with his sufferings, the
   commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ until his advent.

   Very early this mystery was incorporated into a small sacramental
   narrative, which we possess under four forms, very similar to one
   another. The fourth Evangelist, preoccupied with the Eucharistic ideas,
   and who narrates the Last Supper with so much prolixity, connecting it
   with so many circumstances and discourses, does not mention this
   narrative. This is a proof that he did not regard the Eucharist as a
   peculiarity of the Lord's Supper. To the fourth Evangelist the rite of
   the Last Supper was the washing of feet. It is probable that in certain
   primitive Christian families this latter rite obtained an importance
   which it has since lost. No doubt Jesus, on some occasions, had
   practised it to give his disciples an example of brotherly humility. It
   was connected with the eve of his death, in consequence of the tendency
   to group around the Last Supper all the great moral and ritual
   recommendations of Jesus.

   A high sentiment of love, of concord, of charity, and of mutual
   deference, animated, moreover, the remembrances which were believed to
   surround the last hours of Jesus. It is always the unity of his Church,
   constituted by him or by his Spirit, which is the essence of the
   symbols and of the discourses which Christian tradition referred to
   this sacred moment. "A new commandment I give unto you," said he, "
   that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one
   another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
   have love one to another. Henceforth I call you not servants; for the
   servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends;
   for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto
   you. These things I command you, that ye love one another." At this
   last sacred moment several rivalries and struggles for precedence again
   took place. Jesus remarked that if he, the Master, had been in the
   midst of his disciples as their servant, how much more ought they to
   submit themselves to one another. According to some, in drinking the
   wine, he said, "I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine
   until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father's kingdom."
   According to others, he promised them soon a celestial feast, at which
   they would be seated on thrones at his side.

   It seems that, towards the close of the evening, the presentiments of
   Jesus took hold of the disciples. All felt that a very serious danger
   threatened the Master, and that they were verging on a crisis. At one
   time Jesus thought of precautions, and spoke of swords. There were two
   in the company. "It is enough," said he. He did not, however, follow
   out this idea; he saw clearly that timid provincials could not stand up
   before the armed force of the great powers of Jerusalem. Cephas, full
   of zeal and self-confidence, swore that he would go with him to prison
   and to death. Jesus, with his usual astuteness, expressed doubts
   concerning him. According to a tradition, which probably originated
   with Peter himself, Jesus gave him till cock-crowing. Like Peter, they
   all swore that they would not yield.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIV.

  ARREST AND TRIAL OF JESUS.

   It was quite dark when they left the room. Jesus, as was his wont,
   passed through the valley of Kedron; and, accompanied by his disciples,
   went to the garden of Gethsemane, at the foot of the Mount of Olives.
   He sat down there. Overawing his friends by his great superiority, he
   watched and prayed. They were sleeping near him, when suddenly an armed
   troop appeared bearing lighted torches. It was the guards of the
   temple, armed with staves, a kind of brigade of police under the
   control of the priests; they were supported by a detachment of Roman
   soldiers with their swords; the order for the arrest emanated from the
   high priest and the Sanhedrim. Judas, knowing the habits of Jesus, had
   indicated this place as that where he might most easily be surprised.
   According to the unanimous tradition of the earliest times, Judas
   accompanied the detachment himself; according to some, he carried his
   hateful conduct even to the length of betraying him with a kiss. Be
   that as it may, certain it is that there was some show of resistance on
   the part of the disciples. One of them (Peter, according to
   eye-witnesses) drew his sword, and wounded one of the servants of the
   high priest, named Malchus, on the ear. Jesus put a stop to this
   resistance, and surrendered himself to the soldiers. Weak and incapable
   of acting with effect, especially against authorities with so much
   prestige, the disciples took to flight and became dispersed. Peter and
   John alone did not lose sight of their Master. Another unknown young
   man (probably Mark), wrapped in a light garment, followed him. The
   authorities sought to arrest him, but the young man fled, leaving his
   tunic in the hands of the guards.

   The course which the priests had resolved to pursue in regard to Jesus
   was quite in conformity with the established law. The procedure against
   the "corrupter" (mésith), who sought to attaint the purity of religion,
   is explained in the Talmud, with details the naïve impudence of which
   provokes a smile. A judicial ambush is therein erected into an
   essential part of the examination of criminals. When a man was accused
   of being a "corrupter," two witnesses were suborned who were concealed
   behind a partition. It was arranged to bring the accused into a
   contiguous room, where he could be heard by these two witnesses without
   his perceiving them. Two candles were lighted near him, in order that
   it might be satisfactorily proved that the witnesses "saw him." He was
   then made to repeat his blasphemy; next, urged to retract it. If he
   persisted, the witnesses who had heard him conducted him to the
   tribunal, and he was stoned to death. The Talmud adds that this was the
   manner in which they treated Jesus; that he was condemned on the faith
   of two witnesses who had been suborned, and that the crime of
   "corruption" is, moreover, the only one for which the witnesses are
   thus prepared.

   In fact, the disciples of Jesus inform us that the crime with which
   their Master was charged was that of "corruption;" and, apart from some
   minutiæ, the offspring of the rabbinical imagination, the narrative of
   the Gospels corresponds exactly with the procedure described by the
   Talmud. The plan of the enemies of Jesus was to convict him, by the
   testimony of witnesses and by his own avowals, of blasphemy and of
   outrage against the Mosaic religion, to condemn him to death according
   to law, and then to get the condemnation sanctioned by Pilate. The
   priestly authority, as we have already seen, was in reality entirely in
   the hands of Hanan. The order for the arrest in all probability
   emanated from him. It was to the residence of this powerful personage
   that Jesus was first taken. Hanan questioned him in regard to his
   doctrine and his disciples. Jesus, with justifiable pride, declined to
   enter into long explanations. He referred Hanan to his teachings, which
   had been public; he maintained that he had never held any secret
   doctrine; and requested the ex high priest to interrogate those who had
   listened to him. This was a perfectly natural response; but the
   idolatrous respect which surrounded the old priest made it appear
   audacious; and one of those present replied to it, it is said, by a
   blow.

   Peter and John had followed their Master to the residence of Hanan.
   John, who was known in the house, was admitted without difficulty; but
   Peter was stopped at the entrance, and John was obliged to beg the
   porter to let him pass. The night was cold. Peter remained in the
   antechamber, and approached a brazier, around which the servants were
   warming themselves. He was soon recognised as a disciple of the
   accused. The unfortunate man, betrayed by his Galilean accent, and
   pursued by questions from the servants, one of whom was a kinsman of
   Malchus and had seen him at Gethsemane, denied thrice that he had ever
   had the slightest connection with Jesus. He imagined that Jesus could
   not hear him, and never dreamt that this dissimulated cowardice was
   exceedingly dishonourable. But his better nature soon revealed to him
   the fault he had committed. A fortuitous circumstance, the crowing of
   the cock, recalled to him a remark that Jesus had made. Touched to the
   heart, he went out and wept bitterly.

   Hanan, although the real author of the judicial murder about to be
   committed, had not power to pronounce sentence upon Jesus, so he sent
   him to his son-in-law, Kaïapha, who bore the official title. This man,
   the blind instrument of his father-in-law, naturally ratified
   everything required of him by Hanan. The Sanhedrim was assembled at his
   house. The inquiry commenced; and several witnesses, well instructed
   beforehand, according to the inquisitorial process described in the
   Talmud, appeared before the tribunal. The fatal sentence which Jesus
   had really uttered, "I am able to destroy the temple of God and to
   build it in three days," was cited by two witnesses. To blaspheme the
   temple of God was, according to the Jewish law, equivalent to
   blaspheming God Himself. Jesus remained silent, and refused to explain
   the incriminating speech. If we may believe one version, the high
   priest then adjured him to say if he were the Messiah; Jesus confessed
   it, and proclaimed before the assembly the near approach of his
   heavenly reign. The courage of Jesus, who had resolved to die, did not
   require this. It is more probable that here, as when before Hanan, he
   remained silent. This was in general, during his last moments, his rule
   of conduct. The sentence was determined on; and they only sought for
   pretexts. Jesus perceived this, and did not undertake a useless
   defence. From the orthodox Judaism point of view, he was truly a
   blasphemer, a destroyer of the established worship, and these crimes
   were punishable by the law with death. With one voice, the assembly
   declared him guilty of a capital crime. The members of the council, who
   had a secret penchant for him, were absent or did not vote. The usual
   frivolity of old-established aristocracies did not permit the judges to
   reflect long upon the consequences of the sentence they had rendered.
   Human life was at that time very lightly sacrificed; the members of the
   Sanhedrim could not, of course, dream that their sons would have to
   render account to an angry posterity for the sentence pronounced with
   such flippant disdain.

   The Sanhedrim had not the right to execute a sentence of death. But in
   the confusion of powers which then prevailed in Judæa, Jesus was, from
   that moment, none the less condemned. He remained the rest of the night
   exposed to the wicked treatment of an infamous pack of servants, who
   spared him no affront.

   In the morning the chief priests and the elders again assembled. The
   question was, how to get Pilate to ratify the condemnation pronounced
   by the Sanhedrim, whose powers, since the occupation of the Romans,
   were no longer sufficient. The procurator was not invested, like the
   imperial legate, with the power of life and death. But Jesus was not a
   Roman citizen: it only required the authorisation of the governor in
   order that the sentence pronounced against him should take its course.
   As always happens when a political people subjects a nation amongst
   which the civil and the religious laws are confounded, the Romans had
   been led to give to the Jewish law a sort of official support. The
   Roman law was not applicable to Jews. The latter remained under the
   canonical law which we find recorded in the Talmud, just as the Arabs
   in Algeria are still governed by the code of Islamism. Although neutral
   in religion, the Romans thus very often sanctioned penalties inflicted
   for religious faults. The situation was nearly that of the sacred
   cities of India under the English dominion, or rather that which would
   be the state of Damascus if to-morrow Syria were conquered by a
   European nation. Josephus pretends, though the assertion may be
   doubted, that if a Roman ventured beyond the pillars which bore
   inscriptions forbidding Pagans to advance, the Romans themselves would
   have delivered him to the Jews to be put to death.

   The agents of the priests therefore bound Jesus and led him to the
   judgment-hall, which was the former palace of Herod, adjoining the
   Tower of Antonia. It was the morning of the day on which the Paschal
   lamb was to be eaten (Friday the 14th of Nisan, our 3rd of April). The
   Jews would have been defiled by entering the judgment-hall, and would
   not have been able to share in the sacred feast, and therefore remained
   without. Pilate, apprised of their presence, ascended the bima or
   tribunal, situated in the open air, at the place named Gabbatha, or in
   Greek, Lithostrotos, on account of the pavement which covered the
   ground.

   Hardly had he been informed of the accusation before he manifested his
   annoyance at being mixed up in the affair. He then shut himself up in
   the judgment-hall with Jesus. There a conversation took place, the
   precise details of which are lost, no witness having been able to
   repeat it to the disciples, but the tenor of which appears to have been
   happily conjectured by the fourth Evangelist. His narrative, at least,
   is in perfect accord with what history teaches us of the respective
   positions of the two interlocutors.

   The procurator, Pontius, surnamed Pilate, doubtless on account of the
   pilum or javelin of honour with which he or one of his ancestors was
   decorated, had hitherto had no relation with the new sect. Indifferent
   to the internal quarrels of the Jews, he only saw in all these
   sectarian movements the effects of a diseased imagination and
   disordered brain. In general, he did not like the Jews. The Jews, on
   their part, detested him still more. They considered him harsh,
   scornful, and passionate, and accused him of improbable crimes.
   Jerusalem, the centre of a great national fermentation, was a very
   seditious city, and an insupportable abode for a foreigner. The
   enthusiasts pretended that it was a fixed design of the new procurator
   to abolish the Jewish law. Their narrow fanaticism, their religious
   hatreds, shocked that broad sentiment of justice and of civil
   government which the humblest Roman carried everywhere with him. All
   the acts of Pilate which are known to us attest him to have been a good
   administrator. In the earlier period of the exercise of his charge, he
   had had difficulties with those subject to him which he had solved in a
   very brutal manner; but it seems that on the whole he was right. The
   Jews must have appeared to him a very backward people; he doubtless
   judged them as a liberal prefect formerly judged the Bas-Bretons, who
   rebelled for such a simple matter as a new road, or the establishment
   of a school. In his best projects for the good of the country, notably
   in those relating to public works, he had encountered an impassable
   obstacle in the Law. The Law narrowed life to such a point that it was
   opposed to all change and to all amelioration. The Roman structures,
   even the most useful ones, were, on the part of zealous Jews, objects
   of great antipathy. Two votive escutcheons with inscriptions, which
   Pilate had set up at his residence, which was near the sacred
   precincts, provoked a still more violent storm. Pilate at first cared
   little for these susceptibilities; and he thus was soon seen engaged in
   sanguinary repressions, which afterwards culminated in his removal. The
   experience of so many conflicts had rendered him very prudent in his
   relations with an intractable people, who avenged themselves upon their
   governors by compelling the latter to use towards them rigorous
   severities. The procurator, with extreme displeasure, saw himself led
   to play a cruel part in this new affair, by a law he hated. He knew
   that religious fanaticism, when it has obtained some power from civil
   governments, is afterwards the first to throw the responsibility upon
   the latter, almost accusing them of being the author of their own
   excesses. What could be more unjust? for the true culprit is, in such
   cases, the instigator!

   Pilate, then, would have liked to save Jesus. Perhaps the calm and
   dignified attitude of the accused made an impression upon him.
   According to a tradition, Jesus found a supporter in the procurator's
   own wife. She may have seen the gentle Galilean from some window of the
   palace, which overlooked the courts of the temple. Perhaps she had seen
   him again in her dreams; and the blood of this beautiful young man,
   which was about to be spilt, had given her nightmare. Certain it is
   that Jesus found Pilate prepossessed in his favour. The governor
   questioned him kindly, with the desire of finding out by what means he
   could send him away pardoned.

   The title of "King of the Jews," which Jesus had never taken upon
   himself, but which his enemies represented as the sum and substance of
   his acts and pretensions, was naturally that by which they might be
   able to excite the suspicions of the Roman authority. He was accused of
   sedition, and of being guilty of treason against the government.
   Nothing could be more unjust; for Jesus had always recognised the Roman
   empire as the established power. But conservative religious bodies are
   not accustomed to shrink from calumny. In spite of all his explanations
   they drew certain conclusions from his teaching; they made him out to
   be a disciple of Judas the Gaulonite; they pretended that he forbade
   the payment of tribute to Cæsar. Pilate asked him if he was really the
   King of the Jews. Jesus did not dissimulate his belief. But the great
   ambiguity of speech which had been the source of his strength, and
   which, after his death, was to establish his kingship, did not serve
   him on this occasion. An idealist, that is to say, not distinguishing
   the spirit from the substance, Jesus, whose words, to use the image of
   the Apocalypse, were as a two-edged sword, never completely satisfied
   the powers of earth. If we may believe John, he did avow his royalty,
   but coupled it with this profound sentence: "My kingdom is not of this
   world." Then he explained the nature of his kingdom, which consisted
   entirely in the possession and proclamation of truth. Pilate knew
   nothing of this grand idealism. Jesus doubtless appeared to him as
   being an inoffensive dreamer. The total absence of religious and
   philosophical proselytism among the Romans of this epoch made them
   regard devotion to truth as a chimera. Such discussions annoyed them,
   and appeared to them devoid of meaning. Not perceiving the element of
   danger to the empire that lay hidden in these new speculations, they
   had no reason to employ violence against them. All their displeasure
   fell upon those who asked them to inflict punishment for vain
   subtleties. Twenty years after, Gallio still followed the same course
   towards the Jews. Until the fall of Jerusalem, the rule which the
   Romans adopted in administration was to remain completely indifferent
   to the quarrels those sectarians had among themselves.

   An expedient suggested itself to the mind of the governor by which he
   could reconcile his own feelings with the demands of the fanatical
   people, whose resentment he had already so often felt. It was the
   custom to deliver a prisoner to the people at the time of the Passover.
   Pilate, knowing that Jesus had only been arrested in consequence of the
   jealousy of the priests, tried to obtain for him the benefit of this
   custom. He appeared again upon the bima, and proposed to the multitude
   to release the "King of the Jews." The proposition, made in these
   terms, though ironical, was characterised by a degree of liberality.
   The priests saw the danger of it. They acted promptly, and, in order to
   combat the proposition of Pilate, they suggested to the crowd the name
   of a prisoner who enjoyed great popularity in Jerusalem. By a singular
   coincidence he also was called Jesus, and bore the surname of Bar-Abba,
   or Bar-Rabban. He was a well-known personage, and had been arrested for
   being mixed up in a disturbance which had been accompanied by murder. A
   general clamour was raised, "Not this man; but Jesus Bar-Rabban;" and
   Pilate was obliged to release Jesus Bar-Rabban.

   His embarrassment increased. He feared that too much indulgence to a
   prisoner, to whom was given the title of "King of the Jews," might
   compromise him. Fanaticism, moreover, constrains all powers to make
   terms with it. Pilate felt himself obliged to make some concession; but
   still hesitating to shed blood, in order to satisfy men whom he
   detested, wished to turn the thing into a jest. Affecting to laugh at
   the pompous title they had given to Jesus, he caused him to be
   scourged. Flagellation was the usual preliminary of crucifixion.
   Perhaps Pilate wished it to be believed that this sentence had already
   been pronounced, hoping that the preliminary would suffice. Then took
   place, according to all the narratives, a revolting scene. The soldiers
   put a scarlet robe on the back of Jesus, a crown of thorny branches
   upon his head, and a reed in his hand. Thus attired, he was led to the
   tribunal in front of the people. The soldiers defiled before him,
   striking him in turn, and knelt to him, saying, "Hail! King of the
   Jews," Others, it is said, spit upon him, and bruised his head with the
   reed. It is difficult to understand that Roman dignity could lend
   itself to acts so shameful. True, Pilate, in the capacity of
   procurator, had scarcely any but auxiliary troops under his command.
   Roman citizens, as the legionaries were, would not have stooped to such
   indignities.

   Did Pilate think by this display to shield himself from responsibility?
   Did he hope to turn aside the blow which threatened Jesus by conceding
   something to the hatred of the Jews, and by substituting for the tragic
   denouement a grotesque termination, whence would seem to follow that
   the affair merited no other issue? If such were his idea, it did not
   succeed. The tumult increased, and became an actual riot. The cry
   "Crucify him! Crucify him!" resounded on all sides. The priests,
   assuming a tone of more and more urgency, declared the law to be in
   peril if the corrupter were not punished with death. Pilate saw clearly
   that in order to save Jesus he would have to put down a furious riot.
   He still tried, however, to gain time. He returned to the
   judgment-hall, and ascertained from what country Jesus came, seeking a
   pretext to free him from adjudicating. According to one tradition, he
   even sent Jesus to Antipas, who it is said was then at Jerusalem. Jesus
   encouraged but little these benevolent efforts; he maintained, as he
   had done at the house of Kaïapha, a grave and dignified silence which
   astonished Pilate. The cries from without became more and more
   menacing. The people had already begun to denounce the lack of zeal of
   the functionary who shielded an enemy of Cæsar. The greatest
   adversaries of the Roman rule were found to be transformed into loyal
   subjects of Tiberius, so as to have the right of accusing the too
   tolerant procurator of treason. "We have no king," said they, "but
   Cæsar. If thou let this man go thou art not Cæsar's friend: whosoever
   maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar." The feeble Pilate
   yielded; he foresaw the report that his enemies would send to Rome, in
   which they would accuse him of having favoured a rival of Tiberius.
   Already the Jews, in the matter of the votive escutcheons, had written
   to the emperor, and their action had been approved. He feared for his
   office. By a condescension, which was to hold up his name to the lash
   of history, he yielded, throwing, it is said, all the responsibility of
   what was about to happen upon the Jews. The latter, according to the
   Christians, fully accepted it by exclaiming, "His blood be on us and on
   our children!"

   Were these words really uttered? It is open to doubt. They nevertheless
   are the expression of a profound historical truth. Considering the
   attitude which the Romans had taken up in Judæa, Pilate could scarcely
   have acted otherwise than he did. How many sentences of death dictated
   by religious intolerance have forced the hand of the civil power! The
   king of Spain, who, in order to please a fanatical clergy, delivered
   hundreds of his subjects to the stake, was more blamable than Pilate,
   for he was the representative of a more absolute power than were the
   Romans at Jerusalem. When the civil power becomes persecuting or
   meddlesome at the solicitation of the priesthood, it demonstrates its
   weakness. But let the government that is without sin in this respect
   throw the first stone at Pilate. The "secular arm," behind which
   clerical cruelty shelters itself, is not the culprit. No one is
   justified in saying that he has a horror of blood when he causes it to
   be shed by his servants.

   It was, then, neither Tiberius nor Pilate who condemned Jesus. It was
   the old Jewish party; it was the Mosaic Law. According to our modern
   ideas, there is no transmission of moral demerit from father to son;
   each one has to account to human or divine justice for that which he
   himself has done. Consequently, every Jew who suffers to-day for the
   murder of Jesus has a right to complain, for he might have been a Simon
   the Cyrenean, or at least not have been one of those who cried "Crucify
   him!" But nations, like individuals, have their responsibilities. Now,
   if ever a crime was the crime of a nation, it was the death of Jesus.
   This death was "legal" in the sense that it was primarily caused by a
   law which was the very soul of the nation. The Mosaic Law, it is true,
   in its modern yet accepted form, pronounced the penalty of death
   against all attempts to change the established worship. Now, there is
   no doubt that Jesus attacked this worship, and hoped to destroy it. The
   Jews expressed this to Pilate with truthful simplicity: "We have a law,
   and by our law he ought to die; because he has made himself the Son of
   God." The law was detestable, but it was the law of ancient ferocity;
   and the hero who attempted to abrogate it had first of all to endure
   its penalty.

   Alas! it has taken more than eighteen hundred years for the blood that
   he shed to bear its fruits. For ages tortures and death have been
   inflicted in the name of Jesus on thinkers as noble as himself. Even
   to-day, in countries which call themselves Christian, penalties are
   pronounced for religious derelictions. Jesus is not responsible for
   these errors. He could not foresee that people with mistaken ideas
   would one day imagine him to be a frightful Moloch, greedy of burnt
   victims. Christianity has been intolerant, but intolerance is not
   essentially a Christian monopoly. It is Jewish, in the sense that it
   was Judaism which first raised the theory of the absolute in religion,
   and laid down the principle that every innovator, even if he brings
   miracles in support of his doctrine, ought without trial to be stoned.
   The Pagan world has as undoubtedly also had its religious violences.
   But if it had had this law, how would it have become Christian? The
   Pentateuch has thus been in the world the first code of religious
   terrorism. Judaism has given the example of an immutable dogma armed
   with the sword. If, instead of pursuing the Jews with a blind hatred,
   Christianity had abolished the order of things which killed its
   founder, how much more consistent would it not have been--how much
   better would it not have deserved of the human race!
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXV.

  DEATH OF JESUS.

   Although the real motive for the death of Jesus was entirely religious,
   his enemies had succeeded, in the judgment-hall, in representing him as
   guilty of treason against the state; they could not have obtained from
   the sceptical Pilate a condemnation simply on the ground of heterodoxy.
   Following up this idea, the priests demanded, through the people, the
   crucifixion of Jesus. This mode of punishment was not of Jewish origin.
   If the condemnation of Jesus had been purely Mosaic, he would have been
   stoned. Crucifixion was a Roman punishment. reserved for slaves, and
   for cases in which it was wished to add to death the aggravation of
   ignominy. In applying it to Jesus, they treated him as they treated
   highway robbers, brigands, bandits, or those enemies of inferior rank
   to whom the Romans did not grant the honour of death by the sword. It
   was the chimerical "King of the Jews," not the heterodox dogmatist, who
   was punished. Following out the same idea, the execution was left to
   the Romans. At this epoch we know that, amongst the Romans, the
   soldiers performed, at least in cases of political condemnations, the
   office of executioners. Jesus was therefore delivered to a cohort of
   auxiliary troops commanded by a centurion, and all the odious
   accessories connected with executions, introduced by the cruel customs
   of the new conquerors, were practised upon him. It was about noon. They
   re-clothed him with the garments which they had removed on arraigning
   him before the tribunal, and, as the cohort had already in reserve two
   thieves who were to be executed, the three convicts were placed
   together, and the procession set out for the place of execution.

   This was a locality called Golgotha, situated outside Jerusalem, but
   near the walls of the city. The name Golgotha signifies a skull; it
   seems to correspond to our word Chaumont, and probably designated a
   bare hill, having the form of a bald skulL Where this hill was situated
   is not exactly known. Certainly it was on the north or north-west of
   the city, on the high irregular plain which extends between the walls
   and the two valleys of Kedron and Hinnom--a rather unattractive region,
   and rendered still more repulsive by the objectionable circumstances
   that always characterise the neighbourhood of a great city. It is
   difficult to identify Golgotha with the spot that, since Constantine,
   has been venerated by all Christendom. This spot is too near the
   interior of the city, and we are led to believe that, in the time of
   Jesus, it was comprised within the circuit of the walls.

   Any one condemned to the cross was forced himself to carry the
   instrument of his execution. But Jesus, physically weaker than his two
   companions, was not able to carry his. The troop met a certain Simon of
   Cyrene, who was returning from the country, and the soldiers, with the
   offhand procedure of foreign garrisons, compelled him to carry the
   fatal tree. In so doing they perhaps exercised a recognised right to
   enforce labour, the Romans not being allowed to carry the infamous
   wood. It seems that Simon was afterwards of the Christian community.
   His two sons, Alexander and Rufus, were well known in it. He related
   perhaps more than one circumstance of which he had been witness. No
   disciple was at this moment near Jesus.

   The place of execution was at length reached. According to Jewish
   usage, the victims were offered a strong aromatic wine, an intoxicating
   drink, which, from a feeling of pity, was given to the condemned to
   stupefy him. It appears that the women of Jerusalem often brought this
   kind of stupefying wine to the unfortunates who were being led to
   execution; when there was none presented by the latter, it was
   purchased at the expense of the public treasury. Jesus, after having
   touched the rim of the cup with his lips, refused to drink. This sad
   consolation of common sufferers did not accord with his exalted nature.
   He preferred to quit life with perfect clearness of mind, and to await
   in full consciousness the death he had willed and brought upon himself.
   He was then divested of his garments, and fastened to the cross. The
   cross was composed of two beams, tied in the form of the letter T. It
   was so little raised that the feet of the condemned almost touched the
   earth. They commenced by securing it; they next fastened the sufferer
   to it by driving nails into his hands; the feet were often nailed,
   occasionally only bound with cords. A piece of wood was fastened to the
   shaft of the cross, near the centre, and passed between the legs of the
   condemned, who rested on it. Failing this, the hands would have been
   torn, and the body would have sunk down. At other times a small
   horizontal rest was fixed at the elevation of the feet, and supported
   them.

   Jesus experienced these horrors in all their atrocity. A burning
   thirst, one of the tortures of crucifixion, consumed him. He asked to
   drink. Near him there was a cup full of the ordinary drink of the Roman
   soldiers, a mixture of vinegar and water, called posca. The soldiers
   had to carry with them their posca on all their expeditions, amongst
   which executions were reckoned. A soldier dipped a sponge in this
   mixture, put it on the end of a reed, and raised it to the lips of
   Jesus, who sucked it. Two thieves were crucified, one on each side. The
   executioners, to whom were usually left the small effects of the
   victims, drew lots for his garments, and, sitting at the foot of the
   cross, guarded him. According to one tradition, Jesus uttered this
   sentence, which was in his heart, if not upon his lips: "Father,
   forgive them, for they know not what they do."

   According to the Roman custom, a writing was affixed to the head of the
   cross, bearing in three languages -- Hebrew, Greek, and Latin -- the
   words: "THE KING OF THE JEWS." There was in this inscription something
   painful and insulting to the nation. Those who passed by and read it
   were offended. The priests complained to Pilate that he ought to have
   made use of an inscription which implied simply that Jesus had called
   himself King of the Jews. But Pilate, already tired of the whole
   affair, refused to change what had been written.

   The disciples of Jesus had fled. John, nevertheless, declares himself
   to have been present, and to have remained standing at the foot of the
   cross during the whole time. It may be affirmed, with more certainty,
   that the devoted women of Galilee, who had followed Jesus to Jerusalem
   and continued to tend him, did not abandon him. Mary Cleophas, Mary
   Magdalen, Joanna, wife of Khouza, Salome, and others, stood off at a
   certain distance, never losing sight of him. If we must believe John,
   Mary, the mother of Jesus, was also at the foot of the cross, and
   Jesus, seeing his mother and his beloved disciple together, said to the
   one, "Behold my mother!" and to the other, "Behold thy son!" But we do
   not understand how the synoptics, who name the other women, should have
   omitted her whose presence was so striking a feature. Perhaps even the
   extreme elevation of the character of Jesus does not render such
   personal emotion probable, at the moment when, solely preoccupied by
   his work, he no longer existed except for humanity.

   Apart from this small group of women, whose presence consoled him,
   Jesus had before him only the spectacle of the baseness or stupidity of
   humanity. The passers-by insulted him. He heard around him foolish
   scoffs, and his greatest cries of pain turned into odious jests: "He
   trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he
   said, I am the Son of God." "He saved others," they said again;
   "himself he cannot save. If he be the king of Israel, let him now come
   down from the cross, and we will believe him! Ah, thou that destroyest
   the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself." Some, vaguely
   acquainted with his apocalyptic ideas, thought they heard him call
   Elias, and said, "Let us see whether Elias will come to save him." It
   appears that the two crucified thieves at his side also insulted him.
   The sky was dark; and the earth, as in all the environs of Jerusalem,
   dry and gloomy. For a moment, according to certain narratives, his
   heart failed him; a cloud hid from him the face of his Father; he
   experienced an agony of despair a thousand times more acute than all
   his tortures. He saw only the ingratitude of men. Repenting perhaps in
   suffering for a vile race, he exclaimed: "My God, my God, why hast thou
   forsaken me?" But his divine instinct still sustained him. In
   proportion as the life of the body eked out, his soul became clear,
   returning by degrees to its celestial origin. The object of his mission
   returned: he saw in his death the salvation of the world; he lost sight
   of the hideous spectacle spread at his feet, and, irrevocably united to
   his Father, he began upon the gibbet the divine life which was to enter
   into the heart of humanity for all eternity.

   The peculiar atrocity of crucifixion was that one could live three or
   four days in this horrible state upon the instrument of torture. The
   bleeding from the hands soon stopped, and was not fatal. The real cause
   of death was the unnatural position of the body, which brought on a
   frightful disturbance of the circulation, terrible pains in the head
   and heart, and, finally, rigidity of the limbs. Victims with strong
   constitutions died simply of hunger. The original idea of this cruel
   punishment was not directly to kill the culprit by positive injuries,
   but to expose the slave, nailed by the hand of which he had neglected
   to make good use, and to let him rot on the wood. The delicate
   organisation of Jesus preserved him from this slow agony. Everything
   tends to show that the instantaneous rupture of a vessel in the heart
   killed him, at the end of three hours. A few moments before giving up
   the ghost his voice was still strong. Suddenly he uttered a terrible
   cry, which some heard as, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit!"
   but which others, more intent on the accomplishment of prophecies,
   render, "It is finished!" His head fell upon his breast, and he
   expired.

   Rest now in thy glory, noble founder. Thy work is completed; thy
   divinity is established. Fear no more to see the edifice of thy efforts
   crumble through a flaw. Henceforth, stripped of all frailty, thou shalt
   aid, by the exaltation of thy divine peace, the infinite fruits of thy
   acts. At the cost of a few hours of suffering, which have not even
   tinged thy great soul, thou hast purchased the most complete
   immortality. During thousands of years, the world will extol thee.
   Ensign of our contradictions, thou wilt be the standard around which
   will be fought the fiercest battles. A thousand times more living, a
   thousand times more loved, since thy death than during the days of thy
   pilgrimage here below, thou wilt become so completely the corner-stone
   of humanity that to tear thy name from this world would be to shake it
   to its foundations. Between thee and God, men will no longer
   distinguish. Complete vanquisher of death, take possession of thy
   kingdom, whither shall follow thee, by the royal road thou hast traced,
   ages of adorers.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVI.

  JESUS IN THE TOMB.

   It was about three o'clock in the afternoon, according to our custom of
   reckoning, when Jesus expired. A Jewish law forbade a corpse suspended
   on the cross to be left beyond the evening of the day of the execution.
   It is not probable that in the executions performed by the Romans this
   rule was observed. But as the next day was the Sabbath, and a Sabbath
   of peculiar solemnity, the Jews expressed to the Roman authorities
   their desire that this holy day should not be profaned by such a
   spectacle. Their request was granted; orders were given to hasten the
   death of the three condemned ones, and to remove them from the cross.
   The soldiers executed this order by applying to the two thieves a
   second punishment much more speedy than that of the cross, the
   crurifragium, breaking of the legs, the usual punishment of slaves and
   of prisoners of war. As to Jesus, they found him dead, and did not
   think it necessary to break his legs. But one of them, to remove all
   doubt as to the real death of the third victim, and to complete it, if
   any breath remained in him, pierced his side with a spear. They thought
   they saw water and blood flow, which was regarded as a sign of the
   cessation of life.

   The fourth Evangelist, who here represents the Apostle John as having
   been an eye-witness, insists strongly on this detail. It is evident, in
   fact, that doubts arose as to the reality of the death of Jesus. A few
   hours of suspension on the cross appeared to persons accustomed to see
   crucifixions as entirely insufficient to lead to such a result. They
   cited many instances of persons crucified, who, removed in time, had
   been brought to life again by energetic treatment. Origen, later on,
   thought it needful to invoke miracle in order to explain so sudden an
   end. The same astonishment is discovered in the narrative of Mark. To
   speak truly, the best guarantee that the historian possesses upon a
   point of this nature is the suspicious hatred of the enemies of Jesus.
   It is very doubtful whether the Jews were at that time preoccupied with
   the fear that Jesus might be thought to be resuscitated; but, in any
   case, they must have made sure that he was really dead. Whatever may
   have been, at certain periods, the neglect of the ancients in all that
   appertained to legal proof and the strict conduct of affairs, we cannot
   but believe that for once those interested had taken, on so important a
   point to them, some precautions in this respect.

   According to the Roman custom, the corpse of Jesus ought to have
   remained suspended in order to become the prey of birds. According to
   the Jewish law, it would, being removed in the evening, have been
   deposited in the place of infamy set apart for the burial of those who
   were executed. If Jesus' disciples had consisted only of his poor
   Galileans, timid and without influence, the second course would have
   been adopted. But we have seen that, in spite of his small success at
   Jerusalem, Jesus had gained the sympathy of some people of
   consideration who expected the kingdom of God, and who, without avowing
   themselves his disciples, had for him a strong attachment. One of
   these, Joseph, of the small town of Arimathea (Ha-ramathaim), went in
   the evening to ask the body from the procurator. Joseph was a man rich,
   honourable, and a member of the Sanhedrim. Roman law, at this period,
   commanded, moreover, the delivering up of the body of the person
   executed to those who claimed it. Pilate, who was ignorant of the
   circumstance of the crurifragium, was astonished that Jesus was so soon
   dead, and summoned the centurion who had superintended the execution to
   know how this was. Pilate granted to Joseph the object of his request.
   The body probably had already been removed from the cross. They
   delivered it to Joseph, that he might do with it as he pleased.

   Another secret friend, Nicodemus, whom we have already seen employing
   his influence more than once in favour of Jesus, came forward at this
   moment. He arrived bearing an ample provision of the materials
   necessary for embalming. Joseph and Nicodemus interred Jesus according
   to the Jewish custom--that is to say, they wrapped him in a sheet with
   myrrh and aloes. The Galilean women were present, and no doubt
   accompanied the scene with piercing cries and tears.

   It was late, and all this was done in great haste. The place had not
   yet been chosen where the body would be finally deposited. The carrying
   of the body, moreover, might have been delayed to a late hour, and have
   involved a violation of the Sabbath; the disciples still
   conscientiously observed the prescriptions of the Jewish law. A
   temporary interment was hence decided upon. There was near at hand, in
   the garden, a tomb recently dug out in the rock, which had never been
   used. It belonged, probably, to one of the believers. The funeral
   caves, when they were destined for a single body, were composed of a
   small chamber, at the bottom of which the place for the body was marked
   by a trough or couch let into the wall, and surmounted by an arch. As
   these caves were dug out of the sides of sloping rocks, they were
   entered by the floor; the door was shut by a stone very difficult to
   move. Jesus was deposited in the cave, and the stone was rolled to the
   door, as it was intended to return in order to give him a more complete
   burial. But, the next day being a solemn Sabbath, the labour was
   postponed till the day following.

   The women retired after having carefully noticed how the body was laid.
   They employed the hours of the evening which remained to them in making
   new preparations for the embalming. On the Saturday all rested.

   On the Sunday morning, the women, Mary Magdalen the first, came very
   early to the tomb. The stone was displaced from the opening, and the
   body was no longer in the place where they had put it. At the same
   time, the strangest rumours were spread in the Christian community. The
   cry, "He is risen!" spread amongst the disciples like lightning. Love
   caused it to find ready credence everywhere. What had taken place? In
   treating of the history of the apostles we shall have to examine this
   point and to investigate the origin of the legends as touching the
   resurrection. For the historian, the life of Jesus finishes with his
   last sigh. But such was the impression he had left in the hearts of his
   disciples and of a few devoted females, that during some weeks more it
   was as if he were living and consoling them. Had his body been taken
   away? Did enthusiasm, always credulous in certain circumstances, create
   afterwards the group of narratives by which it was sought to establish
   faith in the resurrection? In the absence of opposing documents this
   can never be ascertained. Let us say, however, that the strong
   imagination of Mary Magdalen played in this circumstance an important
   part. Divine power of love! Sacred moments in which the passion of one
   possessed gave to the world a resuscitated God!
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVII.

  FATE OF THE ENEMIES OF JESUS.

   According to the calculation which we have adopted, the death of Jesus
   took place in the year 33 of our era. It could not, at all events, be
   either anterior to the year 29, the preaching of John and Jesus having
   commenced in the year 28, or posterior to the year 35, as in the year
   36, and probably before the Passover, Pilate and Kaïapha both lost
   their offices. The death of Jesus, moreover, had no connexion whatever
   with these two removals. In his retirement., Pilate probably never
   dreamt for a moment of the forgotten episode which was to transmit his
   pitiful renown to the most distant posterity. As to Kaïapha, he was
   succeeded by Jonathan, his brother-in-law, son of the same Hanan who
   had played the principal part in the trial of Jesus. The Sadducean
   family of Hanan retained the pontificate a long time, and, more
   powerful than ever, continued to wage against the disciples and the
   family of Jesus the implacable war which they had commenced against the
   Founder. Christianity, which owed to him the definitive act of its
   foundation, owed to him also its first martyrs. Hanan was looked upon
   as one of the happiest men of his age. The actual person guilty of the
   death of Jesus ended his life overwhelmed with honours and
   consideration, without ever doubting for an instant that he had
   rendered a great service to the nation. His sons continued to reign
   around the temple, and, kept down with difficulty by the procurators,
   they ofttimes dispensed with the consent of the latter in order to
   gratify their haughty and violent instincts. Antipas and Herodias soon
   disappeared also from the political arena. Herod Agrippa having been
   raised to the dignity of king by Caligula, the jealous Herodias swore
   that she too would be queen. Pressed incessantly by this ambitious
   woman, who treated him as a coward, because he suffered a superior in
   his family, Antipas overcame his natural indolence, and went to Rome in
   order to solicit the title which his nephew had just obtained (the year
   39 of our era). But the affair turned out very badly. Injured in the
   eyes of the emperor by Herod Agrippa, Antipas was removed, and spent
   the rest of his life in exile at Lyons and in Spain. Herodias followed
   him in his misfortunes. A hundred years, at least, were to elapse
   before the name of their obscure subject (who had become God) should
   appear in these remote countries to inscribe upon their tombs the
   murder of John the Baptist.

   As to the wretched Judas of Kerioth, terrible legends were current
   about his death. It was maintained that he had bought a field in the
   neighbourhood of Jerusalem with the price of his perfidy. There was,
   indeed, on the south of Mount Zion, a place named Hakeldama (the field
   of blood). It was alleged that this was the property acquired by the
   traitor. According to one tradition he killed himself. According to
   another, he had a fall in his field, which caused his bowels to gush
   out. According to others, he died of a kind of dropsy, which, being
   accompanied by repulsive circumstances, was regarded as a chastisement
   of heaven. The desire of making out Judas to be another Absalom, and of
   showing in him the accomplishment of the menaces which the Psalmist
   pronounces against the perfidious friend, may have given rise to these
   legends. Perhaps, in the retirement of his field of Hakeldama, Judas
   led a quiet and obscure life; while his former friends prepared the
   conquest of the world, and spread the report of his infamy. Perhaps,
   also, the terrible hatred which was concentrated on his head drove him
   to violent acts, in which were seen the finger of heaven.

   The time of the great Christian revenge was, moreover, far distant. The
   new sect had nothing to do with the catastrophe which Judaism was soon
   to experience. The synagogue did not understand till much later to what
   it exposed itself in practising laws of intolerance. The empire was
   certainly still further from suspecting that its future destroyer had
   been born. For nearly three hundred years it pursued its path without
   suspecting that in its bosom principles were growing which were
   destined to subject humanity to a complete transformation. At once
   theocratic and democratic, the idea thrown by Jesus into the world was,
   together with the invasion of the Germans, the most active cause of the
   dissolution of the work of the Cæsars. On the one hand, the right of
   all men to participate in the kingdom of God was proclaimed. On the
   other, religion was henceforth separated in principle from the state.
   The rights of conscience, outside of political law, resulted in the
   constitution of a new power,--the "spiritual power." This power has
   more than once belied its origin. For ages the bishops have been
   princes, and the Pope has been a king. The pretended empire of souls
   has shown itself at various conjunctures as a frightful tyranny,
   employing the rack and the stake in order to maintain itself. But the
   day will come when the separation will bear its fruits, when the domain
   of things spiritual will cease to be called a "power," and will be
   denominated a "liberty." Proceeding from the bold affirmation of a man
   of the people, formed in the presence of the people, beloved and
   admired first by the people, Christianity was stamped by an original
   character which will never be effaced. It was the first triumph of
   revolution, the victory of the popular sentiment, the advent of the
   simple in heart, the inauguration of the beautiful as understood by the
   people. Jesus thus, in the aristocratic societies of antiquity, opened
   the breach through which all will pass.

   The civil power, in fact, although innocent of the death of Jesus (it
   only countersigned the sentence, and even in spite of itself), ought to
   bear a great share of the responsibility. In presiding at the scene of
   Calvary, the state gave itself a serious blow. A legend full of all
   kinds of irreverence prevailed, and became known to everybody--a legend
   in which the constituted authorities played a hateful part, in which it
   was the accused that was right, and in which the judges and the guards
   were leagued against the truth. Seditious in the highest degree, the
   history of the Passion, spread by a thousand popular images,
   represented the Roman eagles as sanctioning the most iniquitous of
   executions, soldiers executing it, and a prefect commanding it. What a
   blow for all established powers! They have never entirely recovered
   from it. How can they assume infallibility in respect to poor men, when
   they have on their conscience the great contumely of Gethsemane?
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVIII.

  ESSENTIAL CHARACTER OF THE WORK OF JESUS.

   Jesus, it is seen, never extended his action beyond the Jewish circle.
   Although his sympathy for outcasts of heterodoxy led him to admit
   Pagans into the kingdom of God, although he had more than once resided
   in a Pagan country, and although once or twice we surprise him in
   kindly relations with unbelievers, it may be said that his life was
   passed entirely in the small world in which he was born. In Greek or
   Roman countries he was never heard of; his name only appears in profane
   authors of a hundred years later, and then in an indirect manner, in
   connection with seditious movements provoked by his doctrine, or
   persecutions of which his disciples were the object. Even on the heart
   of Judaism Jesus made no very durable impression. Philo, who died about
   the year 50, knew nothing of him Josephus, born in the year 37, and
   writing at the close of the century, mentions his execution in a few
   lines, as an event of secondary importance, while in the enumeration of
   the sects of his time he omits the Christians altogether. Even the
   Mishna affords no trace of the new school. The passages in the two
   Gemaras in which the founder of Christianity is named, do not carry us
   back beyond the fourth or fifth century. The essential work of Jesus
   was to form around him a circle of disciples, whom he inspired with
   boundless affection, and in whose breasts he deposited the germ of his
   doctrine. To have made himself beloved, "to the extent that after his
   death they ceased not to love him," was the great work of Jesus, and
   that which most struck his contemporaries. His doctrine was a thing so
   little dogmatic that he neither thought of writing it nor of having it
   written. Men did not become his disciples by believing this or that,
   but by attaching themselves to his person and by loving him. A few
   sentences easily revoked from the memory, and especially his type of
   character, and the impression it had left, were what remained of him.
   Jesus was not a founder of dogmas, or a deviser of symbols; he
   introduced into the world a new spirit. The least Christianised of men
   were, on the one hand, the doctors of the Greek Church, who, from the
   fourth century, began to entangle Christianity in a labyrinth of
   puerile metaphysical discussions, and, on the other, the scholastics of
   the Latin Middle Ages, who wished to draw from the Gospel the thousands
   of articles of a colossal system. To adhere to Jesus with the kingdom
   of God in prospect was what at first entitled one to be called a
   Christian.

   It will now be understood why, by an exceptional destiny, pure
   Christianity still presents, after eighteen centuries, the character of
   a universal and eternal religion. In truth it is because the religion
   of Jesus is, in some respects, the final religion. The product of a
   perfectly spontaneous movement of souls, disengaged at its birth from
   all dogmatic restraints, having struggled three hundred years for
   liberty of conscience, Christianity, in spite of the catastrophes which
   have followed it, reaps still the fruits of its excellent origin. To
   renew itself it has only to return to the Gospel. The kingdom of God,
   such as we conceive it, differs materially from the supernatural
   apparition that early Christians hoped to see appear in the clouds. But
   the sentiment which Jesus introduced into the world is really ours. His
   perfect idealism is the highest rule of a pure and virtuous life. He
   created a heaven of pure souls, where are to be found what we seek in
   vain for on earth,--the perfect nobility of the children of God,
   absolute holiness, total abstraction from the pollutions of the world;
   in fine, liberty, which society eschews as an impossibility, and which
   can only find full scope in the domain of mind. The great Master of
   those who take refuge in this ideal kingdom of God is still Jesus. He
   was the first to proclaim the sovereignty of the mind; the first to
   say, at least through his acts, "My kingdom is not of this world." The
   foundation of true religion is verily his work. Since him, it only
   remains to fructify and develop it.

   "Christianity" has thus become almost synonymous with "religion." All
   that one may attempt, outside this grand and noble Christian tradition,
   is futile. Jesus founded the religion of humanity, just as Socrates
   founded philosophy, and Aristotle science. There was philosophy before
   Socrates, and science before Aristotle. But since the times of Socrates
   and Aristotle philosophy and science have made immense progress; yet it
   has all been reared upon the foundations they laid down. Similarly,
   before Jesus religion had passed through many revolutions; since Jesus
   it has achieved great conquests; yet we have not advanced, and never
   will improve upon the essential principle Jesus created; he fixed for
   ever the idea of pure worship. The religion of Jesus in this sense is
   not limited. The Church has had its epochs and its phases; it has
   enveloped itself in creeds which have lasted and can only last for a
   time: Jesus, on the other hand, has founded absolute religion, which
   excludes nothing, determines nothing unless it be sentiment. His creeds
   are not fixed dogmas, but ideas susceptible of indefinite
   interpretations. We should seek in vain for a theological proposition
   in the Gospel. All professions of faith are travesties of the idea of
   Jesus, just as the scholasticism of the Middle Ages, in proclaiming
   Aristotle the only master of a completed science, perverted the
   teachings of Aristotle. Aristotle, if he had taken part in the debates
   of the schools, would have repudiated this narrow doctrine; he would
   have allied himself to the party of progressive science as against the
   routine which shielded itself under his authority; he would have
   applauded his opponents. Similarly, if Jesus were to return among us,
   he would recognise as disciples, not those who pretend to embody his
   teachings in a few catechismal phrases, but those who labour as he
   laboured. The eternal glory in all great things is to lay the first
   stone. It may be that in modern "Physics" and "Meteorology" we may not
   discover a word of the treatises of Aristotle which bear these titles;
   but Aristotle remains no less the founder of natural science. Whatever
   may be the transformations of dogma, Jesus will ever be the creator of
   the pure spirit of religion; the Sermon on the Mount will never be
   surpassed. No matter what revolution takes place, nothing will prevent
   us attaching ourselves in religion to the grand intellectual and moral
   line at the head of which is enshrined the name of Jesus. In this sense
   we are Christians, even when we separate ourselves on almost all points
   from the Christian tradition which has preceded us.

   And this great foundation was indeed the personal work of Jesus. To
   make himself adored to this degree, he must have been adorable. Love is
   only kindled by an object worthy of it, and we should know nothing of
   Jesus if it were not for the passion he inspired in those around him,
   which obliges us still to affirm that he was great and pure. The faith,
   the enthusiasm, the constancy of the first Christian generation is only
   explicable on the supposition that at its inception there existed a man
   of transcendent greatness. In view of the marvellous creations of the
   ages of faith two equally fatal impressions to good historical
   criticism spring up in the mind. In one view we are led to regard these
   creations as too impersonal; we impute to collective action that which
   has often been the work of a single powerful will. In another, we
   refuse to see men like ourselves in the authors of these extraordinary
   movements which have decided the fate of humanity. Let us take a
   broader view of the powers which nature conceals in her bosom. Our
   civilisations, governed by minute restrictions, cannot give us any idea
   of the power of man at periods in which the originality of each one had
   a far freer development. Let us imagine a recluse, dwelling in the
   mountains near our capital, coming out from time to time in order to
   present himself at the palaces of sovereigns, brushing the sentinels
   aside, and, with an imperious tone, announcing to kings the approach of
   revolutions of which he had been the promoter. The bare idea provokes a
   smile. Yet such was Elisha; Elisha the Tishbite, in our days, would not
   be able to pass the gate of the Tuileries. The preaching of Jesus, and
   his free activity in Galilee, do not deviate less completely from the
   social conditions to which we are accustomed. Free from our polished
   conventionalities, exempt from the uniform education which refines us,
   but which so greatly dwarfs our individuality, these mighty souls
   carried a surprising energy into action. They appear to us like the
   giants of a heroic age, who could not have been real. This is a
   profound error! These men were our brothers; they were of our stature,
   felt and thought as we do. But the breath of God was free in them; with
   us, it is restrained by the iron bonds of a mean society, and condemned
   to an irremediable mediocrity.

   Let us place, then, at the highest summit of human greatness the person
   of Jesus. Let us not be led astray by sneers in the presence of a
   legend which keeps us always in a superhuman world. The life of Francis
   d'Assisi is, too, only a tissue of miracles. Has any one ever doubted,
   though, of his existence, and of the part he played? Let us say no more
   that the glory of founding Christianity must be attributed to the
   multitude of the first Christians, and not to him whom legend has
   deified. The inequality of men is much more marked in the East than
   with us. It is no rarity to see spring up there, in the midst of a
   general atmosphere of wickedness, characters whose greatness astonishes
   us. So far from Jesus having been made by his disciples, he appeared in
   everything superior to them. The latter, St. Paul and St. John
   excepted, were men without invention or genius. St. Paul himself bears
   no comparison with Jesus, and as to St. John, he has done little more
   in his Apocalypse than to breathe the poetry of Jesus. Hence the
   immense superiority of the Gospels among the writings of the New
   Testament. Hence the painful lowering of sentiment we experience in
   passing from the history of Jesus to that of the apostles. The
   evangelists themselves, who have transmitted to us the image of Jesus,
   are so much beneath him of whom they speak that they constantly
   disfigure him, not being able to attain to his height. Their writings
   are full of errors and contradictions. We feel in each line a discourse
   of divine beauty, told by narrators who do not understand it, and who
   substitute their own ideas for those they have only half grasped. On
   the whole, the character of Jesus, far from having been embellished by
   his biographers, has been marred by them. Criticism, in order to find
   what he was, needs to discard a series of errors, which prove the
   mediocre minds of the disciples. The latter painted him as they
   understood him, and often, in thinking to exalt him, they have debased
   him.

   I know that our modern ideas have been offended more than once in this
   legend, conceived by another race, under another sky, and in the midst
   of other social wants. There are virtues which, in some respects, are
   more conformable to our taste. The upright and gentle Marcus Aurelius,
   the humble and tender Spinoza, not having believed in miracles, were
   exempt from some errors that Jesus shared. Spinoza, in his profound
   obscurity, had an advantage which Jesus did not seek. By our extreme
   delicacy in the use of means of conviction, by our absolute sincerity
   and our disinterested love of the pure idea, we have founded--all we,
   who have devoted our lives to science--a new ideal of morality. But the
   judgment of general history ought not to be restricted to
   considerations of personal merit. Marcus Aurelius and his noble masters
   have left no durable impress on the world. Marcus Aurelius left behind
   him delightful books, an execrable son, and a decaying nation. Jesus
   remains an inexhaustible principle of moral regeneration for humanity.
   Philosophy does not suffice for the multitude. They must have sanctity.
   An Apollonius of Tyana with his miraculous legend, is therefore more
   successful than a Socrates with his cold reason. "Socrates," it was
   said, "leaves men on the earth, Apollonius transports them to heaven;
   Socrates is but a sage, Apollonius is a god." Religion, so far, has not
   existed without a share of asceticism, of piety, and of the marvellous.
   When it was wished, after the Antonines, to make a religion of
   philosophy, it was requisite to transform the philosophers into saints,
   to write the "Edifying Life" of Pythagoras and of Plotinus, to
   attribute to them a legend, virtues of abstinence, contemplation and
   supernatural powers, without which neither credence nor authority were
   found in that age.

   Preserve us, then, from mutilating history in order to satisfy our
   petty susceptibilities! Which of us, pigmies as we are, could do what
   the extravagant Francis d'Assisi, or the hysterical Saint Theresa, has
   done? Let medicine have names to express these grand errors of human
   nature; let it maintain that genius is a disease of the brain; let it
   see in a certain delicacy of morality the commencement of consumption;
   let it class enthusiasm and love amongst the nervous accidents--it
   matters little. The terms healthy and diseased are entirely relative.
   Who would not prefer to be diseased like Pascal, rather than healthy
   like the common herd? The narrow ideas which are spread in our times
   respecting madness, mislead our historical judgments in the most
   serious manner in questions of this kind. A state in which a man says
   things of which he is not conscious, in which thought is produced
   without the summons and control of the will, exposes him to being
   confined as a lunatic. Formerly this was called prophecy and
   inspiration. The most beautiful things in the world are done in a state
   of fever; every great creation involves a breach of equilibrium;
   child-birth is, by a law of nature, a violent process.

   We acknowledge, indeed, that Christianity is too complex to have been
   the work of a single man. In one sense, entire humanity has co-operated
   therein. There is no one so shut in as not to receive some influence
   from without. History is full of singular synchronisms, which cause,
   without any communication with each other, very remote portions of the
   human species to arrive at the same time at almost identical ideas and
   imaginations. In the thirteenth century, the Latins, the Greeks, the
   Syrians, the Jews, and the Mussulmans adopted scholasticism, and very
   nearly the same scholasticism prevailed from York to Samarcand; in the
   fourteenth century every one in Italy, Persia, and India yielded to the
   taste for mystical allegory; in the sixteenth, art was developed in a
   very similar manner in Italy, and at the court of the Great Moguls,
   without St. Thomas, Barhebræus, the Rabbis of Narbonne, or the
   Motécallémin of Bagdad having known each other, without Dante and
   Petrarch having seen any sofi, without any pupil of the schools of
   Perouse or of Florence having been at Delhi. We should say there are
   great moral influences running through the world like epidemics,
   without distinction of frontier and of race. The interchange of ideas
   in the human species does not take place only by books or by direct
   instruction. Jesus was ignorant of the very name of Buddha, of
   Zoroaster, and of Plato; he had read no Greek book, no Buddhist Soutra,
   nevertheless there was in him more than one element, which, without his
   suspecting it, came from Buddhism, Parseeism, or from the Greek wisdom.
   All this was done through secret channels and by that kind of sympathy
   which exists among the various portions of humanity. The great man, on
   the one hand, receives everything from his age; on the other, he
   governs his age. To show that the religion founded by Jesus was the
   natural consequence of that which had preceded does not diminish its
   excellence, but only proves that it had a reason for its existence,
   that it was legitimate--that is to say, conformable to the instinct and
   wants of the heart in a given age.

   Is it more just to say that Jesus was wholly indebted to Judaism, and
   that his greatness is only that of the Jewish people? No one is more
   disposed than myself to place high this unrivalled people, whose
   particular heritage seems to have been to contain amongst them the
   extremes of good and evil. Jesus doubtless sprang from Judaism; but he
   proceeded from it as Socrates did from the schools of the Sophists, as
   Luther proceeded from the Middle Ages, as Lamennais from Catholicism,
   as Rousseau from the eighteenth century. A man belongs to his age and
   race even when he reacts against his age and race. Far from continuing
   Judaism, Jesus represents the rupture with the Jewish spirit. The
   supposition that his idea in this respect could lead to equivocation is
   disproved by the general direction of Christianity after him. The
   general tendency of Christianity has been to separate itself more and
   more from Judaism. Its perfection depends on its returning to Jesus,
   but certainly not in returning to Judaism. The great originality of the
   founder remains then unchallenged; his glory does not admit any
   legitimate sharer.

   Doubtless, circumstances much aided the success of this marvellous
   revolution; but circumstances only second endeavours as to what is just
   and true. Each branch of the development of humanity, art, poetry,
   religion, encounters, in crossing the ages, a privileged epoch, in
   which it attains perfection by a sort of spontaneous instinct, and
   without effort. No labour of reflection would succeed in producing
   afterwards the masterpieces which nature creates at those moments by
   inspired geniuses. What the golden age of Greece was for art and
   profane literature, the age of Jesus was for religion. Jewish society
   exhibited the most extraordinary moral and intellectual state which the
   human species has ever passed through. It was truly one of those divine
   hours in which the sublime is produced by combinations of a thousand
   hidden forces, in which great souls find a flood of admiration and
   sympathy to sustain them. The world, delivered from the very narrow
   tyranny of small municipal republics, enjoyed great liberty. Roman
   despotism did not make itself felt in a disastrous manner until much
   later, and it was, moreover, always less oppressive in those distant
   provinces than in the centre of the empire. Our petty preventive
   interferences (far more destructive than death to spiritual things) did
   not exist. Jesus, during three years, could lead a life which, in our
   societies, would have brought him twenty times before the magistrates.
   Our laws upon the illegal exercise of medicine would alone have
   sufficed to cut short his career. The unbelieving dynasty of the
   Herods, on the other hand, occupied itself little with religious
   movements; under the Asmoneans, Jesus would probably have been arrested
   at his first step. An innovator, in such a state of society, only
   risked death, and death is a gain to those who labour for the future.
   Imagine Jesus reduced to bear the burden of his divinity until his
   sixtieth or seventieth year, losing his celestial fire, wearing out
   little by little under the burden of an unparalleled mission!
   Everything favours those who have a special destiny; they become
   glorious by a sort of invincible impulse and command of fate.

   This sublime person, who each day still presides over the destiny of
   the world, may be called divine, not in the sense that Jesus has
   absorbed all the divine, but in the sense that Jesus is the person who
   has impelled his fellow-men to make the greatest step towards the
   divine. Humanity in its totality presents an assemblage of low beings,
   selfish, superior to the animal only in the single particular that its
   selfishness is more reflective. Still, from the midst of this uniform
   depravity, pillars rise towards the sky, and testify to a nobler
   destiny. Jesus is the highest of these pillars that show to man whence
   he comes, and whither he ought to tend. In him was concentrated all
   that is good and elevated in our nature. He was not without sin; he had
   to conquer the same passions that we have to combat; no angel of God
   comforted him, except it was his good conscience; no Satan tempted him,
   more than each one bears in his heart. In the same way that many of his
   great qualities are lost to us, in consequence of the lack of
   intelligence of his disciples, it is also probable that many of his
   faults have been concealed. But never has any one made the interests of
   humanity predominate to the same extent in his life over the
   littlenesses of self-love. Unreservedly devoted to his idea, he
   subordinated everything to it to such a degree that, towards the end of
   his life, the universe existed no longer for him. It was by this
   transport of heroic will that he conquered heaven. There never was a
   man--Sakya Mouni alone excepted--who so completely trampled under foot
   family, the pleasures of this world, and all temporal care. He lived
   only for his Father and the divine mission with which he believed
   himself charged.

   As to us, eternal children, condemned to impotence, who labour without
   reaping, and who will never witness the fruit of that which we have
   sown, let us bow before these demi-gods. They did that which we cannot
   do--create, affirm, act. Will great originality be borne again, or will
   the world henceforth content itself by following the paths opened by
   the bold original minds of antiquity? We do not know. In any case,
   Jesus will pot be surpassed. His worship will constantly renew itself,
   his history will provoke endless pious tears, his sufferings will
   subdue the stoutest hearts; all ages will proclaim that, among the sons
   of men, no one has been born who is greater than Jesus.

  END OF THE LIFE OF JESUS.
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX.

  OF THE USE IT IS PROPER TO MAKE OF THE FOURTH GOSPEL IN WRITING THE LIFE OF
  JESUS.

   The greatest difficulty which presents itself to the historian of Jesus
   is the value of the sources upon which such a history rests. On the one
   hand, what is the value of the Gospels called synoptic? On the other,
   what use is to be made of the fourth Gospel in writing the life of
   Jesus? On the first point all those who occupy themselves with these
   studies, according to the critical method, are thoroughly in accord.
   The synoptics represent the tradition, often legendary, of the two or
   three first Christian generations in regard to the person of Jesus.
   This permits of much uncertainty in the application, and necessitates
   the continual employment in the narrative of the formulas: "Some have
   said this," "Others have related that," &c. But that suffices to inform
   us as to the general character of the founder, the charm and the
   principal features of his teaching, and even as regards the most
   important circumstances of his life. The writers of the life of Jesus,
   who confine themselves to the employment of the synoptics, do not
   differ more from one another than the narrators of the life of Mahomet
   who have made use of the hadith. The biographers of the Arab prophet
   may take different views of the value of such and such a document. But,
   on the whole, they are all agreed as to the value of the hadith. They
   all, according to their manner, class them along with those legendary
   and traditional documents, but not as precise documents of history
   properly speaking.

   Upon the second point, I desire to say, in regard to the employment it
   is fitting to make of the fourth Gospel, that there is disagreement. I
   have, with many reserves and precautions, made use of this document. In
   the opinion of excellent judges, I ought not to have made any use of
   it, with the exception of chapters xvii. and xix., which contain the
   narrative of the Passion. Almost all the enlightened criticisms which I
   have received apropos of my work are in accord on that point. I am not
   surprised at this: for I could not be ignorant of the somewhat contrary
   opinion as to the historic value of the fourth Gospel which obtains in
   the liberal schools of theology. Objections coming from men so eminent
   rendered it imperative that I should submit my opinion to the test of a
   new examination. Putting to one side the question as to knowing who
   wrote the fourth Gospel, I set myself to follow that Gospel through,
   paragraph by paragraph, as if it had come to me as a manuscript newly
   discovered, without the name of the author. Let us divest ourselves of
   every preconceived idea, and let us endeavour to render an account of
   the impressions produced on us by that singular writing.

   § 1. The opening verses (i. 1-14) raise within us at once the gravest
   suspicions. This introduction transports us into the very heart of
   apostolic theology, presents no resemblance to the synoptics, puts
   forth ideas assuredly very different from those of Jesus and of his
   true disciples. At the outset this prologue warns as that the work in
   question cannot be a simple history, transparent and impersonal like
   the narrative of Mark, for example; that the author has a theology;
   that he wishes to prove a thesis, to wit, that Jesus is the divine
   logos. We are hence admonished to take great precautions. Is it
   necessary, nevertheless, in regard to this first page, to reject the
   book in its entirety, and to perceive an imposture in the 14th verse,
   in which the author declares he has been a witness of the events which
   compose the life of Jesus?

   That would be, in my opinion, a premature conclusion. A work full of
   theological ideas may embrace valuable historical information. Were not
   the synoptics written with the constant preoccupation of demonstrating
   that Jesus realised all the Messianic prophecies? Because of this, are
   we to give up searching in their accounts for a historical basis? The
   theory of the logos, which is so strongly developed in our Gospel, is
   not a reason for rejecting it at the middle or close of the second
   century. The belief that Jesus was the logos of the Alexandrian
   theology must have been early put forward, and that in a most logical
   manner. Happily, the founder of Christianity had no idea of that kind.
   But, from the year 68, it was already called "The Word of God."
   Apollos, who was from Alexandria, and who appears to have resembled
   Philo, passes already (about the year 57) for a new preacher, holding
   peculiar doctrines. These ideas are in perfect accord with the state of
   mind in which the Christian community found itself, when people
   despaired of seeing Jesus appear soon in the clouds as the Son of Man.
   A change of the same kind appears to have been wrought in the opinions
   of St. Paul. We knew the difference there is between the first epistles
   of that Apostle and the last. The hope, for example, of the immediate
   coming of Christ, which pervades the two epistles to the Thessalonians,
   disappears towards the end of the life of St. Paul. The Apostle then
   turns his attention towards another order of invention. The doctrine of
   the epistle to the Colossians has a great resemblance to that of the
   fourth Gospel, Jesus being represented in the said epistle as the image
   of the in, visible God, the first-born of every creature, by whom
   every-thing has been created, who was before all things, and through
   whom everything subsists, in whom the plenitude of the Divinity
   corporeally dwells. Is there not here the "Word" of Philo? I know there
   are those who reject the authenticity of the epistle to the Colossians,
   but for reasons, in my opinion, altogether insufficient. These changes
   of theories, or rather of style, amongst the men of those times, men
   who were filled with ardent passion, are, within certain limits,
   matters quite admissible. Why should not the crisis which was produced
   in the soul of St. Paul not be produced in other apostles, men in the
   last years of the first century? When the "kingdom of God," as it is
   described in the synoptics and the apocalypse, had become a chimera,
   people took refuge in metaphysics. The theory of the logos was the
   consequence of the disappointment of the first Christian generation.
   People carried into the ideal that which they hoped to see realised in
   the order of things. Each delay that was put on the coming of Jesus was
   one step more towards his deification; and this is so true that it was
   exactly at the hour when the last Millenarian dream vanished that the
   divinity of Jesus was proclaimed in an absolute manner.

   § 2. Let us return to our subject. According to consecrated usage the
   evangelist commences his narrative with the mission of John the
   Baptist. That which he says of the relations of John with Jesus is
   similar in many points to the tradition of the synoptics; in other
   points the divergence is considerable. The theory, soon held so dear by
   all the Christians, according to which John proclaimed the divine
   mission of Jesus, is greatly exaggerated by our author. Things are
   better managed in the synoptics, where John entertains to the end
   doubts as to the character of Jesus, and sends to him messengers to
   question him. The narrative of the fourth Gospel implies a perfectly
   prearranged plan, and confirms us in the idea that we have divined the
   prologue, to wit, that the author sought rather to prove than to
   record. We shall discover presently, however, that the author, though
   differing much from the synoptics, possesses many traditions in common
   with them. He cites the same prophecies; like them he believes in a
   dove which should descend upon the head of Jesus immediately after
   baptism. But his narrative is less ingenuous, more advanced, more ripe,
   if I may so speak. One single detail staggers me; this is v. 28, which
   fixes the place with precision. Admit that the designation Bethania is
   inexact (Bethania was not known along those coasts, and the Greek
   interpreters have arbitrarily substituted Bethabara for it), what does
   it matter? A theologian having nothing Jewish about him, nor possessing
   any recollections direct or indirect of Palestine, a pure theorist like
   him who composed the prologue, would not have put in that detail. What
   did this topographical detail matter to a sectary of Asia Minor or of
   Alexandria? If the author inserted it, it was because he had a
   substantial reason for so doing, either in the documents he possessed
   or in some recollections. Already, then, we are led to think that our
   theologian is indeed able to inform us of things in regard to the life
   of Jesus of which the synoptics knew nothing. Nothing, certainly,
   proves ocular testimony. But it must at least be supposed that the
   author had other sources of information from those which we have, and
   that to us it may well have the value of an original.

   § 3. Beginning with v. 35 we read about a series of conversions of
   apostles, associated together in a manner not very natural, and which
   do not correspond with the accounts of the synoptics. Can it he
   maintained that the accounts of these last have here a historical
   superiority? No. The conversions of the apostles recorded in the
   synoptics are all cast in the same mould; one perceives that a
   legendary and idyllic type is being indistinctly applied to all
   narratives of this species. The short narratives of the fourth Gospel
   have more character and angles less polished. They much resemble badly
   edited recollections of one of the apostles. I know that the narratives
   of simple-minded people and of children always enter much into details.
   I do not insist upon the minutiæ of v. 39. But wherefore that idea of
   connecting the first conversion of disciples with the sojourn of Jesus
   near John the Baptist? Whence come these so precise particulars about
   Philip, about the father of Andrew and Peter, and, above all, about
   Nathaniel? This latter personage belongs to our Gospel. I cannot hold
   the latter as inventions which were concocted a hundred years after
   Jesus and far away from Palestine, together with the so precise details
   which are reported of him. If he is a symbolical personage, why are we
   troubled with being told that he was of Cana of Galilee, a city that
   our evangelist appeared to be particularly well acquainted with? Why
   should anyone have invented all this? There is no dogmatic intention
   implied, if it be not in v. 51, which is put in the mouth of Jesus.
   Above all, there is no symbolical intention. I believe in intentions of
   this kind when they are indicated, and, if 1 might say so, underlined
   by the author. I do not believe in them when the mystic allusion is not
   self-indicative. The allegorical exegete does not speak in half
   sentences; he presents his argument and insists upon it with
   complacency. I say as much also of the sacramental numbers. The
   adversaries of the fourth Gospel have remarked that the miracles it
   records are seven in number. If the author himself had selected this
   number it would be a serious matter, and would prove his motives. The
   author did not count them; he must only have taken them up at random.

   The discussion on this point is somewhat favourable to our text. Verses
   35 to 51 have a more historic turn than the corresponding passages in
   the synoptics. It seems that the fourth evangelist was better
   acquainted than the other narrators of the life of Jesus with that
   which concerned the vocation of the apostle; I admit that it was the
   school of John the Baptist from which Jesus attached to himself the
   first disciples, whose names remain celebrated; I opine that the
   principal apostles were disciples of John the Baptist before they
   became disciples of Jesus, and this affirms the importance which the
   whole of the first Christian generation accorded to John the Baptist.
   If this importance, as is argued by the learned Hollandic school, was
   in part factitious, and conceived almost wholly to sustain the rôle of
   Jesus as respects an incontestable authority, why was John the Baptist
   chosen, a man who was not held in great repute except by the Christian
   family? The truth, in my opinion, is, that John the Baptist was not
   only for the disciples of Jesus a simple guarantee, but was also for
   them a first master, with whom they indissolubly connected the
   recollection of the very beginnings of the mission of Jesus. A fact of
   greater importance is that the baptism conserved by Christianity as the
   necessary introduction to a new life is a mark of the origin which
   still attests, in a visible fashion, that Christianity was at first a
   detached branch of the school of John the Baptist.

   The fourth Gospel should then be limited to the first chapter, which
   must be defined as "a fragment made up of traditions or of
   recollections hastily written, and occupied with a theology far removed
   from the primitive Christian spirit; a chapter of legendary biography,
   in which the author permits the introduction of traditional data, which
   he often transforms, but invents nothing." If the question is one of à
   priori biography, it is indeed rather in the synoptics that I find a
   biography of that sort. It is the synoptics which make Jesus to be born
   at Bethlehem, which make him go into Egypt, which lead the Magi to him,
   &c., for the necessities of the cause. It is Luke who creates or admits
   personages who perhaps never existed. The Messianic prophets, in
   particular, prepossessed our author less than the synoptics, and
   occasioned in him fewer fabulous recitals. In other terms, we already
   reach, in that which concerns the fourth Gospel, the distinction
   between the narrative basis and the doctrinal basis. In the first,
   Jesus appears to us as a powerful being, superior in certain points to
   the Jesus of the synoptics; but the second is a great distance from the
   actual discourses of Jesus, such as the synoptics, particularly
   Matthew, have preserved to us.

   A circumstance, moreover, strikes us from this moment. The author
   wishes it to be accepted that the two first disciples of Jesus were
   Andrew and another disciple. Andrew very soon attracts Peter, his
   brother, who thus finds himself put a little into the shade. The second
   disciple is not named. But, in comparing this passage with others we
   encounter later on, we are induced to think that the other unnamed
   disciple is none other than the author of the Gospel, or at least one
   who wishes to pass himself off for the author. In the last chapters of
   the book, in fact, we shall see the author speaking with a certain
   mystery of himself, and, what is most remarkable, affecting always to
   place himself before Peter, even when recognising the hierarchical
   superiority of the latter. Let us observe also that in the synoptics
   the vocation of John is closely associated with that of Peter; but in
   the Acts John is continually represented as the companion of Peter. A
   double difficulty is hence presented to us. For, if the unnamed
   disciple is really John, the son of Zebedee, one is led to think that
   John, the son of Zebedee, is the author of our Gospel. To suppose that
   an impostor, in wishing to make believe that the author is John, had
   had the intention of not naming John and of designating him in an
   enigmatical fashion, would be to impute to him a ridiculous artifice.
   On the other hand, are we to understand that, if the real author of our
   Gospel commenced by being a disciple of John the Baptist, he speaks of
   the latter in a fashion so little historical, that the synoptic Gospels
   on this point are superior to his narrative?

   § 4. Paragraph ii. 1-12 is a miraculous recital like so many others to
   be found in the synoptics. There is in the structure of the narrative a
   little more of mise-en-scène, something less ingenuous; nevertheless,
   there is nothing in the groundwork which departs from the general
   colouring of the tradition. The synoptics do not speak of this miracle;
   but it is quite natural that, in the rich marvellous legend which
   circulated, some were acquainted with one detail, others with another.
   The allegorical explanation, based principally upon verse 10, and
   according to which water and wine were to be the old and the new
   alliance, imputes to the author, in my opinion, a thought which he did
   not possess. Verse 11 proves that, in the eyes of the latter, the whole
   narrative has but one aim--to manifest the power of Jesus. The mention
   of the little town of Cana, and of the sojourn the mother of Jesus made
   there, is not forgotten. If the miracle of the water being changed into
   wine had been invented by the author of the fourth Gospel, as is
   supposed by the adversaries of the historic value of the said Gospel,
   why introduce this detail? Verses 11 and 12 furnish a connected train
   of facts. What importance would such topographical circumstances have
   to Hellenist Christians of the second century? The apocryphal Gospels
   do not proceed in this manner. They are vague, destitute of local
   colouring, constructed by people who had no regard for Palestine. Let
   us add, moreover, that our evangelist always speaks of Cana of Galilee,
   a wholly obscure small town. How was it possible to create with an
   after-stroke a celebrity for that small borough, of which assuredly the
   semignostic Christians of Asia Minor had but faint recollections?

   § 5. That which follows verse 13 is of high interest, and constitutes a
   decisive triumph for our Gospel. According to the synoptics, Jesus,
   from the commencement of his public life, only made one visit to
   Jerusalem. The sojourn of Jesus in that city lasted only a few days, at
   the end of which he was put to death. That admits of enormous
   difficulties which I do not repeat here, having touched on them in the
   "Life of Jesus." A few weeks (if we suppose that the intention of the
   synoptics goes the length of attributing this stay to the interval
   which supervened between his triumphal entry and his death) would not
   have sufficed for all that Jesus ought to do at Jerusalem. Many
   circumstances placed by the synoptics in Galilee, above all the
   wranglings with the Pharisees, have but little meaning outside of
   Jerusalem. All the events which follow the death of Jesus go to prove
   that his sect had taken deep root at Jerusalem. If the things took
   place there which Matthew and Mark would have us believe did,
   Christianity was in an especial manner developed in Galilee. Mere
   sojourners for a few days would not have chosen Jerusalem for their
   capital. St. Paul entertains not one souvenir of Galilee: for him the
   new religion was born at Jerusalem. The fourth Gospel, which admits
   that Jesus made many journeys to and long sojourns in the capital,
   appears then much nearer the truth. Luke, in this instance, seems to be
   in secret harmony with our author, or rather gravitates between the two
   opposing systems. This is very important, for we shall reveal soon
   other circumstances where Luke sails along with the author of the
   fourth Gospel, and seems to have had a knowledge of the same
   traditions.

   But there is yet something more striking. The first circumstance of the
   sojourns of Jesus at Jerusalem reported by our evangelist is likewise
   reported by the synoptics, and placed by them almost on the eve of the
   death of Jesus; this is the driving of the merchants out of the temple.
   Is it to a Galilean that, on the morrow of his arrival at Jerusalem, we
   can attribute with any show of likelihood such an act, which, however,
   might have had some reality, since it is reported in each of the four
   texts ? In the chronological arrangement of the narrative, the
   advantage belongs entirely to our author. It is evident that the
   synoptics accumulated during the last days circumstances which were
   furnished to them by tradition, and that they did not know where to
   place them.

   We must now touch upon a question which it is time to clear up. We have
   already found that our evangelist possessed many traditions in common
   with the synoptics (the part played by John the Baptist, the dove at
   the baptism, the etymology of the name Cephas, the names of at least
   three of the apostles, the merchants who were driven from the temple).
   Does our evangelist imbibe this from the synoptics? No: for he presents
   these same circumstances with two important differences. Whence, then,
   did he get these narratives in common? Evidently from tradition, or
   from recollections. But what does this import, except that the author
   has sketched for us an original version of the life of Jesus, that this
   life ought to be put at the very outset upon the same footing as the
   other biographies of Jesus, but afterwards to be decided in detail by
   motives of preference? An inventor à priori of a life of Jesus would
   have nothing in common with the synoptics, or would paraphrase them as
   is done in the apocrypha. The symbolical and dogmatic intention would
   have been in that case much more sensible. In the whole of his writings
   there would then have been reason and intention. There would not have
   been that sort of indifferent and disinterested circumstances which
   abound in our narrative. There is nothing which resembles the biography
   of an æon; it is not thus that the Hindoo writes his lives of Krishna,
   or recounts the incarnations of Vishnu. An example of this species of
   composition, in the first centuries of our era, is the Pista Sophia
   attributed to Valentinus. In the latter there is nothing real: all is
   truly symbolical and ideal. The same remark applies to "The Gospel of
   Nicodemus," which is an artificial composition, founded entirely on
   metaphors. In our text, which possesses similar amplification, there is
   a lacuna, and, if it were imperative to find analogous amplifications
   amongst the canonical Gospels, it would be in the synoptics rather than
   in our Gospel that we should have to seek for them.

   § 6. There follows another incident, the relation of which to the
   synoptics is no less remarkable. The latter, or at least Matthew and
   Mark, report, apropos of the proceedings of Jesus and of his agony on
   Golgotha, a phrase that Jesus would have given expression to, and which
   would have been one of the principal causes of his condemnation:
   "Destroy this temple and I will build it up again in three days." The
   synoptics do not say that Jesus had uttered these words: on the
   contrary, they treat that as false testimony. Our evangelist records
   that Jesus did in fact give utterance to this incriminating expression.
   Did he take this sentence from the synoptics? It is hardly probable:
   for he gives a different version of it, and even an allegorical
   explanation of which the synoptics are not cognisant. It seems, then,
   that here he adhered to an original tradition, one more original even
   than that of the synoptics, since the latter do not cite directly the
   expression of Jesus, and only report an echo of it. True it is that, in
   placing this sentence two years before the death of Jesus, the compiler
   of the fourth Gospel yields to an idea which does not seem to be the
   most happy.

   Observe the Jewish historical characteristic in v. 20; it is a good
   enough counterfeit and accords sufficiently well with Josephus.

   § 7. The verses ii. 23-25 are rather unfavourable to our text; they are
   sluggish, cold and tiresome; they smell of the apologist and the
   polemic. They prove a premeditated compilation, and are much posterior
   to that of the synoptics.

   § 8. Let us look now at the episode of Nicodemus (iii. 1-21). I
   naturally sacrifice the whole of the conversation of Jesus with that
   Pharisee. It is a fragment of apostolic, not evangelic, theology. Such
   a conversation could only have been reported by Jesus or Nicodemus.
   Both hypotheses are equally improbable. Moreover, on leaving v. 12 the
   author forgets the personage he has introduced into the scene, and
   launches into a general explanation which is addressed exclusively to
   the Jews. It is here that we detect one of the essential
   characteristics of our author: his liking for theological
   conversations, his tendency to attach to such conversations, incidents
   more or less historic. Fragments of this sort teach us nothing more
   regarding the doctrine of Jesus than the dialogues of Plato do
   regarding the thoughts of Socrates. They are imaginary, not traditional
   compositions. We can only compare them with the harangues that the
   ancient historians make no scruple of imputing to their heroes. These
   discourses are far removed both from the style and the ideas of Jesus;
   on the contrary, they present a similitude corresponding exactly with
   the theology of the prologue (i. 1-14), where the author speaks in his
   own name. Is the circumstance to which the author attaches this
   conversation historical, or is it his own invention? It is difficult to
   say. I incline, however, to the former; for the fact is reported
   further on (xix. 39), and Nicodemus is mentioned elsewhere (vii. 50 and
   following). I am constrained to believe that Jesus in reality had
   relations with a person of consideration of that name, and that the
   author of our Gospel, who knew that, has chosen Nicodemus, like as
   Plato has chosen Phaeton or Alcibiades as interlocutors in one of his
   great theoretical dialogues.

   § 9. The v. 22 and following up to v. 2 of chapter iv., transport us,
   in my opinion, into real history. They show us anew Jesus near John the
   Baptist, but on this occasion surrounded with a group of disciples.
   Jesus, like John, baptizes, attracts the multitude more than the
   latter, and has greater success than he. The disciples, like their
   master, baptize, and a jealousy, to which the chiefs of the sect rise
   superior, is kindled between the two schools. This is most remarkable;
   for the synoptics contain nothing of the kind. As for me, I regard this
   episode as exceedingly probable. What in certain details it possesses
   of the inexplicable is far from invalidating the historical value of
   the ensemble. It contains things which we can only half understand, but
   which fit in well with the hypothesis of writings of personal
   recollections, intended for a limited circle. Such obscurities, on the
   contrary, are not to be explained in a work composed with the single
   aim of making certain ideas prevail. Those ideas enter everywhere.
   There could not have been so many singular incidents and without
   apparent signification. The topography, moreover, is here most precise
   (v. 22, 23). We do not know, it is true, where Latim was, but Linon is
   a significant hint. It is the word Ænawan, the Chaldean plural of Aïn
   or Æn, "fountain." How can you account for some Hellenic sectaries
   being able to divine this? They could not be the name of any locality,
   or they would have stood for one which was well known, or they would
   have coined an impossible word in its relationship to the Semitic
   etymology.

   The sentiment of v. 24 has likewise justness and precision. The
   connection between v. 25 and that which precedes and follows, which is
   not very apparent, dispels the idea of a fictitious composition. We
   should say that here we have notes which have been badly edited, old
   recollsctions loosely put together, yet at times possessing great
   lucidity. What could be more artless than the thought at v. 26, and
   repeated at v. 1 of chapter iv.? Verses 27-36 are quite of another
   character. The author trips again in his discourse, to which it is
   impossible to attribute any claim to authenticity. But verse 1 of
   chapter iv. possesses anew rare transparency, while as to verse v. 2 it
   is important. The author, in a sort of repenting himself of what he has
   written, and believing that no evil consequences will be deduced from
   his narrative, instead of erasing it, inserts a parenthesis which is in
   flagrant contradiction with that which precedes. He no longer assumes
   that Jesus has baptized; he pretends that it was only his disciples who
   baptized. We hold that v. 2 was added later. The fact will always
   remain that the passage iii. 22 and following is in no wise a fragment
   of à priori theology, since, on the contrary, the à priori theologian
   takes up the pen at v. 2 to contradict this passage and to free it from
   that which might have proved embarrassing.

   § 10. We now come to the interview of Jesus with the Samaritan woman
   and the mission to the Samaritans (iv. 1-42). Luke knew of this
   mission, which probably was real. Here, however, the theory of those
   who do see in out Gospel only a series of fictions is destined to lead
   to an exposition of principles worthy of being studied. The details of
   the dialogue are evidently fictitious. On the other hand, the
   topography of v. 3-6 is satisfactory. Only a Palestine Jew who had
   often passed the entrance to the Valley of Sichem could have written
   that. Verses 5, 6 are not exact, but the tradition which is there
   mentioned may have come from Gen. xxxiii. 19; xlviii. 22; Josh. xxiv.
   32. The author seems to make a play on words (Sichar for Sichem), by
   which the Jews believed they cast bitter raillery upon the Samaritans.
   I do not think that people were so very solicitous at Ephesus about the
   hatred which divided the Jews from the Samaritans, and of the mutual
   interdict which existed between them (v. 9). The allusions which people
   pretend to see in the verses 16-18 to the religious history of Samaria
   appears to me to be forced, and v. 22 is important. It cuts asunder the
   admirable sentence, "Woman, believe me, the time is come . . ." and
   expresses a wholly opposed sentiment. It would seem that there is here
   an analogous correction at v. 2 of the same chapter, where either the
   author or one of his disciples corrects an idea which he found
   dangerous or too bold. In any case, this verse is profoundly imbued
   with Jewish prejudices. It is beyond my comprehension, if it was
   written about the year 130 or 150 in the circle of Christianity the
   most removed from Judaism. V. 35 is exactly in the style of the
   synoptics and is the actual words of Jesus. The sentence is a splendid
   relic (v. 21-23, when 22 is omitted). There is no rigorous authenticity
   for such sentences. How is it to be admitted that Jesus or the
   Samaritan woman related the conversation they had had together? The
   Oriental manner of narration is essentially anecdotic, everything with
   them resolves itself into precise and palpable facts. General phrases,
   with us expressing a tendency or general state, are to them unknown.
   There is thus here an anecdote which we can no more admit than all the
   other anecdotes of history. But the anecdote often contains a truth. If
   Jesus never pronounced that Divine sentence, the sentence is none the
   less his--the sentence would not have existed apart from him. I am
   aware that in the synoptics there often occur principles wholly opposed
   to one another, circumstances in which Jesus treats the Jews with great
   severity. But there are likewise some others in which the broad spirit
   that pervades this chapter of John is to be found. Discrimination is
   imperative. It is in these last passages that I discover the true
   thought of Jesus. The others are, in my opinion, blemishes and lapses,
   proceeding from disciples only moderately capable of comprehending
   their master and of extracting his thought.

   § 11. Verses 43-45 of chapter iv. contain something which astonishes.
   The author pretends that it was at Jerusalem, at the time of the
   feasts, that Jesus made his great demonstrations. It seems that there,
   this was a habit of his. But that which proves that such a habit,
   although erroneous, was connected with recollections is that it is
   supported (v. 44) by a saying of Jesus which is also reported in the
   synoptics and which has a high character of authenticity.

   § 12. Ver. 46 of ch. iv., which recalls the small town of Cana, is not
   to be explained in a composition fictitious and uniquely dogmatic. Thus
   (v. 46-54) there is a miracle of healing, strongly resembling those
   which abound in the synoptics and which with some variations respond to
   the one which is recorded at Matt. viii. 5 and following, and at Luke
   vii. 1 and following. This is very remarkable, for it proves that the
   author does not invent his miracles to please, and that in recounting
   them he follows a tradition. To sum up, in regard to the seven miracles
   mentioned there are only two the marriage feast at Cana and the
   resurrection of Lazarus) of which there is no trace in the synoptics.
   The five others are to be found there with some differences of detail.

   § 13. Chapter v. constitutes a fragment apart. Here the processes of
   the author are nakedly exhibited. He recounts a miracle which is
   attested to have taken place at Jerusalem with some dramatic details
   calculated to render the prodigy more striking, and he seizes this
   occasion for making a long and dogmatic discourse against the Jews.
   Does the author invent the miracle or does he take it from tradition?
   If he invents it, we must admit that he had lived at Jerusalem, for he
   knows the city well (v. 2 and following). It is not a question of
   Bethesda; yet, to have invented this name and the circumstances
   relating to it, the author of the fourth Gospel must have known Hebrew,
   which is a thing the adversaries of our Gospel do not admit. It is more
   probable that he made the tradition the basis of his account. This
   account presents, in fact, notable parallelisms to Mark. A part of the
   Christian community then attributed miracles to Jesus which were
   attested to have taken place at Jerusalem. This is a very serious
   matter. That Jesus had acquired great renown in thaumaturgy in a
   country simple, rustic, and favourably disposed like Galilee, is quite
   natural. Even had he not in a single instance connived at the execution
   of marvellous acts, these acts would have taken place in spite of him.
   His thaumaturgic reputation would have spread independently of all
   co-operation on his part and of his knowledge. The miracle explains
   itself before a benevolent public; in such a case it is in reality the
   public which creates it. But before an evil-disposed public the matter
   is wholly different. The latter has been clearly seen in the
   recrudescence of miracles which took place in Italy five or six years
   ago. The miracles which were produced in the Roman States succeeded;
   those, on the other hand, which ventured to make their appearance in
   the Italian provinces were immediately subjected to an inquest and
   quickly arrested. Those whom it was pretended had been cured avowed
   that they had never been sick. The thaumaturgists themselves, on being
   interrogated, declared that they knew nothing of them, but, seeing that
   the rumours of their miracles were so widespread, they believed they
   were able to work them. In other words, for a miracle to succeed there
   is need of a little complaisance. The bystanders not assisting in them,
   it was necessary for the participants to lend a hand. In like manner,
   if Jesus performed miracles at Jerusalem we arrive at suppositions
   which are to us very shocking. Let us reserve our judgment, for we
   shall soon have to treat of a Jerusalemitish miracle, in other respects
   more important than the one now in question, and much more intimately
   connected with the essential events in the life of Jesus

   § 14. Chapter vi. 1-14. The Galilean miracle, moreover, is still
   nevertheless identical with one of those which are reported by the
   synoptics; we refer to the multiplication of loaves. It is clear that
   this is one of those miracles which was attributed to him in his
   lifetime. It is a miracle to which a real circumstance gives colour.
   There is nothing more easy than to instil such an illusion into
   consciences at once credulous, artless, and sympathetic. "While we were
   with him, we had neither hunger nor thirst:" this very simple utterance
   becomes a marvellous fact, which is retold with all sorts of additions.
   The narrative in our text, as always, aims at a little more effect than
   in the synoptics. In this sense it is of an inferior quality. But the
   part which the Apostle Philip plays in it is to be noted. Philip is
   particularly acquainted with the author of our Gospel (compare i. 43
   and following: xii. 21, and following). Now, Philip resided at
   Hierapolis, in Asia Minor, where Papias knew his sons. All this may be
   readily enough reconciled. We can assume that the author took this
   miracle from the synoptics, or from an analogous source, and
   appropriated it in his own way. But why does the detail which he has
   added to it harmonise so well with that which we have from other
   sources, if this detail did not come from a direct tradition?

   § 15. By means of evidently artificial connections, which prove clearly
   that all these recollections (if recollection it be) were written
   afterwards, the author introduces a strange series of miracles and
   visions (vi. 16, and following). During a tempest, Jesus appeared on
   the waves, seeming to be walking on the sea: the barque itself is
   miraculously transported. This miracle is also found in the synoptics.
   Here, then, we are yet dealing with tradition, and not with individual
   fantasy. Verse 23 fixes the localities, establishes a connection
   between this miracle and that of the multiplication of the loaves, and
   seems to prove that these miraculous accounts ought to be put in the
   class of miracles which have a historical basis. The prodigy which we
   are now discussing probably corresponds with some hallucination which
   the companions of Jesus entertained in regard to the lake, and in
   virtue of which they, in a moment of danger, believed they saw their
   master come to their rescue. The idea into which they had easily
   drifted, that his body was impalpable like that of a spirit, gave
   credence to this. We shall soon find (chap. xxi.) another tradition
   which is founded on analogous fancies.

   § 16. The two miracles which precede serve to lead up to a most
   important sermon, which Jesus is alleged to have delivered in the
   synagogue of Capemaum. This sermon was evidently related to a
   collection of symbols which were very familiar to the oldest Christian
   community--symbols in which Christ was presented as the bread of
   believers. I have already said that, in our Gospel, the discourses of
   Christ are almost all fictitious works, and the one in question may
   certainly be one of the number. I would, if put to it, own that this
   fragment possesses more importance in regard to the history of the
   eucharistic ideas of the first century than the statement even of the
   sentiments of Jesus. Nevertheless, I believe that our Gospel furnishes
   us here again with a gleam of light. According to the synoptics, the
   institution of the eucharist does not ascend beyond the last soiree of
   Jesus. It is clear that very far back this was believed in, whilst it
   was the doctrine of St. Paul. But to admit this to be true, it is
   necessary to suppose that Jesus knew absolutely the day when he would
   die, a supposition which we cannot accept. The usages which gave rise
   to the eucharist ascend, then, beyond the last supper, and I believe
   that our Gospel is completely within the truth, in omitting the
   sacramental account of the soiree of the Friday, and in disseminating
   eucharistic ideas in the course even of the life of Jesus. That which
   is essential in the eucharistic account is at bottom only the
   reproduction of what took place at every Jewish repast. It was not
   once, but a hundred times, that Jesus had blessed the bread, broken and
   distributed it, and also blessed the cup. I by no means pretend that
   the words which are attributed to Jesus are textual. But the precise
   details furnished by verses 60, and following, 68, 70-71, have an
   original character. Later on we will again take notice of the personal
   hatred entertained by our author against Judas of Kerioth. The
   synoptics, certainly, have no affection for the latter. But the hatred
   of the fourth narrator is more premeditated, more personal; it comes
   out in two Or three places previous to the account of the betrayal: it
   seeks to accumulate upon the head of the culprit wrongs of which the
   other evangelists make no mention.

   § 17. Ver. 1-10 of ch. vii. are a small historical treasure. The wicked
   sulky humour of the brothers of Jesus, the precautions which the latter
   is obliged to take, are therein expressed with admirable ingenuousness.
   It is here that the dogmatic and symbolical explanation is completely
   at fault. What a dogmatic or symbolic intention to find in that short
   passage, which is calculated rather to give rise to the objection that
   has served the requirements of the apologetic Christian! Why should an
   author whose unique device had been Scribitur ad probandum have
   imagined such a fantastic detail? No, no, here we can say boldly,
   Scribitur ad narrandum. It is hence an original souvenir, come whence
   it might and from whose pen soever it had proceeded. Why say after this
   that the personages of our Gospel are certain types, certain
   characters, and not historic beings of flesh and bones? In fact, it is
   rather the synoptics which have an idyllic and a legendary turn;
   compared with them the fourth Gospel possesses the requisites of
   history, and a narrative which aims at being correct.

   § 18. Now comes a dispute (vii. 11, and following) between Jesus and
   the Jews, to which I attach little value. Scenes of this description
   are hence very numerous. Our author's species of imagination imposes
   itself very strongly on all that he recounts; with him such pictures
   must be moderately true in the colouring. The discourses put in the
   mouth of Jesus are conformable with the ordinary style of our author.
   The intervention of Nicodemus (v. 50 and following) may alone in all
   this possess a historic value. Verse 52 is open to objections. This
   verse, they say, contains an error which neither John nor even a Jew
   could have committed. Could the author be ignorant of the fact that
   Jonas and Nahum were born in Galilee? Yes, certainly, he might not know
   it, or, at least, he might not think of it. The historical and
   exegetical knowledge of the evangelists, and in general the authors of
   the New Testament, Saint Paul excepted, was very incomplete. In any
   case they wrote from memory, and were not careful as to being exact.

   § 19. The account of the woman taken in adultery gives room for great
   critical doubts. This passage is wanting in the best manuscripts; I
   believe, however, that it constituted part of the primitive text. The
   topographical data of verses 1 and 2 are correct. There is nothing in
   the fragment which harmonises with the style of the fourth Gospel. I
   think it is by reason of a misplaced scruple which originated in the
   minds of some false rigorists as to the apparent moral laxity of the
   episode, that would make one cut away these lines which, in view of
   their beauty, might be saved by attaching them to other parts of the
   gospel texts. In any case, if the detail of the adulterous woman did
   not at first form a part of the fourth Gospel, it is surely of
   evangelical tradition. Luke was acquainted with it, though in a
   different form. Papias seems to have read a similar account in the
   Gospel according to the Hebrews. The sentence "Let anyone amongst you
   who is without sin" . . . is so perfectly in accord with the spirit of
   Jesus, corresponds so well with other sentiments of the synoptics, that
   we are quite entitled to consider it as being authentic to the same
   extent as sentences of the synoptics. At all events, we can much more
   readily comprehend why such a passage may have been abridged instead of
   added to.

   § 20. The theological disputes which fill up the rest of chap. viii.
   are without any value in the life of Jesus. The author evidently
   attributed his own ideas to Jesus, without either supporting them by
   any proof, or by any direct hearsay. How, it might be said, could an
   immediate disciple or a traditionist directly associated with an
   apostle, thus alter the words of the master? But Plato was an immediate
   disciple of Socrates, and he, nevertheless, made no scruple of
   attributing to him fictitious discourses. The "Phædon" contains
   historical information of the strictest verity, and discourses which
   have no authenticity. The tradition of facts is much easier preserved
   than that of discourses. An active Christian school, pervading rapidly
   the circle of ideas, succeeded in fifty or sixty years in totally
   modifying the image which had been made of Jesus, whilst it was much
   better able than all the others to recall certain peculiarities and the
   general contexture of the biographies of the reformer. The simple and
   gentle Christian families of Batanea, amongst whom was formed the
   collection of Dogia,--small committees, which were very pure and very
   honest, of ebionine (the poor of God), remained most faithful to the
   teachings of Jesus, having piously guarded the depôt of his words,
   forming a little world in which there was little movement of
   ideas--could have at once very well preserved the timbre of the
   master's voice, and be very bad authorities as to the biographical
   circumstances for which they cared little. The distinction which we
   here indicate is reproduced, moreover, in that which concerns the first
   Gospel. This evangelist is surely the one who gives us the best
   rendering of the discourses of Jesus, and yet is, as to facts, more
   inexact than the second. It is in vain that unity of authorship is
   alleged by some for the fourth Gospel. This unity I indeed recognise:
   but a composition compiled by a single hand may yet embrace data of
   very unequal value. The life of Mahomet, by Ibn-Hescham, is perfectly
   uniform, and yet this Life contains things which we can admit, others
   which we cannot.

   § 21. Chapters ix. and x. up to verse 21 of the latter form a paragraph
   commencing with a new Jerusalem miracle, that of the man being born
   blind, where the intention of heightening the demonstrative force of
   the prodigy is made to be felt in a more fatiguing manner than in
   anywhere else. We nevertheless discern a somewhat precise knowledge of
   the topography of Jerusalem (v. 7): the explanation of eiloos is rather
   good. It is impossible to pretend that this miracle was evolved from
   the symbolical imagination of our author; for it is also found in Mark
   (viii. 22, and following), with a coincidence which bears a minute and
   bizarre characteristic (comp. John ix. 6 and Mark viii. 23). In the
   discussions and discourses which follow, I acknowledge that it would be
   dangerous to seek an echo in the mind of Jesus. An essential
   characteristic of our author, which is henceforward conspicuous, is his
   habit of taking a miracle as a point of departure for long
   demonstrations. His miracles are reasoned and explained miracles. This
   is not the case with the synoptics. The theurgy of the latter is
   perfectly artless: they never retrace their steps in order to draw
   marvellous conclusions upon what they have related. The theurgy of the
   fourth Gospel, on the contrary, is reflective, set forth with all the
   artifices of exposition whose aim is conviction, and exploited in
   favour of certain sermons in which the author makes the account of his
   prodigies to follow. If our Gospel was limited to such fragments, the
   opinion which sees in it a simple thesis of theology would be perfectly
   established.

   § 22. But it is far from being limited to this. Beginning with verse 22
   of chap. x. we enter into topographical details of rigorous precision,
   which are hardly applicable if it is maintained that in no degree does
   our Gospel embrace the Palestinian tradition. I sacrifice the whole of
   the dispute contained in verses 24-39. The journey to Perea indicated
   at verse 40 appears, on the contrary, to be historical. The synoptics
   are cognisant of this journey, to which they attach the divers
   incidents of Jericho.

   § 23. We reach now a most important passage (xi. 1-45). It relates to a
   miracle, but a miracle which trenches upon others, and is produced
   under circumstances entirely different. All the other miracles are
   represented as having been attended with some éclat and as wrought upon
   obscure individuals who never again figure in evangelical history. In
   this instance the miracle takes place in the centre of a well-known
   family, and in which the author of our Gospel in particular, if he is
   sincere, appears to have participated. The other miracles are little
   aside gyrations, designed to prove by their number the divine mission
   of the master, but, taken by themselves, of no consequence, since in no
   single case are we told what took place; nor does one amongst them form
   an integral part of the life of Jesus. They can be treated en bloc, as
   I have done in my work, without shaking the edifice or breaking the
   continuity of events. The miracle in question here, on the contrary, is
   deeply concerned in the account of the last weeks of Jesus, such as we
   find them in our Gospel. Now we shall see that it is precisely on
   account of that record of these last weeks that our text possesses an
   incontestable superiority. This miracle makes then by itself a class
   apart; at first glance it seems as if it ought to be reckoned among the
   events in the life of Jesus. It is not the minute detail of the account
   which strikes me. The two other Jerusalem miracles of Jesus, of which
   the author of the fourth Gospel speaks, are recounted in similar
   fashion. If the whole of the circumstances of the resurrection of
   Lazarus had been the product of the imagination of the narrator, it
   would have proved that all these circumstances had been combined with
   the view (a constant habit that we have remarked in our author) that
   the principal fact should not remain less exceptional in evangelical
   history.

   The miracle of Bethany is to the Galilean miracles what the stigmata of
   Francis d'Assisi were to the miracles of the same saint. M. Karl Hase
   has composed an exquisite Life of Christ in the shades, without
   insisting particularly upon any of these latter; but he saw clearly
   that it would not have been a sincere biography if he had not descanted
   upon the stigmata; he has devoted to these a long chapter, giving place
   to all sorts of conjectures and suppositions.

   Amongst the miracles which are spread over the four compilations of the
   Life of Jesus, a distinction makes itself felt. Some are pure and
   simple legendary creations. There is nothing in the real life of Jesus
   which has a place in them. They are the fruit of that labour of
   imagination which is produced around all popular celebrities. Others
   have had actual facts for their foundation. Legend has not arbitrarily
   attributed to Jesus the healing of those possessed of devils.
   Doubtless, Jesus more than once was believed to make such cures. The
   multiplication of loaves, many cures of sickness, perhaps certain
   apparitions, ought to be put in the same category. These are not
   miracles hatched out of pure imagination, they are miracles conceived
   àpropos of real incidents, exaggerated and transformed. Let us
   absolutely discard an idea which is very widespread, that no
   eye-witness reports miracles. The author of the last chapter of the
   Acts is surely an ocular witness of the life of St. Paul. Now this
   writer records miracles which have taken place before him. But what am
   I saying? St. Paul himself speaks to us of his miracles and founds upon
   them the truth of his preaching. Certain miracles were permanent in the
   Church, and were in some sort common property. "Why," said they,
   "challenge ocular testimony when people recount things which have never
   been heard or seen?" But then the tres socii did not know of Francis
   d'Assisi, for they record a multitude of things which they could not
   have seen or heard.

   In what category must we place the miracle which we are now discussing?
   Did some actual fact, which had been exaggerated and embellished, give
   rise to it? Or, again, does it possess reality of any sort? Is it a
   pure legend, an invention of the narrator? What complicates the
   difficulty is that the third Gospel, that of Luke, presents to us here
   consonances which are most peculiar. Luke, in fact, knew Martha and
   Mary; he knew at the same time they did not hail from Galilee; in fine,
   he knew them in a light which was strongly analogous to that under
   which these two personages figure in the fourth Gospel. Martha, in the
   latter text, plays the rôle of a servant, diechonei, Mary, the rôle of
   a forward, ardent personage. We know the admirable little episode which
   Luke has extracted thence. But, if we compare the passages in Luke and
   in the fourth Gospel, it is clearly the fourth Gospel which plays here
   the original part; not that Luke, or whoever the author of the third
   Gospel may be, may have read the fourth, but in the sense in which we
   find in the fourth Gospel the data which explain the legendary anecdote
   of the third. Was the third Gospel also cognisant of Lazarus? After
   having for a long time refused to admit this, I have arrived at the
   belief that this is very probable. Yes, I now think that the Lazarus of
   the parable of the rich man is but a transformation of our resurgent
   one. Let it not be said that in thus being metamorphosed it has been
   much changed in the process. In this respect everything is possible,
   since the repast of Martha, Mary, and Lazarus, who play a great part in
   the fourth Gospel and who are placed by the synoptics in the house of
   Simon the Leper, becomes in the third Gospel a repast at the house of
   Simon the Pharisee, where there figures a fisherwoman who, like Mary in
   our Gospel, anoints the feet of Jesus and wipes them with her hair.
   What thread holds together this inextricable labyrinth of broken and
   patched-up legends? For my part, I admit the family of Bethany to have
   had a real existence, and to have given rise in certain branches of the
   Christian tradition to a cycle of legends One of these données
   legendaires was that Jesus had called back to life the head even of the
   family. Certainly, such an "on dit" may have originated after the death
   of Jesus. I do not, however, regard as impossible that one real fact in
   his life may not have given it birth. The silence of the synoptics in
   regard to the Bethany episode does not greatly astonish me. The
   synoptics were very badly informed as to all that which immediately
   preceded the last weeks of Jesus. It was not only the Bethany incident
   which was lacking to them, but also the whole period of the life of
   Jesus to which this incident relates. We are here brought back once
   more to that fundamental point, that of knowing which of the two
   accounts is the true one, the one which makes Galilee the theatre of
   all the activity of Jesus, or the one which makes Jesus pass a part of
   his life at Jerusalem.

   I know what has been attempted here by means of symbolical explanation.
   The miracle of Bethany, according to the learned and profound defenders
   of this system, signifies that Jesus is to believers in a spiritual
   sense the resurrection and the life. Lazarus is the poor man, the ebion
   resurrected by Christ from his state of spiritual death. It was on
   account of this, the sense of a popular reawakening which came to
   perplex them, that the official classes decided on making Jesus perish.
   This is the theory upon which the best theologians that the Church has
   possessed in our days repose. In my opinion it is an erroneous one.
   That our Gospel is dogmatic I recognise, but it is by no means
   allegorical. The really allegorical writings of the first centuries,
   the Apocalypse, the Pastor of Hermas, the Pista Sophia, possess quite a
   different charm. At bottom of all this symbolism is the companion of
   the mysticism of M. Strauss; the expedients of theologians at their
   wit's end, seeking by means of allegory, mysticism, and symbolism to
   escape from their dilemma. For us, who are seeking only for pure
   historic truth without a shade of either theological or political
   arrière pensée, we have more scope. For us, all this is not mythical,
   all this is not symbolical, all this is sectarian and popular history.
   It must necessarily provoke grave distrust, but no party offers fitting
   explanations.

   Divers examples are pleaded. The Alexandrian school, such as we know it
   through the writings of Philo, exercised unquestionably a strong
   influence upon the theology of the apostolic century. Now, do we not
   see this school press its taste for symbolism to the verge of folly?
   The whole of the Old Testament became in its hands only a pretext for
   subtle allegories. Are not the Talmud and the Midraschim full of
   pretended historical teachings which have been stripped of all truth,
   and which can only be explained by religious tenets or by the desire of
   originating arguments in support of a thesis? But this is not the case
   with the fourth Gospel. The principles of criticism which it is proper
   to apply to the Talmud and the Midraschim, cannot be transferred to a
   composition altogether at variance with the likings of the Palestinian
   Jews. Philo discerns allegories in the ancient texts; he does not
   invent allegorical texts. An old sacred book exists; the plain
   interpretation of this text embarrasses or is insufficient; we seek in
   it its hidden and mysterious meaning; examples such as these abound.
   But when we write an extended historical narrative with the arrière
   pensée of concealing in it symbolical finesse which was only to be
   discovered seventeen hundred years later, this is what is but seldom
   seen. It is the partisans of the allegorical explanation who, in this
   case, play the part of Alexandrians. It is they who, embarrassed by the
   fourth Gospel, treat it just as Philo treated Genesis, just as the
   Jewish and Christian tradition has treated the Canticle of Canticles.
   For us simple historians who admit first of all (1) That the question
   here is only one of legends, in parts true, in parts false, like all
   legends; (2) that the reality which served as a basis for these legends
   was beautiful, splendid, touching and delicious, but, like all things
   human, greatly marred by weaknesses which would disgust us if we saw
   them--for us, I say, there are no difficulties of this kind. There are
   texts, and the question is to extract the largest amount of historic
   truth possible, that is all.

   Another very delicate question presents itself here. In the miracles of
   the second class, in those which owe their origin to a real fact in the
   life of Jesus, is there not mixed up with these sometimes a little
   complaisance? I believe so, or at least I declare that if this were not
   so, nascent Christianity has been an event absolutely without parallel.
   This event has been the greatest and the most beautiful amongst facts
   of the same species; but it has not escaped the common laws which must
   govern the facts of religious history. There does not exist a single
   great religious creation which does not embrace a little of that which
   would now be denominated--fraud. The ancient religions were full of it.
   Few of the institutions of the past have a greater right to be
   recognised by us than the oracle of Delphi, seeing that that oracle
   eminently contributed to save Greece, the mother of all science and of
   all art. The enlightened patriotism of Pythia was not more than once or
   twice found at fault She was ever the mouthpiece of the sages who were
   endowed with the justest sentiment of Greek interests. These sages, who
   have founded civilisation, made no scruple about consulting this
   virgin, who was reputed to be inspired by the gods. Moses, if the
   traditions we have regarding him contain anything historical, made use
   of natural events, such as tempests and fortuitous plagues, to further
   his designs and his policy. All the ancient legislators gave their laws
   as if inspired by a god. All the prophets, without any scruple, made it
   appear as if their sublime invectives were prompted by the Eternal.
   Buddhism, which is full of such high religious sentiment, saw permanent
   miracles, which could not be produced of themselves. The most artless
   country of Europe, the Tyrol, is the country of the stigmatics, the
   fashion of which is only possible by means of a little trickery. The
   history of the Church, so respectable in its way, is full of false
   relics and false miracles. Was there ever a religious movement more
   ingenuous than that of Francis d'Assisi? And yet the whole history of
   the stigmata is inexplicable without some connivance on the part of the
   intimate companions of the saint.

   "People do not prepare," I have been told, "sophistical miracles, when
   people believe they everywhere are truth." This is an error. It is when
   people believe in miracles that they are drawn away, without doubting
   in them, to augment their number. We can with difficulty, with our
   consciences clear and precise, figure to ourselves the bizarre
   illusions by which these obscure but powerful consciences, playing with
   the supernatural, if I might say so, would glide incessantly from
   credulity to complaisance, and from complaisance to credulity. What can
   be more striking than the mania spread at certain epochs of attributing
   to the ancient sages the apocryphal books? The apocrypha of the Old
   Testament, the writings of the hermetic cycle, the innumerable
   pseudo-epigraphic productions of India, responded to a great elevation
   of religious sentiments. People believed they were doing honour to the
   old sages in attributing to them these productions; people became their
   collaborators without thinking that the day would come when that would
   be denominated a fraud. The authors of the Middle Age legends,
   magnifying in cold blood upon their desks the miracles of their saints,
   would also be surprised in hearing themselves called impostors.

   The eighteenth century would describe all religious history as
   imposture. The critic of our times has totally discarded that
   explanation. The term is certainly improper; but to what extent have
   the most beautiful souls of the past not aided in their own illusions,
   or in those of which they have been the object, is what a reflective
   age can no longer comprehend. For one to understand this thoroughly one
   must have been in the East. In the East passion is the soul of
   everything and credulity has no limits. We can never get at the bottom
   of the mind of an Oriental; because this bottom often does not exist
   for himself. Passion on one side, credulity on the other, make
   imposture. So no great movement is produced in this country without
   some fraud. We no longer know how to desire or to hate; cunning finds
   no longer a place in our society, for she has no longer an object. But
   exaltation is a passion which does not accommodate itself to this
   reserve, this indifference to consequences which is the basis of our
   sincerity. When absolute natures will embrace a thesis after the
   Oriental manner, they are no longer restrainable, and nothing, the day
   even when illusion becomes necessary, is too dear to them. Is that the
   fault of sincerity? Not at all; it is because conviction is most keenly
   felt by such spirits, because they are incapable of returning upon
   themselves, that they have few scruples. To call this deceit is
   inexact; it is precisely the force with which they embrace their idea
   which extinguishes in them every other thought, for the end appears so
   absolutely good to them that everything which can serve it seems in
   their view legitimate. Fanaticism is always sincere in respect of its
   thesis, but an impostor in respect of the choice of methods of
   demonstration. If the public do not at first accept the reason which it
   believes to be good, that is to say, its affirmations, it has recourse
   to reasons which it knows to be bad. With it to believe is everything:
   the motives which induce belief are of but little importance. Who among
   us would accept the responsibility for all the arguments through which
   was wrought the conversion of the barbarians? In our days people only
   employ fraudulent devices when they are aware of the falsity of that
   which is maintained. Formerly, the employment of these means
   presupposed a profound conviction, and was allied to the highest moral
   elevation. Our method of criticism is different. It professes to expose
   falsehood and to discover the truth through the network of deceptions
   and illusions of every sort which envelop history; while in face of
   such facts we experience a sentiment of repugnance. But do not let us
   impose our delicate scruples upon those whose duty it has been to
   direct poor humanity. Between the general truth of a principle and the
   truth of a meagre fact the man of faith never hesitates. We had, at the
   time of the coronation of Charles X., the most authentic proofs of the
   destruction of the ampulla. The ampulla was found again, inasmuch as it
   was necessary. On the one side, there was the salvation of royalty, so
   at least it was believed; on the other, the question of the
   authenticity of some drops of oil; no good royalist hesitated.

   To summarise amongst the miracles which the Gospels attribute to Jesus,
   there are some purely legendary. But there were probably some of them
   in which he consented to play a part. Let us put to one side the fourth
   Gospel. The Gospel of Mark, the most original of the synoptics, is the
   life of an exorcist and thaumaturgist. Some details, as in Luke viii.
   45, 46, are not less sad than those which, in the episode of Lazarus,
   lead the theologians to exclaim in a loud voice against the myths and
   symbols. I do not hold to the reality of the miracle in question. The
   hypothesis which I propose in the present edition reduces everything to
   a misapprehension. I desire solely to show that this fantastic episode
   of the fourth Gospel is not a decisive objection against the historic
   value of the said Gospel. In each part of the "Life of Jesus," on which
   we are now about to enter, the fourth Gospel contains many special
   points of information, which are infinitely superior to any in the
   synoptics. Now it is singular that the account of the resurrection of
   Lazarus is joined to these last pages by hooks so slender that, if we
   were to reject it as being imaginary, the whole edifice of the last
   weeks of the "Life of Jesus," which are so solid in our Gospel, would
   crumble at a stroke.

   § 24. Verses 46-54 of chapter xi. introduce us to a first secret
   council held by the Jews, in order to put Jesus to death, as a direct
   consequence of the miracle of Bethany. People might say that this bond
   was an artificial one. Bat why? Does not our narrator more nearly
   approach probability than the synoptics, which make the conspiracy
   against Jesus begin only two or three days before his death? The whole
   account we have just examined is otherwise very natural; it is
   terminated by a circumstance which was not surely invented--the flight
   of Jesus to Ephraim or Ephron. What allegorical meaning is to be found
   in that? Is it not evident that our author possessed data totally
   unknown to the synoptics, which latter, caring little about composing a
   regular biography, compressed into a few days the last six months of
   the life of Jesus? Verses 55, 56 present a chronological arrangement
   which is very satisfactory.

   § 25. Again (xii. 1 and following) is an episode common to all the
   narratives, except to Luke, who has, in this instance, arranged his
   facts in a wholly different fashion; we mean the feast of Bethany. We
   have seen in the "six days" of verse xii. 1 a symbolical reason. I mean
   the intention of making the day of the unction coincide with the 10th
   of Nisan, the day on which the paschal lambs should have been selected
   (Exodus xii. 3, 6) The latter is much less clearly indicated. At
   chapter xix. v. 36, where we can penetrate the design of assimilating
   Jesus to the paschal lamb, the author is much more explicit. As regards
   the incidents of the feast, is it from pure fancy that our author here
   enters into details which were unknown to Matthew and to Mark? I do not
   think so. It is that he was better acquainted with them. The woman who
   is not named in the synoptics is Mary of Bethany. The disciple who
   makes the observation is Judas, and the name of this disciple
   immediately leads the narrator into lively personal abuse (v. 6). This
   v. 6 breathes strongly the hatred of two co-disciples whc have lived
   long together, who are deeply embittered against one another, and who
   have followed opposite paths. And this Martha diechonei explains so
   fully an episode of Luke! And the hair used to wipe the feet of Jesus,
   is it not also found in Luke! All leads to the belief that we here hit
   upon an original source, which serves as a key to the other less
   skilfully constructed narratives. I do not deny the strangeness of
   verses 1, 2, 9-11, 17, 18, which return three times to the resurrection
   of Lazarus and improve upon xi. 45 and following. On the contrary, I
   see nothing at all unlikely in the design imputed to the family of
   Bethany of awakening the indifference of the Jerusalemites by exterior
   demonstrations which were unknown to the simple Galilean. It must not
   be said such and such suppositions are false, because they are shocking
   and pitiful. If people were to see the obverse of the greatest events
   which take place in this world, of those which enchant us, of those
   amidst which we live, nothing would be accomplished. Let us remark,
   moreover, that the actors here are women who have imbibed that
   unequalled love which Jesus knew how to inspire around him; women who
   believed they were living in the bosom of the marvellous, who felt
   convinced that Jesus had done innumerable prodigies, and who were
   placed face to face with incredulous people, who railed at him whom
   they loved. If a scruple could have arisen in their soul, the
   recollection of other miracles of Jesus would have silenced it. Suppose
   that a legitimist dame was reduced to the extremity of assisting heaven
   to save Joas? Would she hesitate? Passion imputes always to God anger
   and selfishness; it enters into the councils of God, makes him speak,
   urges him to act. People are sure of being in the right; they make use
   of God in advocating their cause, in supplementing the zeal which he
   does not evince.

   § 26. The account of the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem (xii.
   12 and following) is conformable with the synoptics. Yet that which
   astonishes us here is the imperturbable appeal to the miracle of
   Bethany (v. 17, 18). It was on account of that miracle that the
   Pharisees decided on the death of Jesus; it was that miracle which made
   the Jerusalemites think; it was that miracle which was the cause of the
   triumph of Bethphage. I should like to put the whole of this to the
   account of an author of the year 150, who was ignorant of the real
   character and the artless innocence of the Galilean movement. But first
   let us guard against believing that innocence and conscientious
   illusion were likewise excluded. It is in the fugitive sensations of
   the soul of the woman of the East that we must here seek for analogies.
   Passion, ingenuousness, abandon, tenderness, perfidy, poetry and crime,
   frivolity and depth, sincerity and deceit, alternate in these sorts of
   natures, and baffle any absolute estimation. The critic ought in such
   circumstances to steer clear of every exclusive system. The mythical
   explanation is often true; but for all that the historical explanation
   ought not to be banished. Now look at verses xii. 20 and following,
   which contain an undoubted historical secret. First, it is the obscure
   and isolated episode of the Hellenes which is addressed to Philip.
   Remark the part played by this apostle; our Gospel is the only one
   which knows anything of it. Remark, especially, how the whole of this
   passage is exempt from any dogmatical or symbolical design. To say that
   these Greeks are reasonable beings, like Nicodemus and the Samaritan
   woman, is most gratuitous. The discourses which they hold (v. 23 et
   seq.) have no relation to them.

   The aphorism in v. 25 is again met with in the synoptics; it is
   evidently authentic. Our author does not copy it from the synoptics.
   Again, even when he makes Jesus speak, the author of the fourth Gospel
   now and then follows a tradition.

   § 27. Verses 27 et seq. possess much importance; Jesus is troubled. He
   prays his Father "to deliver him from this hour." Then he resigns
   himself. A voice makes itself heard from heaven, or better, according
   to other accounts, an angel speaks to Jesus. What does this episode
   import? There is no doubt that it is the parallel of the agony of
   Gethsemane, which, to be sure, is omitted by our author at the place
   where it should have been found--after the Last Supper. Remark the
   incident of the apparition of an angel, which Luke alone knew of. There
   is one more feature to add to the series of those agreements between
   the third Gospel and the fourth, which constitute for evangelical
   criticism a fact of so great importance. But the existence of two
   versions so different from an incident which happened during the last
   days of Jesus, which is certainly historic, constitute a fact much more
   decisive still. Which merits here the preference? The fourth Gospel, in
   my opinion. First, the narrative of this Gospel is less dramatic, less
   skilfully adjusted and constructed, less beautiful, I admit. In the
   second place, the moment where the fourth Gospel introduces the episode
   in question is much more convenient. The synoptics report the scene of
   Gethsemane, along with other solemn circumstances, as taking place on
   the last evening of Jesus, in consequence of the tendency we have of
   accumulating our recollections upon the last hours of a beloved person.
   These circumstances placed thus have, moreover, more effect. But, to
   admit the order of the synoptics, we must suppose that Jesus knew with
   certainty the day on which he should die. We thus generally find the
   synoptics yielding oftentimes to the desire for an arrangement which
   shall proceed with a certain art. Art divine, whence has emerged the
   most beautiful popular poem that has ever been written--the Passion But
   undoubtedly in such a case the historical critic will always prefer the
   version which is least dramatic. It is this principle which makes us
   place Matthew after Mark, and Luke after Matthew, when the question is
   one of determining the historical value of a synoptical account.

   § 28. We have now reached the last evening (chapter xiii). The farewell
   repast is recounted, as in the synoptics, at great length. But the
   surprising thing is that the capital circumstance of this repast, as
   reported in the synoptics, is omitted. There is not a word about the
   establishment of the Lord's Supper, which holds such an important
   position in the preoccupations of our author (chap. vi.). And this is
   as though the narration took here a reflective turn (v. 1), as though
   the author insists upon the tender and mystic signification of the last
   feast. What does that silence mean? Here, as in the episode of
   Gethsemane, I see in such an omission an idea of superiority on the
   part of the fourth Gospel. To pretend that Jesus reserved for the
   Friday evening so important a ritual institution is to believe in a
   sort of miracle, to suppose that he was certain to die the next day.
   Although Jesus (it is permissible to believe) might have presentiments,
   we cannot, apart from the supernatural, admit such distinctness in his
   previsions. I hence think that it was by means of a displacement, very
   easy to explain, that the disciples centred all their eucharistic
   remembrances upon the Last Supper. Jesus on this occasion, as he had
   done many times before, practised the habitual Jewish rite at table, in
   attaching to it the mystical sense when it was convenient, and, as the
   last supper could be better recalled to mind than others, people fell
   into accord in referring to it this fundamental usage. The authority of
   St. Paul, which is here in accord with the synoptics, possesses no
   preeminence, seeing that he had not been present at the repast; it
   proves only that which no one can doubt, that a great part of tradition
   fixed the establishment of the sacred memorial on the eve of his death.
   This tradition answers to the generally accepted tradition that on the
   said evening Jesus substituted a new Eastern for the Jewish Passover;
   it supports another opinion of the synoptics, which is contradicted by
   the fourth Gospel, to wit, that Jesus made with his disciples the
   paschal feast, and died, consequently, on the morrow of the day when
   people eat the paschal lamb.

   What is very remarkable is, that the fourth Gospel, in place of the
   eucharist, gives another rite, the washing of feet, as having been the
   proper institution of the last supper. Doubtless, our evangelist has
   for once yielded to the natural tendency of reporting on the last
   evening the solemn acts in the life of Jesus. The hatred of our author
   against Judas unmasks itself more and more, because of a strong
   prepossession which made him speak of this unhappy man, even when he is
   not directly in evidence (verses 2, 10, 11, 18). In the account of the
   announcement that Jesus had committed treason, the great superiority of
   our text again reveals itself. The same anecdote is to be found in the
   synoptics, but is presented in an improbable and contradictory manner.
   In the synoptics Jesus is represented as designating the traitor in
   indirect language, and yet the expressions he makes use of become known
   to all. Our fourth Gospel explains clearly this little misapprehension.
   According to it, Jesus privately confided his presentiment to a
   disciple who lay upon his bosom, who, in turn, communicated to Peter
   what Jesus had said to him. In regard to the others present, Jesus
   shrouds himself in mystery, and no one has any suspicion of what has
   passed between him and Judas. The little details of the account, the
   broken bread, the glimpse which verse 29 gives us of the inner life of
   the sect, are also characterised by justness, and when we see the
   author saying quite clearly, "I was there," one is inclined to think
   that he speaks the truth. Allegory is essentially cold and stiff. The
   persons in it are of brass, and are moved simultaneously. It is not so
   with our author. That which is striking in his narrative is its life,
   its realism. We perceive a passionate man, who is jealous because he
   loves much, and susceptible, a man who resembles the Orientals of our
   days. Fictitious compositions never possess this personal trait; there
   is something vague and awkward which always betrays their origin.

   § 29. Now follow long discourses which possess a certain beauty, but
   which, there can be no doubt, contain nothing traditional. These are
   fragments of theology and rhetoric, having no analogy to the discourses
   of Jesus in the synoptic Gospels, and to which we must not attribute
   any more historical reality than to the discourses which Plato puts
   into the mouth of his master at the moment of dying. Nothing must be
   concluded hence as to the value of the context. The discourses inserted
   by Sallust and Titus Livy in their histories are assuredly fictions;
   but are we to conclude from this that the basis of these histories is
   fictitious ) It is probable, moreover, that in these homilies
   attributed to Jesus there is one feature which is of historic value,
   Thus, the promise of the Holy Spirit (xiv. 16 et seq. 26; xv. 26; xvi.
   7, 13), which Mark and Matthew do not give in a direct form, are found
   in Luke (xxiv. 49), and correspond with a statement in Acts (ii.) which
   must have had some reality. In any case, this idea of a spirit which
   Jesus will send from the bosom of his Father, when he shall have
   quitted the earth, is another instance of agreement with Luke (Acts i.
   and ii.). The idea of the Holy Spirit concerned as Mediator (Paraclete)
   is also found, especially in Luke (xii. 11, 12; comp. Matthew x. 20;
   Mark xiii. 11). The scheme of the Ascension, explained by Luke, finds
   its obscure germ in our author (xvi. 7).

   § 30. After the Supper our evangelist, like the synoptics, conducts
   Jesus to the Garden of Gethsemane (chap. xviii.). The topography of v.
   1 is exact. Tõnchedron may be an inadvertence of the copyist, or, if we
   might say so, of the editor, of him who prepared the narrative for the
   public. The same error is to be found in the Septuagint (2 Sam. xv.
   23). The Codex Sinaïticus bears touchedrou. The true reading touchedrou
   would appear strange to people who did not know Greek. I have elsewhere
   already explained the omission of the agony at this particular moment,
   an omission in which I see an argument in favour of the account of the
   fourth Gospel. The arrest of Jesus is also much better told. The
   incident of the kissing of Judas, so touching, so beautiful, but which
   has a legendary odour, is passed over in silence. Jesus names himself
   and frees himself. This is, indeed, a very useless miracle (v. 6); but
   the incident of Jesus requesting of them to let the disciples go away
   which acompanied it (v. 8) is plausible. It is quite possible that the
   latter may have been at first arrested with their master. Faithful to
   his habits of precision--whether real or apparent--our author knew the
   names of the two persons who were for the moment engaged in a struggle,
   from which resulted a slight effusion of blood.

   But here follows the proof the most sensible which our author possesses
   on the Passion--evidence much more original than that of the other
   evangelists. He alone causes Jesus to be conducted to Annas or Hanan,
   the father-in-law of Kaïaphas. Josephus confirms the correctness of
   this account, and Luke seems here again to gather a sort of echo of our
   Gospel. Hanan had for a long time been deposed from the Pontificate;
   but, during the remainder of his long life, he in reality retained the
   power, which he exercised under the names of his son and sons-in-law,
   who were successively raised to the sacerdotal sovereignty. This
   circumstance, which the two first synoptics, very poorly informed as to
   matters at Jerusalem, cast no doubt upon, is a trait de lumière. How
   could a sectary of the second century, writing in Egypt or Asia Minor,
   have known this? The too oft repeated opinion that our author knew
   nothing of Jerusalem or of matters Jewish appears to me to be utterly
   destitute of foundation.

   § 32. The recital of the denials of Peter possesses the same
   superiority. The whole episode, in our author, is more circumstantial
   and better explained. The details of v. 16 contain a marvellous amount
   of truth. Far from seeing in them an improbability, I discover in them
   a mark of simplicity, resembling that of a provincial who boasts of
   having influence in a minister's office because he is acquainted with a
   doorkeeper or a domestic. Will it also be maintained that there is here
   some mystic allegory? A rhetorician coming a long time after the
   events, and composing his work from accepted texts, would not have
   written like that. Look at the synoptics: everything is ingeniously
   combined for the sake of effect. Certainly a multitude of the details
   of the fourth Gospel smell also of an artificial arrangement, but
   others seem indeed only to be there because they are true, being so
   many accidents and sharp angles.

   § 33. We come now to Pilate. The incident of v. 28 has all the
   appearance of truth. Our author is at variance with the synoptics as to
   the day on which Jesus died. According to him it was on the day on
   which the paschal Iamb was eaten, the 14th of Nisan; according to the
   synoptics it was the day following. The error in the synoptics might be
   quite naturally explained by the desire which people had to make of the
   last supper the paschal feast, so as to give it more solemnity and to
   furnish a motive for the celebration of the Jewish Passover. True, it
   may also be said that the fourth Gospel has placed the death on the day
   on which the paschal lamb was eaten, so as to inculcate the idea that
   Jesus himself was the veritable paschal lamb, an idea which he in one
   place avows (xix. 36), and which, perhaps, is to be met with in other
   passages (xii. 1, xix. 29). That which, however, clearly proves that
   the synoptics here do violence to historical reality is that they add a
   circumstance drawn from the ordinary ceremony of the Passover, and not
   certainly from a positive tradition. I refer to the singing of psalms.
   Certain incidents reported by the synoptics--the fact, for example, of
   Simon of Cyrene returning from his labours in the fields--presuppose
   thus that the crucifixion took place before the commencement of the
   sacred period. Finally, it cannot be conceived that the Jews should
   provoke an execution, or even that the Romans should bring about one,
   on a day so solemn.

   § 34. I abandon the conversations of Pilate and Jesus, composed
   evidently from mere conjecture, yet with an exact enough sentiment as
   regards the situation of the two persons. The question in v. 9 has,
   however, its echo in Luke, and, as usual, that insignificant detail
   becomes in the third Gospel wholly legendary. The topography and the
   Hebrew are good counterfeits. The whole scene presents great historical
   exactness, even though the language imputed to the personages is in the
   narrator's style. What concerns Barabbas, however, is, in the
   synoptics, more satisfactory. Our author doubtless is mistaken in
   making of this man a thief. The synoptics are much nearer probability
   in representing him to be a personage beloved by the people and
   arrested for causing a riot. As regards the flagellation, Mark and
   Matthew contain also a little shade more of information. In their
   account we see better that flagellation was a simple preliminary of
   crucifixion, ordained by common law. The author of the fourth Gospel
   does not seem to doubt that flagellation presupposed an irrevocable
   condemnation. Once more, he proceeds in perfect accord with Luke
   (xxiii. 16), and like the latter seeks in everything which concerns
   Pilate to exculpate the Roman authority and to inculpate the Jews.

   § 35. The minute details of the seamless coat furnish also an argument
   against our author. It might be said that his false conception of it
   arose from his having eagerly seized the parallelism of the passage in
   Psalm xxii. which he cites. We have an example of the same kind of
   error in Matt. xxi. 2-5. Perhaps also the seamless vestment of the high
   priest (Josephus, Ant. III. vii. 4) has something to do with all this.
   We touch now upon the greatest objection against the veracity of our
   author. Matthew and Mark make only the Galilean women, the inseparable
   companions of Jesus, assist at the crucifixion. Luke adds to those
   women all the people of the acquaintance of Jesus (pant es oignostoi
   auto), an addition which is at variance with the two first Gospels, and
   with what Justin tells us of the defection amongst the disciples (oi
   gnori moiautou pantes) after the crucifixion. At all events, in the
   three first Gospels, this group of the faithful kept at a distance from
   the cross, and did not hold converse with Jesus. Our Gospel adds three
   essential details. 1st. Mary, the mother of Jesus, assisted at the
   crucifixion. 2nd. John also assisted at it. 3rd. They all stood at the
   foot of the cross; Jesus conversed with them, and confided the care of
   his mother to his favourite disciple. This is most singular. "The
   mother of the sons of Zebedee," or Salome, whom Matthew and Mark place
   amongst the faithful women, is deprived of these honours in the recital
   which is alleged to have been written by her son. The attributing of
   the name of Mary to the sister of Mary, the mother of Jesus, is also a
   most singular thing. Here I am wholly with the synoptics. "That the
   knowledge of the touching presence of Mary near the cross, and the
   filial functions which Jesus entrusted to John," says M. Strauss,
   "should be forgotten, is that which is indeed less easy of
   comprehension than it is to comprehend why all this should have been
   invented by the circle from which the fourth Gospel emanated. Is it to
   be thought that it was a circle in which the Apostle John enjoyed
   especial veneration, the proof of which we see in the care with which
   our Gospel chooses him from amongst the three most esteemed confidants
   of Jesus, in order to make of him the one apostle well-beloved?
   henceforth, is it possible to find anything which puts the seal to this
   predilection in a more striking manner than the solemn declaration of
   Jesus, who, by a last act of his will, bequeaths to John his mother, as
   the most precious legacy, substituted him thus in his place, and made
   him Vicar of Christ,' without thinking whether it was natural to ask
   this, both in respect of Mary and of the apostle well-beloved, and
   whether it was possible when they were far removed from the side of
   Jesus at that supreme moment?"

   This is very happily put. It completely proves that our author had more
   than one arrière pensée, that he had not the sincerity and the absolute
   naïvete of Matthew and Mark. But it is, at the same time, the most
   apparent indication of the origin of the work we are discussing. In
   comparing this passage with others where the privileges "of the
   disciple whom Jesus loved" are mentioned, there can be no doubt as to
   the Christian family whence this book originated. This does not prove,
   however, that an immediate disciple of Jesus wrote it; yet it proves
   that he who held the pen believed, or wished it to be believed, that he
   recorded the recollections of an immediate disciple of Jesus, and that
   his intention was to exalt the prerogative of that disciple, and show
   that he had been what neither James nor Peter had been--a true brother,
   a spiritual brother of Jesus.

   In any case, this new accord which we have found between our text and
   the Gospel is very remarkable. The words of Luke, in fact (xxiii. 49),
   do not exactly exclude Mary from the foot of the cross, and the author
   of the Acts, who is in truth the same person as the author of the third
   Gospel, places Mary amongst the disciples at Jerusalem a few days after
   the death of Jesus. But this is of small historical value, for the
   author of the third Gospel and of the Acts (at least of the first
   chapters of the latter work) is the least authoritative traditionist of
   all the New Testament. Still, it establishes more and more this fact,
   in my eyes a very serious one, that the Johannine tradition was not an
   isolated accident in the primitive Church, that many traditions
   belonging to the school of John had become known or were common to
   other Christian churches, even before the compilation of the fourth
   Gospel, or at least independently of it. For to suppose that the author
   of the fourth Gospel had the Gospel of Luke under his eyes when
   composing his work, is what appears to me most improbable.

   § 37. Our text recovers its superiority in that which concerns the
   potion offered on the cross. This circumstance, with respect to which
   Matthew and Mark express themselves with obscurity, which in Luke is
   entirely transformed (xxiii. 36), finds here its true explanation. It
   is Jesus himself who, burning with thirst, asks for something to drink.
   A soldier offers him, on a sponge, a little acidulated water. This is
   very natural and most consistent with ancient usage. It's presented
   neither in derision nor to aggravate his sufferings, as the synoptics
   would have us believe. It is a humane action on the part of the
   soldier.

   § 38. Our Gospel omits the earthquake and the phenomena which the most
   widely circulated legend would have it believed accompanied the last
   supper of Jesus.

   § 39. The episode of the crurifragium (the breaking of Jesus' legs) and
   the lance thrust, which are peculiar to our Gospel, is certainly
   possible. The ancient Jewish and Roman customs, contained in v. 31, are
   exact. The crurifragium was indeed a Roman punishment. As to the
   medicine spoken of in v. 34, it is attributable to several sources.
   But, even though our author should give proof here of an imperfect
   physiology, no inference can be drawn from this. I am aware that the
   lance thrust may have been invented to accord with Zechariah xii. 10,
   comp. Apoc. i. 7. I recognise that the à priori symbolical explanation
   was very well adapted to the circumstance that Jesus was not subjected
   to the crurifragium. The author wishes to assimilate Jesus to the
   paschal lamb, and it suits his thesis very well indeed that the bones
   of Jesus were not broken. Nor was he perhaps displeased that a little
   hyssop should have been introduced. As for the water and the blood
   which flowed from his side, it is equally easy to discover their
   dogmatic value. Is it to be said that the author of the fourth Gospel
   invented these details? I can very well understand people who reason
   thus: Jesus, as Messiah, was to be born at Bethlehem; the writings,
   most improbable in other respects, which make his parents go to
   Bethlehem on the eve of his birth, belong to fiction. But can it also
   be said that it was written beforehand that not a bone of Jesus was to
   be broken, and that water and blood should flow from his side? Is it
   not admissible that such circumstances really happened, circumstances
   that the subtle mind of the disciples would instantly remark, and
   whence appeared profound providential combinations? I know of nothing
   more instructive in this respect than in the comparison of that which
   concerns the potion offered to Jesus before the crucifixion in Mark
   (xv. 23) and in Matthew (xxvii. 34). Mark here, as almost always, is
   the most original. According to his account, Jesus is offered, as was
   customary, an aromatic wine, to render him insensible. There is nothing
   Messiani about that. According to Matthew, the aromatic wine was
   compounded of gall and vinegar. In this manner was brought about a
   pretended fulfilment of the 22nd verse of Psalm lxix. Here then is one
   instance where we can attach to a fact a process of transformation. If
   we had only the narrative of Matthew, we would be authorised in
   believing that that circumstance was of pure invention, that it was
   created to obtain the realisation of a passage alleged to have
   reference to the Messiah. But the account of Mark indeed proves that
   there was in this instance an actual fact, and that it has been warped
   to suit the requirements of the Messianic interpretation.

   § 40. At the burial, Nicodemus, a personage peculiar to our Gospel,
   reappears. It must be observed that this personage plays no part in the
   early apostolic history. Moreover, as regards the Twelve Apostles,
   seven or eight of them disappeared completely after the death of Jesus.
   It seems that there were near Jesus groups which looked upon him in
   very different lights, and some of which do not figure in the history
   of the Church. The author of the teachings which form the basis of our
   Gospel has been able to recognise friends of Jesus who are not
   mentioned in the synoptics, who lived in a less extended world. The
   evangelical personnel was very different in the different Christian
   families. James, brother of the Lord, a man in St. Paul's eyes of the
   first importance, plays only a very secondary part in the eyes of the
   synoptics and of our author. Mary Magdalene, who, according to the four
   texts, played a capital part in the resurrection, is not included by
   St. Paul in the number of the persons to whom Jesus showed himself, and
   after that solemn hour she is no more heard of It was the same in the
   case of Babism. In the accounts which we possess of the origins of that
   religion, and which are in complete accord, the personnel differs quite
   sensibly. Each witness has observed the fact from his own point of
   view, and has attributed a special importance to such of the founders
   as were known to him.

   Observe a new textual coincidence between Luke (xx3 53) and John (xix.
   41).

   § 41. An important fact arises from the discussion which have just
   instituted. Our Gospel, disagreeing very considerably with the
   synoptics up to the last week of Jesus, is throughout the whole account
   of the Passion in general accord with them. We cannot say, however,
   that it has borrowed from them, for, on the contrary, it sails
   perfectly dear of them, it has not copied any of their expressions. If
   the author of the fourth Gospel had read some account of the synoptic
   tradition, which is very possible, it must at least be said that he did
   not have it before him when he wrote. What is to be concluded hence?
   That he had a tradition of his own, a tradition similar to that of the
   synoptics, although between the two we have only intrinsic reasons to
   guide us in forming a decision. A fictitious narrative, a sort of à
   priori gospel, written in the second century, would not have had that
   character. Like as with the apocryphas, the author has copied the
   synoptics, but has amplified them to suit his own tastes. The position
   of the Johannine writer is that of an author who was not ignorant of
   what had already been written on the subject he was treating, who
   approved many of the things which had been said, but who believed
   himself to be possessed of superior information, and advanced the
   latter without disturbing himself about others. This may be compared to
   what we know of the Gospel of Marcion. Marcion wrote a gospel under
   similar conditions to those which had been attributed to the author of
   the fourth Gospel. But observe the difference: Marcion had a sort of
   agreement or had an extract made setting forth certain views. A
   composition of the same description as that imputed to the author of
   our gospel, if that author lived in the second century and wrote with
   the end in view that is alleged of him, is absolutely without
   precedent. That is neither the eclectic method and conciliation of
   Tatian and of Marcion, nor the amplification pasticcio of the
   apocryphal Gospels, nor the wholly arbitrary reverie, without
   historical basis, of the Pista Sophia. To get rid of certain dogmatic
   difficulties, one falls into verbal historical difficulties which are
   destitute of meaning.

   § 42. The agreement of our Gospel with the synoptics, which strikes one
   in the narrative of the Passion, is hardly discernible, at least in
   Matthew, in that of the resurrection and what follows. But here again I
   think our author much more near the truth. According to it, Mary
   Magdalene alone goes first to the tomb; alone, she is the first
   messenger of the resurrection, which accords with the finale of the
   Gospel of Mark (xvi. 9, et seq.). On the news brought by Mary
   Magdalene, Peter and John go to the tomb; another most remarkable
   consonance, even in the expression and the little details, with Luke
   (xxiv. 1, 2, 12, 24) and with the finale of Mark, preserved in the
   manuscript L and in the margin of the Philoxenian version. The two
   first evangelists do not speak of a visit of the apostles to the tomb.
   A decisive authority gives here the advantage to the tradition of Luke
   and of the Johannine writer; we refer to St. Paul. According to the
   first epistle to the Corinthians, he writes about the year 57, and
   surely a good while before the Gospels of Luke and John the first
   apparition of the resurrected Jesus was seen by Cephas. True, this
   assertion of Paul coincides better with the account of Luke, who does
   not mention Peter, than with the account of the fourth Gospel,
   according to which the well-beloved apostle should have accompanied
   Peter. But the first chapters of the Acts constantly present Peter and
   John to us as inseparable companions. It is probable that at this
   decisive moment they were together, that they were together when they
   were informed of the event, and that they ran together. The finale of
   Mark in the manuscript L makes use of a more vague formula: oi peri ton
   Petrou.

   The ingenuous personal characteristics which are presented here in the
   narrative of our author are almost sign-manuals. The determined
   adversaries of the authenticity of the fourth Gospel impose on
   themselves a difficult task in forcing themselves to see in these
   characteristics the artifices of a forger. The design of the author to
   place himself alongside or before Peter in important circumstances (i.
   35, et seq.; xiii. 23, et seq.; xviii. 15, et seq.) is altogether
   remarkable. If one would give to it the meaning desired, one would say
   that the compilation of these passages could be but little posterior to
   the death of John. The account of the first goings and comings of
   Sunday morning, which are somewhat confused in the synoptics, is in our
   author perfectly distinct. Yes, here the tradition is original, the
   disjointed members of which have been arranged in the three synoptics
   in three different manners, but wholly inferior, in point of
   likelihood, to the scheme of the fourth Gospel. Remark, that at the
   decisive moment on Sunday morning, the disciple alleged to be the
   author does not attribute to himself any particular vision. A forger,
   writing without regard to tradition for the purpose of creating the
   chief of a school, would not have committed the blunder, in the midst
   of a rolling fire of apparitions, with which latter every tradition of
   these first days was full, of attributing it to a favourite disciple,
   just as it has been done in the case of James.

   Note again a coincidence between Luke (xxiv. 4) and John (xx. 12, 13).
   Matthew and Mark have only an angel at this moment. Verse v. 9 is un
   trait de lumiere. The synoptics are here destitute of all credulity,
   when they pretend that Jesus had predicted his resurrection.

   § 43. The apparition which follows, in our author--we mean the one
   which takes place before the apostles assemble on Sunday
   evening--coincides well with the account of Paul. But it is with Luke
   that the agreements here become striking and decisive. Not only does
   the apparition take place on the same date in presence of the same
   people, but also the words pronounced by Jesus are the same; the
   circumstance of Jesus showing his feet and his hands is lightly
   transposed, but it is recognisable as a part of the other, whilst it is
   wanting in the two first synoptics. The Gospel of the Hebrews marches
   here in accord with the third and fourth Gospels. "But why," it might
   be said, "hold to the narrative of an eyewitness, a narrative which
   embraces manifest impossibilities? He who does not admit the miracle,
   and admits the authenticity of the fourth Gospel, is he not forced to
   regard as an imposture the so formal assurance of verses 30, 31?"
   Certainly not. St. Paul also affirms that he saw Jesus, and yet we do
   not reject either the authenticity of the first chapter to the
   Corinthians or the veracity of St. Paul.

   § 44. A peculiarity of our Gospel is that the inspiration of the Holy
   Spirit occurs on the very evening of the resurrection (xx. 22). Luke
   (Acts ii. et seq.) places this event after the ascension. It is
   nevertheless remarkable that the verse John xx. 22 has its parallel in
   Luke xxiv. 49. Only the contour of the passage in Luke is made to be
   undecided, so as not to contradict the account of the Acts (ii. 1 et
   seq.). Here again, the third and fourth Gospels communicate with one
   another through a kind of secret channel.

   § 45. Like all critics, I make the compilation of the fourth Gospel
   terminate at the end of chapter xx. Chapter xxi. is an addition, but an
   addition nearly contemporaneous, either by the author himself or by one
   of his disciples. The chapter contains the account of a new apparition
   of the resurrected Jesus. Here again important coincidences with the
   third Gospel are to be remarked (comp. John xxi. 12, 13 with Luke xxiv.
   41-43), not to mention certain resemblances to the Gospel to the
   Hebrews.

   46. Details somewhat obscure follow (15 et seq.), in which we have a
   more lively sensation than anywhere else of the imprint of the school
   of John. The perpetual preoccupation of the relations of John and Peter
   reappear. The aim of all this resembles a series of private letters
   which are only understood by him who has written them or by the
   initiated. The allusion to the death of Peter, the amicable and
   fraternal sentiment of rivalry between the two apostles, the belief,
   emitted with reserve, that John should not die before seeing the
   apparition of Jesus--all this appears sincere. The exaggeration of bad
   style, in v. 25, is not felt to be inconsistent in a composition so
   inferior, in the literary sense, to the synoptics. This verse is
   lacking, moreover, in the Codex Sinaïticus. Verse 24, finally, seems a
   signature. The words, "And we know that his witness is true," are an
   addition of the disciples, or rather induce the belief that the last
   editors utilised notes or recollections of the apostle. These
   protestations of veracity are found in almost similar terms in two
   writings which are by the same hand as our Gospel.

   § 47. So, in the account of the life beyond the tomb of Jesus, the
   fourth Gospel retains its superiority. This superiority is to be
   especially recognised in portions taken generally. In the Gospels of
   Luke and Mark (xvi. 9-20) the life of Jesus resurrected has the
   appearance of enduring only for a day. In Matthew it seems to have been
   short. In the Acts (chapter i.) it endures forty days. In the three
   synoptics and in the Acts it terminates by an adieu or by an ascension
   to Heaven. Matters are arranged in a less convenient form in the fourth
   Gospel. The life beyond the tomb has no fixed limits; it is prolonged
   somehow indefinitely. Elsewhere I have demonstrated the superiority of
   this system. It suffices for the present to remember that it responds
   much better to the important passage of St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv. 5-8.

   What is the result of this long analysis? Firstly, that considered by
   itself the narrative of the material circumstances of the life of
   Jesus, as furnished by the fourth Gospel, is superior in point of
   probability to the narrative of the synoptics. Secondly, that, on the
   other hand, the discourses which the fourth Gospel impute to Jesus have
   in general no character of authenticity. Thirdly, that the author has a
   tradition of the life of Jesus very different from that of the
   synoptics, except as concerns the last days. Fourthly, that this
   tradition, however, was pretty well spread; for Luke, who does not
   belong to the school whence emerged our Gospel, has an idea more or
   less vague of many of the facts which were known to our author, and of
   which Matthew and Mark knew nothing. Fifthly, that the work is less
   beautiful than the synoptic Gospels, Matthew and Mark being the
   masterpieces of spontaneous art, Luke presenting an admirable
   combination of ingenuous art and of reflection, whilst the fourth
   Gospel presents only a series of notes, very badly arranged, in which
   legend and tradition, reflection and naïveté se fondent mal. Sixthly,
   that the author of the fourth Gospel, whoever he may be, has written to
   raise the authority of one of the apostles, in order to show that this
   apostle had played a part, in circumstances where he is not mentioned
   in the other narratives, in order to prove that he knew things which
   the other disciples knew not. Seventhly, that the author of the fourth
   Gospel wrote at a time when Christianity was more advanced than the
   synoptics, and with a more exalted idea of the divine rôle of Jesus,
   the figure of Jesus being with him more rugged, more heretical, like
   that of an Æon or a divine hypostasis who operates through his own
   will. Eighthly, that if the material teachings are more exact than
   those of the synoptics, its historic colouring is much less so,
   insomuch that, in order to seize the general physiognomy of Jesus, the
   synoptic Gospels, despite their lacunes and their errors, are still the
   veritable guides.

   Naturally, these reasons in favour of the fourth Gospel would be
   singularly confirmed if it could be established that the author of this
   Gospel is the apostle John, son of Zebedee. But the present is a
   research of a different order. Our aim has been to examine the fourth
   Gospel by itself, independently of its author. This question of the
   authorship of the fourth Gospel is assuredly the most singular that
   there is in literary history. I know of no question of criticism in
   which contrary appearances are so evenly balanced and which hold the
   mind more completely in suspense.

   It is clear at first that the author wishes to pass himself off as an
   ocular witness of evangelical facts (i. 14, xix. 35), and for the
   friend preferred by Jesus (xiii. 22 et seq., xix. 26 et seq., compared
   with xxi. 24). It will serve no purpose to say that chap. xxi. is an
   addition, since this addition is by the author himself or by his
   school. In two other places, moreover (i. 35 et seq., xviii. 15 et
   seq.), one sees clearly that the author loves to speak of himself in
   covered language. One of two things must be true; either the author of
   the fourth Gospel is a disciple of Jesus, an intimate disciple, and
   belonging to the oldest epoch; or else the author has employed, in
   order to give himself authority, an artifice which he has pursued from
   the commencement of the book to the end, the tendency being to make
   believe that he was a witness as well situated as it was possible to be
   to render a true account of the facts.

   Who is the disciple whose authority the author thus seeks to make
   prevail? The title indicates it; it is "John." There is not the least
   reason to suppose it may have been added in opposition to the
   intentions of the real author. It was certainly written at the head of
   our Gospel at the end of the second century. On the other hand,
   evangelical history only presents, outside of John the Baptist, a
   single personage of the name of John. It is necessary then to choose
   between the hypotheses; either we must acknowledge John, son of
   Zebedee, as the author of the fourth Gospel, or regard that Gospel as
   an apocryphal writing composed by some individual who wished to pass it
   off as a work of John, son of Zebedee. The question at issue here is
   not in fact one of legends, the work of multitudes, for which no person
   is responsible. A man who, in order to give credence to that which he
   records, deceives the public not only in regard to his name, but also
   as to the value of his testimony, is not a writer of legends, he is an
   impostor. Such a biography as that of Francis d'Assisi, written one or
   two hundred years posterior to that extraordinary man, may recount
   shoals of miracles created by tradition, without ceasing, for all that,
   to be one of the most candid and most innocent men of the world. But if
   this biography were to say, "I was his companion, he preferred me to
   any other, everything I am about to tell you is true, for I have seen
   it," without contradicting the proper qualification, then it is quite
   another thing.

   That fault is not, moreover, the only one which the author may have
   committed. We have three epistles which in like manner bear the name of
   John. If there is one thing in the domain of criticism which is
   probable, it is that the first at least of these epistles is by the
   same author as the fourth Gospel. One might almost denominate it as a
   detached chapter. The vocabulary of the two writings is identical. Now
   the language of the works of the New Testament is so poor in expression
   and so little varied that such inductions can be drawn with an almost
   absolute certainty. The author of this epistle, like the author of the
   Gospel, gives himself out as an eyewitness (1 John i. 1, et seq., iv.
   14) of evangelical history. He represents himself as a person
   well-known, and enjoying high consideration in the Church. At first
   glance, it seems that the most natural hypothesis is to admit that the
   whole of these writings are indeed the work of John, son of Zebedee.

   Let us hasten to add, nevertheless, that critics of the first order
   have not without grave reason rejected the authenticity of the fourth
   Gospel. The work is too rarely cited in the most ancient Christian
   literature; its authority only commences to be known much later.
   Nothing could less resemble than this Gospel that which might be
   expected from John, an old fisher on the Lake of Gennesareth. The Greek
   in which it is written is not in any sense the Palestinian Greek with
   which we are acquainted in the other books of the New Testament. The
   ideas, in particular, are of an entirely different order. Here we are
   in full Philonian and almost Gnostic metaphysics. The discourses of
   Jesus as they are reported by this pretended witness, this confidential
   friend, are false, often flat, nay impossible. In a word, the
   Apocalypse is also given out as the work of John, not, it is true, in
   the quality of Apostle, but by one who, in the churches of Asia,
   arrogates to himself such a preeminence, and who, with but little
   effort, can be identified with the Apostle John. Now, when we compare
   the style and the thoughts of the author of the Apocalypse with the
   style and the thoughts of the author of the fourth Gospel and the first
   Johannine epistle, we find the most striking discordance. How are we to
   get out of that labyrinth of singular contradictions and of
   inextricable difficulties?

   For my part I see but one way. It is to hold that the fourth Gospel is,
   indeed, in a sense chataIoanoen, that it was not written by John
   himself, that it was for a long time esoteric and secret in one of the
   schools which adhered to John. To penetrate into the mystery of this
   school, to learn how the writing in question was put forth, is simply
   impossible. Can the notes or data left by the Apostle be used as a
   basis for the text which we have? Has a secretary, nurtured by the
   reading of Philo, and possessing a style of his own, given to the
   narratives and letters of his master a turn which without this they
   could never have had? Have we not here something analogous to the
   letters of Saint Catherine of Sienna, revised by her secretary, or to
   those revelations of Catherine Emmerich, of which we can say equally
   that they are by Catherine, and that they are by Bretano, the ideas of
   Catherine having traversed the style of Bretano? Have not some purely
   semi-Gnostics, at the close of the life of the Apostle, seized his pen,
   and, under the pretext of aiding him in writing his recollections and
   of assisting him in his correspondence, incorporated their ideas, and
   favourite expressions, covering themselves with his authority. Who is
   that Presbyteros Johannes, a sort of double of the Apostle, whose tomb
   is pointed out by the side of John's? Is he a different personage from
   the Apostle? Is he the Apostle himself whose long life was for many
   years the foundation of the hopes of believers? I have elsewhere
   touched upon these questions. I shall often return to them again. I
   have had but one aim in this: that in recurring so often in the "Life
   of Jesus" to the fourth Gospel, in order to establish the thread of my
   narrative, I have had strong reasons, even in the case of the said
   Gospel, for not holding it to be the work of the Apostle John.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]33:19   [2]48:22

   Exodus

   [3]12:3   [4]12:6

   Joshua

   [5]24:32

   2 Samuel

   [6]15:23

   Psalms

   [7]22:1-31   [8]69:22

   Proverbs

   [9]19:17

   Isaiah

   [10]52:13-15   [11]53:1-12

   Zechariah

   [12]12:10

   Matthew

   [13]5:3-10   [14]6:19-34   [15]8:5   [16]10:20   [17]13:44-46
   [18]14:1-36   [19]21:2-5   [20]27:34

   Mark

   [21]8:22   [22]8:23   [23]13:11   [24]15:23   [25]16:9   [26]16:9-20
   [27]131

   Luke

   [28]6:24-25   [29]7:1   [30]8:45-46   [31]12:11-12   [32]14:12-14
   [33]16:19-25   [34]21:1-38   [35]23:16   [36]23:36   [37]23:49
   [38]23:53   [39]24:1-2   [40]24:4   [41]24:12   [42]24:24
   [43]24:41-43   [44]24:49   [45]24:49

   John

   [46]1:1-14   [47]1:1-14   [48]1:14   [49]1:14   [50]1:28   [51]1:35
   [52]1:35   [53]1:35   [54]1:35-51   [55]1:39   [56]1:43   [57]1:51
   [58]2:1-12   [59]2:10   [60]2:11   [61]2:11-12   [62]2:13   [63]2:20
   [64]2:23-25   [65]3:1-21   [66]3:12   [67]3:22   [68]3:22-23
   [69]3:22-4:2   [70]3:24   [71]3:25   [72]3:26   [73]3:27-36   [74]4:1
   [75]4:1   [76]4:1-42   [77]4:2   [78]4:2   [79]4:2   [80]4:2
   [81]4:3-6   [82]4:5-6   [83]4:9   [84]4:14   [85]4:16-18
   [86]4:21-23   [87]4:22   [88]4:22   [89]4:35   [90]4:43-45   [91]4:44
   [92]4:46   [93]4:46-54   [94]5:1-47   [95]5:2   [96]6:1-4
   [97]6:1-71   [98]6:16   [99]6:23   [100]6:60   [101]6:68
   [102]6:70-71   [103]7:1-10   [104]7:11   [105]7:50   [106]7:50
   [107]7:52   [108]8:1-2   [109]8:7-59   [110]9:1-41   [111]9:6
   [112]9:7   [113]10:1-20   [114]10:22   [115]10:24-39   [116]10:40
   [117]11:1-45   [118]11:45   [119]11:46-54   [120]11:55-56   [121]12:1
   [122]12:1   [123]12:1   [124]12:1   [125]12:1-2   [126]12:6
   [127]12:6   [128]12:9-11   [129]12:12   [130]12:12   [131]12:17
   [132]12:17-18   [133]12:18   [134]12:20   [135]12:23   [136]12:25
   [137]12:27-28   [138]13:1-38   [139]13:2   [140]13:10   [141]13:11
   [142]13:18   [143]13:22   [144]13:23   [145]13:29   [146]14:16
   [147]14:26   [148]15:26   [149]16:7   [150]16:7   [151]16:13
   [152]17:1-26   [153]18:1   [154]18:1-40   [155]18:6   [156]18:8
   [157]18:15   [158]18:15   [159]18:16   [160]18:28   [161]19:1-42
   [162]19:9   [163]19:23-24   [164]19:26   [165]19:29   [166]19:31
   [167]19:34   [168]19:35   [169]19:36   [170]19:36   [171]19:39
   [172]19:41   [173]20:9   [174]20:12-13   [175]20:22   [176]20:22
   [177]20:30-31   [178]21:1-25   [179]21:1-25   [180]21:1-25
   [181]21:1-25   [182]21:12-13   [183]21:15   [184]21:21-23
   [185]21:24   [186]21:24   [187]21:25

   Acts

   [188]1:1-4   [189]1:1-8   [190]2:1   [191]2:1-47   [192]2:1-47
   [193]2:1-47

   1 Corinthians

   [194]15:5-8

   1 John

   [195]1:1

   Revelation

   [196]1:7
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * Dogia: [197]1
     * Lin: [198]1
     * Martha diechonei: [199]1
     * Os Enoch legei: [200]1
     * Tõnchedron: [201]1
     * diechonei: [202]1
     * eiloos: [203]1
     * lechthenta e prachthenta: [204]1
     * lechtheuta e prachtheuta: [205]1
     * logia: [206]1 [207]2
     * oi gnori moiautou pantes: [208]1
     * oi peri ton Petrou.: [209]1
     * parakletos: [210]1
     * pant es oignostoi auto: [211]1
     * sunadelphos: [212]1
     * touchedrou: [213]1
     * touchedrou: [214]1
     * chataIoanoen: [215]1
     * Ho Presbuteros: [216]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Dies iræ, dies illa!: [217]1
     * Est Deus in nobis.: [218]1
     * In ictu oculi!: [219]1
     * Scribitur ad narrandum: [220]1
     * Scribitur ad probandum: [221]1
     * convicium : [222]1
     * crurifragium: [223]1 [224]2 [225]3
     * crurifragium : [226]1 [227]2
     * petitio principii: [228]1 [229]2
     * quondam: [230]1
     * sursum corda: [231]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Chaumont: [232]1
     * Rue de Rivoli: [233]1
     * arrière pensée: [234]1 [235]2 [236]3 [237]4
     * belles lettres: [238]1
     * depôt: [239]1
     * données legendaires: [240]1
     * en bloc: [241]1
     * ensemble: [242]1
     * finesse: [243]1
     * matériel: [244]1
     * mise-en-scène: [245]1 [246]2
     * mélange: [247]1
     * naïveté se fondent mal: [248]1
     * on dit: [249]1
     * par excellence: [250]1 [251]2
     * personnel: [252]1 [253]2
     * points d'appui: [254]1
     * raison d'être: [255]1
     * resumé: [256]1
     * régime: [257]1
     * souvenirs: [258]1
     * timbre: [259]1
     * trait de lumière: [260]1
     * un trait de lumiere: [261]1
     * universelle consolation: [262]1
     * éclat: [263]1 [264]2
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [265]i  [266]ii  [267]iii  [268]iv  [269]v  [270]vi  [271]vii
   [272]viii  [273]ix  [274]x  [275]xi  [276]xii  [277]xiii  [278]xiv
   [279]xv  [280]xvi  [281]xvii  [282]xviii  [283]xix  [284]xx  [285]xxi
   [286]xxii  [287]xxiii  [288]xxiv  [289]xxv  [290]xxvi  [291]xxvii
   [292]xxviii  [293]xxix  [294]xxx  [295]xxxi  [296]xxxii  [297]xxxiii
   [298]xxxiv  [299]xxxv  [300]xxxvi  [301]xxxvii  [302]xxxviii
   [303]xxxix  [304]xl  [305]xli  [306]xlii  [307]xliii  [308]xliv
   [309]xlv  [310]xlvi  [311]xlvii  [312]xlviii  [313]xlix  [314]l
   [315]li  [316]lii  [317]liii  [318]liv  [319]lv  [320]lvi  [321]1
   [322]2  [323]3  [324]4  [325]5  [326]6  [327]7  [328]8  [329]9
   [330]10  [331]11  [332]12  [333]13  [334]14  [335]15  [336]16  [337]17
   [338]18  [339]19  [340]20  [341]21  [342]22  [343]23  [344]24  [345]25
   [346]26  [347]27  [348]28  [349]29  [350]30  [351]31  [352]32  [353]33
   [354]34  [355]35  [356]36  [357]37  [358]38  [359]39  [360]40  [361]41
   [362]42  [363]43  [364]44  [365]45  [366]46  [367]47  [368]48  [369]49
   [370]50  [371]51  [372]52  [373]53  [374]54  [375]55  [376]56  [377]57
   [378]58  [379]59  [380]60  [381]61  [382]62  [383]63  [384]64  [385]65
   [386]66  [387]67  [388]68  [389]69  [390]70  [391]71  [392]72  [393]73
   [394]74  [395]75  [396]76  [397]77  [398]78  [399]79  [400]80  [401]81
   [402]82  [403]83  [404]84  [405]85  [406]86  [407]87  [408]88  [409]89
   [410]90  [411]91  [412]92  [413]93  [414]94  [415]95  [416]96  [417]97
   [418]98  [419]99  [420]100  [421]101  [422]102  [423]103  [424]104
   [425]105  [426]106  [427]107  [428]108  [429]109  [430]110  [431]111
   [432]112  [433]113  [434]114  [435]115  [436]116  [437]117  [438]118
   [439]119  [440]120  [441]121  [442]122  [443]123  [444]124  [445]125
   [446]126  [447]127  [448]128  [449]129  [450]130  [451]131  [452]132
   [453]133  [454]134  [455]135  [456]136  [457]137  [458]138  [459]139
   [460]140  [461]141  [462]142  [463]143  [464]144  [465]145  [466]146
   [467]147  [468]148  [469]149  [470]150  [471]151  [472]152  [473]153
   [474]154  [475]155  [476]156  [477]157  [478]158  [479]159  [480]160
   [481]161  [482]162  [483]163  [484]164  [485]165  [486]166  [487]167
   [488]168  [489]169  [490]170  [491]171  [492]172  [493]173  [494]174
   [495]175  [496]176  [497]177  [498]178  [499]179  [500]180  [501]181
   [502]182  [503]183  [504]184  [505]185  [506]186  [507]187  [508]188
   [509]189  [510]190  [511]191  [512]192  [513]193  [514]194  [515]195
   [516]196  [517]197  [518]198  [519]199  [520]200  [521]201  [522]202
   [523]203  [524]204  [525]205  [526]206  [527]207  [528]208  [529]209
   [530]210  [531]211  [532]212  [533]213  [534]214  [535]215  [536]216
   [537]217  [538]218  [539]219  [540]220  [541]221  [542]222  [543]223
   [544]224  [545]225  [546]226  [547]227  [548]228  [549]229  [550]230
   [551]231  [552]232  [553]233  [554]234  [555]235  [556]236  [557]237
   [558]238  [559]239  [560]240  [561]241  [562]242  [563]243  [564]244
   [565]245  [566]246  [567]247  [568]248  [569]249  [570]250  [571]251
   [572]252  [573]253  [574]254  [575]255  [576]256  [577]257  [578]258
   [579]259  [580]260  [581]261  [582]262  [583]263  [584]264  [585]265
   [586]266  [587]267  [588]268  [589]269  [590]270  [591]271  [592]272
   [593]273  [594]274  [595]275  [596]276  [597]277  [598]278  [599]279
   [600]280  [601]281  [602]282  [603]283  [604]284  [605]285  [606]286
   [607]287  [608]288  [609]289  [610]290  [611]291  [612]292  [613]293
   [614]294  [615]295  [616]296  [617]297  [618]298  [619]299  [620]300
   [621]301  [622]302  [623]303  [624]304  [625]305  [626]306  [627]307
   [628]308  [629]309  [630]310  [631]311  [632]312  [633]313  [634]314
   [635]315  [636]316
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=33&scrV=19#xxxiii-p20.4
   2. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=22#xxxiii-p20.5
   3. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=3#xxxiii-p44.3
   4. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xxxiii-p44.3
   5. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=32#xxxiii-p20.6
   6. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=23#xxxiii-p51.4
   7. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=1#xxxiii-p56.1
   8. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#xxxiii-p61.10
   9. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=17#xv-p2.3
  10. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=13#v-p7.1
  11. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#v-p7.2
  12. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxxiii-p61.5
  13. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xiv-p2.2
  14. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#xiv-p4.1
  15. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=5#xxxiii-p22.3
  16. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=20#xxxiii-p50.10
  17. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=44#xiv-p7.1
  18. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv-p15.1
  19. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=2#xxxiii-p56.2
  20. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=34#xxxiii-p61.9
  21. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=22#xxxiii-p31.5
  22. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=23#xxxiii-p31.7
  23. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=11#xxxiii-p50.11
  24. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=23#xxxiii-p61.8
  25. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=9#xxxiii-p65.1
  26. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=9#xxxiii-p72.1
  27. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=131&scrV=0#iv-p15.2
  28. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=24#xv-p2.1
  29. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=1#xxxiii-p22.4
  30. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=45#xxxiii-p42.1
  31. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=11#xxxiii-p50.9
  32. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=12#xv-p2.2
  33. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#xiv-p7.2
  34. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iv-p13.1
  35. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=16#xxxiii-p55.2
  36. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=36#xxxiii-p59.1
  37. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=49#xxxiii-p58.1
  38. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=53#xxxiii-p63.1
  39. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=1#xxxiii-p65.2
  40. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=4#xxxiii-p67.1
  41. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=12#xxxiii-p65.2
  42. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=24#xxxiii-p65.2
  43. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=41#xxxiii-p70.3
  44. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=49#xxxiii-p50.5
  45. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=49#xxxiii-p69.4
  46. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p3.1
  47. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p17.3
  48. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxxiii-p3.2
  49. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxxiii-p75.1
  50. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xxxiii-p5.1
  51. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#xxxiii-p6.1
  52. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#xxxiii-p66.1
  53. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#xxxiii-p75.7
  54. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#xxxiii-p7.1
  55. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=39#xxxiii-p6.2
  56. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=43#xxxiii-p24.2
  57. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#xxxiii-p6.3
  58. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxxiii-p10.1
  59. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxxiii-p10.3
  60. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxxiii-p10.4
  61. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxxiii-p10.5
  62. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xxxiii-p11.1
  63. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=20#xxxiii-p15.1
  64. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#xxxiii-p16.1
  65. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxxiii-p17.1
  66. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxxiii-p17.2
  67. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xxxiii-p19.9
  68. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xxxiii-p18.3
  69. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xxxiii-p18.1
  70. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=24#xxxiii-p19.1
  71. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=25#xxxiii-p19.2
  72. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=26#xxxiii-p19.3
  73. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=27#xxxiii-p19.5
  74. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xxxiii-p19.4
  75. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xxxiii-p19.6
  76. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xxxiii-p20.1
  77. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xxxiii-p19.7
  78. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xxxiii-p19.8
  79. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xxxiii-p19.10
  80. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xxxiii-p20.10
  81. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xxxiii-p20.2
  82. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=5#xxxiii-p20.3
  83. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#xxxiii-p20.7
  84. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#xxxiii-p77.2
  85. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xxxiii-p20.8
  86. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=21#xxxiii-p20.12
  87. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#xxxiii-p20.9
  88. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#xxxiii-p20.13
  89. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=35#xxxiii-p20.11
  90. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=43#xxxiii-p21.1
  91. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=44#xxxiii-p21.2
  92. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=46#xxxiii-p22.1
  93. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=46#xxxiii-p22.2
  94. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xxxiii-p23.1
  95. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xxxiii-p23.2
  96. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xxxiii-p24.1
  97. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xxxiii-p48.2
  98. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xxxiii-p25.1
  99. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=23#xxxiii-p25.2
 100. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=60#xxxiii-p26.1
 101. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=68#xxxiii-p26.2
 102. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=70#xxxiii-p26.2
 103. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=1#xxxiii-p27.1
 104. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=11#xxxiii-p28.1
 105. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=50#xxxiii-p17.5
 106. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=50#xxxiii-p28.2
 107. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=52#xxxiii-p28.3
 108. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=1#xxxiii-p29.1
 109. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=7#xxxiii-p30.1
 110. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=1#xxxiii-p31.1
 111. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xxxiii-p31.6
 112. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xxxiii-p31.3
 113. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=1#xxxiii-p31.2
 114. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=22#xxxiii-p32.1
 115. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=24#xxxiii-p32.2
 116. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=40#xxxiii-p32.3
 117. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xxxiii-p33.1
 118. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=45#xxxiii-p44.9
 119. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=46#xxxiii-p43.1
 120. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=55#xxxiii-p43.2
 121. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxxiii-p44.1
 122. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxxiii-p44.2
 123. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxxiii-p48.3
 124. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxxiii-p54.3
 125. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxxiii-p44.8
 126. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xxxiii-p44.5
 127. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xxxiii-p44.6
 128. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=9#xxxiii-p44.8
 129. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=12#xxxiii-p24.3
 130. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=12#xxxiii-p45.1
 131. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=17#xxxiii-p44.8
 132. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=17#xxxiii-p45.2
 133. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xxxiii-p44.8
 134. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xxxiii-p45.3
 135. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=23#xxxiii-p45.4
 136. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=25#xxxiii-p46.1
 137. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#xxxiii-p47.1
 138. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xxxiii-p48.1
 139. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=2#xxxiii-p49.1
 140. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#xxxiii-p49.1
 141. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=11#xxxiii-p49.1
 142. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=18#xxxiii-p49.1
 143. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=22#xxxiii-p75.3
 144. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#xxxiii-p66.2
 145. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=29#xxxiii-p49.2
 146. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#xxxiii-p50.1
 147. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xxxiii-p50.2
 148. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#xxxiii-p50.3
 149. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#xxxiii-p50.4
 150. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#xxxiii-p50.12
 151. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#xxxiii-p50.4
 152. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#xxxiii-p2.1
 153. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=1#xxxiii-p51.2
 154. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=1#xxxiii-p51.1
 155. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#xxxiii-p51.7
 156. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=8#xxxiii-p51.8
 157. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#xxxiii-p66.3
 158. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#xxxiii-p75.8
 159. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=16#xxxiii-p53.1
 160. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#xxxiii-p54.1
 161. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=1#xxxiii-p2.2
 162. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=9#xxxiii-p55.1
 163. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#iv-p40.2
 164. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=26#xxxiii-p75.4
 165. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=29#xxxiii-p54.4
 166. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=31#xxxiii-p61.2
 167. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=34#xxxiii-p61.4
 168. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=35#xxxiii-p75.2
 169. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=36#xxxiii-p44.4
 170. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=36#xxxiii-p54.2
 171. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=39#xxxiii-p17.4
 172. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=41#xxxiii-p63.3
 173. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=9#xxxiii-p67.3
 174. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=12#xxxiii-p67.2
 175. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#xxxiii-p69.1
 176. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#xxxiii-p69.3
 177. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=30#xxxiii-p68.1
 178. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iv-p27.3
 179. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#xxxiii-p25.3
 180. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#xxxiii-p70.1
 181. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#xxxiii-p75.6
 182. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=12#xxxiii-p70.2
 183. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xxxiii-p71.1
 184. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=21#iv-p27.4
 185. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=24#xxxiii-p71.3
 186. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=24#xxxiii-p75.5
 187. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=25#xxxiii-p71.2
 188. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p72.2
 189. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p50.7
 190. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxxiii-p69.5
 191. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxxiii-p50.6
 192. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxxiii-p50.8
 193. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxxiii-p69.2
 194. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#xxxiii-p72.3
 195. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p77.1
 196. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xxxiii-p61.6
 197. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p30.2
 198. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p18.4
 199. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p44.7
 200. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p7.1
 201. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p51.3
 202. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p36.1
 203. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p31.4
 204. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p37.2
 205. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p15.3
 206. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p15.4
 207. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p37.1
 208. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p56.4
 209. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p65.3
 210. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-p7.1
 211. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p56.3
 212. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-p7.2
 213. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p51.5
 214. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p51.6
 215. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p79.1
 216. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p27.2
 217. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-p15.1
 218. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-p32.1
 219. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-p16.1
 220. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p27.3
 221. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p27.2
 222. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-p3.1
 223. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxx-p1.2
 224. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxx-p3.1
 225. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p61.7
 226. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p61.1
 227. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p61.3
 228. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-p4.1
 229. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-p7.1
 230. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p21.1
 231. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-p8.1
 232. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-p2.1
 233. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-p7.1
 234. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p25.1
 235. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p37.1
 236. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p38.1
 237. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p57.1
 238. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-p2.1
 239. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p30.3
 240. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p36.2
 241. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p33.3
 242. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p18.2
 243. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p38.2
 244. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-p5.1
 245. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-p13.1
 246. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p10.2
 247. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-p8.1
 248. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p73.1
 249. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p36.3
 250. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p27.1
 251. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-p11.1
 252. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p62.1
 253. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p62.2
 254. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-p29.1
 255. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-p8.1
 256. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-p6.1
 257. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-p7.1
 258. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-p7.1
 259. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p30.4
 260. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p52.1
 261. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p67.4
 262. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-p2.1
 263. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-p33.1
 264. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-p33.2
 265. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#i-Page_i
 266. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#i-Page_ii
 267. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#i-Page_iii
 268. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ii-Page_iv
 269. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ii-Page_v
 270. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ii-Page_vi
 271. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ii-Page_vii
 272. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ii-Page_viii
 273. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ii-Page_ix
 274. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_x
 275. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xi
 276. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xii
 277. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xiii
 278. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xiv
 279. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xv
 280. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xvi
 281. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xvii
 282. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xviii
 283. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xix
 284. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xx
 285. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxi
 286. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxii
 287. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxiii
 288. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxiv
 289. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxv
 290. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxvi
 291. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxvii
 292. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxviii
 293. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxix
 294. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxx
 295. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxxi
 296. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxxii
 297. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iii-Page_xxxiii
 298. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xxxiv
 299. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xxxv
 300. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xxxvi
 301. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xxxvii
 302. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xxxviii
 303. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xxxix
 304. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xl
 305. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xli
 306. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xlii
 307. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xliii
 308. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xliv
 309. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xlv
 310. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xlvi
 311. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xlvii
 312. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xlviii
 313. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_xlix
 314. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_l
 315. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_li
 316. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_lii
 317. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_liii
 318. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_liv
 319. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_lv
 320. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#iv-Page_lvi
 321. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_1
 322. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_2
 323. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_3
 324. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_4
 325. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_5
 326. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_6
 327. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_7
 328. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_8
 329. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_9
 330. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_10
 331. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_11
 332. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_12
 333. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#v-Page_13
 334. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vi-Page_14
 335. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vi-Page_15
 336. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vi-Page_16
 337. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vi-Page_17
 338. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vi-Page_18
 339. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_19
 340. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_20
 341. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_21
 342. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_22
 343. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_23
 344. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_24
 345. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_25
 346. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#vii-Page_26
 347. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_27
 348. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_28
 349. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_29
 350. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_30
 351. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_31
 352. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_32
 353. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_33
 354. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_34
 355. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_35
 356. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_36
 357. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_37
 358. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_38
 359. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_39
 360. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_40
 361. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_41
 362. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_42
 363. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#viii-Page_43
 364. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_44
 365. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_45
 366. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_46
 367. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_47
 368. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_48
 369. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_49
 370. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_50
 371. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_51
 372. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_52
 373. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_53
 374. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_54
 375. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_55
 376. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#ix-Page_56
 377. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_57
 378. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_58
 379. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_59
 380. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_60
 381. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_61
 382. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_62
 383. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_63
 384. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_64
 385. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_65
 386. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#x-Page_66
 387. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_67
 388. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_68
 389. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_69
 390. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_70
 391. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_71
 392. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_72
 393. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_73
 394. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_74
 395. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_75
 396. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xi-Page_76
 397. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_77
 398. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_78
 399. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_79
 400. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_80
 401. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_81
 402. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_82
 403. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_83
 404. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_84
 405. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_85
 406. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xii-Page_86
 407. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_87
 408. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_88
 409. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_89
 410. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_90
 411. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_91
 412. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_92
 413. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_93
 414. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_94
 415. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiii-Page_95
 416. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_96
 417. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_97
 418. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_98
 419. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_99
 420. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_100
 421. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_101
 422. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_102
 423. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_103
 424. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xiv-Page_104
 425. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_105
 426. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_106
 427. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_107
 428. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_108
 429. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_109
 430. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_110
 431. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_111
 432. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_112
 433. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_113
 434. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xv-Page_114
 435. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvi-Page_115
 436. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvi-Page_116
 437. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvi-Page_117
 438. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvi-Page_118
 439. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvi-Page_119
 440. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvi-Page_120
 441. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_121
 442. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_122
 443. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_123
 444. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_124
 445. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_125
 446. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_126
 447. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_127
 448. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_128
 449. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_129
 450. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xvii-Page_130
 451. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_131
 452. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_132
 453. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_133
 454. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_134
 455. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_135
 456. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_136
 457. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xviii-Page_137
 458. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_138
 459. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_139
 460. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_140
 461. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_141
 462. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_142
 463. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_143
 464. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_144
 465. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_145
 466. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_146
 467. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xix-Page_147
 468. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_148
 469. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_149
 470. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_150
 471. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_151
 472. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_152
 473. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_153
 474. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_154
 475. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_155
 476. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xx-Page_156
 477. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_157
 478. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_158
 479. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_159
 480. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_160
 481. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_161
 482. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_162
 483. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_163
 484. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_164
 485. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_165
 486. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_166
 487. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxi-Page_167
 488. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_168
 489. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_169
 490. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_170
 491. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_171
 492. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_172
 493. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_173
 494. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_174
 495. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_175
 496. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_176
 497. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxii-Page_177
 498. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_178
 499. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_179
 500. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_180
 501. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_181
 502. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_182
 503. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_183
 504. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_184
 505. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiii-Page_185
 506. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_186
 507. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_187
 508. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_188
 509. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_189
 510. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_190
 511. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_191
 512. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_192
 513. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_193
 514. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxiv-Page_194
 515. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_195
 516. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_196
 517. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_197
 518. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_198
 519. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_199
 520. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_200
 521. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_201
 522. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_202
 523. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_203
 524. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_204
 525. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxv-Page_205
 526. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_206
 527. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_207
 528. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_208
 529. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_209
 530. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_210
 531. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_211
 532. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_212
 533. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvi-Page_213
 534. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_214
 535. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_215
 536. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_216
 537. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_217
 538. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_218
 539. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_219
 540. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_220
 541. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_221
 542. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_222
 543. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_223
 544. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_224
 545. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_225
 546. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxvii-Page_226
 547. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_227
 548. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_228
 549. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_229
 550. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_230
 551. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_231
 552. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_232
 553. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_233
 554. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_234
 555. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_235
 556. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_236
 557. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_237
 558. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_238
 559. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxviii-Page_239
 560. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_240
 561. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_241
 562. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_242
 563. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_243
 564. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_244
 565. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_245
 566. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxix-Page_246
 567. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxx-Page_247
 568. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxx-Page_248
 569. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxx-Page_249
 570. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxx-Page_250
 571. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxi-Page_251
 572. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxi-Page_252
 573. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxi-Page_253
 574. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxi-Page_254
 575. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_255
 576. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_256
 577. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_257
 578. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_258
 579. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_259
 580. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_260
 581. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_261
 582. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_262
 583. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_263
 584. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_264
 585. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_265
 586. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_266
 587. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxii-Page_267
 588. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_268
 589. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_269
 590. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_270
 591. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_271
 592. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_272
 593. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_273
 594. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_274
 595. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_275
 596. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_276
 597. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_277
 598. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_278
 599. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_279
 600. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_280
 601. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_281
 602. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_282
 603. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_283
 604. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_284
 605. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_285
 606. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_286
 607. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_287
 608. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_288
 609. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_289
 610. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_290
 611. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_291
 612. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_292
 613. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_293
 614. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_294
 615. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_295
 616. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_296
 617. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_297
 618. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_298
 619. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_299
 620. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_300
 621. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_301
 622. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_302
 623. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_303
 624. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_304
 625. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_305
 626. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_306
 627. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_307
 628. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_308
 629. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_309
 630. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_310
 631. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_311
 632. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_312
 633. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_313
 634. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_314
 635. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_315
 636. file:///ccel/r/renan/lifeofjesus/cache/lifeofjesus.html3#xxxiii-Page_316
