     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Spirit of Love
      Creator(s): Law, William (1686-1761)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Mysticism
     __________________________________________________________________

The
Spirit
of
Love

P A R T the F I R S T.

In a Letter to a Friend

     __________________________________________________________________

By W I L L I A M ~ L A W. M.A.
     __________________________________________________________________



L O N D O N :

   Printed for G. Robinson and J. Roberts,
   No. 25 Pater-noster-Row.

1752
     __________________________________________________________________

THE SPIRIT OF LOVE

  My Dear Friend,

   You had no Occasion to make any Apology for the Manner of your Letter
   to me, for though you very well know that I have as utter an aversion
   to waste my Time and Thoughts in Matters of theological Debate as in
   any Contentions merely of a worldly Nature, as knowing that the Former
   are generally as much, if not more, hurtful to the Heart of Man than
   the Latter; yet as your Objections rather tend to stir up the Powers of
   Love than the wrangle of a rational Debate, so I consider them only as
   Motives and Occasions of edifying both you and myself with the Truth,
   the Power and Divine Blessedness of the Spirit of Love.

   You say There is nothing in all my Writings that has more affected you
   than that Spirit of Love that breathes in them, and that you wish for
   nothing so much as to have a living Sensibility of the Power, Life, and
   Religion of Love. But you have these two Objections often rising in
   your Mind: First, that this Doctrine of pure and universal Love may be
   too refined and imaginary, because you find that however you like it,
   yet you cannot attain to it, or overcome all That in your Nature which
   is contrary to it, do what you can; and so are only able to be an
   Admirer of that Love which you cannot lay hold of. Secondly, Because
   you find so much said in Scripture of a Righteousness and Justice, a
   Wrath and Vengeance of God that must be atoned and satisfied, &c., that
   though you are in Love with that Description of the Deity which I have
   given, as a Being that is all Love, yet you have some Doubt whether the
   Scripture will allow of it.'

   Thus stand your Objections, which will fall into nothing as soon as you
   look at them from a right Point of View, Which will then be, as soon as
   you have found the true Ground of the Nature, Power, and Necessity of
   the blessed Spirit of Love.

   Now the Spirit of Love has this Original. God, as considered in himself
   in his Holy Being, before any thing is brought forth by him or out of
   him, is only an eternal Will to all Goodness. This is the one eternal
   immutable God, that from Eternity to Eternity changeth not, that can be
   neither more nor less nor any thing else but an eternal Will to all the
   Goodness that is in himself, and can come from him. The Creation of
   ever so many Worlds or Systems of Creatures adds nothing to, nor takes
   any thing from this immutable God. He always was and always will be the
   same immutable Will to all Goodness. So that as certainly as he is the
   Creator, so certainly is he the Blesser of every created Thing, and can
   give nothing but Blessing, Goodness, and Happiness from himself because
   he has in himself nothing else to give. It is much more possible for
   the Sun to give forth Darkness, than for God to do, or be, or give
   forth anything but Blessing and Goodness. Now this is the Ground and
   Original of the Spirit of Love in the Creature; it is and must be a
   Will to all Goodness, and you have not the Spirit of Love till you have
   this Will to all Goodness at all Times and on all Occasions. You may
   indeed do many Works of Love and delight in them, especially at such
   Times as they are not inconvenient to you, or contradictory to your
   State or Temper or Occurrences in Life. But the Spirit of Love is not
   in you till it is the Spirit of your Life, till you live freely,
   willingly, and universally according to it. For every Spirit acts with
   Freedom and Universality according to what it is. It needs no command
   to live its own Life, or be what it is, no more than you need bid Wrath
   be wrathful. And therefore when Love is the Spirit of your Life, it
   will have the Freedom and Universality of a Spirit; it will always live
   and work in Love, not because of This or That, Here or There, but
   because the Spirit of Love can only love, wherever it is or goes or
   whatever is done to it. As the Sparks know no Motion but that of flying
   upwards, whether it be in the Darkness of the Night or in the Light of
   the Day, so the Spirit of Love is always in the same Course; it knows
   no Difference of Time, Place, or Persons, but whether it gives or
   forgives, bears or forbears, it is equally doing its own delightful
   Work, equally blessed from itself. For the Spirit of Love, wherever it
   is, is its own Blessing and Happiness because it is the Truth and
   Reality of God in the Soul, and therefore is in the same Joy of Life
   and is the same Good to itself, everywhere and on every Occasion.

   Oh Sir! Would you know the Blessing of all Blessings? It is this God of
   Love dwelling in your Soul and killing every Root of Bitterness which
   is the Pain and Torment of every earthly, selfish Love. For all Wants
   are satisfied, all Disorders of Nature are removed, no Life is any
   longer a Burden, every Day is a Day of Peace, every thing you meet
   becomes a Help to you because every thing you see or do is all done in
   the sweet, gentle Element of Love. For as Love has no By-Ends, wills
   nothing but its own Increase, so every thing is as Oil to its Flame. It
   must have that which it wills and cannot be disappointed, because every
   thing naturally helps it to live in its own Way and to bring forth its
   own Work. The Spirit of Love does not want to be rewarded, honoured, or
   esteemed. Its only Desire is to propagate itself and become the
   Blessing and Happiness of every thing that wants it. And therefore it
   meets Wrath and Evil and Hatred and Opposition with the same one Will
   as the Light meets the Darkness, only to overcome it with all its
   Blessings. Did you want to avoid the Wrath and Ill-will or to gain the
   Favour of any Persons, you might easily miss of your Ends; but if you
   have no Will but to all Goodness, everything you meet, be it what it
   Will, must be forced to be assistant to you. For the Wrath of an Enemy,
   the Treachery of a Friend, and every other Evil only helps the Spirit
   of Love to be more triumphant, to live its own Life and find all its
   own Blessings in a higher Degree. Whether therefore you consider
   Perfection or Happiness, it is all included in the Spirit of Love and
   must be so for this Reason, because the infinitely perfect and happy
   God is mere Love, an unchangeable Will to all Goodness; and therefore
   every Creature must be corrupt and unhappy, so far as it is led by any
   other Will than the one Will to all Goodness. Thus you see the Ground,
   the Nature, and Perfection of the Spirit of Love. Let me now in a Word
   or two show you the Necessity of it. Now the Necessity is absolute and
   unchangeable. No Creature can be a Child of God but because the
   Goodness of God is in it; nor can it have any Union or Communion with
   the Goodness of the Deity till its Life is a Spirit of Love. This is
   the one only Band of Union betwixt God and the Creature. All besides
   this, or that is not this, call it by what Name you Will, is only so
   much Error, Fiction, Impurity, and Corruption got into the Creature,
   and must of all Necessity be entirely separated from it before it can
   have that Purity and Holiness which alone can see God or find the
   Divine Life. For as God is an immutable Will to all Goodness, so the
   Divine Will can unite or Work with no creaturely Will but that which
   willeth with him only that which is good. Here the Necessity is
   absolute; nothing will do instead of this Will; all Contrivances of
   Holiness, all Forms of religious Piety, signify nothing without this
   Will to all Goodness. For as the Will to all Goodness is the whole
   Nature of God, so it must be the whole Nature of every Service or
   Religion that can be acceptable to him. For nothing serves God or
   worships and adores him but that which wills and worketh with him. For
   God can Delight in nothing but his own Will and his own Spirit, because
   all Goodness is included in it and can be nowhere else. And therefore
   every thing that followeth an own Will or an own Spirit forsaketh the
   one Will to all Goodness, and whilst it doth so, hath no Capacity for
   the Light and Spirit of God. The Necessity therefore of the Spirit of
   Love is what God himself cannot dispense with in the Creature, no more
   than he can deny himself or act contrary to his own holy Being. But as
   it was his Will to all Goodness that brought forth Angels and the
   Spirits of Men, so he can Will nothing in their Existence but that they
   should live and work and manifest that same Spirit of Love and Goodness
   which brought them into Being. Every thing therefore but the Will and
   Life of Goodness is an Apostasy in the Creature and is Rebellion
   against the whole Nature of God.

   There is no Peace, nor ever can be for the Soul of Man but in the
   Purity and Perfection of its first created Nature; nor can it have its
   Purity and Perfection in any other Way than in and by the Spirit of
   Love. For as Love is the God that created all Things, so Love is the
   Purity, the Perfection, and Blessing of all created Things; and nothing
   can live in God but as it lives in Love. Look at every Vice, Pain, and
   Disorder in human Nature; it is in itself nothing else but the Spirit
   of the Creature turned from the Universality of Love to some
   self-seeking or own Will in created Things. So that Love alone is, and
   only can be, the Cure of every Evil, and he that lives in the Purity of
   Love is risen out of the Power of Evil into the Freedom of the one
   Spirit of Heaven. The Schools have given us very accurate Definitions
   of every Vice, whether it be Covetousness, Pride, Wrath, Envy, &c., and
   shown us how to conceive them as notionally distinguished from one
   another. But the Christian has a much shorter Way of knowing their
   Nature and Power and what they all are and do in and to himself. For
   call them by what Names you will, or distinguish them with ever so much
   Exactness, they are all, separately and jointly, just that same one
   Thing, and all do that same one Work as the Scribes, the Pharisees,
   Hypocrites, and Rabble of the Jews who crucified Christ were all but
   one and the same Thing and all did one and the same Work, however
   different they were in outward Names. If you would therefore have a
   true Sense of the Nature and Power of Pride, Wrath, Covetousness, Envy,
   &c., they are in their whole Nature nothing else but the Murderers and
   Crucifiers of the true Christ of God; not as the High-Priests did many
   hundred Years ago, nailing his outward Humanity to an outward Cross,
   but crucifying afresh the Son of God, the holy Immanuel, who is the
   Christ that every Man crucifies as often as he gives way to Wrath,
   Pride, Envy, or Covetousness, &c. For every Temper or Passion that is
   contrary to the new Birth of Christ and keeps the holy Immanuel from
   coming to Life in the Soul is, in the strictest Truth of the Words, a
   Murderer and Killer of the Lord of Life. And where Pride and Envy and
   Hatred, &c., are suffered to live, there the same Thing is done as when
   Christ was killed and Barrabas was saved alive. The Christ of God was
   not then first crucified when the Jews brought him to the Cross but
   Adam and Eve were his first real Murderers; for the Death which
   happened to them in the Day that they did eat of the earthly Tree was
   the Death of the Christ of God or the Divine Life in their Souls. For
   Christ had never come into the World as a second Adam to redeem it had
   he not been originally the Life and Perfection and Glory of the First
   Adam. And he is our Atonement and Reconciliation with God, because by
   and through him brought to Life in us, we are set again in that first
   State of Holiness, and have Christ again in us as our first Father had
   at his Creation. For had not Christ been in our first Father as a Birth
   of Life in him, Adam had been created a mere Child of Wrath, in the
   same Impurity of Nature, in the same Enmity with God, and in the same
   Want of an atoning Saviour as we are at this Day.-- For God can have no
   Delight or Union with any Creature but because his well-beloved Son,
   the express Image of his Person, is found in it.-- This is as true of
   all unfallen as of all fallen Creatures; the one are redeemed and the
   other want no Redemption, only through the Life of Christ dwelling in
   them. For as the Word, or Son of God, is the Creator of all Things, and
   by him every Thing is made that was made, so every Thing that is good
   and holy in unfallen Angels is as much through his living and dwelling
   in them as every Thing that is good and holy in redeemed Man is through
   him. And he is just as much the preserver, the Strength, and Glory, and
   Life of all the Thrones and Principalities of Heaven as he is the
   Righteousness, the Peace, and Redemption of fallen Man.

   This Christ of God hath many Names in Scripture, but they all mean only
   this, that he is, and alone can be, the Light and Life and Holiness of
   every Creature that is holy, whether in Heaven or on Earth. Wherever
   Christ is not, there is the Wrath of Nature or Nature left to itself
   and its own tormenting Strength of Life, to feel nothing in itself but
   the vain, restless Contrariety of its own working Properties. This is
   the one only Origin of Hell, and every kind of Curse and Misery in the
   Creature. It is Nature without the Christ of God or the Spirit of Love
   ruling over it. And here you may observe that Wrath has in itself the
   Nature of Hell, and that it can have no Beginning or Power in any
   Creature but so far as it has lost the Christ of God. And when Christ
   is everywhere, Wrath and Hatred Will be nowhere. Whenever therefore you
   willingly indulge Wrath or let your Mind work in Hatred, you not only
   work without Christ, but you resist him and withstand his redeeming
   Power over you. You do in Reality what those Jews did when they said,
   "We will not have this Man to reign over us." For Christ never was, nor
   can be, in any Creature but purely as a Spirit of Love.

   In all the Universe of Nature nothing but Heaven and heavenly Creatures
   ever had, or could have, been known, had every created Will continued
   in that State in which it came forth out of and from God. For God can
   will nothing in the Life of the Creature but a creaturely Manifestation
   of his own Goodness, Happiness and Perfection. And therefore, where
   this is wanted, the Fact is certain that the Creature hath changed and
   lost its first State that it had from God. Every Thing therefore which
   is the Vanity, the Wrath, the Torment and Evil of Man or any
   intelligent Creature is solely the Effect of his Will turned from God
   and can come from nothing else. Misery and Wickedness can have no other
   Ground or Root, for whatever wills and works with God must of all
   Necessity partake of the Happiness and Perfection of God.

   This therefore is a certain Truth, that Hell and Death, Curse and
   Misery, can never cease or be removed from the Creation till the Will
   of the Creature is again as it came from God and is only a Spirit of
   Love that willeth nothing but Goodness. All the whole fallen Creation,
   stand it never so long, must groan and travail in Pain; this must be
   its Purgatory till every Contrariety to the Divine Will is entirely
   taken from every Creature.

   Which is only saying that all the Powers and Properties of Nature are a
   Misery to themselves, can only Work in Disquiet and Wrath till the
   Birth of the Son of God brings them under the Dominion and Power of the
   Spirit of Love.

   Thus Sir, you have seen the Original, immutable Ground and Necessity of
   the Spirit of Love. It is no imaginary Refinement or speculative
   Curiosity, but is of the highest Reality and most absolute Necessity.
   It stands in the Immutability and Perfection of God, and not only every
   intelligent Creature, be it what and where it will, but every inanimate
   Thing must work in Vanity and Disquiet till it has its State in and
   works under, the Spirit of Love. For as Love brought forth all Things,
   and all Things were what they were and had their Place and State under
   the working Power of Love, so every Thing that has lost its
   first-created State must be in restless Strife and Disquiet till it
   finds it again. There is no sort of Strife, Wrath, or Storm in outward
   Nature, no Fermentation, Vegetation, or Corruption in any Elementary
   Things but what is a full Proof and real Effect of this Truth, viz.,
   That Nature can have no Rest but must be in the Strife of Fermentation,
   Vegetation, and Corruption, constantly doing and undoing, building and
   destroying, till the Spirit of Love has rectified all outward Nature
   and brought it back again into that glassy Sea of Unity and Purity in
   which St. John beheld the Throne of God in the Midst of it. For this
   glassy Sea, which the beloved Apostle was blessed with the Sight of, is
   the transparent, heavenly Element in which all the Properties and
   Powers of Nature move and work in the Unity and Purity of the one Will
   of God, only known as so many endless Forms of triumphing Light and
   Love. For the Strife of Properties, of Thick against Thin, Hard against
   Soft, Hot against Cold, &c., had no Existence till Angels fell, that is
   till they turned from God to Work with Nature. This is the Original of
   all the Strife, Division, and Materiality, in the fallen World.

   No Fluid in this World ferments but because there is some Thickness and
   Contrariety in it which it would not have. And it ferments only for
   this Reason, to have a Unity and Clearness in itself which its Nature
   wants to have. Now when you see this in any Fluid, you see the Work of
   all fallen Nature and the same, that every Thing else is doing, as well
   as it can, in its own Way; it is in a restless Working and Strife after
   a Unity and Purity which it can neither have nor forbear to seek. And
   the Reason why all Things are doing thus is this, because all the
   Elements of this World, before they were brought down into their
   present State, had their Birth and Existence in the Unity and Purity of
   the heavenly glassy Sea, and therefore must be always in some Sort of
   Strife and Tendency after their first State, and doomed to Disquiet
   till it is found.

   This is the Desire of all fallen Nature in this World. It cannot be
   separated from it but every Part must work in Fermentation, Vegetation,
   and Corruption, till it is restored to its first Unity and Purity under
   the Spirit of Love.

   Every Son of fallen Adam is under this same Necessity of working and
   striving after something that he neither is nor hath, and for the same
   Reason, because the Life of Man has lost its first Unity and Purity and
   therefore must be in a working Strife till all Contrariety and Impurity
   is separated from it and it finds its first State in God. All evil as
   well as good Men, all the Wisdom and Folly of this Life, are equally
   Proof of this. For the Vanity of wicked Men in their various Ways, and
   the Labours of good Men in Faith and Hope, &c., proceed from the same
   Cause, viz., from a Want and Desire of having and being something that
   they neither are nor have. The Evil seek Wrong and the Good seek Right,
   but they both are Seekers, and for the same Reason, because their
   present State has not That which it wants to have. And this must be the
   State of human Life and of every Creature that has fallen from its
   first State or has something in it that it should not have. It must do
   as the polluted Fluid does; it must ferment and work, either right or
   wrong, to mend its State. The muddled Wine always works right to the
   utmost of its Power because it works according to Nature, but if it had
   an intelligent free Will it might work as vainly as Man does; it might
   continually thicken itself, be always stirring up its own Dregs, and
   then it would seek for its Purity, just as well as the Soul of Man
   seeks its Happiness, in the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes,
   and the Pride of Life. All which must of the same Necessity fall away
   from the Heart of Man before it can find its Happiness in God, as the
   Dregs must separate from the Wine before it can have its Perfection and
   Clearness.

   Purification therefore is the one Thing necessary, and nothing will do
   in the stead of it. But Man is not purified till every earthly,
   wrathful, sensual, selfish, partial, self-willing Temper, is taken from
   him. He is not dying to himself, till he is dying to these Tempers; and
   he is not alive in God, till he is dead to them. For he wants
   Purification only because he has these Tempers, and therefore he has
   not the Purification which he wants till they are all separated from
   him. It is the Purity and Perfection of the Divine Nature that must be
   brought again into him; because in that Purity and Perfection he came
   forth from God, and could have no less, as he was a Child of God, that
   was to be blessed by a Life in him, and from him. For nothing impure or
   imperfect in its Will and Working, can have any Union with God. Nor are
   you to think that these Words, the Purity and Perfection of God, are
   too high to be used on this Occasion; for they only mean, that the Will
   of the Creature, as an Offspring of the Divine Will, must will and work
   with the Will of God, for then it stands and lives truly and really in
   the Purity and Perfection of God; and whatever does not thus, is at
   Enmity with God, and cannot have any Union of Life and Happiness with
   him, and in him.

   Now, nothing wills and works with God but the Spirit of Love, because
   nothing else Works in God himself. The Almighty brought forth all
   Nature for this only End, that boundless Love might have its Infinity
   of Height and Depth to dwell and work in, and all the striving and
   working Properties of Nature are only to give Essence and Substance,
   Life and Strength, to the invisible hidden Spirit of Love, that it may
   come forth into outward Activity and manifest its blessed Powers, that
   Creatures born in the Strength, and out of the Powers of Nature, might
   communicate the Spirit of Love and Goodness, give and receive mutual
   Delight and Joy to and from one another. All below this State of Love
   is a Fall from the one Life of God, and the only Life in which the God
   of Love can dwell. Partiality, Self, Mine, Thine, &c., are Tempers that
   can only belong to Creatures that have lost the Power, Presence, and
   Spirit of the universal Good. They can have no Place in Heaven, nor can
   be anywhere but because Heaven is lost. Think not, therefore, that the
   Spirit of pure, universal Love, which is the one Purity and Perfection
   of Heaven, and all heavenly Natures, has been, or can be carried too
   high, or its absolute Necessity too much asserted. For it admits of no
   Degrees of higher or lower, and is not in Being till it is absolutely
   pure and unmixed, no more than a Line can be straight till it is
   absolutely free from all Crookedness.

   All the design of Christian Redemption is, to remove every Thing that
   is unheavenly, gross, dark, wrathful, and disordered, from every Part
   of this fallen World. And when you see Earth and Stones, Storms and
   Tempests, and every kind of Evil, Misery, and Wickedness, you see that
   which Christ came into the World to remove, and not only to give a new
   Birth to fallen Man, but also to deliver all outward Nature from its
   present Vanity and Evil and set it again in its first heavenly State.
   Now, if you ask, How came all Things into this Evil and Vanity? It is
   because they have lost the blessed Spirit of Love, which alone makes
   the Happiness and Perfection of every Power of Nature. Look at
   Grossness, Coldness, Hardness, and Darkness; they never could have had
   any Existence, but because the Properties of Nature must appear in this
   manner when the Light of God is no longer dwelling in them.

   Nature is at first only spiritual; it has in itself nothing but the
   spiritual Properties of the Desire, which is the very Being and Ground
   of Nature. But when these spiritual Properties are not filled and
   blessed, and all held in one Will by the Light and Love of God ruling
   in them, then something is found in Nature which never should have been
   found; viz., the Properties of Nature, in a State of visible, palpable
   Division and Contrariety to each other. And this new State of the
   Properties of Nature is the first Beginning and Birth, and Possibility
   of all that Contrariety that is to be found betwixt Hot and Cold, Hard
   and Soft, Thick and Thin, &c., all which could have had no Existence,
   till the Properties of Nature lost their first Unity, and Purity under
   the Light and Love of God, manifested and working in them. And this is
   the one true Origin of all the Materiality of this earthly System, and
   of every Struggle and Contrariety, found in material Things. Had the
   Properties of Nature been kept by the Creature, in their first State,
   blessed and overcome with the Light and Love of Heaven dwelling and
   working in them, no Wrath or Contrariety could ever have been known by
   any Creature; and had not Wrath and Contrariety entered into the
   Properties of Nature, nothing Thick or Hard or Dark, &c., could ever
   have been found or known in any Place. Now every Thing that you see and
   know of the Things of this World, shows you, that Matter began only in
   and from the Change of the spiritual Properties of Nature; and that
   Matter is changed and altered, just as the Light and Purity of Heaven
   is more or less in it. How comes the Flint to be in such a State of
   hard, dark Compaction? It is because the Meekness and Fluidity of the
   Light, and Air, and Water of this World have little or no Existence in
   it. And therefore, as soon as the Fire has unlocked its hard Compaction
   and opened in it the Light, and Air, and Water of this World, it
   becomes transparent Glass, and is brought so much nearer to that first
   glassy Sea in which it once existed. For the Light, and Air, and Water,
   of this World, though all of them in a material State, yet have the
   most of the first heavenly Nature in them; and as these are more, or
   less, in all material Things, so are they nearer, or farther from,
   their first heavenly State. And as Fire is the first Deliverer of the
   Flint from its hard Compaction, so the last universal Fire must begin
   the Deliverance of this material System and fit every Thing to receive
   that Spirit of Light and Love, which will bring all Things back again
   to their first glassy Sea, in which the Deity dwelleth, as in his
   Throne. And thus, as the earthly Fire turns Flint into Glass, so Earth
   will become Heaven, and the Contrariety of four divided Elements Will
   become one transparent Brightness of Glory, as soon as the last Fire
   shall have melted every Grossness into its first undivided Fluidity,
   for the Light and Love, and Majesty, of God to be all in all in it. How
   easy and natural is it to suppose all that is Earth, and Stones, to be
   dissolved in Water, the Water to be changed into Air, the Air into
   Aether, and the Aether rarefied into Light? Is there any Thing here
   impossible to be supposed? And how near a Step is the next, to suppose
   all this changed or exalted into that glassy Sea, which was everywhere,
   before the Angels fell? What now is become of hard, heavy, dead,
   divisible, corruptible Matter? Is it annihilated? No; And yet nothing
   of it is left; all that you know of it is gone, and nothing but its
   shadowy Idea will be known in Eternity. Now as this shows you, how
   Matter can lose all its material Properties, and go back to its first
   spiritual State, so it makes it very intelligible to you, how the Sin
   of Angels, which was their sinful Working in and with the Properties of
   Nature, could bring them out of their first Spirituality into that
   Darkness, Grossness, and Chaos out of which God raised this material
   System. See now, Sir, how unreasonably you once told me, that our
   Doctrine must suppose the Eternity of Matter; for throughout the Whole
   you might easily have seen, that it neither does nor can suppose it,
   but demonstrates the Impossibility of it; shows the true Origin of
   Matter, that it is no older than Sin; could have no Possibility of
   beginning to be, but from Sin, and therefore must entirely vanish when
   Sin is entirely done away.

   If Matter, said you, be not made out of nothing then it must be
   eternal. Just as well concluded, as if you had said, If Snow and Hail
   and Ice are not made out of nothing, then they must be eternal. And if
   your Senses did not force you to know, how these things are created out
   of something, and are in themselves only the Properties of Light, and
   Air, and Water, brought out of their first State into such a Compaction
   and Creation, as is called Snow, Hail, and Ice, your rational
   Philosophy would stand to its noble Conclusion, that they must be made
   out of Nothing. Now every time you see Snow or Hail or Ice, you see in
   Truth and Reality the Creation of Matter, or how this World came to be
   of such a material Nature as it is. For Earth and Stones, and every
   other Materiality of this World, came from some antecedent Properties
   of Nature by that same creating Power or Fiat of God as turns the
   Properties of Light, and Air, and Water, into the different
   Materialities of Snow, Hail, and Ice.

   The first Property of Nature, which is in itself a constringing,
   attracting, compressing, and coagulating Power, is that working Power
   from whence comes all Thickness, Darkness, Coldness, and Hardness; and
   this is the Creator of Snow and Hail and Ice out of something that
   before was only the Fluidity of Light, Air, and Moisture. Now this same
   Property of Nature, directed by the Will of God, was the Fiat and
   creating Power which, on the first Day of this World, compacted,
   coagulated, or created the wrathful Properties of fallen Nature in the
   Angelic Kingdom into such a new State as to become Earth and Stones and
   Water and a visible Heaven. And the new State of the created Heaven and
   Earth and Stones and Water, &c., came forth by the Fiat of God, or the
   Working of the first Property of Nature, from the Properties of fallen
   Nature; just as Snow and Ice and Hail, come forth by the same Fiat from
   the Properties of Light, Air, and Water. And the created Materiality of
   Heaven, Earth, Stones, and Water, have no more Eternity in them, than
   there is in Snow or Hail or Ice, but are only held for a time in their
   compacted or created State, by the same first astringing Property of
   Nature, which for a time holds Snow and Hail and Ice in their compacted
   State.

   Now here you see with the utmost Certainty that all the Matter or
   Materiality of this World is the Effect of Sin, and could have its
   Beginning from nothing else. For as Thickness, Hardness, and Darkness
   (which is the Essence of Matter) is the Effect of the wrathful
   predominant Power of the first Property of Nature, and as no Property
   of Nature can be predominant, or known as it is in itself, till Nature
   is fallen from its harmonious Unity under the Light and Love of God
   dwelling in it, so you have the utmost Certainty, that where Matter, or
   which is the same Thing, where Thickness, Darkness, Hardness, &c., are
   found, there the Will of the Creature has turned from God and opened a
   disorderly Working of Nature without God.

   Therefore as sure as the Materiality of this World standeth in the
   predominant Power of the first attracting, astringing Property of
   Nature, or in other Words, is a Thickness, Darkness, Hardness, &c., so
   sure is it that all the Matter of this World has its Beginning from Sin
   and must have its End as soon as the Properties of Nature are again
   restored to their first Unity and blessed Harmony under the Light and
   Spirit of God.

   It is no Objection to all this, that Almighty God must be owned to be
   the true Creator of the Materiality of this World. For God only brought
   or created it into this Materiality out of the fallen sinful Properties
   of Nature, and in order to stop their sinful Working, and to put them
   into a State of Recovery. He created the confused Chaos of the
   darkened, divided, contrary Properties of spiritual Nature into a
   further, darker, harder Coagulation and Division, that so the fallen
   Angels might thereby lose all Power over them, and that this new
   Materiality might become a Theatre of Redemption and stand its Time
   under the Dominion of the Lamb of God till all the Wrath and Grossness
   and Darkness, born of the Sin of the Angels, was fitted to return to
   its first heavenly Purity.

   And thus, though God is the Creator of the Materiality of this World,
   yet seeing he created it out of that Wrath, Division, and Darkness
   which Sin had opened in Nature, this Truth stands firm, that Sin alone
   is the Father, first Cause, and Beginner of all the Materiality of this
   World; and that when Sin is removed from Nature all its Materiality
   must vanish with it. For when the Properties of Nature are again in the
   Unity of the one Will of Light and Love, then Hot and Cold, Thick and
   Thin, Dark and Hard, with every Property of Matter, must give up all
   their Distinction, and all the divided Elements of this World lose all
   their Materiality and Division in that first heavenly Spirituality of a
   glassy Sea from whence they fell.

   Now as all the whole Nature of Matter, its Grossness, Darkness, and
   Hardness, is owing to the unequal, predominant Working of the first
   Property of Nature which is an attracting, astringing, and compressing
   Desire; so every spiritual Evil, every wicked Working and disorderly
   State of any intelligent Being is all owing to the same disorderly,
   predominant Power of the first Property of Nature, doing all that
   inwardly in the Spirit of the Creature, which it does in an outward
   Grossness, Darkness, and Hardness. Thus, when the Desire (the first
   Property of Nature) in any intelligent Creature, leaves the Unity and
   Universality of the Spirit of Love and contracts or shuts up itself in
   an own Will, own Love, and Self-seeking, then it does all that inwardly
   and spiritually in the Soul, which it does in outward Grossness,
   Hardness, and Darkness. And had not own Will, own Love, and
   Self-seeking come into the Spirit of the Creature, it never could have
   found or felt any outward Contrariety, Darkness or Hardness: For no
   Creature can have any other outward Nature but that which is in the
   same State with its inward Spirit, and belongs to it as its own natural
   Growth.

   Modern Metaphysics has no Knowledge of the Ground and Nature either of
   Spirit or Body, but supposes them not only without any natural
   Relation, but essentially contrary to one another, and only held
   together in a forced Conjunction by the arbitrary Will of God. Nay, if
   you were to say that God first creates a Soul out of nothing, and when
   that is done, then takes an understanding Faculty and puts it into it,
   after that adds a Will and then a Memory, all is independently made, as
   when a Tailor first makes the Body of a Coat and then adds Sleeves or
   Pockets to it, were you to say This, the Schools of Descartes,
   Malebranche, or Locke could have nothing to say against it. And the
   Thing is unavoidable, for all these Philosophers were so far from
   knowing the Ground of Nature, how it is a Birth from God, and all
   Creatures a Birth from Nature, through the working Will of God in and
   by the Powers of Nature, as they were so far from knowing this, as to
   hold a Creation out of nothing, so they were necessarily excluded from
   every fundamental Truth concerning the Origin either of Body or Spirit
   and their true Relation to one another. For a Creation out of nothing
   leaves no room for accounting why any Thing is as it is.-- Now every
   wise Man is supposed to have Respect to Nature in every Thing that he
   would have joined together; he cannot suppose his Work to succeed
   unless this be done. But to suppose God to create Man with a Body and
   Soul, not only not naturally related but naturally impossible to be
   united by any Powers in either of them, is to suppose God acting and
   creating Man into an unnatural State, which yet he could not do, unless
   there was such a Thing as Nature antecedent to the Creation of Man. And
   how can Nature be, or have any Thing but what it is and has from God?
   Therefore to suppose God to bring any Creature into an unnatural State
   is to suppose him acting contrary to himself and to that Nature which
   is from him.

   Yet all the Metaphysics of the Schools does this. It supposes God to
   bring a Soul and a Body together which have the utmost natural
   Contrariety to each other and can only affect or act upon one another
   by an arbitrary Will of God, willing that Body and Soul, held together
   by Force, should seem to do that to one another which they have no
   natural or possible Power to do. But the true Philosophy of this
   Matter, known only to the Soul, that by a new Birth from above has
   found its first State in and from God is this: Namely, that Nature is a
   Birth or Manifestation of the triune invisible Deity. And as it could
   only come into Existence as a Birth from God, so every Creature or
   beginning Thing can only come forth as a Birth from and out of Nature
   by the Will of God, willing it to come forth in such a Birth. And no
   Creature can have, or be, any Thing, but by and according to the
   working Powers of Nature; and therefore, strictly speaking, no Creature
   can be, or be put into an unnatural State. It may indeed lose or fall
   from its natural Perfection by the wrong Use or Working of its Will;
   but then its fallen State is the natural Effect of the wrong Use of its
   Will, and so it only has that which is natural to it. The Truth of the
   Matter is this: There neither is, nor can be, any Thing, nor any Effect
   in the whole Universe of Things but by the Way of Birth. For as the
   working Will is the first Cause or Beginner of every Thing, so nothing
   can proceed further than as it is driven by the Will and is a Birth of
   it. And therefore nothing can be in any Thing but what is natural to
   its own working Will and the true Effect of it. Every Thing that is
   outward in any Being is only a Birth of its own Spirit, and therefore
   all Body, whether it be heavenly or earthly or hellish, has its whole
   Nature and Condition from its own inward Spirit, and no Spirit can have
   a Body of any other Properties but such as are natural to it as being
   its own true outward State. For Body and Spirit are not two separate,
   independent Things, but are necessary to each other, and are only the
   inward and outward conditions of one and the same Being.

   Every creaturely Spirit must have its own Body and cannot be without
   it, for its Body is that which makes it manifest to itself. It cannot
   be said to exist as a Creature till in a Body, because it can have no
   Sensibility of itself, nor feel nor find either that it is, or what it
   is, but in and by its own Body. Its Body is its first Knowledge of its
   Something and Somewhere.

   And now, Sir, if you ask why I have gone into this Detail of the Origin
   and Nature of Body and Spirit, when my Subject was only concerning the
   Spirit of Love, it is to show you, that Grossness, Darkness,
   Contrariety, Disquiet, and Fermentation must be the State of the Body
   and Spirit till they are both made pure and luminous by the Light and
   Love of Heaven manifested in them. All Darkness, Grossness, and
   Contrariety must be removed from the Body before it can belong to
   Heaven, or be united with it; but these Qualities must be in the Body
   till the Soul is totally dead to Self, Partiality, and Contrariety, and
   breathes only the Spirit of universal Love, because the State of the
   Body has nothing of its own, or from itself, but is solely the outward
   Manifestation of nothing else but that which is inwardly in the Soul.
   Every Animal of this World has nothing in its outward Form or Shape,
   every Spirit, whether heavenly or hellish, has nothing in the Nature
   and State of its Body, but that which is the Form and Growth of its own
   inward Spirit. As no Number can be any Thing else but that which the
   Unities contained in it make it to be, so no Body of any Creature can
   be any Thing else but the Coagulation, or S um total, of those
   Properties of Nature that are coagulated in it. And when the Properties
   of Nature are formed into the band of a creaturely Union, then is its
   Body brought forth, whether the Spirit of the Creature be earthly,
   heavenly, or hellish.

   Nature, or the first Properties of Life, are in a State of the highest
   Contrariety, and the highest Want of something which they have not.
   This is their whole Nature and they have nothing else in them. And this
   is their true Ground and Fitness to become a Life of triumphing Joy and
   Happiness, viz., when united in the Possession of that which they seek
   for in their Contrariety. And if Life, in its first Root, was not this
   Depth of Strife, this Strength of Hunger, and Sensibility of Want, the
   Fullness of heavenly Joy could not be manifested in it.

   You are not a Stranger to the Mystery of the Seven Properties of Nature
   which we have often spoken of; and therefore I shall shorten the
   Matter, and only say so much of them as may be of Service to our
   present Subject.

   Nature, whether eternal or temporal, is That which comes not into Being
   for its own Self or to be That which it is in itself, but for the Sake
   of Something that it is not, and has not. And this is the Reason why
   Nature is only a Desire; it is because it is for the Sake of something
   else; and is also the Reason why Nature in itself is only a Torment,
   because it is only a strong Desire, and cannot help itself to that
   which it wants, but is always working against itself.

   Now a Desire that cannot be stopped, nor get That which it would have,
   has a threefold Contrariety, or Working in it, which you may thus
   conceive as follows: The first and peculiar Property, or the one only
   Will of the Desire, as such, is to have That which it has not; and all
   it can do toward having it is to act as if it were seizing it; and this
   is it which makes the Desire to be a magic Compressing, Inclosing, or
   Astringing, because that is all that it can do toward Seizing of that
   which it would have. But the Desire cannot thus magically astringe,
   compress, or strive to inclose, without Drawing and Attracting: But
   Drawing is Motion, which is the highest Contrariety and Resistance to
   compressing or holding together. And thus the Desire, in its magical
   Working, sets out with two contrary Properties, inseparable from one
   another and equal in Strength; for the Motion has no Strength but as it
   is the Drawing of the Desire; and the Desire only draws in the same
   Degree as it wills to compress and astringe; and therefore the Desire,
   as astringing, always begets a Resistance equal to itself. Now from
   this great and equally strong Contrariety of the two first Properties
   of the Desire, magically pulling, as I may say, two contrary Ways,
   there arises as a necessary Birth from both of them, a third Property,
   which is emphatically called a Wheel or whirling Anguish of Life. For a
   Thing that can go neither inward nor outward, and yet must be and move
   under the equal Power of both of them, must whirl or turn round; it has
   no Possibility of doing any Thing else or of ceasing to do that. And
   that this whirling Contrariety of these inseparable Properties is the
   great Anguish of Life and may properly be called the Hell of Nature;
   and every lesser Torment which any Man finds in this mixed World, has
   all its Existence and Power from the Working of these three Properties:
   For Life can find no troublesome Motions, or Sensibility of Distress,
   but so far as it comes under their Power, and enters into their
   whirling Wheel.

   Now here you may observe, that as this whirling Anguish of Life is a
   third State, necessarily arising from the Contrariety of the two first
   Properties of the Desire, so in this material System, every whirling or
   orbicular Motion of any Body is solely the Effect or Product of the
   Contrariety of these two first Properties. For no material Thing can
   whirl or move round, till it is under the Power of these two
   Properties; that is, till it can neither go inwards nor outwards, and
   yet is obliged to move, just as the whirling Anguish of the Desire then
   begins when it can neither go inwards nor outwards and yet must be in
   Motion.

   And this may be again another strict Demonstration to you, that all the
   Matter of this World is from spiritual Properties, since all its
   Workings and Effects are according to them: For if Matter does nothing
   but according to them, it can be nothing but what it is, and has from
   them.

   Here also, that is, in these three Properties of the D esire, you see
   the Ground and Reason of the three great Laws of Matter and Motion,
   lately discovered, and so much celebrated, and need no more to be told,
   that the illustrious Sir Isaac plowed with Behmen's Heifer, when he
   brought forth the Discovery of them. In the mathematical System of this
   great Philosopher these three Properties, Attraction, equal Resistance,
   and the orbicular Motion of the Planets as the effect of them, &c., are
   only treated of as Facts and Appearances, whose Ground is not pretended
   to be known. But in our Behmen, the illuminated Instrument of God,
   their Birth and Power in Eternity are opened; their eternal Beginning
   is shown, and how and why all Worlds, and every Life of every Creature,
   whether it be heavenly, earthly, or hellish, must be in them, and from
   them, and can have no Nature either spiritual or material, no kind of
   Happiness or Misery, but according to the working Power and State of
   these Properties.

   All outward Nature, all inward Life, is what it is, and works as it
   works, from this unceasing, powerful Attraction, Resistance, and
   Whirling.

   Every Madness and Folly of Life is their immediate Work and every good
   Spirit of Wisdom and Love has all its Strength and Activity from them.
   They equally support Darkness and Light: The one could have no Powers
   of Thickness and Coldness, the other no Powers of Warmth, Brightness,
   and Activity but by and through these three Properties acting in a
   different State. Not a Particle of Matter stirs, rises, or falls,
   separates from or unites with any other, but under their Power. Not a
   Thought of the Mind, either of Love or Hatred, of Joy or Trouble, of
   Envy or Wrath, of Pride and Covetousness, can rise in the Spirit of any
   Creature, but as these Properties act and stir in it.

   The next and following Properties, viz., the fourth, called Fire; the
   fifth, called the Form of Light and Love, and the sixth, Sound, or
   Understanding, only declare the gradual Effects of the Entrance of the
   Deity into the three first Properties of Nature, changing, or bringing
   their strong wrathful Attraction, Resistance, and Whirling, into a Life
   and State of triumphing Joy, and Fullness of Satisfaction; which State
   of Peace and Joy in one another is called the Seventh Property, or
   State of Nature. And this is what Behmen means by his Ternarius
   Sanctus, which he so often speaks of as the only Place from whence he
   received all that he said and wrote: He means by it the holy
   Manifestation of the Triune God in the seven Properties of Nature, or
   Kingdom of Heaven. And from this Manifestation of God in the seven
   Properties of Nature, or Kingdom of Heaven, he most wonderfully opens,
   and accounts for all that was done in the six first working Days of the
   Creation, showing how every one of the six active Properties had its
   peculiar Day's Work, till the whole ended or rested in the sanctified,
   paradisiacal Sabbath of the seventh Day, just as Nature doth in its
   seventh Property.

   And now, Sir, you may see in the greatest Clearness how every Thing in
   this World, every Thing in the Soul and Body of Man, absolutely
   requires the one Redemption of the Gospel. There is but one Nature in
   all created Things, whether spiritual or material; they all stand and
   work upon the same Ground, viz., the three first Properties of Nature.
   That only which can illuminate the Soul, that alone can give Brightness
   and Purity to the Body. For there is no Grossness, Darkness, and
   Contrariety in the Body, but what strictly proceeds from the same Cause
   that makes Selfishness, Wrath, Envy, and Torment in the Soul; it is but
   one and the same State and Working of the same three first Properties
   of Nature. All Evil, whether natural or moral, whether of Body or
   Spirit, is the sole Effect of the Wrath and Disorder of the Spirits of
   Nature working in and by themselves. And all the Good, Perfection, and
   Purity of every Thing, whether spiritual or material, whether it be the
   Body or Spirit of Man or Angel, is solely from the Power and Presence
   of the supernatural Deity dwelling and working in the Properties of
   Nature. For the Properties of Nature are in themselves nothing else but
   a mere Hunger, Want, Strife, and Contrariety, till the Fullness and
   Riches of the Deity entering into them unites them all in one Will and
   one Possession of Light and harmonious Love; which is the one
   Redemption of the Gospel, and the one Reason why nothing else but the
   Heart, or Son, or Light of God, can purify Nature and Creature from all
   the Evil they are fallen into.

   For nothing can possibly deliver the Soul from its selfish Nature and
   earthly Passions but that one Power that can deliver Matter from its
   present material Properties and turn Earth into Heaven: And that for
   this plain Reason, because Soul and Body, outward Nature and inward
   Life, have but one and the same Evil in them, and from one and the same
   Cause.

   The Deist, therefore, who looks for Life and Salvation through the Use
   of his Reason, acts contrary to the whole Nature of every Thing that he
   sees and knows of himself and of the Nature and State of this World.
   For from one End of it to the other, all its material State, all its
   gross divided Elements, declare that they are what they are, because
   the Light and Love of Heaven is not working and manifest in them, and
   that nothing can take Darkness, Materiality, Rage, Storms, and Tempests
   from them, but that same heavenly Light and Love which was made Flesh
   to redeem the fallen Humanity first, and after that the whole material
   System.

   Can the Deist with his Reason bring the Light of this World into the
   Eyes of his Body? If not, how comes it to be less absurd, or more
   possible, for Reason to bring heavenly Light into the Soul? Can Reason
   hinder the Body from being heavy, or remove Thickness and Darkness from
   Flesh and Blood? Yet nothing less than such a Power can possibly help
   the Soul out of its fallen and earthly State. For the Grossness of
   Flesh and Blood is the natural State of the fallen Soul; and therefore
   nothing can purify the Soul, or raise it out of its earthly, corrupt
   State, but that which hath all Power over all that, that is earthy and
   material in Nature.

   To pretend, therefore, that Reason may have sufficient Power to remove
   all hellish Depravity and earthly Lusts from the Soul, whilst it has
   not the least Power over Sweet or Sour in any one Particle of Matter in
   the Body, is as highly absurd, as if a Man should pretend that he has a
   full Power to alter the inward, invisible, vegetable Life of a Plant,
   but none at all over its outward State, Colour, Leaves, or Fruit. The
   Deist therefore, and not the Christian, stands in need of continual
   Miracles to make good his Doctrine. For Reason can have no Pretence to
   amend or alter the Life of the Soul, but so far as it can show that it
   has Power to amend and alter the Nature and State of the Body.

   The unbelieving Jews said of our Lord, "How can this Man forgive Sins?"
   Christ showed them how by appealing to that Power which they saw he had
   over the Body: "Whether," says he, "is it easier to say, Thy Sins are
   forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, take up thy Bed, and walk?" But the
   Delusion of the unbelieving Deist is greater than that of the Jew. For
   the Deist sees, that his Reason has no Power over his Body, can remove
   no Disease, Blindness, Deafness, or Lameness, from it, and yet will
   pretend to have Power enough from his Reason to help the Soul out of
   all its Evil; not knowing that Body and Soul go hand in hand, and are
   nothing else but the inward and outward State of one and the same Life;
   and that therefore he only, who can say to the dead Body of Lazarus,
   "Come forth," can say to the Soul, "Be thou clean." The Deist
   therefore, if he pleases, may style himself a natural or a moral
   Philosopher, but with no more Truth than he can call himself a Healer
   of all the Maladies of the Body. And for a Man to think himself a moral
   Philosopher, because he has made a choice Collection of Syllogisms, in
   order to quicken and revive a Divine Goodness in the Soul, or that no
   Redeemer need come from Heaven, because human Reason, when truly left
   to itself, has great Skill in chopping of Logic; may justly be deemed
   such an Ignorance of the Nature of Things as is seldom found in the
   Transactions of illiterate and vulgar Life. But this by the by.

   To return to our chief subject: The Sum of all that has been said is
   this: All Evil, be it what it will, all Misery of every kind, is in its
   Birth, Working and Extent, nothing else but Nature left to itself, and
   under the divided Workings of its own Hunger, Wrath, and Contrariety;
   and therefore no Possibility for the natural, earthly Man to escape
   eternal Hunger, Wrath, and Contrariety, but solely in the Way as the
   Gospel teacheth, by denying and dying to Self. On the other hand, all
   the Goodness and Perfection, all the Happiness, Glory, and Joy that any
   intelligent, Divine Creature can be possessed of, is, and can be, from
   nothing else, but the invisible uncreated Light and Spirit of God
   manifesting itself in the Properties of the creaturely Life, filling,
   blessing, and uniting them all in one Love and Joy of Life. And thus
   again: no Possibility of Man's attaining to any heavenly Perfection and
   Happiness, but only in the Way of the Gospel, by the Union of the
   Divine and human Nature, by Man's being born again from above of the
   Word and Spirit of God. There is no Possibility of any other Way,
   because there is nothing that can possibly change the first Properties
   of Life into an heavenly State, but the Presence, and working Power, of
   the Deity united with, and working in them. And therefore the "Word was
   made Flesh," and must of all Necessity be made Flesh, if Man is to have
   a heavenly Nature. Now as all Evil, Sin, and Misery, have no Beginning,
   nor Power of Working, but in the Manifestation of Nature in its
   divided, contrary Properties; so it is certain that Man has nothing to
   turn to, seek or aspire after, but the lost Spirit of Love. And
   therefore it is, that God only can be his Redeemer, because God only is
   Love; and Love can be nowhere else but in God, and where God dwelleth
   and worketh.

   Now the Difficulty which you find in attaining to this Purity, and
   Universality of the Spirit of Love is because you seek for it, as I
   once told you, in the Way of reasoning: You would be possessed of it
   only from a rational Conviction of the Fitness and Amiableness of it.
   And as this clear Idea does not put you immediately into the real
   Possession of it, your Reason begins to waver, and suggests to you,
   that it may be only a fine Notion that has no Ground but in the Power
   of the Imagination. But this, Sir, is all your own Error, and as
   contrary to Nature, as if you would have your Eyes do That which only
   your Hands or Feet can do for you. The Spirit of Love is a Spirit of
   Nature and Life; and all the Operations of Nature and Life are
   according to the working Powers of Nature; and every Growth and Degree
   of Life can only arise in its own Time and Place from its proper Cause,
   and as the genuine Effect of it. Nature and Life do nothing by Chance
   or accidentally, but every Thing in one uniform Way. Fire, Air, and
   Light, do not proceed sometimes from one Thing, and sometimes from
   another; but wherever they are, they are always born in the same
   Manner, and from the same Working in the Properties of Nature. So in
   like Manner, Love is an immutable Birth, always proceeding from the
   same Cause, and cannot be in Existence till its own true Parents have
   brought it forth.

   How unreasonable would it be to begin to doubt whether Strength and
   Health of Body were real Things, or possible to be had, because you
   could not by the Power of your Reason take Possession of them? Yet this
   is as well as to suspect the Purity and Perfection of Love to be only a
   Notion, because your Reason cannot bring forth its Birth in your Soul.
   For Reason has no more Power of altering the Life and Properties of the
   Soul, than of altering the Life and Properties of the Body. That, and
   That only, can cast Devils and evil Spirits out of the Soul, that can
   say to the Storm, Be still, and to the Leper, Be thou clean.

   The Birth of Love is a Form or State of Life, and has its fixed Place
   in the fifth Form of Nature. The three first Properties or Forms of
   Nature are the Ground or Band of Life, that is in itself only an
   extreme Hunger, Want, Strife, and Contrariety. And they are in this
   State, that they may become a proper Fuel for the fourth Form of
   Nature, viz., the Fire, to be kindled in them. You will perhaps say,
   "What is this Fire? What is its Nature? And how is it kindled? And how
   is it that the Hunger and anguishing State of the Properties, are a
   Fitness to be a Fuel of this Fire?" It may be answered, This Hunger and
   Anguish of Nature, in its first Forms, is its Fitness to be changed
   into a Life of Light, Joy, and Happiness: And that for this Reason,
   because it is in this Hunger and Anguish only because God is not in it.
   For as Nature comes from God, and for this only End, that the Deity may
   manifest Heaven in it, it must stand in an Hunger and anguishing State
   till the Deity is manifested in it. And therefore its Hunger and
   Anguish are its true Fitness to be changed into a better State, and
   this is its Fitness for the Birth of the Fire: For the Fire means
   nothing, and is nothing else, but That which changes them into a better
   State. Not as if Fire was a fourth, distinct Thing that comes into them
   from without, but is only a fourth State, or Condition into which the
   same Properties are brought.

   The Fire then is that which changes the Properties into a new and
   heavenly State: Therefore the Fire does two things; it alters the State
   of Nature and brings Heaven into it, and therefore it must Work from a
   two-fold Power; the Deity and Nature must both be in it. It must have
   some Strength from Nature, or it could not work in Nature. It must have
   some Strength from the Deity or it could not overcome and change Nature
   into a Divine Life. Now all this is only to show you, that the Fire can
   only be kindled by the Entrance of the Deity, or supernatural God, into
   a Conjunction or Union with Nature. And this Conjunction of the Deity
   and Nature maketh, or bringeth forth, that State or Form of Life, which
   is called and truly is, Fire: First, Because it does that in the
   spiritual Properties of Nature, which Fire doth in the Properties of
   material Nature; and Secondly, Because it is that alone, from which
   every Fire in this World, whether in the Life of animal or vegetable or
   inanimate Matter, has its Source and Power and Possibility of Burning.
   The Fire of this World overcomes its Fuel, breaks its Nature, alters
   its State and changes it into Flame and Light. But why does it do this?
   Whence has it this Nature and Power? It is because it is a true
   Outbirth of the eternal Fire, which overcomes the Darkness, Wrath, and
   Contrariety of Nature, and changes all its Properties into a Life of
   Light, Joy, and Glory. Not a Spark of Fire could be kindled in this
   World, nor a Ray of Light come from any material Fire, but because
   material Nature is, in itself, nothing else but the very Properties of
   eternal Nature, standing for a Time in a material State or Condition;
   and therefore they must work in Time as they do in Eternity; and
   consequently there must be Fire in this World, it must have the same
   Birth and do the same Work in its material Way, which the eternal Fire
   hath, and doth in spiritual Nature. And this is the true Ground and
   Reason why every Thing in this World is delivered as far as it can be
   from its earthly Impurity, and brought into its highest State of
   Existence, only by Fire; it is because the eternal Fire is the Purifier
   of eternal Nature and the Opener of every Perfection, Light, and Glory
   in it. And if you ask why the eternal Fire is the Purifier of eternal
   Nature, the Reason is plain; it is because the eternal Fire has its
   Birth and Nature and Power from the Entrance of the pure, supernatural
   Deity into the Properties of Nature, which Properties must change their
   State, and be what they were not before, as soon as the Deity entereth
   into them. Their Darkness, Wrath, and Contrariety, is driven out of
   them, and they work and give forth only a Life and Strength of Light,
   and Joy, and Glory. And this two-fold Operation, viz., on one hand
   taking from Nature its wrathful Workings, and on the other hand opening
   a glorious Manifestation of the Deity in them, is the whole Nature and
   Form of the Fire, and is the Reason why from Eternity to Eternity it is
   and must be the Purifier of eternal Nature; namely, as from Eternity to
   Eternity changing Nature into a Kingdom of Heaven. Now every Fire in
   this World does, and must do, the same Thing in its low Way, to the
   utmost of its Power, and can do nothing else. Kindle Fire where, or in
   what you will, it acts only as from and by the Power of this eternal
   purifying Fire; and therefore it breaks and consumes the Grossness of
   every Thing, and makes all that is pure and spirituous to come forth
   out of it; and therefore Purification is its one only Work through all
   material Nature, because it is a real Out-birth of that eternal Fire
   which purifies eternal Nature, and changes it into a mere Heaven of
   Glory.

   The eternal Fire is called a fourth Form, or State of Nature; because
   it cannot exist but from the first Three and hath its Work in the
   fourth Place in the Midst of the seven Forms, changing the three first
   into the three last Forms of Nature, that is, changing them from their
   natural into a heavenly State. So that, strictly speaking, there are
   but three Forms of Nature in answerableness to the threefold Working of
   the Triune Deity. For the three last are not three new or different
   Properties, but are only the three first brought into a new State by
   the Entrance of the Triune Deity into Conjunction with them. Which
   Entrance of the supernatural Deity into them is the consuming of all
   that is bad in them, and turning all their Strength into a working Life
   of Light, Joy, and heavenly Glory; and therefore has the justest Title
   to be called Fire, as having no other Nature and Operation in it but
   the known Nature of Fire, and also as being That from which every Fire
   in this World has all its Nature and Power of doing as it doth.

   You once, as I remember, objected to my speaking so much in the Appeal,
   &c., of the Fire of Life, as thinking it too gross an Expression to be
   taken in its literal Meaning, when mention is made of the eternal Fire,
   or the Fire in animal Life. But, Sir, Fire has but one Nature through
   the whole Universe of Things, and material Fire has not more or less of
   the Nature of Fire in it, than that which is in eternal Nature; because
   it has nothing, works nothing, but what it has, and works from thence.
   How easy was it for you to have seen, that the Fire of the Soul and the
   Fire of the Body had but one Nature? How else could they unite in their
   Heat? How easy also to have seen that the Fire of animal Life was the
   same Fire that burns in the Kitchen? How else could the Kitchen Fire be
   serviceable to animal Life? What Good could it do you to come to a Fire
   of Wood where you wanted to have the Heat of your own Life increased?
   In animal Life the Fire is kindled and preserved in such a Degree, and
   in such Circumstances, as to be Life, and the Preservation of Life; and
   this is its Difference from Fires kindled in Wood and burning it to
   Ashes. It is the same Fire, only in a different State, that keeps up
   Life and consumes Wood; and has no other Nature in the Wood than in the
   Animal. Just as in Water that has only so much Fire in it as to make it
   warm, and Water that is by Fire made boiling hot, the same Nature and
   Power of Fire is in both, but only in a different State. Now will you
   say, that Fire is not to be literally understood, when it only makes
   Water to be warm, because it is not red and flaming as you see it in a
   burning Coal? Yet this would be as well as to say, that Fire is not
   literally to be understood in the animal Life, because it is so
   different from that Fire which you see burning in a Piece of Wood. And
   thus, Sir, there is no Foundation for any Objection to all that has
   been said of Fire in the Appeal, &c. It is one and the same great Power
   of God in the spiritual and material World; it is the Cause of every
   Life and the Opener of every Power of Nature; and its one great Work
   through all Nature and Creature, animate and inanimate, is Purification
   and Exaltation; it can do nothing else, and that for this plain Reason,
   because its Birth is from the Entrance of the pure Deity into Nature,
   and therefore must in its various State and Degrees be only doing that
   which the Entrance of the Deity into Nature does. It must bring every
   natural Thing into its highest State. But to go back now to the Spirit
   of Love and show you the Time and Place of its Birth before which it
   can have no Existence in your Soul, do what you will to have it.

   The Fire, you see, is the first Overcomer of the hungry, wrathful,
   self-tormenting State of the Properties of Nature; and it only
   overcomes them, because it is the Entrance of the pure Deity into them;
   and therefore That which overcomes them is the Light of the Deity. And
   this is the true Ground and Reason why every right-kindled Fire must
   give forth Light, and cannot do otherwise. It is because the eternal
   Fire is only the Effect or Operation of the supernatural Light of the
   Deity entering into Nature; and therefore Fire must give forth Light,
   because it is itself only a Power of the Light, and Light can be
   nowhere in Nature but as a fifth Form or State of Nature, brought forth
   by the Fire. And as Light thus brought forth is the first State that is
   lovely and delightful in Nature, so the Spirit of Love has only its
   Birth in the Light of Life, and can be nowhere else. For the Properties
   of Life have no common Good, nothing to rejoice in, till the Light is
   found; and therefore no possible Beginning of the Spirit of Love till
   then.

   The Shock that is given to the three first Properties of Nature by the
   amazing Light of the Deity breaking in upon them, is the Operation of
   the Fire, that consumes, or takes away, the wrathful Strength and
   Contrariety of the Properties, and forces each of them to shrink, as it
   were, away from itself, and come under the Power of this new-risen
   Light. Here all Strife of Enmity and wrathful Contrariety in the
   Properties must cease, because all are united in the Love of the Light,
   and all equally helping one another to a higher Enjoyment and Delight
   in it. They are all one Triune Will, all doing the same Thing, viz.,
   all rejoicing in the one Love of the Light. And here it is, in this
   delightful Unity of Operation, that the Spirit of Love is born, in the
   fifth Property or Light of Life; and cannot possibly rise up in any
   Creature till the Properties of its Life are brought into this fifth
   State, thus changed and exalted into a new Sensibility of Life. Let me
   give you this Similitude of the Matter: Fancy to yourself a Man shut up
   in a deep Cave underground, without ever having seen a Ray of the
   Light, his Body all over tortured with Pain, his Mind distracted with
   Rage, himself whirling and working with the utmost Fury and Madness, he
   knows not what; and then you have an Image of the first Properties of
   Life as they are in themselves before the Fire had done its Work in
   them.

   Fancy this Man suddenly struck, or all surrounded, with such a Glare of
   Light as in the Twinkling of an Eye stopped or struck dead, every
   Working of every Pain and Rage, both in his Body and Mind; and then you
   have an Image of the Operation of the Fire, and what it does to the
   first Properties of Nature. Now as soon as the first Terror of the
   Light has had its fiery Operation, and struck nothing dead but every
   working Sensibility of Distress, fancy this Man, as you now well may,
   in the sweetest Peace of Mind and bodily Sensations, blessed in a new
   Region of Light, giving Joy to his Mind, and Gratification to every
   Sense; and then the Transports, the Overflowings of Love and Delight in
   this new State may give you an Image how the Spirit of Love is, and
   must be born, when Fire and Light have overcome and changed the State
   of the first Properties of Nature; and never till then, can have any
   Existence in any Creature, nor proceed from any other Cause. Thus, Sir,
   you may sufficiently see, how vainly you attempt to possess yourself of
   the Spirit of Love by the Power of your Reason; and also what a Vanity
   of all Vanities there is in the Religion of the Deists, who will have
   no other Perfection, or Divine Life, but what they can have from their
   Reason: as great a Contradiction to Nature, as if they would have no
   Life or Strength of Body, but that which can be had from their Faculty
   of Reasoning. For Reason can no more alter or exalt any one Property of
   Life in the Soul, and bring it into its perfect State, than it can add
   one Cubit to the Stature of the Body. The Perfection of every Life is
   no way possibly to be had, but as every Flower comes to its Perfection,
   viz., from its own Seed and Root and the various Degrees of
   Transmutation which must be gone through before the Flower is found: It
   is strictly thus with the Perfection of the Soul: All its Properties of
   Life must have their true natural Birth and Growth from one another.
   The first, as its Seed and Root, must have their natural change into an
   higher State; must, like the Seed of the Flower, pass through Death
   into Life and be blessed with the Fire and Light and Spirit of Heaven,
   in their Passage to it; just as the Seed passes through Death into
   Life, blessed by the Fire, and Light, and Air of this World, till it
   reaches its last Perfection, and becomes a beautiful sweet-smelling
   Flower. And to think that the Soul can attain its Perfection any other
   Way, than by the Change and Exaltation of its first Properties of Life,
   just as the Seed has its first Properties changed and exalted till it
   comes to have its Flower, is a total Ignorance of the Nature of Things.
   For as whatever dies cannot have a Death particular to itself, but the
   same Death in the same Way, and for the same Reasons, that any other
   Creature, whether Animal or vegetable, ever did or can die; so every
   Life and Degree of Life, must come into its State and Condition of Life
   in the same Way, and for the same Reasons as Life, and the Perfection
   of Life, comes into every other living Creature, whether in Heaven or
   on Earth. Therefore the Deists' Religion or Reason, which is to raise
   the Soul to its true Perfection, is so far from being the Religion of
   Nature, that it is quite unnatural and declared to be so by every
   Working in Nature. For since Reason can neither give Life nor Death to
   any one Thing in Nature, but every Thing lives, or dies, according to
   the Working of its own Properties, every Thing, dead and alive, gives
   forth a Demonstration, that Nature asks no Counsel of Reason, nor stays
   to be directed by it. Hold it therefore for a certain Truth, that you
   can have no Good come into your Soul, but only by the one Way of a
   Birth from above, from the Entrance of the Deity into the Properties of
   your own soulish Life. Nature must be set right, its Properties must
   enter into the Process of a new Birth, it must work to the Production
   of Light, before the Spirit of Love can have a Birth in it. For Love is
   Delight, and Delight cannot arise in any Creature till its Nature is in
   a delightful State, or is possessed of that in which it must rejoice.
   And this is the Reason why God must become Man; it is because a Birth
   of the Deity must be found in the Soul, giving to Nature all that it
   wants, or the Soul can never find itself in a delightful State and only
   Working with the Spirit of Love. For whilst the Soul has only its
   natural Life, it can only be in such a State, as Nature, without God,
   is in, viz., a mere Hunger, Want, Contrariety, and Strife for it knows
   not what. Hence is all that Variety of blind, restless, contrary
   Passions, which govern and torment the Life of fallen Man. It is
   because all the Properties of Nature must Work in Blindness, and be
   doing they know not what, till the Light of God is found in them. Hence
   also it is, that That which is called the Wisdom, the Honour, the
   Honesty, and the Religion of the natural Man, often does as much Hurt
   to himself, and others, as his Pride, Ambition, Self-Love, Envy, or
   Revenge, and are subject to the same Humour and Caprice; it is because
   Nature is no better in one Motion than in another, nor can be so, till
   something supernatural is come into it. We often charge Men, both in
   Church and State, with changing their Principles; but the Charge is too
   hasty; for no Man ever did, or can change his Principles, but by a
   Birth from above. The natural, called in Scripture, the old Man, is
   steadily the same in Heart and Spirit in every Thing he does, whatever
   Variety of Names may be given to his Actions. For Self can have no
   Motion but what is selfish, which Way soever it goes, or whatever it
   does, either in Church or State. And be assured of this, that Nature in
   every Man, whether he be learned or unlearned, is this very Self, and
   can be nothing else, till a Birth of the Deity is brought forth in it.
   There is therefore no Possibility of having the Spirit of Love, or any
   Divine Goodness, from any Power of Nature or Working of Reason. It can
   only be had in its own Time and Place; and its Time and Place is
   nowhere, but where Nature is overcome by a Birth of the Life of God in
   the Properties of the Soul. And thus you see the infallible Truth, and
   absolute Necessity, of Christian Redemption; it is the most
   demonstrable Thing in all Nature.-- The Deity must become Man, take a
   Birth in the fallen Nature, be united to it, become the Life of it, or
   the natural Man must of all Necessity be forever and ever in the Hell
   of his own Hunger, Anguish, Contrariety, and Self-Torment; and all for
   this plain Reason, because Nature is, and can be, nothing else, but
   this Variety of Self-Torment, till the Deity is manifested and dwelling
   in it.

   And now, Sir, you see also the absolute Necessity of the
   Gospel-Doctrine of the Cross, viz., of dying to Self, as the one only
   Way to Life in God. This Cross, or Dying to Self, is the one Morality
   that does Man any Good. Fancy as many Rules as you will of modeling the
   moral Behaviour of Man, they all do nothing, because they leave Nature
   still alive, and therefore can only help a Man to a feigned,
   hypocritical Art of concealing his own inward Evil, and seeming to be
   not under its Power. And the Reason why it must be so is plain; it is
   because Nature is not possible to be reformed; it is immutable in its
   Workings and must be always as it is, and never any better or worse,
   than its own untaught Workings are. It can no more change from Evil to
   Good, than Darkness can Work itself into Light. The one Work therefore
   of Morality is the one Doctrine of the Cross, viz., to resist and deny
   Nature, that a supernatural Power or Divine Goodness, may take
   Possession of it, and bring a new Light into it.

   In a Word, there are, in all the Possibility of Things, but two States,
   or Forms of Life; the one is Nature, and the other is God manifested in
   Nature; and as God and Nature are both within you, so you have it in
   your Power to live and work with which you will; but are under a
   Necessity of doing either the one or the other. There is no standing
   still, Life goes on, and is always bringing forth its Realities, which
   Way soever it goeth. You have seen, that the Properties of Nature are,
   and can be, nothing else in their own Life, but a restless Hunger,
   Disquiet, and blind Strife for they know not what, till the Property of
   Light and Love has got Possession of them. Now when you see this, you
   see the true State of every natural Man, whether he be Caesar or Cato,
   whether he gloriously murders others or only stabs himself; blind
   Nature does all the Work, and must be the Doer of it, till the Christ
   of God is born in him. For the Life of Man can be nothing else but a
   Hunger of Covetousness, a Rising up of Pride, Envy, and Wrath, a medley
   of contrary Passions, doing and undoing it knows not what because these
   Workings are essential to the Properties of Nature; they must be always
   hungering, and working one against another, striving to be above one
   another, and all this in Blindness, till the Light of God has helped
   them to one common Good, in which they all willingly unite, rest, and
   rejoice. In a Word, Goodness is only a Sound and Virtue a mere Strife
   of natural Passions, till the Spirit of Love is the Breath of every
   Thing that lives and moves in the Heart. For Love is the one only
   Blessing and Goodness, and God of Nature; and you have no true
   Religion, are no Worshiper of the one true God, but in and by that
   Spirit of Love, which is God himself living and working in you.

   But here I take off my Pen and shall leave the remaining Part of your
   Objection to another Opportunity.

  I am, &c.


   King's Cliff,
   June 16, 1752
     __________________________________________________________________



THE

SPIRIT

OF

   L O V E

P A R T the S E C O N D.


   In DIALOGUES

     __________________________________________________________________

By W I L L I A M ~ L A W. M.A.
     __________________________________________________________________



L O N D O N :

   Printed for M. Richardson, in Pater-noster-Row.

1754

     __________________________________________________________________

   THE
   FIRST DIALOGUE
   BETWEEN

Theogenes, Eusebius, and Theophilus.


   Theogenes. Dear Theophilus, this Gentleman is Eusebius, a very valuable
   and worthy Curate in my Neighbourhood; he would not let me wait any
   longer for your second Letter of the Spirit of Love, nor be content
   till I consented to our making you this Visit. And indeed, we are both
   on the same Errand and in equal Impatience to have your full Answer to
   that Part of my Objection, which you reserved for a second Letter.

   Theophilus. My Heart embraces you both with the greatest Affection, and
   I am much pleased at the Occasion of your Coming which calls me to the
   most delightful Subject in the World, to help both you and myself to
   rejoice in that adorable Deity whose infinite Being is an Infinity of
   mere Love, an unbeginning, never-ceasing, and forever overflowing Ocean
   of Meekness, Sweetness, Delight, Blessing, Goodness, Patience, and
   Mercy, and all this as so many blessed Streams breaking out of the
   Abyss of universal Love, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a Triune Infinity
   of Love and Goodness, for ever and ever giving forth nothing but the
   same Gifts of Light and Love, of Blessing and Joy, whether before or
   after the Fall, either of Angels or Men.

   Look at all Nature, through all its Height and Depth, in all its
   Variety of working Powers; it is what it is for this only End, that the
   hidden Riches, the invisible Powers, Blessings, Glory, and Love of the
   unsearchable God, may become visible, sensible, and manifest in and by
   it.

   Look at all the Variety of Creatures; they are what they are for this
   only End, that in their infinite Variety, Degrees, and Capacities, they
   may be as so many speaking Figures, living Forms of the manifold Riches
   and Powers of Nature, as so many Sounds and Voices, Preachers, and
   Trumpets, giving Glory and Praise and Thanksgiving to that Deity of
   Love which gives Life to all Nature and Creature.

   For every Creature of unfallen Nature, call it by what name you Will,
   has its Form, and Power, and State, and Place in Nature, for no other
   End, but to open and enjoy, to manifest and rejoice in some Share of
   the Love, and Happiness, and Goodness of the Deity, as springing forth
   in the boundless Height and Depth of Nature.

   Now this is the one Will and Work of God in and through all Nature and
   Creature. From Eternity to Eternity he can will and intend nothing
   toward them, in them, or by them, but the Communication of various
   Degrees of his own Love, Goodness, and Happiness to them, according to
   their State, and Place, and Capacity in Nature. This is God's
   unchangeable Disposition toward the Creature; He can be nothing else
   but all Goodness toward it, because he can be nothing toward the
   Creature but that which he is, and was, and ever shall be in Himself.

   God can no more begin to have any Wrath, Rage, or Anger in Himself,
   after Nature and Creature are in a fallen State, than He could have
   been infinite Wrath and boundless Rage everywhere, and from all
   Eternity. For nothing can begin to be in God, or to be in a new State
   in Him; every Thing that is in Him is essential to Him, as inseparable
   from Him, as unalterable in Him as the triune Nature of his Deity.

   Theogenes. Pray, Theophilus, let me ask you, does not Patience and Pity
   and Mercy begin to be in God, and only then begin, when the Creature
   has brought itself into Misery? They could have no Existence in the
   Deity before. Why then may not a Wrath and Anger begin to be in God,
   when the Creature has rebelled against him, though it neither had nor
   could have any Existence in God before?

   Theophilus. Tis true, Theogenes, that God can only then begin to make
   known his Mercy and Patience, when the Creature has lost its Rectitude
   and Happiness, yet nothing then begins to be in God or to be found in
   him, but that which was always in him in the same infinite State, viz.,
   a Will to all Goodness, and which can will nothing else. And his
   Patience and Mercy, which could not show forth themselves till Nature
   and Creature had brought forth Misery, were not new Tempers, or the
   Beginning of some new Disposition that was not in God before, but only
   new and occasional Manifestations of that boundless eternal Will to all
   Goodness, which always was in God in the same Height and Depth. The
   Will to all Goodness, which is God himself, began to display itself in
   a new Way when it first gave Birth to Creatures. The same Will to all
   Goodness began to manifest itself in another new Way, when it became
   Patience and Compassion toward fallen Creatures. But neither of these
   Ways are the Beginning of any new Tempers or Qualities in God, but only
   new and occasional Manifestations of that true eternal Will to all
   Goodness, which always was, and always will be, in the same Fullness of
   Infinity in God.

   But to suppose that when the Creature has abused its Power, lost its
   Happiness and plunged itself into a Misery, out of which it cannot
   deliver itself, to suppose that then there begins to be something in
   the holy Deity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that is not of the
   Nature and Essence of God, and which was not there before, viz., a
   Wrath, and Fury, and vindictive Vengeance, breaking out in Storms of
   Rage and Resentment because the poor Creature has brought Misery upon
   itself, is an Impiety and Absurdity that cannot be enough abhorred. For
   nothing can be in God, but that which He is and has from Himself, and
   therefore no Wrath can be in the Deity itself, unless God was in
   Himself, before all Nature, and from all Eternity, an Infinity of
   Wrath.

   Why are Love, Knowledge, Wisdom, and Goodness said to be infinite and
   eternal in God, capable of no Increase or Decrease, but always in the
   same highest State of Existence? Why is his Power eternal and
   omnipotent, his Presence not here, or there, but everywhere the same?
   No Reason can be assigned, but because nothing that is temporary,
   limited, or bounded, can be in God. It is his Nature to be that which
   He is, and all that He is, in an infinite, unchangeable Degree,
   admitting neither higher, nor lower, neither here nor there, but
   always, and everywhere, in the same unalterable State of Infinity. If
   therefore Wrath, Rage, and Resentment could be in the Deity itself, it
   must be an unbeginning, boundless, never-ceasing Wrath, capable of no
   more, or less, no up or down, but always existing, always working, and
   breaking forth in the same Strength, and everywhere equally burning in
   the Height and Depth of the abyssal Deity. There is no medium here;
   there must be either all or none, either no Possibility of Wrath, or no
   Possibility of its having any Bounds. And therefore, if you would not
   say, that every Thing that has proceeded, or can, or ever shall proceed
   from God, are and can be only so many Effects of his eternal and
   omnipotent Wrath, which can never cease, or be less than infinite; if
   you will not hold this monstrous Blasphemy, you must stick close to the
   absolute Impossibility of Wrath having any Existence in God. For
   nothing can have any Existence in God, but in the Way and Manner as his
   Eternity, Infinity, and Omnipotence have their Existence in him. Have
   you any Thing to object to this?

   Theogenes. Indeed, Theophilus, both Eusebius and myself have been from
   the first fully satisfied with what has been said of this Matter in the
   Book of Regeneration, the Appeal, and the Spirit of Prayer, &c. We find
   it impossible to think of God as subject to Wrath, or capable of being
   inflamed by the Weakness, and Folly, and Irregularity of the Creature.
   We find ourselves incapable of thinking any otherwise of God, than as
   the one only Good, or, as you express it, an eternal immutable Will to
   all Goodness, which can will Nothing else to all Eternity, but to
   communicate Good, and Blessing, and Happiness, and Perfection to every
   Life, according to its Capacity to receive it.

   Had I an hundred Lives, I could with more Ease part with them, all by
   suffering an hundred Deaths, than give up this lovely idea of God. Nor
   could I have any Desire of Eternity for myself, if I had not Hopes,
   that, by partaking of the Divine Nature, I should be eternally
   delivered from the Burden and Power of my own Wrath, and changed into
   the blessed Freedom of a Spirit, that is all Love, and a mere Will to
   Nothing but Goodness. An Eternity without this, is but an Eternity of
   Trouble. For I know of no Hell, either here or hereafter, but the Power
   and Working of Wrath, nor any Heaven, but where the God of Love is all
   in all, and the working Life of all. And therefore, that the holy Deity
   is all Love, and Blessing, and Goodness, willing and working only Love
   and Goodness to every Thing, as far as it can receive it, is a Truth as
   deeply grounded in me as the feeling of my own Existence. I ask you for
   no Proof of this; my only Difficulty is how to reconcile this Idea of
   God to the Letter of Scripture. First, Because the Scripture speaks so
   much and so often of the Wrath, and Fury, and vindictive Vengeance of
   God. Secondly, Because the whole Nature of our Redemption is so plainly
   grounded on such a supposed Degree of Wrath and Vengeance in God, as
   could not be satisfied, appeased and atoned by any Thing less than the
   Death and Sacrifice of the only begotten Son of God.

   Theophilus. I will do more for you, Theogenes, in this Matter than you
   seem to expect. I will not only reconcile the Letter of Scripture with
   the foregoing Description of God, but will show you, that every Thing
   that is said of the Necessity of Christ's being the only possible
   Satisfaction and Atonement of the vindictive Wrath of God is a full and
   absolute Proof that the Wrath of God spoken of never was, nor is, or
   possibly can be in God.

   Eusebius. Oh! Theophilus, you have forced me now to speak, and I cannot
   contain the Joy that I feel in this Expectation which you have raised
   in me. If you can make the Scriptures do all that which you have
   promised to Theogenes, I shall be in Paradise before I die. For to know
   that Love alone was the Beginning of Nature and Creature, that nothing
   but Love encompasses the whole Universe of Things, that the governing
   Hand that overrules all, the watchful Eye that sees through all, is
   nothing but omnipotent and omniscient Love, using an Infinity of
   Wisdom, to raise all that is fallen in Nature, to save every misguided
   Creature from the miserable Works of its own Hands, and make Happiness
   and Glory the perpetual Inheritance of all the Creation is a Reflection
   that must be quite ravishing to every intelligent Creature that is
   sensible of it. Thus to think of God, of Providence, and Eternity,
   whilst we are in this Valley and Shadow of Death, is to have a real
   Foretaste of the Blessings of the World to come. Pray, therefore, let
   us hear how the Letter of Scripture is a Proof of this God of Love.

   Theophilus. Before I do this, Eusebius, I think it requisite to show
   you, in a Word or two, the true Ground and Nature of Wrath in all its
   Kinds, what it is in itself, whence it has its Birth, Life, and Manner
   of Existence. And then you will see with your own Eyes why, and how,
   and where Wrath or Rage can, or cannot be. And until you see this
   fundamentally in the Nature of things, you cannot be at all qualified
   to judge of the Matter in Question, but must only think and speak at
   random, merely as your Imagination is led by the Sound of Words. For
   until we know, in the Nature of the Thing, what Wrath is in itself, and
   why, and how it comes into Existence, wherever it is, we cannot say,
   where it can enter or where it cannot. Nor can we possibly know what is
   meant by the Satisfaction, Appeasement, or Atonement of Wrath in any
   Being but by knowing how, and why, and for what Reason Wrath can rise
   and Work in any Being; and then only can we know how any Wrath,
   wherever raised, can be atoned or made to cease.

   Now there are two Things, both of them visible to your outward Senses,
   which entirely open the true Ground and Nature of Wrath, and undeniably
   show what it is in itself, from whence it arises, and wherein its Life,
   and Strength, and Being consist. And these two Things are, a Tempest in
   the Elements of this World, and a raging Sore in the Body of Man, or
   any other Animal. Now that a Tempest in the Elements is Wrath in the
   Elements, and a Sore in the Body of an Animal a Wrath in the State of
   the Juices of the Body, is a Matter, I think, that needs no Proof or
   Explication. Consider, then, how or why a Tempest arises in the
   Elements, or an inflamed Sore in the Body, and then you have the true
   Ground and Nature of Wrath. Now a Tempest does not, cannot arise in the
   Elements whilst they are in their right State, in their just Mixture or
   Union with one another. A Sore does not, cannot break forth in the
   Body, whilst the Body is altogether in its true State and Temperature
   of its Juices. Hence you plainly see, that Wrath has its whole Nature,
   and only Ground of its Existence, in and by the Disorder or bad State
   of the Thing in which it exists and works. It can have no Place of
   Existence, no Power of breaking forth, but where the Thing has lost its
   proper Perfection, and is not as it ought to be. And therefore no good
   Being, that is in its proper State of Goodness, can, whilst it is in
   such a State, have any Wrath or Rage in it. And therefore, as a Tempest
   of any kind in the Elements, is a sure Proof that the Elements are not
   in their right State, but under Disorder, as a raging Sore in the Body
   is a certain Indication that the Body is impure and corrupt, and not as
   it should be; so in whatever Mind, or intelligent Being, Wrath or Rage
   works and breaks forth, there, there is Proof enough, that the Mind is
   in that same impure, corrupt, and disordered State, as those Elements
   that raise a Tempest, and that Body which gives forth an inflamed Sore.
   And now, Gentlemen, what think you of a supposed Wrath, or Rage in God?
   Will you have such Things to be in the Deity itself as cannot have
   Place or Existence even in any Creature, until it is become disordered
   and impure and has lost its proper State of Goodness?

   Eusebius. But pray, Theophilus, let me observe, that it does not yet
   appear to me, that there is but one Wrath possible to be in Nature and
   Creature. I grant there is such a Likeness in the Things you have
   appealed to, as is sufficient to justify Poets, Orators, or popular
   Speakers, in calling a Tempest Wrath, and Wrath a Tempest. But this
   will not do in our present Matter; for all that you have said depends
   upon this, whether, in a philosophic Strictness in the Nature of the
   Thing, there can be only one Wrath, wherever it is, proceeding strictly
   from the same Ground, and having everywhere the same Nature. Now if you
   can prove this Identity or Sameness of Wrath, be it where it Will,
   either in an intelligent Mind, the Elements of this World, or the Body
   of an Animal, then your Point is absolutely gained, and there can be no
   Possibility for Wrath to have any Existence in the Deity. But as Body
   and Spirit are generally held to be quite contrary to each other in
   their most essential Qualities, I do not know how you can sufficiently
   prove, that they can only have one Kind of Wrath, or that Wrath must
   have one and the same Ground and Nature, whether it be in Body or
   Spirit.

   Theophilus. Wrath can have no better or other Ground and Nature in
   Body, than it has in Spirit, for this Reason, because it can have no
   Existence or Manner of working in the Body, but what it has directly
   from Spirit. And therefore, in every Wrath that is visible in any Body
   whatever, you have a true Manifestation of the Ground and Nature of
   Wrath, in whatever Spirit it is. And therefore, as there is but one
   Ground and Nature of Wrath in all outward Things, whether they be
   animate or inanimate, so you have Proof enough, that so it is with all
   Wrath in the Spirit or Mind. Because Wrath in any Body or outward
   Thing, is nothing else but the inward working of that Spirit, which
   manifests itself by an outward Wrath in the Body.

   And what we call Wrath in the Body, is truly and strictly speaking, the
   Wrath of the Spirit in the Body.

   For you are to observe, that Body begins not from itself, nor is any
   Thing of itself, but is all that it is, whether pure or impure, has all
   that it has, whether of Light or Darkness, and works all that it works,
   whether of Good or Evil, merely from Spirit. For nothing, my Friend,
   acts in the whole Universe of Things but Spirit alone. And the State,
   Condition, and Degree of every Spirit, is only and solely opened by the
   State, Form, Condition, and Qualities of the Body that belongs to it.
   For the Body can have no Nature, Form, Condition, or Quality but that
   which the Spirit that brings it forth, gives to it.

   Was there no eternal, universal Spirit, there could be no eternal or
   universal Nature; that is, was not the Spirit of God everywhere, the
   Kingdom of Heaven, or the visible Glory of God, in an outward Majesty
   of Heaven, could not be everywhere. Now the Kingdom of Heaven is that
   to the Deity, which every Body is to the Spirit, which liveth, worketh,
   and manifesteth itself in it. But the Kingdom of Heaven is not God, yet
   all that it is, and has, and does, is only an outward Manifestation of
   the Nature, Power, and Working of the Spirit of God.

   It is thus with every creaturely Spirit and its Body, which is the
   Habitation or Seat of its Power; and as the Spirit is in its Nature,
   Kind and Degree, whether heavenly, earthly, or hellish, so is its Body.
   Were there not creaturely Spirits, there could be no creaturely Bodies.
   And the Reason why there are creaturely Bodies of such various Forms,
   Shapes, and Powers, is because Spirits come forth from God in various
   Kinds and Degrees of Life, each manifesting its own Nature, Power, and
   Condition, by that Body which proceeds from it as its own Birth, or the
   Manifestation of its own Powers.

   Now the Spirit is not Body, nor is the Body Spirit; they are so
   essentially distinct, that they cannot possibly lose their Difference,
   or be changed into one another; and yet all that is in the Body is from
   the Nature, Will, and Working of its Spirit. There is therefore no
   possible Room for a Supposition of two Kinds of Wrath, or that Wrath
   may have two Natures, the one as it is in Spirit, and the other as it
   is in Body; first, because nothing can be wrathful but Spirit, and
   secondly, because no Spirit can exert, or manifest Wrath but in and by
   its Body. The kindling its own Body is the Spirit's only Wrath. And
   therefore, through the whole Universe of Things, there is and can be
   but one possible Ground and Nature of Wrath, whether it be in the Sore
   of an animal Body, in a Tempest of the Elements, in the Mind of a Man,
   in an Angel, or in Hell.

   Eusebius. Enough, enough, Theophilus. You have made it sufficiently
   plain, that Wrath can be no more in God Himself than Hell can be
   Heaven. And therefore we ask no more of you, but only to reconcile this
   with the Language and Doctrine of the holy Scriptures.

   Theogenes. You are in too much Haste, Eusebius; it would be better to
   let Theophilus proceed further in this Matter. He has told us what
   Wrath is in itself, be it where it will; I should be glad to know its
   one true Original, or how, and where, and why it could possibly begin
   to be.

   Theophilus. To inquire or search into the Origin of Wrath, is the same
   Thing as to search into the Origin of Evil and Sin: For Wrath and Evil
   are but two Words for one and the same Thing. There is no Evil in any
   Thing, but the Working of the Spirit of Wrath. And when Wrath is
   entirely suppressed, there can be no more Evil, or Misery, or Sin in
   all Nature and Creature. This therefore is a firm Truth, that nothing
   can be capable of Wrath, or be the Beginning of Wrath, but the
   Creature, because nothing but the Creature can be the Beginner of Evil
   and Sin.

   Again, the Creature can have no Beginning, or Sensibility of Wrath in
   itself, but by losing the living Power, the living Presence, and
   governing Operation of the Spirit of God within it; or in other Words,
   by its losing that heavenly State of Existence in God, and Influence
   from Him which it had at its Creation.

   Now no intelligent Creature, whether Angel or Man, can be good and
   happy but by partaking of, or having in itself, a two-fold Life. Hence
   so much is said in the Scripture of an inward and outward, an old and a
   new Man.-- For there could be no Foundation for this Distinction, but
   because every intelligent Creature, created to be good and happy, must
   of all Necessity have a two-fold Life in it, or it cannot possibly be
   capable of Goodness and Happiness, nor can it possibly lose its
   Goodness and Happiness, or feel the least Want of them, but by its
   breaking the Union of this two-fold Life in itself. Hence so much is
   said in the Scripture of the quickening, raising, and reviving the
   inward, new Man, of the new Birth from above, of Christ being formed in
   us, as the one only Redemption and Salvation of the Soul. Hence also
   the Fall of Adam was said to be a Death, that he died the Day of his
   Sin, though he lived so many hundred Years after it: it was because his
   Sin broke the Union of his two-fold Life and put an End to the heavenly
   Part of it, and left only one Life, the Life of this bestial, earthly
   World in him.

   Now there is, in the Nature of the Thing, an absolute Necessity of this
   two-fold Life in every Creature that is to be good and happy; and the
   two-fold Life is this, it must have the Life of Nature, and the Life of
   God in it. It cannot be a Creature, and intelligent, but by having the
   Life and Properties of Nature; that is, by finding itself to be a Life
   of various Sensibilities, that hath a Power of Understanding, Willing,
   and Desiring: This is its creaturely Life, which, by the creating Power
   of God, it hath in and from Nature.

   Now this is all the Life that is, or can be creaturely, or be a
   Creature's natural, own Life; and all this creaturely natural Life,
   with all its various Powers and Sensibilities, is only a Life of
   various Appetites, Hungers, and Wants, and cannot possibly be any Thing
   else. God Himself cannot make a Creature to be in itself, or as to its
   own Nature, any Thing else but a State of Emptiness, of Want, of
   Appetite, &c. He cannot make it to be good and happy, in and from its
   natural State: This is as impossible as for God to cease to be the one
   only Good. The highest Life, therefore, that is natural and creaturely,
   can go no higher than this; it can only be a bare Capacity for Goodness
   and Happiness, and cannot possibly be a good and happy Life, but by the
   Life of God dwelling in, and in Union with it. And this is the two-fold
   Life, that of all Necessity must be united in every good and perfect
   and happy Creature.

   See here the greatest of all Demonstrations of the absolute Necessity
   of the Gospel Redemption and Salvation, and all proved from the Nature
   of the Thing. There can be no Goodness and Happiness for any
   intelligent Creature, but in and by this two-fold Life; and therefore
   the Union of the Divine and human Life, or the Son of God incarnate in
   Man, to make Man again a Partaker of the Divine Nature, is the one only
   possible Salvation for all the Sons of fallen Adam, that is, of Adam
   dead to, or fallen from his first Union with the Divine Life.

   Deism, therefore, or a Religion of Nature, pretending to make Man good
   and happy without Christ, or the Son of God entering into Union with
   the human Nature, is the greatest of all Absurdities. It is as contrary
   to the Nature and Possibilities of Things as for mere Emptiness to be
   its own Fullness, mere Hunger to be its own Food, and mere Want to be
   its Possession of all Things. For Nature and Creature, without the
   Christ of God or the Divine Life in Union with it, is and can be
   nothing else but this mere Emptiness, Hunger, and Want of all that
   which can alone make it good and happy. For God himself, as I said,
   cannot make any Creature to be good and happy by any Thing that is in
   its own created Nature; and however high and noble any Creature is
   supposed to be created, its Height and Nobility can consist in nothing,
   but its higher Capacity and Fitness to receive a higher Union with the
   Divine Life, and also a higher and more wretched Misery, when left to
   itself, as is manifest by the hellish State of the fallen Angels. Their
   high and exalted Nature was only an enlarged Capacity for the Divine
   Life; and therefore, when this Life was lost, their whole created
   Nature was nothing else but the Height of Rage, and hellish
   Distraction.

   A plain Demonstration, that there can be no Happiness, Blessing, and
   Goodness for any Creature in Heaven, or on Earth, but by having, as the
   Gospel saith, Jesus Christ made unto it, Wisdom, Righteousness,
   Sanctification, and Peace with God.

   And the Reason is this; it is because Goodness and Happiness are
   absolutely inseparable from God, and can be nowhere but in God. And on
   the other Hand, Emptiness, Want, Insufficiency, &c., are absolutely
   inseparable from the Creature, as such; its whole Nature cannot
   possibly be any Thing else, be it what or where it will, an Angel in
   Heaven, or a Man on Earth; it is and must be, in its whole creaturely
   Nature and Capacity, a mere Hunger and Emptiness, &c. And therefore all
   that we know of God, and all that we know of the Creature, fully
   proves, that the Life of God in Union with the creaturely Life (which
   is the Gospel Salvation) is the one only Possibility of Goodness and
   Happiness in any Creature, whether in Heaven or on Earth.

   Hence also it is enough certain, that this two-fold Life must have been
   the original State of every intelligent Creature, at its first coming
   forth from God. It could not be brought forth by God, to have only a
   creaturely Life of Nature, and be left to that; for that would be
   creating it under a Necessity of being in Misery, in Want, in Wrath,
   and all painful Sensibilities. A Thing more unworthy of God, and more
   impossible for Him to do, than to create numberless earthly Animals
   under a Necessity of being perpetually pained with Hunger and Thirst,
   without any Possibility of finding any Thing to eat or to drink.

   For no creaturely Life can in itself be any higher, or better, than a
   State of Want, or a seeking for something that cannot be found in
   itself; and therefore, as sure as God is good, as sure as He would have
   intelligent Beings live a Life of Goodness and Happiness, so sure it
   is, that such Beings must of all Necessity, in their first Existence,
   have been blessed with a two-fold Life, viz., the Life of God dwelling
   in, and united with, the Life of Nature or created Life.

   Eusebius. What an important Matter have you here proved, in the
   Necessity and Certainty of this two-fold Life in every intelligent
   Being that is to be good and happy: For this great Truth opens and
   asserts the certain and substantial Ground of the spiritual Life, and
   shows, that all Salvation is, and can be nothing else, but the
   Manifestation of the Life of God in the Soul. How clearly does this
   give the solid Distinction between inward Holiness, and all outward,
   creaturely Practices. All that God has done for Man by any particular
   Dispensations, whether by the Law, or the Prophets, by the Scriptures,
   or Ordinances of the Church, are only as Helps to a Holiness which they
   cannot give, but are only suited to the Death and Darkness of the
   earthly, creaturely Life, to turn it from itself, from its own
   Workings, and awaken in it a Faith and Hope, a Hunger and Thirst after
   that first Union with the Life of the Deity, which was lost in the Fall
   of the first Father of Mankind.

   How unreasonable is it, to call perpetual Inspiration Fanaticism and
   Enthusiasm, when there cannot be the least Degree of Goodness or
   Happiness in any intelligent Being, but what is in its whole Nature,
   merely and truly the Breathing, the Life, and the Operation of God in
   the Life of the Creature? For if Goodness can only be in God, if it
   cannot exist separate from Him, if He can only bless and sanctify, not
   by a creaturely gift, but by Himself becoming the Blessing and
   Sanctification of the Creature, then it is the highest Degree of
   Blindness, to look for any Goodness and Happiness from any Thing, but
   the immediate Indwelling Union, and Operation of the Deity in the Life
   of the Creature. Perpetual Inspiration, therefore, is in the Nature of
   the Thing as necessary to a Life of Goodness, Holiness, and Happiness,
   as the perpetual Respiration of the Air is necessary to Animal Life.

   For the Life of the Creature, whilst only creaturely, and possessing
   nothing but itself, is Hell; that is, it is all Pain and Want and
   Distress. Now nothing, in the Nature of the Thing, can make the least
   Alteration in this creaturely Life, nothing can help it to be in Light
   and Love, in Peace and Goodness, but the Union of God with it, and the
   Life of God working in it, because nothing but God is Light, and Love,
   and heavenly Goodness. And, therefore, where the Life of God is not
   become the Life and Goodness of the Creature, there the Creature cannot
   have the least Degree of Goodness in it.

   What a mistake is it, therefore, to confine Inspiration to particular
   Times and Occasions, to Prophets and Apostles, and extraordinary
   Messengers of God, and to call it Enthusiasm, when the common Christian
   looks, and trusts to be continually led and inspired by the Spirit of
   God! For though all are not called to be Prophets or Apostles, yet all
   are called to be holy, as He who has called them is holy, to be perfect
   as their heavenly Father is perfect, to be like-minded with Christ, to
   will only as God wills, to do all to his Honour and Glory, to renounce
   the Spirit of this World, to have their Conversation in Heaven, to set
   their Affections on Things above, to love God with all their Heart,
   Soul, and Spirit, and their Neighbour as themselves.

   Behold a Work as great, as Divine and supernatural, as that of a
   Prophet and an Apostle. But to suppose that we ought, and may always be
   in this Spirit of Holiness, and yet are not, and ought not to be always
   moved and led by the Breath and Spirit of God within us, is to suppose
   that there is a Holiness and Goodness which comes not from God; which
   is no better than supposing that there may be true Prophets and
   Apostles who have not their Truth from God.

   Now the Holiness of the common Christian is not an occasional Thing,
   that begins and ends, or is only for such a Time, or Place, or Action,
   but is the Holiness of that, which is always alive and stirring in us,
   namely, of our Thoughts, Wills, Desires, and Affections. If therefore
   these are always alive in us, always driving or governing our Lives, if
   we can have no Holiness or Goodness, but as this Life of Thought, Will,
   and Affection works in us, if we are all called to this inward Holiness
   and Goodness, then a perpetual, always-existing Operation of the Spirit
   of God within us, is absolutely necessary. For we cannot be inwardly
   led and governed by a Spirit of Goodness, but by being governed by the
   Spirit of God himself. For the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Goodness
   are not two Spirits, nor can we be said to have any more of the one,
   than we have of the other.

   Now if our Thoughts, Wills, and Affections, need only be now and then
   holy and good, then, indeed, the moving and breathing Spirit of God
   need only now and then govern us. But if our Thoughts and Affections
   are to be always holy and good, then the holy and good Spirit of God is
   to be always operating, as a Principle of Life within us.

   The Scripture saith, "We are not sufficient of ourselves to think a
   good Thought." If so, then we cannot be chargeable with not thinking,
   and willing that which is good, but upon this Supposition, that there
   is always a supernatural Power within us, ready and able to help us to
   the Good which we cannot have from ourselves.

   The Difference then of a good and a bad Man does not lie in this, that
   the one wills that which is good, and the other does not, but solely in
   this, that the one concurs with the living inspiring Spirit of God
   within him and the other resists it, and is and can be only chargeable
   with Evil, because he resists it.

   Therefore whether you consider that which is good or bad in a Man, they
   equally prove the perpetual Indwelling and Operation of the Spirit of
   God within us, since we can only be bad by resisting, as we are good by
   yielding to the Spirit of God; both which equally suppose a perpetual
   Operation of the Spirit of God within us.

   How firmly our established Church adheres to this Doctrine of the
   Necessity of the perpetual Operation of the Holy Spirit, as the one
   only Source and Possibility of any Degree of Divine Light, Wisdom,
   Virtue, and Goodness in the Soul of Man, how earnestly she wills and
   requires all her Members to live in the most open Profession of it, and
   in the highest Conformity to it, may be seen by many such Prayers as
   these, in her common, ordinary, public Service.

   "O God, forasmuch as without Thee we are not able to please Thee, grant
   that thy Holy Spirit may in all Things direct and rule our Hearts."
   Again, "We pray Thee, that thy Grace may ALWAYS prevent and follow us,
   and make us CONTINUALLY to be given to all good Works." Again, "Grant
   to us, Lord, we beseech Thee, the Spirit to think and do ALWAYS such
   things as be rightful, that we, who cannot do anything that is good
   without Thee, may by Thee be enabled to live according to thy Will."
   Again, "Because the Frailty of Man, without Thee cannot but Fall, keep
   us ever, by thy Help from all Things hurtful, and lead us to all Things
   profitable to our Salvation," &c. Again, "O God, from whom all good
   Things do come, grant to us thy humble Servants, that by thy holy
   inspiration we may think those Things that be good, and by thy merciful
   guiding may perform the same."-- But now the true Ground of all this
   Doctrine of the Necessity of the perpetual Guidance and Operation of
   the Holy Spirit, lies in what has been said above, of the Necessity of
   a two-fold Life in every intelligent Creature that is to be good and
   happy. For if the creaturely Life, whilst alone, or left to itself, can
   only be Want, Misery, and Distress, if it cannot possibly have any
   Goodness or Happiness in it, till the Life of God is in Union with it,
   as one Life, then every Thing that you read in the Scripture of the
   Spirit of God, as the only Principle of Goodness, opens itself to you
   as a most certain and blessed Truth, about which you can have no doubt.

   Theophilus. Let me only add, Eusebius, to what you have said, that from
   this absolute Necessity of a two-fold Life, in every Creature, that is,
   to be good and happy, we may, in a still greater Clearness see the
   Certainty of that which we have so often spoken of at other Times,
   namely, that the inspoken Word in Paradise, the Bruiser of the Serpent,
   the Seed of the Woman, the Immanuel, the holy Jesus (for they all mean
   the same Thing) is, and was the only possible Ground of Salvation for
   fallen Man. For if the two-fold Life is necessary, and Man could not be
   restored to Goodness and Happiness but by the restored Union of this
   two-fold Life into its first State, then there was an absolute
   Necessity in the Nature of the Thing, that every Son of Adam should
   have such a Seed of Heaven in the Birth of his Life, as could, by the
   Mediation of Christ, be raised into a Birth and Growth of the first
   perfect Man. This is the one Original Power of Salvation, without
   which, no external Dispensation could have done any Thing towards
   raising the fallen State of Man. For nothing could be raised, but what
   there was to be raised, nor Life be given to any Thing but to that
   which was capable of Life. Unless, therefore, there had been a Seed of
   Life, or a smothered Spark of Heaven in the Soul of Man, which wanted
   to come to the Birth, there had been no Possibility for any
   Dispensation of God, to bring forth a Birth of Heaven in fallen Man.

   The Faith of the first Patriarchs could not have been in Being; Moses
   and the Prophets had come in vain, had not the Christ of God lain in a
   State of Hiddenness in every Son of Man. For Faith, which is a Will and
   Hunger after God, could not have begun to be, or have any Life in Man,
   but because there was something of the Divine Nature existing and hid
   in Man. For nothing can have any longing Desire but after its own
   Likeness, nor could any Thing be made to Desire God, but that which
   came from Him, and had the Nature of Him.

   The whole mediatorial Office of Christ, from his Birth to his sitting
   down in Power at the right Hand of God, was only for this End, to help
   Man to a Life that was fallen into Death and Insensibility in him. And
   therefore his mediatorial Power was to manifest itself by Way of a new
   Birth. In the Nature of the Thing nothing else was to be done, and
   Christ had no other Way to proceed, and that for this plain Reason,
   because Life was the Thing that was lost, and Life, wherever it is,
   must be raised by a Birth, and every Birth must, and can only come from
   its own Seed.

   But if Christ was to raise a new Life like his own in every Man, then
   every Man must have had originally, in the inmost Spirit of his Life, a
   Seed of Christ, or Christ as a Seed of Heaven, lying there as in a
   State of Insensibility or Death, out of which it could not arise but by
   the mediatorial Power of Christ, who, as a second Adam, was to
   regenerate that Birth of his own Life, which was lost in all the
   natural Sons of Adam the first.

   But unless there was this Seed of Christ, or Spark of Heaven hidden in
   the Soul, not the least Beginning of Man's Salvation, or of Christ's
   mediatorial Office could be made. For what could begin to deny Self, if
   there was not something in Man different from Self? What could begin to
   have Hope and Faith and Desire of an heavenly Life, if there was not
   something of Heaven hidden in his Soul, and lying therein, as in a
   State of Inactivity and Death, till raised by the Mediation of Christ
   into its first Perfection of Life, and set again in its true Dominion
   over Flesh and Blood?

   Eusebius. You have, Theophilus, sufficiently proved the Certainty and
   Necessity of this Matter. But I should be glad if you knew how to help
   me to some more distinct Idea and Conception of it.

   Theophilus. An Idea is not the Thing to be here sought for; it would
   rather hinder, than help your true Knowledge of it. But perhaps the
   following Similitude may be of some Use to you.

   The Ten Commandments, when written by God on Tables of Stone, and given
   to Man, did not then first begin to belong to Man; they had their
   Existence in Man, were born with him, they lay as a Seed and Power of
   Goodness, hidden in the Form and Make of his Soul, and altogether
   inseparable from it, before they were shown to Man on Tables of Stone.
   And when they were shown to Man on Tables of Stone, they were only an
   outward Imitation of that which was inwardly in Man, though not legible
   because of that Impurity of Flesh and Blood, in which they were drowned
   and swallowed up. For the earthly Nature, having overcome the Divinity
   that was in Man, it gave Commandments of its own to Man, and required
   Obedience to all the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the
   Pride of Life.

   Hence it became necessary, that God should give an outward Knowledge of
   such Commandments as were become inwardly unknown, unfelt, and, as it
   were, shut up in Death in the Soul.

   But now, had not all that is in these Commandments been really and
   antecedently in the Soul, as its own Birth and Nature, had they not
   still lain therein, and, although totally suppressed, yet in such a
   Seed or Remains, as could be called forth into their first living
   State, in vain had the Tables of Stone been given to Man; and all
   outward Writing, or Teaching of the Commandments, had been as useless,
   as so many Instructions given to Beasts or Stones. If therefore you can
   conceive, how all that is good and holy in the Commandments, lay hid as
   an unfelt, unactive Power or Seed of Goodness, till called into
   Sensibility and stirring by Laws written on Tables of Stone, this may
   help your Manner of conceiving, and believing, how Christ as a Seed of
   Life or Power of Salvation, lies in the Soul as its unknown, hidden
   Treasure, till awakened and called forth into Life by the mediatorial
   Office and Process of the holy Jesus.

   Again, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all
   thy Soul, and with all thy Strength, and thy Neighbour as thyself." Now
   these two Precepts, given by the written Word of God, are an absolute
   Demonstration of the first original Perfection of Man, and also a full
   and invincible Proof, that the same original Perfection is not quite
   annihilated, but lies in him as a hidden, suppressed Seed of Goodness,
   capable of being raised up to its first Perfection. For had not this
   Divine Unity, Purity, and Perfection of Love toward God and Man, been
   Man's first natural State of Life, it could have nothing to do with his
   present State. For had any other Nature, or Measure, or kind of Love
   begun in the first Birth of his Life, he could only have been called to
   that. For no Creature has, or can have a Call to be above, or act above
   its own Nature. Therefore, as sure as Man is called to this Unity,
   Purity, and Perfection of Love, so sure is it, that it was, at first,
   his natural, heavenly State, and still has its Seed, or Remains within
   him, as his only Power and Possibility of rising up to it again. And
   therefore, all that Man is called to, every Degree of a new and perfect
   Life, every future Exaltation and Glory he is to have from the
   Mediation of Christ, is a full Proof, that the same Perfection was
   originally his natural State, and is still in him in such a Seed or
   Remains of Existence, as to admit of a perfect Renewal.

   And thus it is, that you are to conceive of the holy Jesus, or the Word
   of God, as the hidden Treasure of every human Soul, born as a Seed of
   the Word in the Birth of the Soul, immured under Flesh and Blood, till
   as a Day-Star, it arises in our Hearts, and changes the Son of an
   earthly Adam into a Son of God.

   And was not the Word and Spirit of God in us all, antecedent to any
   Dispensation or written Word of God, as a real Seed of Life in the
   Birth of our own Life, we could have no more Fitness for the
   Gospel-Redemption, than the Animals of this World, which have nothing
   of Heaven in them. And to call us to Love God with all our Hearts, to
   put on Christ, to walk according to the Spirit, if these Things had not
   their real Nature and Root within us, would be as vain and useless, as
   to make Rules and Orders how our Eyes should smell and taste, or our
   Ears should see.

   Now this Mystery of an inward Life hidden in Man, as his most precious
   Treasure, as the Ground of all that can be great or good in him, and
   hidden only since his Fall, and which only can be opened and brought
   forth in its first Glory by Him to whom all Power in Heaven and on
   Earth is given, is a Truth to which almost every Thing in Nature bears
   full Witness. Look where you will, nothing appears, or works outwardly
   in any Creature, or in any Effect of Nature, but what is all done from
   its own inward invisible Spirit, not a Spirit brought into it, but its
   own inward Spirit, which is an inward invisible Mystery, till made
   known, or brought forth by outward Appearances.

   The Sea neither is, nor can be moved and tossed by any other Wind, than
   that which hath its Birth, and Life, and Strength, in and from the Sea
   itself, as its own Wind. The Sun in the Firmament gives Growth to every
   Thing that grows in the Earth, and Life to every Thing that lives upon
   it, not by giving or imparting a Life from without, but only by
   stirring up in every Thing its own Growth, and its own Life, which lay
   as in a Seed or State of Death, till helped to come out of it by the
   Sun, which, as an Emblem of the Redeemer of the spiritual World, helps
   every earthly Thing out of its own Death into its own highest State of
   Life.

   That which we call our Sensations, as seeing, hearing, feeling,
   tasting, and smelling, are not Things brought into us from without, or
   given unto us by any external Causes, but are only so many inborn,
   secret States of the Soul, which lie in their State of Hiddenness till
   they are occasionally awakened, and brought forth into Sensibility by
   outward Occurrences. And were they not antecedently in the Soul, as
   States and Forms of its own Life, no outward Objects could bring the
   Soul into a Sensibility of them. For nothing can have, or be in any
   State of Sensation, but that which it is, and hath from itself, as its
   own Birth. This is as certain as that a Circle hath only its own
   Roundness.

   The stinking Gum gives nothing to the Soul, nor brings any Thing into
   Sensibility but that which was before in the Soul; it has only a
   Fitness to awaken, and stir up that State of the Soul, which lay
   dormant before, and which when brought into Sensibility, is called the
   Sensation of bad Smelling. And the odoriferous Gum hath likewise but
   the same Power, viz., a Fitness to stir up that State of Sensation in
   the Soul, which is called its delightful Smelling. But both these
   Sensations are only internal States of the Soul, which appear, or
   disappear, are found, or not found, just as Occasions bring them into
   Sensibility.

   Again, the greatest Artist in Music can add no Sound to his Instrument,
   nor make it give forth any other Melody, but that which lieth silently
   hidden in it, as its own inward State.

   Look now at what you will, whether it be animate, or inanimate: All
   that it is, or has, or can be, it is and has in and from itself, as its
   own inward State; and all outward Things can do no more to it, than the
   Hand does to the Instrument, make it show forth its own inward State,
   either of Harmony or Discord.

   It is strictly thus with ourselves. Not a Spark of Joy, of Wrath, of
   Envy, of Love or Grief, can possibly enter into us from without, or be
   caused to be in us by any outward Thing. This is as impossible, as for
   the Sound of Metals to be put into a Lump of Clay. And as no Metal can
   possibly give forth any other, or higher Sound, than that which is
   enclosed within it, so we, however struck, can give forth no other or
   higher Sound either of Love, Hatred, Wrath, &c., than that very Degree
   which lay before shut up within us.

   The natural State of our Tempers has Variety of Covers, under which
   they lie concealed at Times, both from ourselves and others; but when
   this or that Accident happens to displace such or such a Cover, then
   that which lay hid under it breaks forth. And then we vainly think,
   that this or that outward Occasion has not shown us how we are within,
   but has only infused or put into us a Wrath, or Grief, or Envy, which
   is not our natural State or of our own Growth, or has all that it has
   from our own inward State.

   But this is mere Blindness and Self-Deceit, for it is as impossible for
   the Mind to have any Grief, or Wrath, or Joy, but what it has all from
   its own inward State, as for the Instrument to give forth any other
   Harmony, or Discord, but that which is within and from itself.

   Persons, Things, and outward Occurrences may strike our Instrument
   improperly, and variously, but as we are in ourselves, such is our
   outward Sound, whatever strikes us.

   If our inward State is the renewed Life of Christ within us, then every
   Thing and Occasion, let it be what it will, only makes the same Life to
   sound forth, and show itself; then if one Cheek is smitten, we meekly
   turn the other also. But if Nature is alive and only under a religious
   Cover, then every outward Accident that shakes or disturbs this Cover,
   gives Leave to that bad State, whether of Grief, or Wrath, or Joy that
   lay hid within us, to show forth itself.

   But nothing at any Time makes the least Show, or Sound outwardly, but
   only that which lay ready within us, for an outward Birth, as Occasion
   should offer.

   What a miserable Mistake is it therefore, to place religious Goodness
   in outward Observances, in Notions, and Opinions, which good and bad
   Men can equally receive and practise, and to treat the ready real Power
   and Operation of an inward Life of God in the Birth of our Souls as
   Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, when not only the whole Letter and Spirit of
   Scripture, but every Operation in Nature and Creature demonstrates that
   the Kingdom of Heaven must be all within us, or it never can possibly
   belong to us. Goodness, Piety, and Holiness, can only be ours, as
   thinking, willing, and desiring are ours, by being in us, as a Power of
   Heaven in the Birth and Growth of our own Life.

   And now, Eusebius, how is the great controversy about Religion and
   Salvation shortened.

   For since the one only Work of Christ as your Redeemer is only this, to
   take from the earthly Life of Flesh and Blood its usurped Power, and to
   raise the smothered Spark of Heaven out of its State of Death, into a
   powerful governing Life of the whole Man, your one only Work also under
   your Redeemer is fully known. And you have the utmost Certainty, what
   you are to do, where you are to seek, and in what you are to find your
   Salvation. All that you have to do, or can do, is to oppose, resist,
   and, as far as you can, to renounce the evil Tempers, and Workings of
   your own earthly Nature. You are under the Power of no other Enemy, are
   held in no other Captivity, and want no other Deliverance, but from the
   Power of your own earthly Self. This is the one Murderer of the Divine
   Life within you. It is your own Cain that murders your own Abel. Now
   every Thing that your earthly Nature does, is under the Influence of
   Self-will, Self-love, and Self-seeking, whether it carries you to
   laudable or blamable Practices, all is done in the Nature and Spirit of
   Cain and only helps you to such Goodness, as when Cain slew his
   Brother. For every Action and Motion of Self has the Spirit of
   Anti-christ and murders the Divine Life within you.

   Judge not therefore of your Self, by considering how many of those
   Things you do, which Divines and Moralists call Virtue and Goodness,
   nor how much you abstain from those Things, which they call Sin and
   Vice.

   But daily and hourly, in every Step that you take, see to the Spirit
   that is within you, whether it be Heaven, or Earth that guides you. And
   judge every Thing to be Sin and Satan, in which your earthly Nature,
   own Love, or Self-seeking has any Share of Life in you; nor think that
   any Goodness is brought to Life in you, but so far as it is an actual
   Death to the Pride, the Vanity, the Wrath, and selfish Tempers of your
   fallen, earthly Life.

   Again, here you see, where and how you are to seek your Salvation, not
   in taking up your traveling Staff, or crossing the Seas to find out a
   new Luther or a new Calvin, to clothe yourself with their Opinions. No.
   The Oracle is at Home, that always and only speaks the Truth to you,
   because nothing is your Truth, but that Good and that Evil which is
   yours within you. For Salvation or Damnation is no outward Thing, that
   is brought into you from without, but is only That which springs up
   within you, as the Birth and State of your own Life. What you are in
   yourself, what is doing in yourself, is all that can be either your
   Salvation or Damnation.

   For all that is our Good and all that is our Evil, has no Place nor
   Power but within us. Again, nothing that we do is bad, but for this
   Reason, because it resists the Power and working of God within us; and
   nothing that we do can be good but because it conforms to the Spirit of
   God within us. And therefore, as all that can be Good, and all that can
   be Evil in us, necessarily supposes a God working within us, you have
   the utmost Certainty that God, Salvation, and the Kingdom of Heaven,
   are nowhere to be sought, or found, but within you, and that all
   outward Religion from the Fall of Man to this Day, is not for itself,
   but merely for the Sake of an inward and Divine Life, which was lost
   when Adam died his first Death in Paradise. And therefore it may well
   be said, that Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing,
   because nothing is wanted, and therefore nothing can be available, but
   the new Creature called out of its Captivity under the Death and
   Darkness of Flesh and Blood, into the Light, Life, and Perfection of
   its first Creation.

   And thus also, you have the fullest Proof in what your Salvation
   precisely consists. Not in any historic Faith, or Knowledge of any
   Thing absent or distant from you, not in any Variety of Restraints,
   Rules, and Methods of practising Virtues, not in any Formality of
   Opinion about Faith and Works, Repentance, Forgiveness of Sins, or
   Justification and Sanctification, not in any Truth or Righteousness,
   that you can have from yourself, from the best of Men or Books, but
   wholly and solely in the Life of God, or Christ of God quickened and
   born again in you, or in other Words, in the Restoration and perfect
   Union of the first two-fold Life in the Humanity.

   Theogenes. Though all that has passed betwixt you and Eusebius,
   concerns Matters of the greatest Moment, yet I must call it a
   Digression, and quite useless to me. For I have not the least Doubt
   about any of these Things you have been asserting. It is visible
   enough, that there can be no Medium in this Matter; either Religion
   must be all spiritual or all carnal; that is, we must either take up
   with the Grossness of the Sadducees, who say there is neither Angel nor
   Spirit, or with such Purification as the Pharisees had from their
   washing of Pots and Vessels, and tithing their Mint and Rue; we must, I
   say, either acquiesce in all this Carnality, or we must profess a
   Religion that is all Spirit and Life, and merely for the sake of
   raising up an inward spiritual Life of Heaven that fell into Death in
   our first Father.

   I consent also to every Thing that you have said of the Nature and
   Origin of Wrath. That it can have no Place, nor Possibility of
   Beginning, but solely in the creaturely Nature, nor even any
   Possibility of Beginning there, till the Creature has died to, or lost
   its proper State of Existence in God; that is, till it has lost that
   Life, and Blessing, and Happiness, which it had in and from God at its
   first Creation.

   But I still ask, what must I do with all those Scriptures, which not
   only make God capable of being provoked to Wrath and Resentment, but
   frequently inflamed with the highest Degrees of Rage, Fury, and
   Vengeance, that can be expressed by Words?

   Theophilus. I promised, you know, to remove this Difficulty, and will
   be as good as my Word. But I must first tell you, that you are in much
   more Distress about it than you need to be. For in the little Book of
   Regeneration, in the Appeal, in the Spirit of Prayer, &c., which you
   have read with such entire Approbation, the whole Matter is cleared up
   from its true Ground, how Wrath in the Scriptures is ascribed to God,
   and yet cannot belong to the Nature of the Deity.

   Thus you are told in the Appeal, After these two Falls of two orders of
   Creatures (that is, of Angels and Man), the Deity itself came to have
   new and strange Names, new and unheard of Tempers and Inclinations of
   Wrath, Fury, and Vengeance ascribed to it. I call them new, because
   they began at the Fall; I call them strange because they were foreign
   to the Deity, and could not belong to God in Himself. Thus, God is said
   to be a consuming Fire. But to whom? To the fallen Angels and lost
   Souls. But why, and how, is He so to them? It is because those
   Creatures have lost all that they had from God but the Fire of their
   Nature, and therefore God can only be found and manifested in them as a
   consuming Fire. Now, is it not justly said, that God, who is nothing
   but infinite Love, is yet in such Creatures only a consuming Fire? And
   though God be nothing but Love, yet they are under the Wrath and
   Vengeance of God because they have only that Fire in them which is
   broken off from the Light and Love of God and so can know or feel
   nothing of God but his Fire of Nature in them. As Creatures, they can
   have no Life but what they have in and from God; and therefore that
   wrathful Life which they have, is truly said to be a Wrath or Fire of
   God upon them. And yet it is still strictly true that there is no Wrath
   in God Himself, that He is not changed in his Temper toward the
   Creatures, that he does not cease to be one and the same infinite
   Fountain of Goodness, infinitely flowing forth in the Riches of his
   Love upon all and every Life. (Now, Sir, mind what follows, as the true
   Ground, how Wrath can and cannot be ascribed to God.) God is not
   changed from Love to Wrath, but the Creatures have changed their own
   State in Nature, and so the God of Nature can only be manifested in
   them, according to their own State in Nature. And, N.B., this is the
   true Ground of rightly understanding all that is said of the Wrath and
   Vengeance of God in and upon the Creatures. It is only in such a Sense,
   as the Curse of God may be said to be upon them, not because any Thing
   cursed can be in or come from God, but because they have made that
   Life, which they must have in God, to be a mere Curse to themselves.
   For every Creature that lives must have its Life in and from God, and
   therefore God must be in every Creature. This is as true of Devils, as
   of holy Angels. But how is God in them? N.B. Why, only as He is
   manifested in Nature. Holy Angels have the Triune Life of God, as
   manifested in Nature, so manifested also in them, and therefore God is
   in them all Love, Goodness, Majesty, and Glory, and theirs is the
   Kingdom of Heaven.

   Devils have nothing of this Triune Life left in them, but the Fire, or
   Wrath of eternal Nature, broken off from all Light and Love; and
   therefore the Life that they can have in and from God is only and
   solely a Life of Wrath, Rage, and Darkness, and theirs is the Kingdom
   of Hell.

   And because this Life, (though all Rage and Darkness ), is a Strength
   and Power of Life, which they must have in and from God, and which they
   cannot take out of his Hands, therefore is their cursed, miserable,
   wrathful Life, truly and justly said to be the Curse and Misery, and
   Wrath, and Vengeance of God upon them, though God Himself can no more
   have Curse, Misery, Wrath, and Vengeance than He can have Mischief,
   Malice, or any fearful Tremblings in his holy Triune Deity.

   See now, Theogenes, what little Occasion you had for your present
   Difficulty. For here, in the above cited Words, which you have been
   several Years acquainted with, the true Ground and Reason is plainly
   shown you, how and why all the Wrath, Rage, and Curse that is anywhere
   stirring in Nature, or breaking forth in any Creature, is and must be
   in all Truth called by the Scriptures the Wrath, and Rage, and
   Vengeance of God, though it be the greatest of all Impossibilities for
   Rage and Wrath to be in the Holy Deity itself.

   The Scriptures therefore are literally true in all that they affirm of
   the Wrath, &c., of God. For is it not as literally true of God, that
   Hell and Devils are his, as that Heaven and holy Angels are his? Must
   not therefore all the Wrath and Rage of the one, be as truly his Wrath
   and Rage burning in them, as the Light and Joy and Glory of the other,
   is only his Goodness opened and manifested in them, according to their
   State in Nature?

   Take notice of this fundamental Truth.

   Every Thing that works in Nature and Creature, except Sin, is the
   working of God in Nature and Creature. The Creature has nothing else in
   its Power but the free Use of its Will; and its free Will hath no other
   Power, but that of concurring with, or resisting the Working of God in
   Nature. The Creature with its free Will can bring nothing into Being,
   nor make any Alteration in the working of Nature, it can only change
   its own State or Place in the working of Nature, and so feel and find
   something in its State, that it did not feel or find before.

   Thus God, in the Manifestation of himself in and by Nature, sets before
   every Man Fire and Water, Life and Death; and Man has no other Power,
   but that of entering into and uniting with either of these States, but
   not the least Power of adding to, or taking any Thing from them, or of
   making them to be otherwise than he finds them.

   For this Fire and Water, this Life and Death, are Nature, and have
   their unchangeable State in the uniform Working of God in Nature. And
   therefore, whatever is done by this Fire and Water, this Life and Death
   in any Creature, may, nay, must, in the strictest Truth, be affirmed of
   God as done by Him. And consequently, every breathing forth of Fire, or
   Death, or Rage, or Curse, wherever it is, or in whatever Creature, must
   be said, in the Language of Scripture, to be a provoked Wrath, or fiery
   Vengeance of God, poured forth upon the Creature. And yet, every Thing
   that has been said in Proof of the Wrath of God shows, and proves to
   you at the same Time, that it is not a Wrath in the Holy Deity itself.

   For you see, as was said above, that God sets before Man Fire and
   Water, Life and Death; now these Things are not God, nor existent in
   the Deity itself; but they are that which is, and is called Nature, and
   as they are the only Things set before Man, so Man can go no further,
   reach no further, nor find, nor feel, nor be sensible of any Thing
   else, but that which is to be felt or found in this Nature, or Fire and
   Water, Life and Death, which are set before him. And therefore all that
   Man can find or feel of the Wrath and Vengeance of God, can only be in
   this Fire and this Death, and not in the Deity itself.

   Theogenes. Oh Theophilus, you have given me the utmost Satisfaction on
   this Point, and in a much better Way than I imagined. I expected to
   have seen you glossing and criticizing away the literal Expression of
   Scriptures that affirm the Wrath of God, in order to make good your
   Point, that the Deity is mere Love.

   But you have done the utmost Justice to the Letter of Scripture, you
   have established it upon a firm and solid Foundation, and shown that
   the Truth of Things require it to be so, and that there can be no Wrath
   anywhere, but what is and must be called the Wrath and Vengeance of
   God, and yet is only in Nature.

   What you have here said, seems as if it would clear up many Passages of
   Scripture that have raised much Perplexity. Methinks I begin to see how
   the Hardness of Pharaoh's Heart, how Eyes that see not, and Ears that
   hear not, may, in the strictest Truth, be said to be of or from God,
   though the Deity, in itself, stands in the utmost Contrariety to all
   these Things, and in the utmost Impossibility of willing or causing
   them to be.

   But I must not draw you from our present Matter. You have shown, from
   the Letter of Scripture, that nothing else is set before Man but Fire
   and Water, Life and Death; and therefore, no Possibility of Wrath or
   Love, Joy or Sorrow, Curse or Happiness to be found by Man, but in this
   State of Nature set before him, or into which at his Creation he is
   introduced as into a Region of various Sensibilities, where all that he
   finds or feels, is truly God's, but not God himself, who has his
   supernatural Residence above, and distinct from every Thing that is
   Nature, Fire or Water, Life or Death.

   But give me Leave to mention one Word of a Difficulty that I yet have.
   You have proved that Wrath, Rage, Vengeance, &c., can only exist, or be
   found in Nature, and not in God; and yet you say, that Nature is
   nothing else but a Manifestation of the hidden, invisible Powers of
   God. But if so, must not that which is in Nature be also in God? How
   else could Nature be a Manifestation of God?

   Theophilus. Nature is a true Manifestation of the hidden, invisible
   God. But you are to observe, that Nature, as it is in itself, in its
   own State, cannot have the least possible Spark, or Stirring of Wrath,
   or Curse, or Vengeance in it: But, on the contrary, is from Eternity to
   Eternity, a mere Infinity of heavenly Light, Love, Joy, and Glory; and
   thus it is a true Manifestation of the hidden Deity, and the greatest
   of Proofs that the Deity itself can have no Wrath in it, since Wrath
   only then begins to be in Nature, when Nature has lost its first State.

   Theogenes. This is Answer enough. But now another Thing starts up in my
   Mind. For if the Deity in itself, in its supernatural State, is mere
   Love, and only a Will to all Goodness, and if Nature in itself is only
   a Manifestation of this Deity of Love in heavenly Light and Glory, if
   neither God nor Nature have, or can give forth Wrath, how then can Fire
   and Water, Life and Death be set before Man? What can they come from,
   or where can they exist, since God in himself is all Love; and Nature,
   which is the Kingdom of Heaven, is an Infinity of Joy, Blessing, and
   Happiness?

   Theophilus. I will open to you all this Matter to the Bottom in as few
   Words as I can.

   Before God began any Creation, or gave Birth to any Creature, He was
   only manifested, or known to himself in his own Glory and Majesty;
   there was nothing but Himself beholding Himself in his own Kingdom of
   Heaven, which was, and is, and ever will be, as unlimited as Himself.

   Nature, as well as God, is and must be antecedent to all Creature. For
   as no seeing Eye could be created, unless there was antecedently to it,
   a natural Visibility of Things, so no Creature could come into a
   Sensibility of any natural Life, unless such a State of Nature was
   antecedent to it. For no Creature can begin to be in any World or State
   of Nature, but by being created out of that World, or State of Nature,
   into which it is brought to have its Life. For to live in any World, is
   the same Thing as for a Creature to have all that it is, and has, in
   and from that World. And, therefore, no Creature can come into any
   other Kind of Existence and Life, but such as can be had out of that
   World in which it is to live. Neither can there possibly be any other
   Difference between created Beings, whether animate or inanimate, but
   what arises from that out of which they were created. Seeing then, that
   before the Existence of the first Creatures, there was nothing but God
   and his Kingdom of Heaven, the first Creatures could receive no other
   Life but that which was in God, because there was nothing living but
   God, nor any other Life but his, nor could they exist in any other
   Place or outward State, but the Kingdom of Heaven, because there was
   none else in Existence; and therefore, the first Creatures must, of all
   Necessity, be Divine and heavenly, both in their inward Life and
   outward State.

   Theogenes. Here then, Theophilus, comes my Question. Where is that Fire
   and Water, that Life and Death, that is set before the Creature? For as
   to these first Creatures, nothing is set before them, nothing is within
   them, or without them, but God and the Kingdom of Heaven.

   Theophilus. You should not have said, There is nothing within them, but
   God and the Kingdom of Heaven. For that which is their own creaturely
   Nature within them, is not God, nor the Kingdom of Heaven.

   It has been already proved to your Satisfaction, that no Creature can
   be Divine, good, and happy, but by having a two-fold Life united in it.
   And in this two-fold Life of the Creature, is Fire and Water, Life and
   Death unavoidably set before it. For as its Will worketh with either of
   these Lives, so will it find either Fire or Water, Life or Death. If
   its Will turneth from the Life of God, into the creaturely Life, then
   it enters into a Sensibility of that which is meant by Death and Fire,
   viz., a wrathful Misery. But if the Will keeps steadily given up to the
   Deity, then it lives in Possession of that Life and Water, which was
   its first, and will be its everlasting heavenly Joy and Happiness.

   But to explain this Matter something deeper to you, according to the
   Mystery of all Things opened by God in his chosen Instrument, Jacob
   Behmen.

   You know we have often spoken of eternal Nature, that so sure as there
   is an eternal God, so sure is it, that there is an eternal Nature, as
   universal, as unlimited as God Himself, and everywhere working where
   God is, and therefore, everywhere equally existent, as being his
   Kingdom of Heaven, or outward Manifestation of the invisible Riches,
   Powers, and Glories of the Deity.

   Before, or without Nature, the Deity is an entire hidden, shut up,
   unknown, and unknowable Abyss. For Nature is the only Ground, or
   Beginning of something; there is neither this nor that, no Ground for
   Conception, no Possibility of Distinction or Difference; there cannot
   be a Creature to think, nor any Thing to be thought upon, till Nature
   is in Existence. For all the Properties of Sensibility and sensible
   Life, every Mode and Manner of Existence, all Seeing, Hearing, Tasting,
   Smelling, Feeling, all Inclinations, Passions, and Sensations of Joy,
   Sorrow, Pain, Pleasure, &c., are not in God, but in Nature. And
   therefore, God is not knowable, not a Thought can begin about Him, till
   He manifests himself in, and through, and by the Existence of Nature;
   that is, till there is something that can be seen, understood,
   distinguished, felt, &c.

   And this eternal Nature, or the Out-Birth of the Deity, called the
   Kingdom of Heaven, viz., an Infinity, or boundless Opening of the
   Properties, Powers, Wonders, and Glories of the hidden Deity, and this
   not once done, but ever doing, ever standing in the same Birth, for
   ever and ever breaking forth and springing up in new Forms and Openings
   of the abyssal Deity, in the Powers of Nature. And out of this Ocean of
   manifested Powers of Nature, the Will of the Deity, created Hosts of
   heavenly Beings, full of the heavenly Wonders introduced into a
   Participation of the Infinity of God, to live in an eternal Succession
   of heavenly Sensations, to see and feel, to taste and find new Forms of
   Delight in an inexhaustible Source of ever-changing and never-ceasing
   Wonders of the Divine Glory.

   Oh Theogenes! What an Eternity is this, out of which, and for which thy
   eternal Soul was created? What little, crawling Things are all that an
   earthly Ambition can set before Thee? Bear with Patience for a while
   the Rags of thy earthly Nature, the Veil and Darkness of Flesh and
   Blood, as the Lot of thy Inheritance from Father Adam, but think
   nothing worth a Thought, but that which will bring thee back to thy
   first Glory, and land thee safe in the Region of Eternity.

   But to return. Nothing is before this eternal Nature, but the holy,
   supernatural Deity; and every Thing that is after it, is Creature, and
   has all its creaturely Life and State in it, and from it, either
   mediately or immediately.

   This eternal Nature hath seven chief or fountain Properties, that are
   the Doers, or Workers of every Thing that is done in it, and can have
   neither more nor less, because it is a Birth from, or a Manifestation
   of the Deity in Nature. For the Perfection of Nature (as was before
   said of every Divine and happy Creature) is an Union of two Things, or
   is a two-fold State. It is Nature, and it is God manifested in Nature.
   Now God is Triune, and Nature is Triune, and hence there arises the
   Ground of Properties, three and three; and that which brings those
   three and three into Union, or manifests the Triune God in the Triune
   Nature, is another Property; so that the glorious Manifestation of the
   Deity in Nature can have neither more nor less than seven chief or
   fountain Properties from which every Thing that is known, found, and
   felt, in all the Universe of Nature, in all the Variety of Creatures
   either in Heaven or on Earth, hath its only Rise, or Cause, either
   mediately or immediately.

   Theogenes. You say, Theophilus, that the Triune Deity is united or
   manifested in Triune Nature, and that thence comes the glorious
   Manifestation of God in seven heavenly Properties called the Kingdom of
   Heaven. But how does it appear that this Nature, antecedently to the
   Entrance of the Deity into it, is Triune? Or what is this Triune
   Nature, before God is supposed to be in Union with it?

   Theophilus. It is barely a Desire. It neither is, nor has, nor can be
   any Thing else but a Desire. For Desire is the only Thing in which the
   Deity can work and manifest itself; for God can only come into That
   which wants and desires him.

   The Deity is an infinite Plenitude, or Fullness of Riches and Powers,
   in and from itself; and it is only want and Desire, that is excluded
   from It, and can have no Existence in it. And here lies the true,
   immutable Distinction between God and Nature, and shows why neither can
   ever be changed into the other; it is because God is a universal all;
   and Nature or Desire is a universal want, viz., to be filled with God.

   Now as Nature can be nothing but a Desire, so nothing is in, or done in
   any natural Way, but as Desire does it, because Desire is the All of
   Nature. And, therefore, there is no Strength or Substance, no Power or
   Motion, no Cause or Effect in Nature, but what is in itself a Desire,
   or the Working and Effect of it.

   This is the true Origin of Attraction, and all its Powers, in this
   material World. It gives Essence and Substance to all that is Matter
   and the Properties of Matter; it holds every Element in its created
   State; and not only Earth and Stones, but Light and Air and Motion are
   under its Dominion. From the Centre to the Circumference of this
   material System, every Motion, Separation, Union, Vegetation, or
   Corruption begins no sooner, goes on no further, than as Attraction
   Works.

   Take away Attraction from this material System, and then it has all the
   Annihilation it can ever possibly have.

   Whence now has Attraction this Nature?

   It is solely from hence; because all Nature from its Eternity, hath
   been, is, and for ever can be only a Desire, and hath nothing in it but
   the Properties of Desire.

   Now the essential, inseparable Properties of Desire are the three, and
   can be neither more nor less; and in this you have that Tri-Unity of
   Nature which you asked after, and in which the Triune Deity manifesteth
   itself. I shall not now prove these three Properties of the Desire,
   because I have done it at large, and plainly enough elsewhere. { Way to
   Divine Knowledge; Spirit of Love, Part I }

   But to go back now to your Question, Where, or how this Fire and Water,
   &c., can be found, since God is all Love and Goodness, and his
   Manifestation in Nature is a mere Kingdom of Heaven. They are to be
   found in the two-fold State of Heaven, and the two-fold State of every
   heavenly Creature.

   For seeing that the Perfection of Nature, and the Perfection of the
   intelligent Creature, consists in one and the same two-fold State, you
   have here the plainest Ground and Reason why and how every good and
   happy and new created Being, must of all Necessity, have Fire and
   Water, Life and Death set before it, or put into its Choice.

   Because it has it in its Power to turn and give up its Will to either
   of these Lives, it can turn either to God, or Nature, and therefore
   must have Life and Death, Fire or Water in its Choice.

   Now this two-fold Life, which makes the Perfection of Nature and
   Creature, is, in other Words, signified by the seven heavenly
   Properties of Nature; for when God is manifested in Nature, all its
   seven Properties are in a heavenly State.

   But in these seven Properties, though all heavenly, lieth the Ground of
   Fire and Water, &c., because a Division or Separation can be made in
   them by the Will of the Creature. For the three first Properties are as
   distinct from the four following ones, as God is distinct from That
   which wants God. And these three first Properties are the Essence or
   whole Being of that Desire, which is, and is called Nature, or that
   which wants God.

   When, therefore, the Will of the Creature turns from God into Nature,
   it breaks, or looses the Union of the seven heavenly Properties;
   because Nature, as distinct from God, has only the three first
   Properties in it. And such a Creature, having broken or lost the Union
   of the seven Properties, is fallen into the three first, which is meant
   by Fire and Death. For when the first three Properties have lost God,
   or their Union with the four following ones, then they are mere Nature,
   which, in its whole Being, is nothing else but the Strength and Rage of
   Hunger, an Excess of Want, of Self-Torment, and Self-Vexation. Surely
   now, my friend, this Matter is enough explained.

   Theogenes. Indeed, Theophilus, I am quite satisfied; for by this
   Account which you have given of the Ground of Nature, and its true and
   full Distinction from God, you have struck a most amazing Light into my
   Mind.

   For if Nature is mere Want, and has nothing in it but a Strength of
   Want, generated from the three self-tormenting Properties of a Desire,
   if God is all Love, Joy, and Happiness, an infinite Plenitude of all
   Blessings, then the Limits and Bounds of Good and Evil, of Happiness
   and Misery, are made as visibly distinct and as certainly to be known,
   as the Difference between a Circle and a straight Line.

   To live to Desire, that is, to Nature, is unavoidably entering into the
   Region of all Evil and Misery; because Nature has nothing else in it.
   But on the other Hand, to die to Desire, that is, to turn from Nature
   to God, is to be united with the infinite Source of all that is good,
   and blessed, and happy.

   All that I wanted to know, is now cleared up in the greatest Plainness.
   And I have no Difficulty about those passages of Scripture, which speak
   of the Wrath, and Fury, and Vengeance of God. Wrath is his, just as all
   Nature is his, and yet God is mere Love, that only rules and governs
   Wrath, as He governs the foaming Waves of the Sea, and the Madness of
   Storms and Tempests.

   The following Propositions are as evidently true, as that two and two
   are four.

   First, That God in his holy Deity is as absolutely free from Wrath and
   Rage, and as utterly incapable of them as He is of Thickness, Hardness,
   and Darkness; because Wrath and Rage belong to nothing else, can exist
   in nothing else, have Life in nothing else, but in Thickness, Hardness,
   and Darkness.

   Secondly, That all Wrath is Disorder, and can be nowhere but in Nature
   and Creature, because nothing else is capable of changing from Right to
   Wrong.

   Thirdly, That Wrath can have no Existence even in Nature and Creature,
   till they have lost their first Perfection which they had from God, and
   are become that which they should not have been.

   Fourthly, That all the Wrath, and Fury, and Vengeance, that ever did,
   or can break forth in Nature and Creature is, according to the
   strictest Truth, to be called and looked upon as the Wrath and
   Vengeance of God, just as the Darkness, as well as the Light is, and is
   to be called his.

   Oh! Theophilus, what a Key have you given me to the right understanding
   of Scripture!

   For when Nature and Creature are known to be the only Theater of Evil
   and Disorder, and the holy Deity as that governing Love, which wills
   nothing but the Removal of all Evil from every Thing, as fast as
   infinite Wisdom can find Ways of doing it, then whether you read of the
   raining of Fire and Brimstone, or only Showers of heavenly Manna
   falling upon the Earth, it is only one and the same Love, working in
   such different Ways and Diversity of Instruments, as Time, and Place,
   and Occasion, had made wise, and good, and beneficial.

   Pharaoh with his hardened Heart, and St Paul with his Voice from
   Heaven, though so contrary to one another, were both of them the chosen
   Vessels of the same God of Love, because both miraculously taken out of
   their own State, and made to do all the Good to a blind and wicked
   World, which they were capable of doing.

   And thus, Sir, are all the Treasures of the Wisdom and Goodness of God,
   hidden in the Letter of Scripture, made the Comfort and Delight of my
   Soul, and every Thing I read turns itself into a Motive, of loving and
   adoring the wonderful Working of the Love of God over all the various
   Changings of Nature and Creature, till all Evil shall be extinguished,
   and all Disorder go back again to its first harmonious State of
   Perfection.

   Depart from this Idea of God, as an Infinity of mere Love, Wisdom, and
   Goodness, and then every Thing in the System of Scripture, and the
   System of Nature, only helps the reasoning Mind to be miserably
   perplexed, as well with the Mercies, as with the Judgments of God.

   But when God is known to be omnipotent Love, that can do nothing but
   Works of Love, and that all Nature and Creature are only under the
   Operation of Love, as a distempered Person under the Care of a kind and
   skillful Physician, who seeks nothing but the perfect Recovery of his
   Patient, then whatever is done, whether a severe Caustic, or a pleasant
   Cordial is ordered, that is, whether because of its Difference, it may
   have the different Name of Mercy or Judgment, yet all is equally well
   done, because Love is the only Doer of both, and does both, from the
   same Principle, and for the same End.

   Theophilus. Oh Theogenes, Now you are according to your Name, you are
   born of God. For when Love is the Triune God that you serve, worship,
   and adore, the only God, in whom you desire to live and move and have
   your Being, then of a Truth God dwelleth in you, and you in God.

   I shall now only add this one Word more, to strengthen and confirm your
   right understanding of all that is said of the Wrath, or Rage of God in
   the Scriptures.

   The Psalmist, you know, saith thus of God, "He giveth forth his Ice
   like Morsels, and who is able to abide his Frosts?" Now, Sir, if you
   know how to explain this Scripture, and can show how Ice and Frost can
   truly be ascribed to God, as His, though absolutely impossible to have
   any Existence in Him, then you have an easy and unerring Key, how the
   Wrath, and Fury, and Vengeance, that anywhere falls upon any Creature
   is, and may be truly ascribed to God, as his, though Fury and Vengeance
   are as inconsistent with, and as impossible to have any Existence in
   the Deity, as lumps of Ice, or the Hardness of intolerable Frosts.

   Now in this Text, setting forth the Horror of God's Ice and Frost, you
   have the whole Nature of Divine Wrath set before you. Search all the
   Scriptures, and you will nowhere find any Wrath of God, but what is
   bounded in Nature, and is so described, as to be itself a Proof, that
   it has no Existence in the holy supernatural Deity.

   Thus says the Psalmist again, "The Earth trembled and quaked, the very
   Foundations also of the Hills shook, and were removed, because he was
   wroth." No Wrath here but in the Elements.

   Again, "There went a Smoke out in his Presence, and a consuming Fire
   out of his Mouth, so that Coals were kindled at it. The Springs of
   Water were seen, and the Foundations of the round World were discovered
   at thy chiding, O Lord, at the blasting of the Breath of thy
   Displeasure."

   Now every Working of the Wrath of God, described in Scripture, is
   strictly of a Piece with this, it relates to a Wrath solely confined to
   the Powers and working Properties of Nature, that lives and moves only
   in the Elements of the fallen World, and no more reaches the Deity,
   than Ice or Frost do.

   The Apostle saith, "Avenge not yourselves, for it is written, Vengeance
   is mine, I Will repay, saith the Lord."

   This is another full Proof, that Wrath or Vengeance is not in the holy
   Deity itself, as a Quality of the Divine Mind; for if it was, then
   Vengeance would belong to every Child of God, that was truly born of
   Him, or he could not have the Spirit of his Father, or be perfect as
   his Father in Heaven is perfect.

   But if Vengeance only belongs to God, and can only be so affirmed of
   Him, as Ice and Frost are His, and belong to Him, if it has no other
   Manner of Working, than as when it is said, "He sent out his Arrows and
   scattered them, He cast forth Lightnings and destroyed them"; then it
   is certain, that the Divine Vengeance is only in fallen Nature, and its
   disordered Properties, and is no more in the Deity itself, than
   Hailstones and Coals of Fire.

   And here you have the true Reason, why Revenge or Vengeance is not
   allowed to Man; it is because Vengeance can only work in the evil, or
   disordered Properties of fallen Nature. But Man being Himself a Part of
   fallen Nature, and subject to its disordered Properties, is not allowed
   to work with them, because it would be stirring up Evil in himself, and
   that is his Sin of Wrath, or Revenge.

   God therefore reserves all Vengeance to Himself, not because wrathful
   Revenge is a Temper or Quality that can have any Place in the Holy
   Deity, but because the holy supernatural Deity, being free from all the
   Properties of Nature, whence partial Love and Hatred spring, and being
   in Himself nothing but an Infinity of Love, Wisdom, and Goodness, He
   alone knows how to over-rule the Disorders of Nature, and so to repay
   Evil with Evil, that the highest good may be promoted by it.

   To say, therefore, that Vengeance is to be reserved to God, is only
   saying in other Words, that all the Evils in Nature are to be reserved
   and turned over to the Love of God, to be healed by his Goodness. And
   every Act of what is called Divine Vengeance, recorded in Scripture,
   may, and ought, with the greatest strictness of Truth, be called an Act
   of the Divine Love.

   If Sodom flames and smokes with stinking Brimstone, it is the Love of
   God that kindled it, only to extinguish a more horrible Fire. It was
   one and the same infinite Love, when it preserved Noah in the Ark, when
   it turned Sodom into a burning Lake, and overwhelmed Pharaoh in the Red
   Sea. And if God commanded the Waters to destroy the old World, it was
   as high an Act of the same infinite Love toward that Chaos, as when it
   said to the first Darkness upon the Face of the Deep, "Let there be
   Light, and there was Light."

   Not a Word in all Scripture concerning the Wrath or Vengeance of God
   but directly teaches you these two infallible truths. First, that all
   the Wrath spoken of worketh nowhere but in the wrathful, disordered
   Elements and Properties of fallen Nature. Secondly, that all the Power
   that God exercises over them, all that he doth at any Time or on any
   Occasion with or by them is only and solely the one Work of his
   unchangeable Love toward Man.

   Just as the good Physician acts from only one and the same good Will
   toward his Patient, when he orders bitter and sour, as when he gives
   the pleasant Draughts.

   Now, suppose the good Physician to have such intense Love for you, as
   to disregard your Aversion toward them, and to force such Medicines
   down your Throat, as can alone save your Life; suppose he should
   therefore call himself your severe Physician, and declare himself so
   rigid toward you, that he would not spare you, nor suffer you, go where
   you would, to escape his bitter Draughts, till all Means of your
   Recovery were tried, then you would have a true and just, though low
   Representation of those bitter Cups, which God in his Wrath forceth
   fallen Man to drink.

   Now as the bitter, sour, hot, &c., in the Physician's Draughts, are not
   Declarations of any the like Bitterness, Heat, or Sourness in the
   Spirit of the Physician that uses them, but are Things quite distinct
   from the State and Spirit of his Mind, and only manifest his Care and
   Skill in the right Use of such Materials toward the Health of his
   Patient; so in like Manner, all the Elements of fallen Nature are only
   so many outward Materials in the Hands of God, formed and mixed into
   Heat and Cold, into fruitful and pestilential Effects, into Serenity of
   Seasons, and blasting Tempests, into Means of Health and Sickness, of
   Plenty and Poverty, just as the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence sees
   to be the fittest to deliver Man from the miserable Malady of his
   earthly Nature and help him to become heavenly-minded.

   If, therefore, it would be great Folly to suppose Bitterness, or Heat,
   &c., to be in the Spirit of the Physician, when he gives a hot or
   bitter Medicine, much greater Folly surely must it be, to suppose that
   Wrath, Vengeance, or any pestilential Quality, is in the Spirit of the
   holy Deity, when a Wrath, a Vengeance, or Pestilence is stirred up in
   the fallen Elements by the Providence of God, as a proper Remedy for
   the Evil of this, or that Time or Occasion.

   Hear these decisive words of Scripture, viz., "Whom the Lord loveth, he
   chasteneth." What a Grossness therefore of Mistake is it to conclude,
   that Wrath must be in the Deity, because He chastens and threatens
   Chastisement, when you have God's own Word for it, that nothing but his
   Love chasteneth? Again, Thus saith the Lord, "I have smitten you with
   Blasting and Mildew. Your Vineyards, and your Fig Trees, and your Olive
   Yards, did the Palmer-Worm devour," and then the Love that did this
   makes this Complaint, "Yet ye have not returned to me." Again,
   "Pestilence have I sent amongst you; I have made the Stink of your
   Tents come up even into your Nostrils," &c. And then the same Love that
   did this, that made this Use of the disordered Elements, makes the same
   Complaint again, "Yet have ye not returned to me" (Amos 4:9-10).

   Now, Sir, How is it possible for Words to give stronger Proof, that God
   is mere Love, that he has no Will toward fallen Man but to bless him
   with Works of Love, and this as certainly, when he turns the Air into a
   Pestilence, as when he makes the same Air rain down Manna upon the
   Earth, since neither the one nor the other are done, but as Time, and
   Place, and Occasion, render them the fittest Means to make Man return
   and adhere to God, that is, to come out of all the Evil and Misery of
   his fallen State? What can infinite Love do more, or what can it do to
   give greater Proof, that all that it does proceeds from Love? And here
   you are to observe, that this is not said from human Conjecture, or any
   imaginary Idea of God, but is openly asserted, constantly affirmed, and
   repeated in the plainest Letter of Scripture. But this Conversation has
   been long enough. And I hope we shall meet again To-morrow.

   The End of the First D I A L O G U E
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE
   SECOND DIALOGUE
   BETWEEN

Theogenes, Eusebius, and Theophilus.


   Eusebius. There is no Occasion to resume any Thing of our Yesterday's
   Discourse. The following Propositions are sufficiently proved.

   First, That God is an abyssal Infinity of Love, Wisdom, and Goodness;
   that He ever was, and ever will be one and the same unchangeable Will
   to all Goodness and Works of Love, as incapable of any Sensibility of
   Wrath, or acting under it, as of falling into Pain or Darkness, and
   acting under their Direction.

   Secondly, That all Wrath, Strife, Discord, Hatred, Envy, or Pride, &c.,
   all Heat and Cold, all Enmity in the Elements, all Thickness,
   Grossness, and Darkness are Things that have no Existence but in and
   from the Sphere of fallen Nature.

   Thirdly, That all the Evils of Contrariety and Disorder in fallen
   Nature are only as so many Materials in the Hands of infinite Love and
   Wisdom, all made to work in their different Ways, as far as is
   possible, to one and the same End, viz., to turn temporal Evil into
   eternal Good.

   So that whether you look at Light or Darkness, at Night or Day, at Fire
   or Water, at Heaven or Earth, at Life or Death, at Prosperity or
   Adversity, at blasting Winds or heavenly Dews, at Sickness or Health,
   you see nothing but such a State of Things, in and through which, the
   supernatural Deity wills and seeks the Restoration of fallen Nature and
   Creature to their first Perfection.

   It now only remains, that the Doctrine of Scripture concerning the
   Atonement, necessary to be made by the Life, Sufferings, and Death of
   Christ be explained, or in other Words, the true Meaning of that
   Righteousness or Justice of God, that must have Satisfaction done to
   it, before Man can be reconciled to God.

   For this Doctrine is thought by some to favour the Opinion of a Wrath
   and Resentment in the Deity itself.

   Theophilus. This Doctrine, Eusebius, of the Atonement made by Christ,
   and the absolute Necessity and real Efficacy of it, to satisfy the
   Righteousness, or Justice of God, is the very Ground and Foundation of
   Christian Redemption, and the Life and Strength of every Part of it.
   But then, this very Doctrine is so far from favouring the Opinion of a
   Wrath in the Deity itself, that it is an absolute full Denial of it,
   and the strongest of Demonstrations, that the Wrath, or Resentment,
   that is to be pacified or atoned, cannot possibly be in the Deity
   itself.

   For this Wrath that is to be atoned and pacified is, in its whole
   Nature, nothing else but Sin, or Disorder in the Creature. And when Sin
   is extinguished in the Creature, all the Wrath that is between God and
   the Creature is fully atoned. Search all the Bible, from one End to the
   other, and you will find, that the Atonement of that which is called
   the Divine Wrath or Justice, and the extinguishing of Sin in the
   Creature, are only different Expressions for one and the same
   individual Thing. And therefore, unless you will place Sin in God, that
   Wrath, that is to be atoned or pacified, cannot be placed in Him.

   The whole Nature of our Redemption has no other End, but to remove or
   extinguish the Wrath that is between God and Man. When this is removed,
   Man is reconciled to God. Therefore, where the Wrath is, or where that
   is which wants to be atoned, there is that which is the blamable Cause
   of the Separation between God and Man; there is that which Christ came
   into the World to extinguish, to quench, or atone. If, therefore, this
   Wrath, which is the blamable Cause of the Separation between God and
   Man, is in God Himself, if Christ died to atone, or extinguish a Wrath
   that was got into the holy Deity itself, then it must be said, that
   Christ made an Atonement for God, and not for Man; that He died for the
   Good and Benefit of God, and not of Man; and that which is called our
   Redemption, ought rather to be called the Redemption of God, as saving
   and delivering Him, and not Man, from his own Wrath.

   This Blasphemy is unavoidable, if you suppose that Wrath, for which
   Christ died, to be a Wrath in God Himself.

   Again, The very Nature of Atonement absolutely shows, that that which
   is to be atoned cannot possibly be in God, nor even in any good Being.
   For Atonement implies the Alteration, or Removal of something that is
   not as it ought to be. And therefore, every Creature, so long as it is
   good, and has its proper State of Goodness, neither wants, nor can
   admit of any Atonement, because it has nothing in it that wants to be
   altered or taken out of it. And therefore, Atonement cannot possibly
   have any Place in God, because nothing in God either wants, or can
   receive Alteration; neither can it have Place in any Creature, but so
   far as it has lost, or altered that which it had from God, and is
   fallen into Disorder; and then, that which brings this Creature back to
   its first State, which alters that which is wrong in it, and takes its
   Evil out of it, is its true and proper Atonement.

   Water is the proper Atonement of the Rage of Fire; and that which
   changes a Tempest into a Calm is its true Atonement. And, therefore, as
   sure as Christ is a Propitiation and Atonement, so sure is it, that
   that which he does, as a Propitiation and Atonement, can have no Place,
   but in altering that Evil and Disorder which, in the State and Life of
   the fallen Creature, wants to be altered.

   Suppose the Creature not fallen, and then there is no Room nor
   Possibility for Atonement; a plain and full Proof, that the Work of
   Atonement is nothing else but the altering or quenching that which is
   Evil in the fallen Creature.

   Hell, Wrath, Darkness, Misery, and eternal Death, mean the same Thing
   through all Scripture, and these are the only Things from which we want
   to be redeemed; and where there is nothing of Hell, there, there is
   nothing of Wrath, nor any Thing that wants, or can admit of the
   Benefits of the Atonement made by Christ.

   Either, therefore, all Hell is in the Essence of the holy Deity, or
   nothing that wants to be atoned by the Merits and Death of Christ, can
   possibly be in the Deity itself.

   The Apostle saith, that "we are by Nature Children of Wrath"; the same
   Thing as when the Psalmist saith, "I was shapen in Wickedness, and in
   Sin hath my Mother conceived me." And therefore, that Wrath which wants
   the Atonement of the Sufferings, Blood, and Death of Christ, is no
   other than that Sin, or sinful State, in which we are naturally born.
   But now, if this Wrath could be supposed to be in the Deity itself,
   then it would follow, that by being by Nature Children of Wrath, we
   should thereby be the true Children of God; we should not want any
   Atonement, or new Birth from above, to make us Partakers of the Divine
   Nature, because that Wrath that was in us would be our dwelling in God
   and he in us.

   Again, All Scripture teaches us, That God wills and desires the
   Removal, or Extinction of that Wrath, which is betwixt God and the
   Creature; and therefore, all Scripture teaches, that the Wrath is not
   in God; for God cannot will the Removal, or Alteration of any Thing
   that is in Himself; this is as impossible, as for him to will the
   Extinction of his own Omnipotence. Nor can there be any Thing in God,
   contrary to, or against his own Will; and yet, if God wills the
   Extinction of a Wrath that is in Himself, it must be in Him, contrary
   to, or against his own Will.

   This, I presume, is enough to show you, that the Atonement made by
   Christ is itself the greatest of all Proofs, that it was not to atone
   or extinguish any Wrath in the Deity itself; nor, indeed, any Way to
   affect, or alter any Quality, or Temper in the Divine Mind, but purely
   and solely to overcome and remove all that Death and Hell, and Wrath,
   and Darkness, that had opened itself in the Nature, Birth, and Life of
   fallen Man.

   Eusebius. The Truth of all this is not to be denied. And yet it is as
   true, that all our Systems of Divinity give quite another Account of
   this most important Matter. The Satisfaction of Christ is represented
   as a Satisfaction made to a wrathful Deity; and the Merits of the
   Sufferings and Death of Christ, as that which could only avail with
   God, to give up his own Wrath, and think of Mercy toward Man. Nay, what
   is still worse, if possible, the Ground, and Nature, and Efficacy of
   this great Transaction between God and Man, is often explained by
   Debtor and Creditor: Man, as having contracted a Debt with God that he
   could not pay, and God, as having a Right to insist upon the Payment of
   it; and therefore, only to be satisfied by receiving the Death and
   Sacrifice of Christ, as a valuable Consideration, instead of the Debt
   that was due to Him from Man.

   Theophilus. Hence you may see, Eusebius, how unreasonably Complaint has
   been sometimes made against the Appeal, the Spirit of Prayer, &c., as
   introducing a Philosophy into the Doctrines of the Gospel, not enough
   supported by the Letter of Scripture; though every Thing there asserted
   has been over and over shown to be well grounded on the Letter of
   Scripture, and necessarily included in the most fundamental Doctrines
   of the Gospel.

   Yet they who make this Complaint, blindly swallow a Vanity of
   Philosophy, in the most important part of Gospel Religion, which not
   only has less Scripture for it than the Infallibility of the Pope, but
   is directly contrary to the plain Letter of every single Text of
   Scripture that relates to this Matter: as I will now show you.

   First, The Apostle saith, "God so loved the World, that he gave his
   only begotten Son, that all who believe in Him should not perish but
   have everlasting Life." What becomes now of the Philosophy of Debtor
   and Creditor, of a Satisfaction made by Christ to a Wrath in God? Is it
   not the grossest of all Fictions, and in full Contrariety to the plain
   written Word of God? "God so loved the World"; behold the Degree of it?
   But when did He so love it? Why, before it was redeemed, before He sent
   or gave his only Son to be the Redeemer of it. Here you see, that all
   Wrath in God, antecedent to our Redemption, or the Sacrifice of Christ
   for us, is utterly excluded; there is no Possibility for the
   Supposition of it, it is as absolutely denied as Words can do it. And
   therefore the infinite Love, Mercy, and Compassion of God toward fallen
   Man, are not purchased, or procured for us by the Death of Christ, but
   the Incarnation and Sufferings of Christ come from, and are given to us
   by the infinite antecedent Love of God for us, and are the gracious
   Effects of his own Love and Goodness toward us.

   It is needless to show you, how constantly this same Doctrine is
   asserted and repeated by all the Apostles.

   Thus says St. John again, "In this was manifested the Love of God
   toward us, because he sent his only begotten Son into the World, that
   we might live through him." Again, "this is the Record, that God hath
   given unto us eternal Life; and this Life is in his Son." Again, "God,"
   saith St. Paul, "was in Christ, reconciling the World unto Himself, not
   imputing their Trespasses to them." Which is repeated, and further
   opened in these Words, "Giving Thanks unto the Father, who hath made us
   meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, who
   hath delivered us from the Power of Darkness, and hath translated us
   into the Kingdom of his dear Son" (Col. 1:12-13). And again, "Blessed
   be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us
   with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Places in Christ" (Eph. 1:3).

   How great therefore, Eusebius, is the Error, how total the Disregard of
   Scripture, and how vain the Philosophy, which talks of a Wrath in God
   antecedent to our Redemption, or of a Debt which he could not forgive
   us, till he had received a Valuable Consideration for it, when all
   Scriptures from Page to Page tells us, that all the Mercy and Blessing
   and Benefits of Christ, as our Saviour, are the free antecedent Gift of
   God Himself to us, and bestowed upon us for no other Reason, from no
   other Motive, but the Infinity of his own Love toward us, agreeable to
   what the Evangelical Prophet saith of God, "I am He that blotteth out
   Transgressions for my own sake" (Isa. 43:25), that is, not for any
   Reason or Motive that can be laid before me but because I am Love
   itself, and my own Nature is my immutable Reason why nothing but Works
   of Love, Blessing, and Goodness, can come from me.

   Look we now at the Scripture Account of the Nature of the Atonement and
   Satisfaction of Christ, and this will further show us, that it is not
   to atone, or alter any Quality or Temper in the Divine Mind, nor for
   the Sake of God, but purely and solely to atone, to quench, and
   overcome that Death, and Wrath, and Hell, under the Power of which Man
   was fallen.

   "As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive." This is the
   whole Work, the whole Nature, and the sole End of Christ's Sacrifice of
   Himself; and there is not a Syllable in Scripture, that gives you any
   other account of it. It all consists, from the Beginning to the End, in
   carrying on the one Work of Regeneration; and therefore the Apostle
   saith, "The first Adam was made a living Soul, but the last or Second
   Adam was made a Quickening Spirit," because sent into the World by God
   to quicken and revive that Life from above which we lost in Adam. And
   he is called our Ransom, our Atonement, &c., for no other Reason, but
   because that which He did and suffered in our fallen Nature, was as
   truly an efficacious Means of our being born again to a new heavenly
   Life, of Him, and from Him, as that which Adam did, was the true and
   natural Cause of our being born in Sin, and the Impurity of bestial
   Flesh and Blood.

   And as Adam, by what He did, may be truly said to have purchased our
   Misery and Corruption, to have bought Death for us, and to have sold us
   into a Slavery under the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, though all
   that we have from him, or suffer by him, is only the inward working of
   his own Nature and Life within us, so, according to the plain meaning
   of the Words, Christ may be said to be our Price, our Ransom, and
   Atonement; though all that He does for us, as Buying, Ransoming, and
   Redeeming us, is done wholly and solely by a Birth of his own Nature
   and Spirit brought to Life in us.

   The apostle saith, "Christ died for our Sins." Thence it is, that He is
   the great Sacrifice for Sin and its true Atonement. But how and why is
   he so? The Apostle tells you in these Words, "The Sting of Death is
   Sin;-- but Thanks be to God, who giveth us the Victory through our Lord
   Jesus Christ"; and therefore Christ is the Atonement of our Sins when,
   by and from Him, living in us, we have Victory over our sinful Nature.

   The Scriptures frequently say, Christ gave himself for us. But what is
   the full Meaning, Effect, and Benefit, of his thus giving Himself for
   us? The Apostle puts this out of all Doubt, when he says, "Jesus
   Christ, who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all
   Iniquity, and purify to Himself a peculiar People;--that He might
   deliver us from this present World,--from the Curse of the Law,--from
   the Power of Satan,-- from the Wrath to come"; or as the Apostle saith
   in other Words, "that He might be made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness,
   and Sanctification."

   The whole Truth therefore of the Matter is plainly this. Christ given
   for us, is neither more nor less, than Christ given into us. And he is
   in no other Sense, our full, perfect, and sufficient Atonement, than as
   his Nature and Spirit are born, and formed in us, which so purgeth us
   from our Sins, that we are thereby in Him, and by Him dwelling in us,
   become new Creatures, having our Conversation in Heaven.

   As Adam is truly our Defilement and Impurity, by his Birth in us, so
   Christ is our Atonement and Purification, by our being born again of
   Him, and having thereby quickened and revived in us that first Divine
   Life, which was extinguished in Adam. And therefore, as Adam purchased
   Death for us, just so in the same Manner, in the same Degree, and in
   the same Sense, Christ purchases Life for us. And each of them only,
   and solely by their own inward Life within us.

   This is the one Scripture Account of the whole Nature, the sole End,
   and full Efficacy of all that Christ did, and suffered for us. It is
   all comprehended in these two Texts of Scripture: (1) "That Christ was
   manifested to destroy the Works of the Devil; (2) That as in Adam all
   die, so in Christ shall all be made alive." From the Beginning to the
   End of Christ's atoning Work, no other Power is ascribed to it, nothing
   else is intended by it, as an Appeaser of Wrath, but the destroying of
   all that in Man which comes from the Devil; no other Merits, or Value,
   or infinite Worth, than that of its infinite Ability, and Sufficiency
   to quicken again in all human Nature, that Heavenly Life that died in
   Adam.

   Eusebius. Though all that is here said seems to have both the Letter
   and the Spirit of Scripture on its Side, yet I am afraid it will be
   thought not enough to assert the infinite Value and Merits of our
   Saviour's Sufferings. For it is the common Opinion of Doctors that the
   Righteousness or Justice of God must have Satisfaction done to it; And
   that nothing could avail with God, as a Satisfaction, but the infinite
   Worth and Value of the Sufferings of Christ.

   Theophilus. It is true, Eusebius, that this is often, and almost always
   thus asserted in human Writers, but it is neither the Language nor the
   Doctrine of Scripture.

   Not a Word is there said of a Righteousness or Justice as an Attribute
   in God, that must be satisfied; or that the Sacrifice of Christ, is
   that which satisfies the Righteousness that is in God Himself.

   It has been sufficiently proved to you, that God wanted not to be
   reconciled to fallen Man; that He never was anything else toward him
   but Love; and that his Love brought forth the whole Scheme of his
   Redemption. Thence it is, that the Scriptures do not say that Christ
   came into the World to procure us the Divine Favour and good Will, in
   order to put a Stop to antecedent righteous Wrath in God toward us. No,
   the Reverse of all this is the Truth, viz., that Christ and his whole
   mediatorial Office came purely and solely from God, already so
   reconciled to us, as to bestow an Infinity of Love upon us. "The God of
   all Grace," saith the Apostle, "who hath called us to his eternal Glory
   by Jesus Christ" (1 Pet. 5:10). Here you see, Christ is not the Cause
   or Motive of God's Mercy toward fallen Man, but God's own Love for us,
   his own Desire of our eternal Glory and Happiness hath for that End
   given us Christ, that we may be made Partakers of it. The same as when
   it is again said, "God was in Christ reconciling the World to Himself,"
   that is, calling, and raising it out of its ungodly and miserable
   State.

   Thus all the Mystery of our Redemption proclaims nothing but a God of
   Love toward fallen Man. It was the Love of God, that could not behold
   the Misery of fallen Man, without demanding and calling for his
   Salvation. It was Love alone, that wanted to have full Satisfaction
   done to it, and such a Love as could not be satisfied, till all that
   Glory and Happiness that was lost by the Death of Adam, was fully
   restored and regained again by the Death of Christ.

   Eusebius. But is there not some good Sense, in which Righteousness or
   Justice may be said to be satisfied by the Atonement and Sacrifice of
   Christ?

   Theophilus. Yes, most certainly there is. But then it is only that
   Righteousness or Justice that belongs to Man, and ought to be in him.
   Now Righteousness, wherever it is to be, has no Mercy in itself; it
   makes no Condescensions; it is inflexibly rigid; its Demands are
   inexorable; Prayers, Offerings, and Entreaties have no Effect upon it;
   it will have nothing but itself, nor will it ever cease its Demands, or
   take any Thing in lieu of them, as a Satisfaction instead of itself.
   Thus, "Without Holiness," saith the Apostle, "no Man shall see the
   Lord." And again, "Nothing that is defiled, or impure, can enter into
   the Kingdom of Heaven." And this is meant by Righteousness being rigid
   and having no Mercy; it cannot spare, or have Pity, or hear Entreaty,
   because all its Demands are righteous, and good, and therefore must be
   satisfied, or fulfilled.

   Now Righteousness has its absolute Demands upon Man, because Man was
   created righteous, and has lost that original Righteousness, which he
   ought to have kept in its first Purity. And this is the one, only
   Righteousness, or Justice, which Christ came into the World to satisfy,
   not by giving some highly valuable Thing as a Satisfaction to it, but
   by bringing back, or raising up again in all human Nature, that
   Holiness or Righteousness, which originally belonged to it. For to
   satisfy Righteousness, means neither more nor less than to fulfill it.
   Nor can Righteousness want to have Satisfaction in any Being, but in
   that Being, which has fallen from it; nor can it be satisfied, but in
   restoring or fulfilling Righteousness in that Being, which had departed
   from it. And therefore the Apostle saith, that "we are created again
   unto Righteousness in Christ Jesus." And this is the one and only Way
   of Christ's expiating, or taking away the Sins of the World, namely, by
   restoring to Man his lost Righteousness. For this End, saith the
   Scripture, "Christ gave Himself for the Church, that He might sanctify
   and cleanse it, that he might present it to Himself a glorious Church,
   not having Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such Thing, but that it should be
   holy and without Blemish" (Eph. 5:25-27).

   This is the one Righteousness, which Christ came into the World to
   satisfy, by fulfilling it himself, and enabling Man by a new Birth from
   him to fulfill it. And when all Unrighteousness is removed by Christ
   from the whole human Nature, then all that Righteousness is satisfied,
   for the doing of which, Christ poured out his most precious, availing,
   and meritorious Blood.

   Eusebius. Oh Theophilus, the Ground on which you stand must certainly
   be true. It so easily, so fully solves all Difficulties and Objections,
   and enables you to give so plain and solid an Account of every Part of
   our Redemption. This great Point is so fully cleared up to me, that I
   do not desire another Word about it.

   Theophilus. However, Eusebius, I will add a Word or two more upon it,
   that there may be no Room left, either for misunderstanding, or denying
   what has been just now said of the Nature of that Righteousness, which
   must have full Satisfaction done to it by the Atoning and Redeeming
   Work of Christ. And then you will be fully possessed of these two great
   Truths. First, That there is no righteous Wrath in the Deity itself,
   and therefore none to be atoned there. Secondly, That though God is in
   Himself a mere Infinity of Love, from whom nothing else but Works of
   Love and Blessing and Goodness can proceed, yet sinful Men are hereby
   not at all delivered from That which the Apostle calls the Terrors of
   the Lord, but that all the Threatenings of Woe, Misery, and Punishment,
   denounced in Scripture against Sin and Sinners, both in this World, and
   that which is to come, stand all of them in their full Force, and are
   not in the least Degree weakened, or less to be dreaded because God is
   all Love.

   Every Thing that God hath created, is right and just and good in its
   Kind, and hath its own Righteousness within itself. The Rectitude of
   its Nature is its only Law; and it hath no other Righteousness, but
   that of continuing in its first State. No Creature is subject to any
   Pain, or Punishment, or Guilt of Sin, but because it has departed from
   its first right State, and only does, and can feel the painful Loss of
   its own first Perfection. And every intelligent Creature, that departs
   from the State of its Creation, is unrighteous, evil, and full of its
   own Misery. And there is no Possibility for any disordered, fallen
   Creature to be free from its own Misery and Pain, till it is again in
   its first State of Perfection. This is the certain and infallible
   Ground of the absolute Necessity, either of a perfect Holiness in this
   Life, or of a further Purification after Death, before Man can enter
   into the Kingdom of Heaven.

   Now this Pain and Misery, which is inseparable from the Creature that
   is not in that State in which it ought to be, and in which it was
   created, is nothing else but the painful State of the Creature for Want
   of its own proper Righteousness, as Sickness is the painful State of
   the Creature for Want of its own proper Health.

   No other Righteousness, or other Justice, no other severe Vengeance,
   demands Satisfaction, or torments the Sinner, but that very
   Righteousness, which once was in him, which still belongs to him, and
   therefore will not suffer him to have any Rest or Peace, till it is
   again in him as it was at the first. All, therefore, that Christ does
   as an Atonement for Sin, or as a Satisfaction to Righteousness, is all
   done in, and to, and for Man, and has no other Operation but that of
   renewing the fallen Nature of Man, and raising it up into its first
   State of original Righteousness. And if this Righteousness, which
   belongs solely to Man, and wants no Satisfaction, but that of being
   restored and fulfilled in the human Nature, is sometimes called the
   Righteousness of God, it is only so called, because it is a
   Righteousness which Man had originally from God, in and by his
   Creation; and, therefore, as it comes from God, has its whole Nature
   and Power of Working as it does from God, it may very justly be called
   God's Righteousness.

   Agreeably to this Way of ascribing that to God, which is only in the
   State and Condition of Man, the Psalmist saith of God, "Thine Arrows
   stick fast in me, and thy Hand presseth me sore." And yet nothing else,
   or more is meant by it, than when he saith, "My Sins have taken such
   Hold of me that I am not able to look up--My Iniquities are gone over
   my Head, and are like a sore Burden too heavy for me to bear."

   Now, whether you call this State of Man the Burden of his Sins and
   Wickednesses, or the Arrows of the Almighty, and the Weight of God's
   Hand, they mean but one and the same Thing, which can only be called by
   these different Names, for no other Reason but this, because Man's own
   original Righteousness, which he had from God, makes his sinful State a
   Pain and Torment to him, and lies heavy upon him in every Commission of
   Sin. And when the Psalmist again saith, "Take thy Plague away from me,
   I am even consumed by means of thy heavy Hand," it is only praying to
   be delivered from his own Plague, and praying for the same Thing as
   when he saith, in other Words, "Make me a clean Heart, O God, and renew
   a right Spirit within me."

   Now this Language of Scripture, which teaches us to call the Pains and
   Torments of our Sins, the Arrows, Darts, and Strokes of God's Hand upon
   us, which calls us to own the Power, Presence, and Operation of God, in
   all that we feel and find in our own inward State, is the Language of
   the most exalted Piety, and highly suitable to that Scripture which
   tells us, "That in God we live, and move, and have our Being". For by
   teaching us to find, and own the Power and Operation of God in every
   Thing that passes within us, it keeps us continually turned to God for
   all that we want, and by all that we feel within ourselves, and brings
   us to this best of all Confessions, that Pain, as well as Peace of
   Mind, is the Effect and Manifestation of God's infinite Love and
   Goodness toward us.

   For we could not have this Pain and Sensibility of the Burden of Sin,
   but because the Love and Goodness of God made us originally righteous
   and happy; and therefore, all the Pains and Torments of Sin come from
   God's first Goodness toward us, and are in themselves merely and truly
   the Arrows of his Love, and his blessed Means of drawing us back to
   that first righteous State in and for which his first and never ceasing
   Love created us.

   Eusebius. The Matter, therefore, plainly stands thus. There is no
   righteous Wrath, or vindictive Justice in the Deity itself, which, as a
   Quality or Attribute of Resentment in the Divine Mind, wants to be
   contented, atoned, or satisfied; but Man's Original Righteousness,
   which was once his Peace, and Happiness, and Rest in God, is by the
   Fall of Adam become his Tormentor, his Plague, that continually
   exercises its good Vengeance upon him, till it truly regains its first
   State in him.

   Secondly, Man must be under this Pain, Punishment, and Vengeance to all
   Eternity; there is no Possibility, in the Nature of the Thing, for it
   to be otherwise, though God be all Love, unless Man's lost
   Righteousness be fully again possessed by him. And, therefore, the
   Doctrine of God's being all Love, of having no Wrath in Himself, has
   nothing in it to abate the Force of those Scriptures which threaten
   Punishment to Sinners, or to make them less fearful of living and dying
   in their Sins.

   Theophilus. What you say, Eusebius, is very true; but then it is but
   half the Truth of this Matter. You should have added, that this
   Doctrine is the one Ground, and only Reason, why the Scriptures abound
   with so many Declarations of Woe, Misery, and Judgments, sometimes
   executed, and sometimes only threatened by God, and why all Sinners to
   the End of the World must know and feel "that the Wrath of God is
   revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, and
   that Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, must be upon every
   Soul of Man that doth Evil" (Rom. 1:18, 2:8-9).

   For all these Things, which the Apostle elsewhere calls "the Terrors of
   the Lord", have no Ground, nothing that calls for them, nothing that
   vindicates the Fitness and Justice of them, either with Regard to God
   or Man, but this one Truth, viz., That God is in Himself a mere
   Infinity of Love, from whom nothing but outflowings of Love and
   Goodness can come forth from Eternity to Eternity. For if God is all
   Love, if he wills nothing toward fallen Man but his full Deliverance
   from the blind Slavery and Captivity of his earthly, bestial Nature,
   then every kind of Punishment, Distress, and Affliction, that can
   extinguish the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride
   of this Life, may and ought to be expected from God, merely because he
   is all Love and good Will toward fallen Man.

   To say, therefore, as some have said, If God is all Love toward fallen
   Man, how can he threaten or chastise Sinners? This is no better than
   saying, If God is all Goodness in Himself, and towards Man, how can He
   do that in and to Man, which is for his Good? As absurd as to say, If
   the able Physician is all Love, Goodness, and good Will toward his
   Patients, how can he blister, purge, or scarify them, how can he order
   one to be trepanned, and another to have a Limb cut off? Nay, so absurd
   is this Reasoning, that if it could be proved, that God had no
   Chastisement for Sinners, the very Want of this Chastisement would be
   the greatest of all Proofs, that God was not all Love and Goodness
   toward Man.

   The meek, merciful, and compassionate Jesus, who had no Errand in this
   World but to bless and save Mankind, said, "If thy right Eye or thy
   right Hand offend thee, pluck out the one, cut off the other, and cast
   them from thee." And that He said all this from mere Love, he adds, It
   is better for thee to do this, than that thy whole Body should be cast
   into Hell". Therefore, if the Holy Jesus had been wanting in this
   Severity, he had been wanting in true Love toward Man.

   And therefore, the pure, mere Love of God, is that alone from which
   Sinners are justly to expect from God, that no Sin will pass
   unpunished, but that his Love will visit them with every Calamity and
   Distress, that can help to break and purify the bestial Heart of Man,
   and awaken in him true Repentance and Conversion to God. It is Love
   alone in the holy Deity, that Will allow no Peace to the wicked, nor
   ever cease its Judgments, till every Sinner is forced to confess, That
   it is good for him that he has been in Trouble, and thankfully own,
   That not the Wrath, but the Love of God, has plucked out that right
   Eye, cut off that right Hand, which he ought to have done, but would
   not do, for himself and his own Salvation.

   Again, this Doctrine that allows of no Wrath in the Divine Mind, but
   places it all in the Evil State of fallen Nature and Creature, has
   every Thing in it that can prove to Man the dreadful Nature of Sin, and
   the absolute Necessity of totally departing from it. It leaves no Room
   for Self-Delusion, but puts an End to every false Hope, or vain seeking
   for Relief in any Thing else, but the total Extinction of Sin. And this
   it effectually does, by showing, that Damnation is no foreign,
   separate, or imposed State, that is brought in upon us, or adjudged to
   us by the Will of God, but is the inborn, natural, essential State of
   our own disordered Nature, which is absolutely impossible, in the
   Nature of the Thing, to be any Thing else but our own Hell, both here
   and hereafter, unless all Sin be separated from us, and Righteousness
   be again made our natural State, by a Birth of itself in us. And all
   this, not because God will have it so, by an arbitrary Act of his
   sovereign Will, but because he cannot change his own Nature, or make
   any Thing to be happy and blessed, but only that which has its proper
   Righteousness, and is of one Will and Spirit with Himself.

   If then every Creature that has lost, or is without the true Rectitude
   of its Nature, must as such, be of all Necessity, absolutely separated
   from God, and necessarily under the Pain and Misery of a Life that has
   lost all its own natural Good; if no Omnipotence or Mercy, or Goodness
   of God, can make it to be otherwise, or give any Relief to the Sinner,
   but by a total Extinction of Sin by a Birth of Righteousness in the
   Soul, then it fully appears, that according to this Doctrine, every
   Thing in God, and Nature, and Creature, calls the Sinner to an absolute
   Renunciation of all Sin, as the one only possible Means of Salvation,
   and leaves no Room for him to deceive himself with the Hopes that any
   Thing else will do instead of it. Vainly therefore is it said, That if
   God be all Love, the Sinner is let loose from the dreadful
   Apprehensions of living and dying in his Sins.

   On the other Hand, deny this Doctrine, and say, with the current of
   scholastic Divines, That the Sinner must be doomed to eternal Pain and
   Death, unless a supposed Wrath, in the Mind of the Deity, be first
   atoned and satisfied; and that Christ's Death was that valuable Gift,
   or Offering made to God, by which alone he could be moved to lay aside,
   or extinguish his own Wrath toward fallen Man; say this, and then you
   open a wide Door for Licentiousness and Infidelity in some, and
   superstitious Fears in others.

   For if the Evil, the Misery, and sad Effects of Sin, are placed in a
   Wrath in the Divine Mind, what can this beget in the Minds of the
   pious, but superstitious Fears about a supposed Wrath in God which they
   can never know when it is, or is not, atoned? Every Kind of
   Superstition has its Birth from this Belief, and cannot well be
   otherwise. And as to the Licentious, who want to stifle all Fears of
   gratifying all their Passions, this Doctrine has a natural Tendency to
   do this for them. For if they are taught, that the Hurt and Misery of
   Sin, is not its own natural State, not owing to its own Wrath and
   Disorder, but to a Wrath in the Deity, how easy is it for them to
   believe, either that God may not be so full of Wrath as is given out,
   or that he may overcome it himself, and not keep the Sinner eternally
   in a Misery that is not his own, but wholly brought upon him from
   without, by a Resentment in the Divine Mind.

   Again, this Account which the Schools give of the Sacrifice of Christ,
   made to atone a Wrath in the Deity by the infinite Value of Christ's
   Death, is that alone which helps Socinians, Deists, and Infidels of all
   Kinds, to such Cavils and Objections to the Mystery of our Redemption,
   as neither have, nor can be silenced by the most able Defenders of that
   scholastic Fiction. The Learning of a Grotius or Stillingfleet, when
   defending such an Account of the Atonement and Satisfaction, rather
   increases than lessens the Objections to this Mystery: But if you take
   this Matter as it truly is in itself, viz., That God is in Himself all
   Love and Goodness, therefore can be nothing else but all Love and
   Goodness toward fallen Man, and that fallen Man is subject to no Pain
   or Misery, either present or to come, but what is the natural,
   unavoidable, essential Effect of his own evil and disordered Nature,
   impossible to be altered by himself, and that the infinite, never
   ceasing Love of God, has given Jesus Christ in all his Process, as the
   highest, and only possible Means, that Heaven and Earth can afford, to
   save Man from himself, from his own Evil, Misery, and Death, and
   restore to him his original Divine Life. When you look at this Matter
   in this true Light, then a God, all Love, and an Atonement for Sin by
   Christ, not made to pacify a Wrath in God, but to bring forth, fulfill,
   and restore Righteousness in the Creature that had lost it, has every
   Thing in it that can make the Providence of God adorable, and the State
   of Man comfortable.

   Here all Superstition and superstitious Fears are at once totally cut
   off, and every Work of Piety is turned into a Work of Love. Here every
   false Hope of every Kind is taken from the Licentious; they have no
   Ground left to stand upon: Nothing to trust to, as a Deliverance from
   Misery, but the one total Abolition of Sin.

   The Socinian and the Infidel are here also robbed of all their
   Philosophy against this Mystery; for as it is not founded upon, does
   not teach an infinite Resentment, that could only be satisfied by an
   infinite Atonement, as it stands not upon the Ground of Debtor and
   Creditor, all their Arguments which suppose it to be such, are quite
   beside the Matter and touch nothing of the Truth of this blessed
   Mystery. For it is the very Reverse of all this, it declares a God that
   is all Love; and the Atonement of Christ to be nothing else in itself,
   but the highest, most natural, and efficacious Means through all the
   Possibility of Things, that the infinite Love and Wisdom of God could
   use, to put an End to Sin, and Death, and Hell, and restore to Man his
   first Divine State or Life. I say, the most natural, efficacious Means
   through all the Possibilities of Nature; for there is nothing that is
   supernatural, however mysterious, in the whole System of our
   Redemption; every Part of it has its Ground in the Workings and Powers
   of Nature, and all our Redemption is only Nature set right, or made to
   be that which it ought to be.

   There is nothing that is supernatural, but God alone; every Thing
   besides Him is from and subject to the State of Nature. It can never
   rise out of it, or have anything contrary to it. No Creature can have
   either Health or Sickness, Good or Evil, or any State either from God,
   or itself, but strictly according to the Capacities, Powers, and
   Workings of Nature.

   The Mystery of our Redemption, though it comes from the supernatural
   God, has nothing in it but what is done, and to be done, within the
   Sphere, and according to the Powers of Nature. There is nothing
   supernatural in it, or belonging to it, but that supernatural Love and
   Wisdom which brought it forth, presides over it, and will direct it
   till Christ, as a second Adam, has removed and extinguished all that
   Evil, which the first Adam brought into the human Nature.

   And the whole Process of Jesus Christ, from his being the inspoken Word
   or Bruiser of the Serpent given to Adam, to his Birth, Death,
   Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, has all its Ground and Reason
   in this, because nothing else in all the Possibilities of Nature,
   either in Heaven or on Earth, could begin, carry on, and totally effect
   Man's Deliverance from the Evil of his own fallen Nature.

   Thus is Christ the one, full, sufficient Atonement for the Sin of the
   whole World, because He is the one only natural Remedy, and possible
   Cure of all the Evil that is broken forth in Nature, the one only
   natural Life, and Resurrection of all that Holiness and Happiness that
   died in Adam. And seeing all this Process of Christ is given to the
   World, from the supernatural, antecedent, infinite Love of God,
   therefore it is, that the Apostle saith, "God was in Christ reconciling
   the World to Himself." And Christ in God, is nothing else in his whole
   Nature, but that same, certain, and natural Parent of a Redemption to
   the whole human Nature, as fallen Adam was the certain and natural
   Parent of a miserable Life to every Man that is descended from him:
   With this only Difference, that from fallen Adam we are born in Sin,
   whether we will or no, but we cannot have the new Birth which Christ
   has all Power to bring forth in us, unless the Will of our Heart closes
   with it.

   But as nothing came to us from Adam, but according to the Powers of
   Nature, and because he was that which he was with Relation to us; so it
   is with Christ and our Redemption by Him: All the Work is grounded in,
   and proceeds according to the Powers of Nature, or in a Way of natural
   Efficacy or Fitness to produce its Effects; and every Thing that is
   found in the Person, Character, and Condition of Christ, is only there
   as his true and natural Qualification to do all that He came to do, in
   us, and for us. That is to say, Christ was made to be that which He
   was; He was a Seed of Life in our first fallen Father; He lived as a
   Blessing of Promise in the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Israel of God; He
   was born as a Man of a pure Virgin; He did all that He did, whether as
   suffering, dying, conquering, rising, and ascending into Heaven, only
   as so many Things, which as naturally and as truly, according to the
   Nature of Things, qualified Him to be the Producer, or Quickener of a
   Divine Life in us, as the State and Condition of Adam qualified him to
   make us the slavish Children of earthly, bestial Flesh and Blood.

   This is the comfortable Doctrine of our Redemption; nothing in God but
   an Infinity of Love and Goodness toward our fallen Condition; nothing
   in Christ, but that which had its Necessity in the Nature of Things, to
   make Him able to give, and us to receive, our full Salvation from Him.

   I will now only add, That from the Beginning of Deism, and from the
   Time of Socinus, to this Day, not a Socinian or Deist has ever seen or
   opposed this Mystery in its true State, as is undeniably plain from all
   their Writings.

   A late Writer, who has as much Knowledge, and Zeal, and Wit in the
   Cause of Deism, as any of his Predecessors, is forced to attack our
   Redemption by giving this false Account of it.

   "That a perfectly innocent Being, of the highest Order among
   intelligent Natures, should personate the Offender, and suffer in his
   Place and Stead, in order to take down the Wrath and Resentment of the
   Deity against the Criminal, and dispose God to show Mercy to him,--the
   Deist conceives to be both unnatural, and improper, and therefore not
   to be ascribed to God without Blasphemy."

   And again, "The common Notion of Redemption among Christians seems to
   represent the Deity in a disagreeable Light, as implacable and
   revengeful," &c.

   What an Arrow is here, I will not say, shot beside the Mark, but shot
   at nothing! Because nothing of that, which he accuses is to be found in
   our Redemption. The God of Christians is so far from being, as he says,
   implacable and revengeful, that you have seen it proved from Text to
   Text, that the whole Form and Manner of our Redemption comes wholly
   from the free, antecedent, infinite Love and Goodness of God towards
   fallen Man. That the innocent Christ did not suffer, to quiet an angry
   Deity, but merely as co-operating, assisting, and uniting with that
   Love of God, which desired our Salvation. That He did not suffer in our
   Place or Stead, but only on our Account, which is a quite different
   Matter. And to say, that He suffered in our Place or Stead, is as
   absurd, as contrary to Scripture, as to say, that He rose from the
   Dead, and Ascended into Heaven in our Place and Stead, that we might be
   excused from it. For his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension
   are all of them equally on our Account, for our Sake, for our Good and
   Benefit, but none of them possible to be in our Stead.

   And as Scripture and Truth affirm, that He ascended into Heaven for us,
   though neither Scripture nor Truth will allow it to be in our Place and
   Stead, so for the same Reasons, it is strictly true, that He suffered,
   and died for us, though no more in our Place or Stead, nor any more
   desirable to be so, than his Ascension into Heaven for us should be in
   our Place and Stead.

   I have quoted the above Passage, only to show you, that a Defender of
   Deism, however acute and ingenious, has not one Objection to the
   Doctrine of our Redemption, but what is founded on the grossest
   Ignorance, and total Mistake of the whole Nature of it. But when I lay
   this gross Ignorance to the Deists' Charge, I do not mean any natural
   Dullness, Want of Parts, or Incapacity in them to judge aright, but
   only that something or other, either Men or Books, or their own Way of
   Life, has hindered their seeing the true Ground and real Nature of
   Christianity, as it is in itself.

   Eusebius. I would fain Hope, Theophilus, that from all that has been
   said in the Demonstration of the Fundamental Errors of the Plain
   Account, the Appeal to all that doubt, &c., and the rest that follow,
   to these Dialogues; in all which, Christianity and Deism, with their
   several Merits, are so plainly, and with so much good Will and
   Affection toward all Unbelievers, represented to them, all that are
   serious and well-minded amongst the Deists will be prevailed upon to
   reconsider the Matter. For though some People have been hasty enough to
   charge those Writings with Fanaticism, or Enthusiasm, as disclaiming
   the Use of our Reason in Religious Matters, yet this Charge can be made
   by none, but those who, having not read them, take up with hearsay
   Censures.

   For in those Books, from the Beginning to the End, nothing is appealed
   to but the natural Light of the Mind, and the plain, known Nature of
   Things; no one is led, or desired to go one Step further. The Use of
   Reason is not only allowed, but asserted, and proved to be of the same
   Service to us in Things of Religion, as in Things that relate to our
   Senses in this World {Demonstration of Errors of the Plain Account}

   The true Ground, Nature, and Power of Faith is opened, by fully
   proving, that this Saying of Christ, "According to thy Faith, so be it
   done unto Thee," takes in every Individual of human Nature; and that
   all Men, whether Christians, Deists, Idolaters, or Atheists, are all of
   them equally Men of Faith, all equally, and absolutely governed by it,
   and therefore must have all that they have, Salvation or Damnation,
   strictly and solely according to their Faith {Way to Divine Knowledge}
   . All this is so evidently proved, that I can't help thinking, but that
   every considerate Reader must be forced to own it.

   Theogenes. All this is well said. But let us now return to the
   finishing of our main Point, which was to show, that the Doctrine of a
   God all Love, does not only not destroy the Necessity of Christ's Death
   and the infinite Value and Merits of it, but is itself the fullest
   Proof and strongest Confirmation of both.

   Theophilus. How it could enter into anyone's Head, to charge this
   Doctrine with destroying the Necessity and Merits of Christ's Death, is
   exceeding strange.

   For look where you will, no other Cause, or Reason of the Death of
   Christ, can be found but in the Love of God toward fallen Man. Nor
   could the Love of God will or accept of the Death of Christ, but
   because of its absolute Necessity, and availing Efficacy to do all that
   for fallen Man, which the Love of God would have to be done for him.

   God did not, could not, love or like or desire the Sufferings and Death
   of Christ, for what they were in themselves, or as Sufferings of the
   highest Kind. No, the higher and greater such Sufferings had been, were
   they only considered in themselves, the less pleasing they had been to
   a God, that wills nothing but Blessing and Happiness to every Thing
   capable of it.

   But all that Christ was and did and suffered was infinitely prized, and
   highly acceptable to the Love of God, because all that Christ was, and
   did, and suffered in his own Person, was That which gave him full
   Power, to be a common Father of Life to all that died in Adam.

   Had Christ wanted anything that he was, or did, or suffered in his own
   Person, he could not have stood in that Relation to all Mankind as Adam
   had done. Had he not been given to the first fallen Man, as a Seed of
   the Woman, as a Light of Life, enlightening every Man that comes into
   the World, He could not have had his Seed in every Man, as Adam had,
   nor been as universal a Father of Life, as Adam was of Death. Had he
   not in the Fitness, or Fullness of Time, become a Man, born of a pure
   Virgin, the first Seed of Life in every Man, must have lain only as a
   Seed, and could not have come to the Fullness of the Birth of a new Man
   in Christ Jesus. For the Children can have no other State of Life, but
   that which their Father first had. And therefore Christ, as the Father
   of a regenerated human Race, must first stand in the Fullness of that
   human State, which was to be derived from him into all his Children.

   This is the absolute Necessity of Christ's being all that he was,
   before he became Man; a Necessity arising from the Nature of the Thing.
   Because he could not possibly have had the Relation of a Father to all
   Mankind, nor any Power to be a Quickener of a Life of Heaven in them,
   but because He was both God in himself, and a Seed of God in all of
   them.

   Now all that Christ was, and did, and suffered, after He became Man, is
   from the same Necessity founded in the Nature of the Thing. He suffered
   on no other Account, but because that which he came to do in, and for
   the human Nature, was and could be nothing else in itself, but a Work
   of Sufferings and Death.

   A crooked Line cannot become straight, but by having all its
   Crookedness given up, or taken from it. And there is but one Way
   possible in Nature for a crooked Line to lose its Crookedness.

   Now the Sufferings and Death of Christ stand in this kind of Necessity.
   He was made Man for our Salvation, that is, He took upon Him our fallen
   Nature, to bring it out of its evil crooked State, and set it again in
   that Rectitude in which it was created.

   Now there was no more two Ways of doing this, than there are two Ways
   of making a crooked Line to become straight.

   If the Life of fallen Nature, which Christ had taken upon Him, was to
   be overcome by Him, then every Kind of suffering and dying, that was a
   giving up, or departing from the Life of fallen Nature, was just as
   necessary, in the Nature of the Thing, as that the Line to be made
   straight must give up, and Part with every Kind and Degree of its own
   Crookedness.

   And therefore the Sufferings and Death of Christ were, in the Nature of
   the Thing, the only possible Way of his acting contrary to, and
   overcoming all the Evil that was in the fallen State of Man.

   The Apostle saith, "The Captain of our Salvation was to be made perfect
   through Sufferings." This was the Ground and Reason of his Sufferings.
   Had he been without them, He could not have been perfect in Himself, as
   a Son of Man, nor the Restorer of Perfection in all Mankind. But why
   so? Because his Perfection, as a Son of Man, or the Captain of human
   Salvation, could only consist in his acting in, and with a Spirit
   suitable to the first created State of perfect Man; that is, He must in
   his Spirit be as much above all the Good and Evil of this fallen World,
   as the first Man was.

   But now, He could not show that He was of this Spirit, that He was
   under no Power of fallen Nature, but lived in the Perfection of the
   first created Man; He could not do this, but by showing, that all the
   Good of the earthly Life was renounced by Him, and that all the Evil
   which the World, the Malice of Men and Devils, could bring upon Him,
   could not hinder his living wholly and solely to God, and doing his
   Will on Earth with the same Fullness, as Angels do it in Heaven.

   But had there been any Evil in all fallen Nature, whether in Life,
   Death, or Hell, that had not attacked Him, with all its Force, He could
   not have been said to have overcome it. And therefore so sure as
   Christ, the Son of Man, was to overcome the World, Death, Hell, and
   Satan, so sure is it, that all the Evils which they could possibly
   bring upon Him, were to be felt and suffered by Him, as absolutely
   necessary in the Nature of the Thing, to declare his Perfection, and
   prove his Superiority over them. Surely, my Friend, it is now enough
   proved to you, how a God all Love toward fallen Man, must love, like,
   desire, and delight in all the Sufferings of Christ, which alone could
   enable Him, as a Son of Man, to undo, and reverse all that Evil, which
   the first Man had done to all his Posterity.

   Eusebius. Oh, Sir, in what an adorable Light is this Mystery now
   placed. And yet in no other Light than that in which in the plain
   Letter of all Scripture sets it. No Wrath in God, no fictitious
   Atonement, no Folly of Debtor and Creditor, no suffering in Christ for
   Sufferings' sake, but a Christ suffering and dying, as his same Victory
   over Death and Hell, as when He rose from the Dead and ascended into
   Heaven.

   Theophilus. Sure now, Eusebius, you plainly enough see wherein the
   infinite Merits, or the availing Efficacy, and glorious Power of the
   Sufferings and Death of Christ consist; since they were that, in and
   through which Christ himself came out of the State of fallen Nature,
   and got Power to give the same Victory to all his Brethren of the human
   Race.

   Wonder not, therefore, that the Scriptures so frequently ascribe all
   our Salvation to the Sufferings and Death of Christ, that we are
   continually referred to them, as the Wounds and Stripes by which we are
   healed, as the Blood by which we are washed from our Sins, as the Price
   (much above Gold and precious Stones) by which we are bought.

   Wonder not also that in the Old Testament, its Service Sacrifices, and
   Ceremonies were instituted to typify, and point at the great Sacrifice
   of Christ, and to keep up a continual Hope, strong Expectation, and
   Belief of it. And that in the New Testament, the Reality, the Benefits,
   and glorious Effects of Christ our Passover being actually sacrificed
   for us, are so joyfully repeated by every Apostle.

   It is because Christ, as suffering and dying, was nothing else but
   Christ conquering and overcoming all the false Good, and the hellish
   Evil, of the fallen State of Man.

   His Resurrection from the Grave, and Ascension into Heaven, though
   great in themselves, and necessary Parts of our Deliverance, were yet
   but the Consequences and genuine Effects of his Sufferings and Death.
   These were in themselves the Reality of his Conquest; all his great
   Work was done and effected in them and by them, and his Resurrection
   and Ascension were only his entering into the Possession of that, which
   his Sufferings and Death had gained for him.

   Wonder not then, that all the true Followers of Christ, the Saints of
   every Age, have so gloried in the Cross of Christ, have imputed such
   great Things to it, have desired nothing so much, as to be Partakers of
   it, to live in constant Union with it. It is because his Sufferings,
   his Death, and Cross, were the Fullness of his Victory over all the
   Works of the Devil. Not an Evil in Flesh and Blood, not a Misery of
   Life, not a Chain of Death, not a Power of Hell and Darkness, but were
   all baffled, broken, and overcome by the Process of a suffering, and
   dying Christ. Well therefore may the Cross of Christ be the Glory of
   Christians.

   Eusebius. This Matter is so solidly and fully cleared up, that I am
   almost ashamed to ask you any Thing further about it. Yet explain a
   little more, if you please, how it is, that the Sufferings and Death of
   Christ, gave Him Power to become a common Father of Life to all that
   died in Adam. Or how it is, that we, by Virtue of them, have Victory
   over all the Evil of our fallen State.

   Theophilus. You are to know, Eusebius, that the Christian Religion is
   no arbitrary System of Divine worship, but is the one true, real, and
   only Religion of Nature; that is, it is wholly founded in the Nature of
   Things, has nothing in it supernatural or contrary to the Powers and
   Demands of Nature; but all that it does, is only in, and by, and
   according to the Workings and Possibilities of Nature.

   A Religion that is not founded in Nature, is all Fiction and Falsity,
   and as mere a nothing as an Idol. For as no Creature can be, or have
   any Thing, but what it is and has from the Nature of Things, nor have
   any Thing done to it, Good or Harm, but according to the unalterable
   Workings of Nature, so no Religion can be of any Service, but that
   which works with and according to the Demands of Nature. Nor can any
   fallen Creature be raised out of its fallen State, even by the
   Omnipotence of God, but according to the Nature of Things, or the
   unchangeable Powers of Nature; for Nature is the Opening and
   Manifestation of the Divine Omnipotence; it is God's Power-world; and
   therefore all that God doth, is and must be done in and by the Powers
   of Nature. God, though omnipotent, can give no Existence to any
   Creature, but it must have that Existence in Space and Time.-- Time
   cometh out of the Eternity, and Space cometh out of the Infinity of
   God--God hath an omnipotent Power over them, in them, and with them, to
   make both of them set forth and manifest the Wonders of his
   supernatural Deity. Yet Time can only be subservient to the Omnipotence
   of God, according to the Nature of Time; and Space can only obey his
   Will, according to the Nature of Space; but neither of them can, by any
   Power, be made to be in a supernatural State, or be any Thing but what
   they are in their own Nature.

   Now Right and Wrong, Good and Evil, True and False, Happiness and
   Misery, are as unchangeable in Nature, as Time, and Space. And every
   State and Quality that is creaturely, or that can belong to any
   Creature, has its own Nature, as unchangeably as Time and Space have
   theirs.

   Nothing therefore can be done to any Creature supernaturally, or in a
   Way that is without, or contrary to the Powers of Nature; but every
   Thing or Creature that is to be helped, that is to have any Good done
   to it, or any Evil taken out of it, can only have it done so far, as
   the Powers of Nature are able and rightly directed to effect it.

   And this is the true Ground of all Divine Revelation, or that Help
   which the supernatural Deity vouchsafes to the fallen State of Man. It
   is not to appoint an arbitrary System of religious Homage to God, but
   solely to point out, and provide for Man, blinded by his fallen State,
   that one only Religion, that, according to the Nature of Things, can
   possibly restore to him his lost Perfection. This is the Truth, the
   Goodness, and the Necessity of the Christian Religion; it is true, and
   good, and necessary, because it is as much the one only natural and
   possible Way of overcoming all the Evil of fallen Man, as Light is the
   one only natural, possible Thing that can expel Darkness.

   And therefore it is, that all the Mysteries of the Gospel, however
   high, are yet true and necessary Parts of the one Religion of Nature;
   because they are no higher, nor otherwise, than the natural State of
   fallen Man absolutely stands in Need of. His Nature cannot be helped,
   or raised out of the Evils of its present State, by any Thing less than
   these Mysteries; and therefore, they are in the same Truth and Justness
   to be called his natural Religion, as that Remedy which alone has full
   Power to remove all the Evil of a Disease, may be justly called its
   natural Remedy.

   For a Religion is not to be deemed natural, because it has nothing to
   do with Revelation; but then is it the one true Religion of Nature,
   when it has every Thing in it that our natural State stands in need of;
   every Thing that can help us out of our present Evil, and raise and
   exalt us to all the Happiness which our Nature is capable of having.
   Supposing, therefore, the Christian scheme of Redemption to be all
   that, and nothing else in itself, but that which the Nature of Things
   absolutely requires it to be, it must, for that very Reason, have its
   Mysteries.

   For the fallen, corrupt, mortal State of Man, absolutely requires these
   two Things as its only Salvation. First, the Divine Life, or the Life
   of God, must be revived in the Soul of Man. Secondly, there must be a
   Resurrection of the Body in a better State after Death. Now nothing in
   the Power of Man, or in the Things of this World, can effect this
   Salvation. If, therefore, this is to be the Salvation of Man, then some
   Interposition of the Deity is absolutely necessary, in the Nature of
   the Thing, or Man can have no Religion that is sufficiently natural;
   that is to say, no Religion that is sufficient, or equal to the Wants
   of his Nature.

   Now this necessary Interposition of the Deity, though doing nothing but
   in a natural Way, or according to the Nature of Things, must be
   mysterious to Man, because it is doing something more and higher than
   his Senses or Reason ever saw done, or possible to be done, either by
   himself, or any of the Powers of this World.

   And this is the true Ground and Nature of the Mysteries of Christian
   Redemption. They are, in themselves, nothing else but what the Nature
   of Things requires them to be, as natural, efficacious Means of our
   Salvation, and all their Power is in a natural Way, or true Fitness of
   Cause for its Effect; but they are mysterious to Man, because brought
   into the Scheme of our Redemption by the Interposition of God, to work
   in a Way and manner above, and superior to all that is seen and done in
   the Things of the World.

   The Mysteries, therefore, of the Gospel are so far from showing the
   Gospel not to be the one true Religion of Nature, that they are the
   greatest Proof of it, since they are that alone which can help Man to
   all that good which his natural State wants to have done to it.

   For instance, if the Salvation of Man absolutely requires the Revival
   or Restoration of the Divine Life in the human Nature, then nothing can
   be the one, sufficient, true Religion of Nature, but that which has a
   natural Power to do this.

   What a Grossness of Error is it, therefore, to blame that Doctrine
   which asserts the Incarnation of the Son of God, or the Necessity of
   the Word being made Flesh, when in the Nature of the Thing, nothing
   else but this very Mystery can be the natural, efficacious Cause of the
   Renewal of the Divine Life in the human Nature, or have any natural
   Efficacy to effect our Salvation?

   Having now, Eusebius, established this Ground, that nothing is, or can
   be a Part of true, natural Religion, or have any real Efficacy, as a
   Means of Salvation, but only that which has its Efficacy in and from
   the Nature of Things, or in the natural Fitness of Cause to produce its
   Effect, you are brought into the clear View of this Truth, viz., That
   the Religion of Deism is false, and vain, and visionary, and to be
   rejected by every Man as the mere enthusiastic, fanatic Product of pure
   Imagination; and all for this plain Reason, because it quite disregards
   the Nature of Things, stands wholly upon a supernatural Ground, and
   goes as much above and as directly contrary to the Powers of Nature, as
   that Faith that trusts in, and prays to a wooden God.

   I say not this (as is too commonly done) in the Spirit of Accusation,
   or to raise an Odium. No, by no Means. I have the utmost Aversion to
   such a Procedure; I would no more bring a false Charge against the
   Deist, than I would bear false Witness against an Apostle. And I desire
   to have no other Temper, Spirit or Behaviour toward them, but such as
   the loving God with all my Heart, and loving them as I Love myself,
   requires of me. And in this Spirit of Love, I charge them with
   visionary Faith, and enthusiastic Religion; and only so far, as I have
   from Time to Time proved, that they trust to be saved by that, which
   according to the unchangeable Nature of Things can have no Power of
   Salvation in it.

   For a Religion, not grounded in the Power and Nature of Things, is
   unnatural, supernatural, superrational, and is rightly called either
   Enthusiasm, Vision, Fanaticism, Superstition, or Idolatry, just as you
   please. For all these are but different Names for one and the same
   religious Delusion. And every Religion is this Delusion, but that one
   Religion which is required by, and has its Efficacy in and from the
   unchangeable Nature of Things.

   And thus stands the Matter betwixt the Deists and myself. If I knew how
   to do them or the Subject more Justice, I would gladly do it; having no
   Desire, either for them or myself, but that we may all of us be
   delivered from every Thing that separates us from God, all equal
   Sharers of every Blessing that He has for human Nature, all united in
   that Spirit of Love and Goodness for which he created us, and all
   blessed with that Faith and Hope to which the God of Love has called
   us, as the one, only, possible, natural, and full Means of ever finding
   ourselves saved, and redeemed from all the Evils both of Time and
   Eternity.

   And now, Eusebius, upon this Ground, viz., (1) That there is but one
   true Religion, and that it is the Religion of Nature. (2) That a
   Religion has no Pretense to be considered as the Religion of Nature,
   because it rejects Divine Revelation, and has only human Reason for its
   Guide, but wholly and solely because it has every Good in it that the
   natural State of Man wants, and can receive from Religion. (3) That
   nothing can be any religious Good, or have any real Efficacy, as a
   Means of Salvation, but only that which has its Efficacy in and from
   the natural Power of Things, or the Fitness and Sufficiency of Cause to
   produce its Effect. (4) That the Religion of the Gospel, in all its
   Mysteries and Doctrines, is wholly grounded in the natural Powers of
   Things, and their Fitness to produce their Effects. Upon this Ground I
   come to answer your Question, viz., How it is that the Sufferings and
   Death of Christ gave Him full Power to become a common Father of Life
   to all those that died in Adam? Or how it is that we, by Virtue of
   them, are delivered out of all the Evils of our fallen State?

   The Sufferings and Death of Christ have no supernatural Effect that is
   above, or contrary to Nature; because the Thing itself is impossible.
   For a Thing is only therefore impossible, because the Nature of Things
   will not allow it.

   The Fall of all Mankind in Adam is no supernatural Event or Effect, but
   the natural and necessary Consequence of our Relation to him. Could
   Adam at his Fall into this earthly Life have absolutely overcome every
   Power of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, in the same Spirit as
   Christ did, he had been his own Redeemer, had risen out of his Fall,
   and ascended into Paradise, and been the Father of a paradisiacal
   Offspring, just as Christ, when He had overcome them all, rose from the
   Dead, and ascended into Heaven. But Adam did not do this, because it
   was as impossible, in the Nature of the Thing, as for a Beast to raise
   itself into an Angel. If therefore Man is to come out of his fallen
   State, there must be something found out that, according to the Nature
   of Things, hath Power to effect it. For it can no more be done
   supernaturally by any Thing else, than it could by Adam.

   Now the Matter stood thus: The Seed of all Mankind was in the Loins of
   fallen Adam. This was unalterable in the Nature of the Thing, and
   therefore all Mankind must come forth in his fallen State.

   Neither can they ever be in any State whatever, whether earthly or
   heavenly, but by having an earthly Man, or a heavenly Man for their
   Father. For Mankind, as such, must of all Necessity be born of, and
   have that Nature which it hath from a Man. And this is the true Ground,
   and absolute Necessity of the one Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus. For
   seeing Mankind, as such, must have that Birth and Nature which they
   have from Man; seeing they never could have had any Relation to
   Paradise, or any Possibility of partaking of it, but because they had a
   paradisiacal Man for their Father, nor could have had any Relation to
   this earthly World, or any Possibility of being born earthly, but
   because they had an earthly Man for their Father; and seeing all this
   must be unalterably so forever, it plainly follows, that there was an
   utter Impossibility for the Seed of Adam ever to come out of its fallen
   State, or ever have another or better Life, than they had from Adam,
   unless such a Son of Man could be brought into Existence, as had the
   same Relation to all Mankind as Adam had, was as much in them all as
   Adam was, and had as full Power according to the Nature of Things, to
   give a heavenly Life to all the Seed in Adam's loins, as Adam had to
   bring them forth in earthly Flesh and Blood.

   And now, Sir, that Christ was this very Son of Man, standing in the
   same Fullness of Relation to all Mankind as Adam did, having his Seed
   as really in them all, as Adam had, and as truly and fully qualified,
   according to the Nature of Things, to be a common and universal Father
   of Life, as Adam was of Death to all the human Race, shall in a Word or
   two be made as plain and undeniable, as that two and two are four.

   The Doctrine of our Redemption absolutely asserts, that the Seed of
   Christ was sown into the first fallen Father of Mankind, called the
   Seed of the Woman, the Bruiser of the Serpent, the ingrafted Word of
   Life, called again in the Gospel, that Light which lighteth every Man
   that cometh into the World. Therefore Christ was in all Men, in that
   same Fullness of Relation of a Father to all Mankind, as the first Adam
   was. Secondly, Christ was born of Adam's Flesh and Blood, took the
   human Nature upon him, and therefore stood as a human Creature in the
   same Relation to Mankind, as Adam did. Nothing therefore was further
   wanting in Christ, to make him as truly a natural Father of Life to all
   Mankind, as Adam was at first, but God's Appointment of him to that
   End.

   For as Adam could not have been the natural Father of Mankind, but
   because God created and appointed him for that End, so Christ could not
   have been the natural Regenerator, or Redeemer of a heavenly Life that
   was lost in all Mankind, but because God had appointed and brought him
   into the World for that End. Now that God did this, that Christ came
   into the World by Divine Appointment, to be the Saviour, the
   Resurrection and Life of all Mankind, is a Truth as evident from
   Scripture, as that Adam was the first Man.

   And thus it appears, in the utmost degree of Plainness and Certainty,
   that Christ in his single Person was, according to the Nature of
   Things, as fully qualified to be a common Redeemer, as Adam was, in his
   single Person, to be a common Father of all Mankind. He had his Seed in
   all Mankind, as Adam had. He had the human Nature, as Adam had. And He
   had the same Divine Appointment as Adam had. But Christ, however
   qualified to be our Redeemer, could not be actually such, till He had
   gone through, and done all that, by which our Redemption was to be
   effected.

   Adam, however qualified, yet could not be the Father of a paradisiacal
   Offspring, till he had stood out his Trial, and fixed Himself
   victorious over every Thing that could make Trial of Him. In like
   manner, Christ, however qualified, could not be the Redeemer of all
   Mankind, till he had also stood out his Trial, had overcome all That by
   which Adam was overcome, and had fixed Himself triumphantly in that
   Paradise which Adam had lost.

   Now as Adam's Trial was, Whether he would keep Himself in his
   paradisiacal State, above and free from all that was Good and Evil in
   this earthly World? So Christ's trial was, Whether, as a Son of Man,
   and loaded with the Infirmities of fallen Adam, sacrificed to all that
   which the Rage and Malice of the World, Hell, and Devils could possibly
   do to him; whether He in the midst of all these Evils, could live and
   die with his Spirit as contrary to them, as much above them, as unhurt
   by them, as Adam should have lived in Paradise?

   And then it was, that every Thing which had overcome Adam, was overcome
   by Christ; and Christ's Victory did, in the Nature of the Thing, as
   certainly and fully open an Entrance for Him, and all his Seed into
   Paradise, as Adam's Fall cast him and all his Seed into the Prison and
   Captivity of this earthly, bestial World.

   Nothing supernatural came to pass in either Case, but Paradise lost,
   and Paradise regained, according to the Nature of Things, or the real
   Efficacy of Cause to produce its Effects.

   Thus is your Question fully answered; viz., How and why the Sufferings
   and Death of Christ enabled him to be the Author of Life to all that
   died in Adam? Just as the Fall of Adam into this World, under the Power
   of Sin, Death, Hell, and the Devil, enabled him to be the common Father
   of Death, or was the natural, unavoidable Cause of our being born under
   the same Captivity; just so, that Life, and Sufferings, and Death of
   Christ, which declared his breaking out from them, and Superiority over
   them, must in the Nature of the Thing as much enable Him to be the
   common Author of Life, that is, must as certainly be the full, natural,
   efficacious Cause of our inheriting Life from Him. Because, by what
   Christ was in Himself, by what He was in us, by his whole State,
   Character, and the Divine Appointment, we all had that natural Union
   with Him, and Dependence upon Him, as our Head in the Way of
   Redemption, as we had with Adam as our Head in the Way of our natural
   Birth. So that as it must be said, that because Adam fell, we must of
   all Necessity be Heirs of his fallen State, so with the same Truth and
   from the same Necessity of the Thing, it must be said, that because
   Christ our Head is risen victorious out of our fallen State, we as his
   Members, and having his Seed within us, must be and are made Heirs of
   all his Glory. Because in all Respects we are as strictly, as
   intimately connected with, and related to Him as the one Redeemer, as
   we are to Adam as the one Father of all Mankind. So that Christ by his
   Sufferings and Death become in all of us our Wisdom, our Righteousness,
   our Justification and Redemption, is the same sober and solid Truth, as
   Adam by his Fall become in all of us our Foolishness, our Impurity, our
   Corruption, and Death.

   And now, my Friends, look back upon all that has been said, and then
   tell me, Is it possible more to exalt or magnify the infinite Merits,
   and availing Efficacy of the Sufferings and Death of Christ, than is
   done by this doctrine? Or whether every Thing that is said of them in
   Scripture, is not here proved, from the very Nature of the Thing, to be
   absolutely true? And again, Whether it is not sufficiently proved to
   you, that the Sufferings and Death of Christ are not only consistent
   with the Doctrine of a God all Love, but are the fullest and most
   absolute Proof of it?

   Eusebius. Indeed, Theophilus, you have so fully done for us all that we
   wanted to have done, that we are now ready to take Leave of you. As for
   my Part, I want to return Home to enjoy my Bible, and delight myself
   with reading it in this comfortable Light, in which you have set the
   whole Ground and Nature of our Redemption. I am now in full Possession
   of this glorious Truth, that God is mere Love, the most glorious Truth
   that can possess and edify the Heart of Man. It drives every Evil out
   of the Soul, and gives Life to every Spark of Goodness that can
   possibly be kindled in it. Everything in Religion is made amiable, by
   being a Service of Love to the God of Love.

   No Sacrifices, Sufferings, and Death, have any Place in Religion, but
   to satisfy and fulfill that Love of God, which could not be satisfied
   without our Salvation. If the Son of God is not spared, if He is
   delivered up to the Rage and Malice of Men, Devils, and Hell, it is
   because, had we not had such a Captain of our Salvation made perfect
   through Sufferings, it never could have been sung, "Oh Death, where is
   thy Sting, Oh Grave, where is thy Victory!" It never could have been
   true, that "as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin,
   so by one Man came the Resurrection of the Dead." It never could have
   been said " that as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
   alive."

   Therefore, dear Theophilus, adieu. God is Love, and He that hath learnt
   to live in the Spirit of Love, hath learnt to live and dwell in God.
   Love was the Beginner of all the Works of God, and from Eternity to
   Eternity nothing can come from God, but a Variety of Wonders, and Works
   of Love, over all Nature and Creature.

   Theophilus. God prosper, Eusebius, this Spark of Heaven in your Soul.
   May it, like the Seraphim's Coal taken from the Altar, purify your
   Heart from all its Uncleanness. But before you leave me, I beg one more
   Conversation to be on the practical Part of the Spirit of Love, that so
   Doctrine and Practice, hearing and doing, may go Hand in Hand.

   The End of the Second D IALOGUE
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE
   THIRD DIALOGUE
   BETWEEN

Theogenes, Eusebius, and Theophilus.


   Eusebius. You have shown great Good-will toward us, Theophilus, in
   desiring another Meeting before we leave you. But yet I seem to myself
   to have no Need of that which you have proposed by this Day's
   Conversation. For this Doctrine of the Spirit of Love cannot have more
   Power over me, or be more deeply rooted in me; than it is already. It
   has so gained and got Possession of my whole Heart, that every Thing
   else must be under its Dominion. I can do nothing else but love; it is
   my whole Nature. I have no Taste for any Thing else. Can this Matter be
   carried higher in Practice?

   Theophilus. No higher, Eusebius. And was this the true State of your
   Heart, you would bid fair to leave the World as Elijah did; or like
   Enoch to have it said of you, that you lived wholly to love, and was
   not. For was there nothing but this Divine Love alive in you, your
   fallen Flesh and Blood would be in Danger of being quite burnt up by
   it. What you have said of yourself, you have spoken in great Sincerity,
   but in a total Ignorance of yourself, and the true Nature of the Spirit
   of Divine Love. You are as yet only charmed with the Sight, or rather
   the Sound of it; its real Birth is as yet unfelt, and unfound in you.
   Your natural Complexion has a great deal of the animal Meekness and
   Softness of the Lamb and the Dove, your Blood and Spirit are of this
   Turn; and therefore a God all Love, and a Religion all Love, quite
   transport you; and you are so delighted with it, that you fancy you
   have nothing in you but this God and Religion of Love. But, my Friend,
   bear with me, if I tell you, that all this is only the good Part of the
   Spirit of this bestial World in you, and may be in any unregenerate
   Man, that is of your Complexion. It is so far from being a genuine
   Fruit of Divine Love, that if it be not well looked to, it may prove a
   real Hindrance of it, as it oftentimes does, by its appearing to be
   that which it is not.

   You have quite forgot all that was said in the Letter to you on the
   Spirit of Love, that it is a Birth in the Soul, that can only come
   forth in its proper Time and Place, and from its proper Causes. Now
   nothing that is a Birth can be taken in, or brought into the Soul by
   any notional Conception, or delightful Apprehension of it. You may love
   it as much as you please, think it the most charming Thing in the
   World, fancy everything but Dross and Dung in Comparison of it, and yet
   have no more of its Birth in you, than the blind Man has of that Light,
   of which he has got a most charming Notion. His Blindness still
   continues the same; he is at the same Distance from the Light, because
   Light can only be had by a Birth of itself in seeing Eyes. It is thus
   with the Spirit of Love; it is nowhere, but where it rises up as a
   Birth.

   Eusebius. But if I am got no further than this, what Good have I from
   giving in so heartily to all that you have said of this Doctrine? And
   to what End have you taken so much Pains to assert and establish it?

   Theophilus. Your Error lies in this; you confound two Things, which are
   entirely distinct from each other. You make no Difference betwixt the
   Doctrine that only sets forth the Nature, Excellence, and Necessity of
   the Spirit of Love, and the Spirit of Love itself; which yet are two
   Things so different, that you may be quite full of the former, and at
   the same Time quite empty of the latter. I have said every Thing that I
   could , to show you the Truth, Excellence, and Necessity of the Spirit
   of Love. It is of infinite Importance to you to be well established in
   the Belief of this Doctrine. But all that I have said of it, is only to
   induce and encourage you to buy it, at its own Price and to give all
   that for it, which alone can purchase it. But if you think (as you
   plainly do) that you have got it, because you are so highly pleased
   with that which you have heard of it, you only embrace the Shadow,
   instead of the Substance, of that which you ought to have.

   Eusebius. What is the Price that I must give for it?

   Theophilus. You must give up all that you are, and all that you have
   from fallen Adam; for all that you are and have from him is that Life
   of Flesh and Blood, which cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

   Adam, after his Fall, had nothing that was good in him, nothing that
   could inherit an eternal Life in Heaven, but the Bruiser of the
   Serpent, or the Seed of the Son of God that was reserved, and treasured
   up in his Soul. Every Thing else in him was devoted to Death, that this
   incorruptible Seed of the Word might grow up into a new Name in Christ
   Jesus.

   All the Doctrine of God's Reprobation and Election relates wholly and
   solely to these two Things, viz., the earthly bestial Nature from Adam,
   and the incorruptible Seed of the Word, or Immanuel in every Man.

   Nothing is elected, is foreseen, predestinated, or called according to
   the Purpose of God, but this Seed of the new Man, because the one
   eternal, unchangeable Purpose of God towards Man is only this, namely,
   that Man should be a heavenly Image, or Son of God. And therefore
   nothing can be elected, or called according to the Purpose of God, but
   this Seed of a heavenly Birth, because nothing else is able to answer,
   and fulfill the Purpose of God. But every Thing else that is in Man,
   his whole earthly, bestial Nature, is from Sin and is quite contrary to
   God's Purpose in the Creation of Man.

   On the other Hand, nothing is reprobated, rejected, or cast out by God,
   but the earthly Nature which came from the Fall of Adam. This is the
   only Vessel of Wrath, the Son of Perdition, that can have no Share in
   the Promises and Blessings of God.

   Here you have the whole unalterable Ground of Divine Election and
   Reprobation; it relates not to any particular Number of People or
   Division of Mankind, but solely to the two Natures that are, both of
   them, without Exception, in every Individual of Mankind. All that is
   earthly, serpentine, and devilish in every Man, is reprobated and
   doomed to Destruction; and the heavenly Seed of the new Birth in every
   Man, is That which is chosen, ordained, and called to eternal Life.

   Election therefore and Reprobation, as respecting Salvation, equally
   relate to every Man in the World; because every Man, as such, hath That
   in him which only is elected, and that in him which only is reprobated,
   namely, the earthly Nature, and the heavenly Seed of the Word of God.

   Now all this is evident, from the very Nature of the Thing. As soon as
   you but suppose Man at his Fall to have a Power of Redemption, or
   Deliverance from the Evil of his fallen Nature, engrafted into him, you
   then have the first unchangeable Ground of Election and Reprobation;
   you are infallibly shown what it is that God elects and reprobates, and
   the absolute Impossibility of any Thing else being reprobated by God,
   but that fallen, evil Nature from which he is to be redeemed, or of any
   Thing else being elected by God, but that Seed of a new Birth, which is
   to bring forth his Redemption.

   Here therefore you have a full Deliverance from all Perplexity upon
   this Matter, and may rest yourself upon this great, comfortable, and
   most certain Truth, that no other Election or Reprobation, with regard
   to Salvation, ever did, or can belong to any one individual Son of
   Adam, but that very same Election and Reprobation, which both of them
   happened to, and took Place in Adam's individual Person. For all that
   which was in Adam, both as fallen and redeemed, must of all Necessity
   be in every Son of Adam; and no Man can possibly stand in any other
   Relation to God than Adam did, and therefore cannot have either more or
   less, or any other Divine Election and Reprobation than Adam had. For
   from the Moment of Man's Redemption, which began at the Fall, when the
   incorruptible Seed of the Word was given into Adam, every Son of Adam,
   to the End of the World, must come into it, under one and the same
   Election and Reprobation with Regard to God. Because the whole earthly
   Nature, from which Man was to be redeemed, and the Seed of the Word, by
   which he was to be redeemed, were both of them in every Man, one as
   certainly as the other.

   Now this being the inward, essential State of every Man born into the
   World, having in himself all that is elected and all that is reprobated
   by God, hence it is that in order to publish the Truth and Certainty of
   such Election and Reprobation, and the Truth and Certainty of that
   two-fold Nature in Man, on which it is grounded, hence it is that the
   Spirit of God in holy Scripture, represents this Matter to us by such
   outward Figures, as are yet in themselves not figurative, but real
   Proofs of it.

   This is first of all done under the Figures of Cain and Abel, the two
   first Births from Adam, where the one is murdered by the other, hereby
   demonstrating to us, by this Contrariety and Difference of these two
   first Births, the inward real State of the Father of them, namely, that
   the same two-fold Nature was in him, that discovered itself in these
   two first Births from him.

   The same Thing is, age after age set forth in Variety of Figures, more
   especially Ishmael and Isaac, in Esau and Jacob. And all this, only
   further to confirm and establish this great Truth, viz., That such
   Strife and Contrariety as appeared in the Sons of the same Father, were
   not only outward Representations, but full Proofs of that inward Strife
   and Contrariety, which not only existed in their Fathers, but
   universally in every human Creature. For Cain and Abel had not come
   from Adam, but because both their Natures were antecedently in him, and
   in the same State of Opposition and Contrariety to each other. And as
   Cain and Abel were no other than the genuine Effects of the two-fold
   State, which Adam as fallen and redeemed, was then in, so every Man,
   descended from Adam, is in himself infallibly all that which Adam was,
   and has as certainly his own Cain and Abel within himself as Adam had.
   And from the Beginning to the End of the human Race, all that which
   came to pass so remarkably in the Births of Cain and Abel, Ishmael and
   Isaac, Esau and Jacob, all that same, some Way or other, more or less,
   comes to pass in every Individual of Mankind. In one Man, his own Abel
   is murdered by his own Cain, and in another, his own Jacob overcomes
   his own Esau that was born with him.

   And all the Good or the Evil that we bring forth in our Lives, is from
   nothing else, but from the Strife of these two Natures within us, and
   their Victory over one another. Which Strife, no Son of Adam could ever
   have known anything of, had not the free Grace and Mercy of God chosen
   and called all Mankind to a new Birth of Heaven within them, out of
   their corrupt and fallen Souls. No possible War, or Strife of Good
   against Evil, could be in fallen Man, but by his having from God a Seed
   of Life in him, ordained and predestinated to overcome his earthly
   Nature. For that which is put into him by God, as the Power of his
   Redemption, must be contrary to that from which he is to be redeemed.

   And thus a War of Good against Evil, set up within us, by the free
   Grace and Mercy of God to us, is the greatest of all Demonstrations,
   that there is but one Election, and but one Reprobation, and that all
   that God rejects and reprobates, is nothing else but that corrupt
   Nature which every individual Man, Abel as well as Cain, has in himself
   from Adam as fallen; and that all that God elects, predestinates,
   calls, justifies, and glorifies, is nothing else but that heavenly
   Seed, which every individual Man, Pharaoh as well as Moses, has in
   himself from Adam, as redeemed.

   And thus you have an unerring Key to all that is said in Scripture of
   the Election falling upon Abel, Isaac, and Jacob, &c., and of the
   Reprobation falling upon Cain, Ishmael, and Esau; not because God has
   Respect to Persons, or that all Men did not stand before him in the
   same Covenant of Redemption; but the Scriptures speak thus, that the
   true Nature of God's Election and Reprobation may thereby be made
   manifest to the World.

   For the earthly Nature, which God only reprobates, having broke forth
   in Predominance in Cain, Ishmael, and Esau, they became proper Figures
   of that which God reprobates, and were used by God as such. And the
   heavenly Seed, which is alone elected to eternal Glory, having broken
   forth in Predominance in Abel, Isaac, Jacob, &c., they became proper
   Figures of that which God only elects, and were used by God as such.

   Nothing is here to be understood personally, or according to the Flesh
   of these Persons on either Side; but all that is said of them is only
   as they are Figures of the earthly Nature, and heavenly Seed in every
   Man. For nothing is reprobated in Cain, but that very same which is
   reprobated in Abel, viz., the earthly Nature; nor is anything elected
   in Jacob but that very same which is equally elected in Esau, viz., the
   heavenly Seed.

   And now, Gentlemen, you may easily apprehend, how and why a God, in
   whose holy Deity no Spark of Wrath or Partiality can possibly arise,
   but who is from Eternity to Eternity only flowing forth in Love,
   Goodness, and Blessing to every Thing capable of it, could yet say of
   the Children, before they were born, or had done either Good or Evil,
   Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. It is because Esau signifies
   the earthly, bestial Nature, that came from Sin; and Jacob signifies
   the incorruptible Seed of the Word that is to overcome Esau and change
   his Mortal into Immortality.

   But now I stop, for you may perhaps think that I have here made a
   Digression from our proposed Subject.

   Eusebius. A Digression you may call it, if you please, Theophilus, but
   it is such a Digression, as has entirely prevented my ever having one
   more anxious Thought about God's Decrees of Election and Reprobation.

   The Matter now stands in open Daylight, notwithstanding that Thickness
   of learned Darkness, under which it has been hidden, from the Time of
   St. Austin to this Day. And now, Sir, proceed as you please, to lay
   open all my Defects, in the Spirit of Love; for I am earnestly desirous
   of being set right in so important a Matter.

   Theogenes. Let me first observe to Theophilus, that I am afraid the
   Matter is much worse with me, than it is with you. For though this
   Doctrine seems to have got all my Heart, as it is a Doctrine, yet I am
   continually thrown out of it in Practice, and find myself as daily
   under the Power of my old Tempers and Passions, as I was before I was
   so full of this Doctrine.

   Theophilus. You are to know, my Friends, that every Kind of Virtue and
   Goodness may be brought into us by two different Ways. They may be
   taught us outwardly by Men, by Rules and Precepts; and they may be
   inwardly born in us, as the genuine Birth of our own renewed Spirit. In
   the former Way, as we learn them only from Men, by Rules and Documents
   of Instruction, they at best only change our outward Behaviour and
   leave our Heart in its natural State, and only put our Passions under a
   forced Restraint, which will occasionally break forth in spite of the
   dead Letter of Precept and Doctrine. Now this Way of Learning and
   attaining Goodness, though thus imperfect, is yet absolutely necessary,
   in the Nature of the Thing, and must first have its Time, and Place,
   and Work in us; yet it is only for a Time, as the Law was a
   Schoolmaster to the Gospel. We must first be Babes in Doctrine, as well
   as in Strength, before we can be Men. But of all this outward
   Instruction, whether from good Men, or the Letter of Scripture, it must
   be said, as the Apostle saith of the Law, "that it maketh nothing
   perfect;" and yet is highly necessary in order to Perfection.

   The true Perfection and Profitableness of the holy written Word of God
   is fully set forth by St. Paul to Timothy: "From a Child," saith he,
   "thou hast known the Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
   Salvation, which is by Faith in Christ Jesus." Now these Scriptures
   were the Law and the Prophets, for Timothy had known no other from his
   Youth. And as they, so all other Scriptures since, have no other Good
   or Benefit in them, but as they lead and direct us to a Salvation, that
   is not to be had in themselves, but from Faith in Christ Jesus. Their
   Teaching is only to teach us, where to seek and to find the Fountain
   and Source of all Light and Knowledge.

   Of the Law, saith the Apostle, "it was a Schoolmaster to Christ:" Of
   the Prophets, he saith the same. "Ye have," says he, "a more sure Word
   of Prophecy, whereunto you do well, that ye take Heed, as unto a Light
   that shineth in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day-Star
   ariseth in your Hearts." The same Thing is to be affirmed of the Letter
   of the New Testament; it is but our Schoolmaster unto Christ, a Light
   like that of Prophecy, to which we are to take great Heed, until
   Christ, as the Dawning of the Day, or the Day-Star, ariseth in our
   Hearts. Nor can the Thing possibly be otherwise; no Instruction that
   comes under the Form of Words can do more for us, than Sounds and Words
   can do; they can only direct us to something that is better than
   themselves, that can be the true Light, Life, Spirit, and Power of
   Holiness in us.

   Eusebius. I cannot deny what you say, and yet it seems to me to
   derogate from Scripture.

   Theophilus. Would you then have me to say, that the written Word of God
   is that Word of God which liveth and abideth forever; that Word, which
   is the Wisdom and Power of God; that Word, which was with God, which
   was God, by whom all Things were made; that Word of God, which was made
   Flesh for the Redemption of the World; that Word of God, of which we
   must be born again; that Word which lighteth every Man, that cometh
   into the World; that Word, which in Christ Jesus is become Wisdom, and
   Righteousness, and Sanctification in us; would you have me say, that
   all this is to be understood of the written Word of God? But if this
   cannot possibly be, then all that I have said is granted, namely, that
   Jesus is alone that Word of God, that can be the Light, Life, and
   Salvation of fallen Man. Or how is it possible more to exalt the Letter
   of Scripture, than by owning it to be a true, outward, verbal Direction
   to the one only true Light, and Salvation of Man?

   Suppose you had been a true Disciple of John the Baptist, whose only
   Office was to prepare the Way to Christ, how could you have more
   magnified his Office, or declared your Fidelity to him, than by going
   from his Teaching, to be taught by that Christ to whom he directed you?
   The Baptist was indeed a burning and a shining Light, and so are the
   holy Scriptures; "but he was not that Light, but was sent to bear
   Witness to that Light. That was the true Light, which lighteth every
   Man, that cometh into the World."

   What a Folly would it be, to say that you had undervalued the Office
   and Character of John the Baptist, because he was not allowed to be the
   Light itself, but only a true Witness of it, and Guide to it? Now if
   you can show, that the written Word in the Bible can have any other, or
   higher Office, or Power, than such a ministerial one as the Baptist
   had, I am ready to hear you.

   Eusebius. There is no Possibility of doing that.

   Theophilus. But if that is not possible to be done, then you are come
   to the full Proof of this Point, viz., that there are two Ways of
   attaining Knowledge, Goodness, Virtue, &c., the one by the Ministry of
   outward, verbal Instruction, either by Men or Books, and the other by
   an inward Birth of Divine Light, Goodness, and Virtue, in our own
   renewed Spirit: and that the former is only in order to the latter, and
   of no Benefit to us, but as it carries us further than itself, to be
   united in Heart and Spirit with the Light, and Word, and Spirit of God.
   Just as the Baptist had been of no Benefit to his Disciples, unless he
   had been their Guide from himself to Christ.

   But to come now closer to our Subject in Hand.

   From this two-fold Light, or Teaching, there necessarily arises a
   two-fold State of Virtue and Goodness. For such as the Teacher, or
   Teaching is, such is the State and Manner of the Goodness, that can be
   had from it. Every Effect must be according to the Cause that produces
   it. If you learn Virtue and Goodness only from outward Means, from Men,
   or Books, you may be virtuous and good according to Time, and Place,
   and outward Forms; you may do Works of Humility, Works of Love and
   Benevolence, use Times and Forms of Prayer; all this Virtue and
   Goodness is suitable to this Kind of Teaching, and may very well be had
   from it. But the Spirit of Prayer, the Spirit of Love, and the Spirit
   of Humility, or of any other Virtue, are only to be attained by the
   Operation of the Light and Spirit of God, not outwardly teaching, but
   inwardly bringing forth a new-born Spirit within us.

   And now let me tell you both, that it is much to be feared that you as
   yet stand only under this outward Teaching; your good Works are only
   done under Obedience to such Rules, Precepts, and Doctrines, as your
   Reason assents to, but are not the Fruits of a new-born Spirit within
   you. But till you are thus renewed in the Spirit of your Minds, your
   Virtues are only taught Practices, and grafted upon a corrupt Bottom.
   Every-thing you do will be a mixture of good and bad; your Humility
   will help you to Pride, your Charity to others will give Nourishment to
   your own Self-Love; and as your Prayers increase, so will the Opinion
   of your own Sanctity. Because, till the Heart is purified to the
   Bottom, and has felt the Axe at the Root of its Evil (which cannot be
   done by outward Instruction) every Thing that proceeds from it partakes
   of its Impurity and Corruption.

   Now that Theogenes is only under the Law, or outward Instruction, is
   too plain from the Complaint that he made of himself. For
   notwithstanding his Progress in the Doctrine of Love, he finds all the
   Passions of his corrupt Nature still alive in him, and himself only
   altered in Doctrine and Opinion.

   The same may well be suspected of you, Eusebius, who are so mistaken in
   the Spirit of Love, that you fancy yourself to be wholly possessed of
   it, from no other Ground, but because you embrace it, as it were, with
   open Arms, and think of nothing but living under the Power of it.
   Whereas, if the Spirit of Love was really born in you from its own
   Seed, you would account for its Birth, and Power in you, in quite
   another Manner than you have here done; you would have known the Price
   that you had paid for it, and how many Deaths you had suffered, before
   the Spirit of Love came to Life in you.

   Eusebius. But surely, Sir, imperfect as our Virtues are, we may yet, I
   hope, be truly said to be in a State of Grace; and if so, we are under
   something more than mere outward Instruction. Besides, you very well
   know, that it is a Principle with both of us, to expect all our
   Goodness from the Spirit of God dwelling and working in us. We live in
   Faith and Hope of the Divine Operation; and therefore I must needs say,
   that your Censure upon us seems to be more severe than just.

   Theophilus. Dear Eusebius, I censure neither of you, nor have I said
   one Word by Way of Accusation. So far from it, that I love and approve
   the State you are both in. It is good and happy for Theogenes, that he
   feels and confesses, that his natural Tempers are not yet subdued by
   Doctrine and Precept. It is good and happy for you also, that you are
   so highly delighted with the Doctrine of Love, for by this means each
   of you have your true Preparation for further Advancement. And though
   your State has this Difference, yet the same Error was common to both
   of you. You both of you thought, you had as much of the Spirit of Love
   as you could, or ought to have; and therefore Theogenes wondered he had
   no more Benefit from it; and you wondered that I should desire to lead
   you further into it. And therefore, to deliver you from this Error, I
   have desired this Conference upon the practical Ground of the Spirit of
   Love, that you may neither of you lose the Benefit of that good State
   in which you stand.

   Eusebius. Pray therefore proceed as you please. For we have nothing so
   much at Heart, as to have the Truth and Purity of this Divine Love
   brought forth in us. For as it is the highest Perfection that I adore
   in God, so I can neither wish nor desire any Thing for myself, but to
   be totally governed by it. I could as willingly consent to lose all my
   Being, as to find the Power of Love lost in my Soul. Neither Doctrine,
   nor Mystery, nor Precept has any Delight for me, but as it calls forth
   the Birth, and Growth, and Exercise of that Spirit, which doth all that
   it doth, toward God and Man, under the one Law of Love. Whatever
   therefore you can say to me, either to increase the Power, manifest the
   Defects, or remove the Impediments of Divine Love in my Soul, will be
   heartily welcome to me.

   Theophilus. I apprehend that you don't yet know what Divine Love is in
   itself, nor what is its Nature and Pow er in the Soul of Man. For
   Divine Love is perfect Peace and Joy, it is a Freedom from all
   Disquiet, it is all Content and mere Happiness; and makes every Thing
   to rejoice in itself. Love is the Christ of God; wherever it comes, it
   comes as the Blessing and Happiness of every natural Life, as the
   Restorer of every lost Perfection, a Redeemer from all Evil, a
   Fulfiller of all Righteousness, and a Peace of God which passeth all
   Understanding. Through all the Universe of Things, nothing is uneasy,
   unsatisfied, or restless, but because it is not governed by Love, or
   because its Nature has not reached or attained the full Birth of the
   Spirit of Love. For when that is done, every Hunger is satisfied, and
   all complaining, murmuring, accusing, resenting, revenging, and
   striving are as totally suppressed and overcome as the Coldness,
   Thickness, and Horror of Darkness are suppressed and overcome by the
   breaking forth of the Light. If you ask, why the Spirit of Love cannot
   be displeased, cannot be disappointed, cannot complain, accuse, resent,
   or murmur? It is because Divine Love desires nothing but itself; it is
   its own Good, it has all when it has itself, because nothing is good
   but itself, and its own working; for Love is God, and he that dwelleth
   in God, dwelleth in Love. Tell me now, Eusebius, are you thus blessed
   in the Spirit of Love?

   Eusebius. Would you have me tell you that I am an Angel, and without
   the Infirmities of human Flesh and Blood?

   Theophilus. No, but I would have you judge of your State of Love by
   these Angelic Tempers, and not by any Fervour or Heat that you find in
   yourself. For just so much, and so far as you are freed from the Folly
   of all earthly Affections, from all Disquiet, Trouble, and Complaint
   about this, or that, just so much, and so far is the Spirit of Love
   come to Life in you. For Divine Love is a new Life, and new Nature, and
   introduces you into a new World; it puts an End to all your former
   Opinions, Notions, and Tempers; it opens new Senses in you, and makes
   you see high to be low, and low to be high; Wisdom to be Foolishness,
   and Foolishness Wisdom; it makes Prosperity and Adversity, Praise and
   Dispraise, to be equally nothing. "When I was a Child," saith the
   Apostle, "I thought as a Child, I spake as a Child, but when I became a
   Man, I put away childish Things." Whilst Man is under the Power of
   Nature, governed only by worldly Wisdom, his Life (however old he may
   be) is quite childish; every Thing about him only awakens childish
   Thoughts, and Pursuits in him; all that he sees and hears, all that he
   desires or fears, likes or dislikes, that which he gets, and that which
   he loses, that which he hath, and that which he hath not, serve only to
   carry him from this Fiction of Evil to that Fiction of Good, from one
   Vanity of Peace to another Vanity of Trouble. But when Divine Love is
   born in the Soul, all childish Images of Good and Evil are done away,
   and all the Sensibility of them is lost, as the Stars lose their
   Visibility when the Sun is risen.

   Theogenes. That this is the true Power of the Spirit of Divine Love, I
   am fully convinced from my own Uneasiness at finding, that my natural
   Tempers are not overcome by it. For whence could I have this Trouble,
   but because that little Dawning that I have of the Spirit of Love in
   me, maketh just Demands to be the one Light, Breath, and Power of my
   Life, and to have all that is within me overcome and governed by it.
   And therefore I find, I must either silence this small Voice of
   new-risen Love within me, or have no Rest from Complaints and
   Self-condemnation, till my whole Nature is brought into Subjection to
   it.

   Theophilus. Most rightly judged, Theogenes. And now we are fairly
   brought to the one great practical Point, on which all our Proficiency
   in the Spirit of Love entirely depends, namely, that all that we are,
   and all that we have from Adam, as fallen, must be given up, absolutely
   denied and resisted, if the Birth of Divine Love is to be brought forth
   in us. For all that we are by Nature is in full Contrariety to this
   Divine Love, nor can it be otherwise; a Death to itself is its only
   Cure, and nothing else can make it subservient to Good; just as
   Darkness cannot be altered, or made better in itself, or transmuted
   into Light; it can only be subservient to the Light, by being lost in
   it and swallowed up by it.

   Now this was the first State of Man; all the natural Properties of his
   creaturely Life, were hid in God, united in God, and glorified by the
   Life of God manifested in them, just as the Nature and Qualities of
   Darkness are lost and hid, when enlightened and glorified by the Light.
   But when Man fell from, or died to the Divine Life, all the natural
   Properties of his creaturely Life, having lost their Union in and with
   God, broke forth in their own natural Division, Contrariety, and War
   against one another, just as the Darkness, when it has lost the Light,
   must show forth its own Coldness, Horror, and other uncomfortable
   Qualities. And as Darkness, though in the utmost Contrariety to Light,
   is yet absolutely necessary to it, and without which no Manifestation
   or Visibility of Light could possibly be, so it is with the natural
   Properties of the creaturely Life; they are in themselves all
   Contrariety to the Divine Life, and yet the Divine Life cannot be
   communicated but in them and by them.

   Eusebius. I never read, or heard of the Darkness being necessary to
   Light: It has been generally considered as a negative Thing, that was
   nothing in itself, and only signified an Absence of Light. But your
   Doctrine not only supposes Darkness to be something positive, that has
   a Strength and Substantiality in itself, but also to be antecedent to
   the Light, because necessary to bring it into Manifestation. I am
   almost afraid to hear more of this Doctrine. It Sounds harsh to my
   Ears.

   Theophilus. Don't be frightened, Eusebius. I will lead you into no
   Doctrine, but what is strictly conformable to the Letter of Scripture,
   and the most orthodox Piety. The Scripture saith, "God is Light, and in
   Him is no Darkness at all"; therefore the Scripture affirmeth Light to
   be superior, absolutely separate from, and eternally antecedent to
   Darkness; and so do I. In this Scripture you have a noble and true
   Account of Light, what it is, where it is, and was, and always must be.
   It can never change its State or Place, be altered in itself, be
   anywhere, or in another Manner, than as it was, and will be, from and
   to all Eternity. When God said, "Let there be Light, and there was
   Light," no Change happened to eternal Light itself, nor did any Light
   then begin to be; but the Darkness of this World then only began to
   receive a Power, or Operation of the eternal Light upon it, which it
   had not before; or Eternity then began to open some Resemblance of its
   own Glory in the dark Elements, and Shadows of Time, and thus it is,
   that I assert the Priority and Glory of Light, and put all Darkness
   under its Feet, as impossible to be any Thing else but its Footstool.

   Eusebius. I am quite delighted with this. But tell me now, how it is
   that Light can only be manifested in, and by Darkness.

   Theophilus. The Scripture saith that "God dwelleth in the Light, to
   which no Man can approach": Therefore the Scripture teacheth, that
   Light in itself is, and must be invisible to Man, that it cannot be
   approached, or made manifest to him, but in and by something that is
   not Light. And this is all that I said, and the very same Thing that I
   said, when I affirmed that Light cannot be manifested, or have any
   Visibility to created Eyes, but in and through and by Darkness.

   Light, as it is in itself, is only in the Supernatural Deity; and that
   is the Reason, why no Man or any created Being, can approach to it, or
   have any Sensibility of it, as it is in itself. And yet no Light can
   come into this World, but that in which God dwelt before any World was
   created. No Light can be in Time, but that which was the Light of
   Eternity. If therefore the Supernatural Light is to manifest something
   of its incomprehensible Glory, and make itself, in some Degree,
   sensible and visible to the Creature, this supernatural Light must
   enter into Nature, it must put on Materiality. Now Darkness is the one
   only Materiality of Light, in and through which it can become the
   Object of creaturely Eyes; and till there is Darkness, there is no
   possible Medium, or Power, through which the Supernatural Light can
   manifest something of itself, or have any of its Glory visible to
   created Eyes. And the Reason why Darkness can only be the Materiality
   of Light, is this, it is because Darkness is the one only Ground of all
   Nature, and of all Materiality, whether in Heaven or on Earth. And
   therefore every Thing that is creaturely in Nature, that has any Form,
   Figure, or Substance, from the highest Angel in Heaven to the lowest
   Thing upon Earth, hath all that it hath of Figure, Form, or
   Substantiality only and solely from Darkness. Look at the glittering
   Glory of the Diamond and then you see the one Medium, through which the
   Glory of the incomprehensible Light can make some Discovery or
   Manifestation of itself. It matters not, whether you consider Heaven or
   Earth, eternal or temporal Nature, nothing in either State can be
   capable of visible Glory, Brightness, or Illumination, but that which
   standeth in the State of the Diamond, and has its own Thickness of
   Darkness. And if the Universe of eternal and temporal Nature is
   everywhere Light, it is because it has Darkness everywhere for its
   Dwelling Place. Light, you know, is by variety of modern Experiments
   declared to be material; the Experiments are not to be disputed. And
   yet all these Experiments are only so many Proofs, not of the
   Materiality of Light, but of our Doctrine, viz., that Materiality is
   always along with visible Light, and also that Light can only open, and
   display something of itself, in and by Darkness, as its Body of
   Manifestation and Visibility. But Light cannot possibly be material,
   because all Materiality, as such, be it what and where it will, is
   nothing else but so much Darkness. And therefore to suppose Light to be
   material, is the same Absurdity, as to suppose it to be Darkness; for
   so much Materiality is so much Darkness, and it is impossible to be
   otherwise. Again, All Matter has but one Nature; it admits of neither
   more nor less, but wherever it is, all that is material is equally
   there. If therefore Light was material, all the Materiality in the
   World must be Light, and equally so. For no Materiality could be Light,
   unless Light was essential to Matter, as such, no more than any
   Materiality could be extended, unless Extension was essential to Matter
   as such.

   Eusebius. What is it then, that you understand by the Materiality of
   Light?

   Theophilus. No more than I understand by the Materiality of the Wisdom,
   Mercy, and Goodness of God, when they are made intelligible and
   credible to me, by the Materiality of Paper and Ink, &c. For Light is
   as distinct from, and superior to all that Materiality, in and by which
   it gives forth some Visibility of itself, as the Wisdom, Mercy, and
   Goodness of God, are distinct from and superior to all that written
   Materiality, in and through which they are made in some Degree
   intelligible, and credible to human Minds.

   The incomprehensible Deity can make no outward Revelation of his Will,
   Wisdom, and Goodness, but by articulate Sounds, Voices, or Letters
   written on Tables of Stone, or such-like Materiality. Just so, the
   invisible, inaccessible, supernatural Light can make no outward
   Visibility of itself, but through such Darkness of Materiality, as is
   capable of receiving its Illumination. But as the Divine Will, Wisdom,
   and Goodness, when making outward Revelation of themselves, by the
   Materiality of Things, are not therefore material, so neither is the
   Light material when it outwardly reveals something of its invisible,
   incomprehensible Splendour and Glory, by and through the Materiality of
   Darkness.

   All Light then, that is natural, and visible to the Creature, whether
   in Heaven, or on Earth, is nothing else but so much Darkness
   illuminated; and that which is called the Materiality of Light, is only
   the Materiality of Darkness, in which the Light incorporateth itself.

   For Light can be only that same invisible, unapproachable Thing, which
   it always was in God, from all Eternity. And that which is called the
   Difference of Light, is only the Difference of that Darkness, through
   which the Light gives forth different Manifestations of itself. It is
   the same, whether it illuminates the Air, Water, a Diamond, or any
   other Materiality of Darkness. It has no more Materiality in itself,
   when it enlightens the Earth, than when it enlightens the Mind of an
   Angel, when it gives Colour to Bodies, than when it gives Understanding
   to Spirits.

   Sight and Visibility is but one Power of Light, but Light is all Power;
   it is Life and every joyful Sensibility of Life is from it. "In Him,"
   says the Apostle, "was Light, and the Light was the Life of Men." Light
   is all Things, and Nothing. It is Nothing, because it is supernatural;
   it is all Things, because every good Power and Perfection of every
   Thing is from it. No Joy, or Rejoicing in any Creature, but from the
   Power and Joy of Light. No Meekness, Benevolence, or Goodness, in
   Angel, Man, or any Creature, but where Light is the Lord of its Life.
   Life itself begins no sooner, rises no higher, has no other Glory than
   as the Light begins it and leads it on. Sounds have no Softness,
   Flowers and Gums have no Sweetness, Plants and Fruits have no Growth,
   but as the Mystery of Light opens itself in them.

   Whatever is delightful and ravishing, sublime and glorious, in Spirits,
   Minds or Bodies, either in Heaven, or on Earth, is from the Power of
   the supernatural Light, opening its endless Wonders in them. Hell has
   no Misery, Horror, or Distraction, but because it has no Communication
   with the supernatural Light. And did not the supernatural Light stream
   forth its Blessings into this World, through the Materiality of the
   Sun, all outward Nature would be full of the Horror of Hell.

   And hence are all the Mysteries and Wonders of Light, in this material
   System, so astonishingly great and unsearchable; it is because the
   natural Light of this World is nothing else but the Power and Mystery
   of the supernatural Light, breaking forth, and opening itself,
   according to its Omnipotence, in all the various Forms of elementary
   Darkness which constitute this temporary World.

   Theogenes. I could willingly hear you, Theophilus, on this Subject till
   Midnight, though it seems to lead us away from our proposed Subject.

   Theophilus. Not so far out of the Way, Theogenes, as you may imagine;
   for Darkness and Light are the two Natures that are in every Man, and
   do all that is done in him.

   The Scriptures, you know, make only this Division: The Works of
   Darkness are Sin, and they who walk in the Light are the Children of
   God. Therefore Light and Darkness do every Thing, whether good or evil,
   that is done in Man.

   Theogenes. What is this Darkness in itself, or where is it?

   Theophilus. It is everywhere, where there is Nature and Creature. For
   all Nature, and all that is natural in the Creature, is in itself
   nothing else but Darkness, whether it be in Soul or Body, in Heaven or
   on Earth. And therefore, when the Angels (though in Heaven) had lost
   the supernatural Light, they became imprisoned in the Chains of their
   own natural Darkness. If you ask, Why Nature must be Darkness? It is
   because Nature is not God, and therefore can have no Light as it is
   Nature. For God and Light are as inseparable, as God and Unity are
   inseparable. Every Thing, therefore, that is not God, is and can be
   nothing else in itself but Darkness, and can do nothing but in, and
   under, and according to the Nature and Powers of Darkness.

   Theogenes. What are the Powers of Darkness?

   Theophilus. The Powers of Darkness are the Workings of Nature or Self:
   For Nature, Darkness, and Self are but three different Expressions for
   one and the same Thing.

   Now every evil, wicked, wrathful, impure, unjust Thought, Temper,
   Passion, or Imagination, that ever stirred or moved in any Creature;
   every Misery, Discontent, Distress, Rage, Horror, and Torment, that
   ever plagued the Life of fallen Man or Angel are the very Things that
   you are to understand by the Powers or Workings of Darkness, Nature, or
   Self. For nothing is evil, wicked, or tormenting, but that which Nature
   or Self doth.

   Theogenes. But if Nature is thus the Seat and Source of all Evil, if
   every Thing that is bad is in it and from it, how can such a Nature be
   brought forth by God who is all Goodness?

   Theophilus. Nature has all Evil, and no Evil in itself. Nature, as it
   comes forth from God, is Darkness without any Evil of Darkness in it;
   for it is not Darkness without, or separate from Light, nor could it
   ever have been known to have any Quality of Darkness in it, had it not
   lost that State of Light in which it came forth from God, only as a
   Manifestation of the Goodness, Virtues, and Glories of Light. Again, it
   is Nature, viz., a Strife and Contrariety of Properties for this only
   End, that the supernatural Good might thereby come into Sensibility, be
   known, found and felt, by its taking all the Evil of Strife and
   Contrariety from them, and becoming the Union, Peace, and Joy of them
   all. Nor could the Evil of Strife, and Contrariety of Will, ever have
   had a Name in all the Universe of Nature and Creature, had it all
   continued in that State in which it came forth from God. Lastly, it is
   Self, viz., an own Life, that so, through such an own Life, the
   universal, incomprehensible Goodness, Happiness, and Perfections of the
   Deity, might be possessed as Properties and Qualities of an own Life in
   creaturely finite Beings.

   And thus, all that is called Nature, Darkness, or Self, has not only no
   Evil in it, but is the only true Ground of all possible Good.

   But when the intelligent Creature turns from God to Self or Nature, he
   acts unnaturally, he turns from all that which makes Nature to be good,
   he finds Nature only as it is in itself, and without God. And then it
   is, that Nature, or Self, hath all Evil in it. Nothing is to be had
   from it, or found in it, but the Work and Working of every Kind of
   Evil, Baseness, Misery, and Torment, and the utmost Contrariety to God
   and all Goodness. And thus also you see the Plainness and Certainty of
   our Assertion, that Nature or Self hath all Evil, and no Evil in it.

   Theogenes. I plainly enough perceive, that Nature or Self, without God
   manifested in it, is all Evil and Misery. But I would, if I could, more
   perfectly understand the precise Nature of Self, or what it is that
   makes it to be so full of Evil and Misery.

   Theophilus. Covetousness, Envy, Pride, and Wrath, are the four Elements
   of Self, or Nature, or Hell, all of them inseparable from it. And the
   Reason why it must be thus, and cannot be otherwise, is because the
   natural Life of the Creature is brought forth for the Participation of
   some high supernatural Good in the Creator. But it could have no
   Fitness or possible Capacity to receive such Good, unless it was in
   itself both an Extremity of Want, and an extremity of Desire of some
   high Good. When, therefore, this natural Life is deprived of, or fallen
   from God, it can be nothing else in itself but an Extremity of Want,
   continually desiring, and an Extremity of Desire, continually wanting.
   And hence it is, that its whole Life can be nothing else but a Plague
   and Torment of Covetousness, Envy, Pride, and Wrath, all which is
   precisely Nature, Self, or Hell.

   Now Covetousness, Pride, and Envy, are not three different Things, but
   only three different Names, for the restless Workings of one and the
   same Will or Desire, which, as it differently torments itself, takes
   different Names; for nothing is in any of them, but the working of a
   restless Desire, and all this because the natural Life of the Creature
   can do nothing else but work as a Desire. And therefore, when fallen
   from God, its three first Births, and which are quite inseparable from
   it, are Covetousness, Envy, and Pride. It must covet, because it is a
   Desire proceeding from Want; it must envy, because it is a Desire
   turned to Self; it must assume and arrogate, because it is a Desire
   founded on a real Want of Exaltation, or a higher State.

   Now Wrath, which is a fourth Birth from these three, can have no
   Existence, till some or all of these three are contradicted, or have
   something done to them that is contrary to their Will; and then it is
   that Wrath is necessarily born, and not till then.

   And thus you see in the highest Degree of Certainty, what Nature or
   Self is, as to its essential, constituent Parts. It is the three
   forementioned, inseparable Properties of a Desire thrown into a fourth
   of Wrath, that can never cease, because their Will can never be
   gratified. For these four Properties generate one another, and
   therefore generate their own Torment. They have no outward Cause, nor
   any inward Power of altering themselves. And therefore, all Self, or
   Nature, must be in this State till some supernatural Good comes into
   it, or gets a Birth in it. And therefore, every Pain or Disorder, in
   the Mind or Body of any intelligent Creature, is an undeniable Proof
   that it is in a fallen State, and has lost that supernatural Good for
   which it was created. So certain a Truth is the fallen State of all
   Mankind. And here lies the absolute, indispensable Necessity of the one
   Christian Redemption. Till fallen Man is born again from above, till
   such a supernatural Birth is brought forth in him, by the eternal Word
   and Spirit of God, he can have no possible Escape or Deliverance from
   these four Elements of Self or Hell.

   Whilst Man indeed lives amongst the Vanities of Time, his Covetousness,
   Envy, Pride, and Wrath, may be in a tolerable State, may help him to a
   Mixture of Peace and Trouble; they may have at Times their
   Gratifications, as well as their Torments. But when Death has put an
   End to the Vanity of all earthly Cheats, the Soul that is not born
   again of the supernatural Word and Spirit of God, must find itself
   unavoidably devoured, or shut up in its own, insatiable, unchangeable,
   self-tormenting Covetousness, Envy, Pride, and Wrath. Oh! Theogenes,
   that I had Power from God to take those dreadful Scales from the Eyes
   of every Deist, which hinder him from seeing and feeling the infinite
   importance of this most certain Truth!

   Theogenes. God give a Blessing, Theophilus, to your good Prayer. And
   then let me tell you, that you have quite satisfied my Question about
   the Nature of Self. I shall never forget it, nor can I ever possibly
   have any Doubt of the Truth of it.

   Theophilus. Let me however go a little deeper in the Matter. All Life,
   and all Sensibility of Life, is a Desire; and nothing can feel or find
   itself to exist, but as it finds itself to have and be a Desire; and
   therefore, all Nature is a Desire; and all that Nature does, or works,
   is done by the Working of Desire. And this is the Reason why all
   Nature, and the natural Life of every Creature, is a State of Want, and
   therefore must be a State of Misery and Self-Torment, so long as it is
   mere Nature, or left to itself. For every Desire, as such, is and must
   be made up of Contrariety, as is sufficiently shown elsewhere. { Way to
   Divine Knowledge; Spirit of Love. } And its essential Contrariety,
   which it has in itself, is the one only possible Beginning or Ground of
   its Sensibility. For nothing can be felt, but because of Contrariety to
   that which feels. And therefore no creaturely Desire can be brought
   into Existence, or have any possible Sensibility of itself, but because
   Desire, as such, is unavoidably made up of that Contrariety, whence
   comes all Feeling, and the Capacity of being felt.

   Again, All natural Life is nothing else but a mere Desire founded in
   Want; now Want is contrary to Desire; and, therefore every natural
   Life, as such, is in a State of Contrariety and Torment to itself. It
   can do nothing but work in, and feel its own Contrariety, and so be its
   own unavoidable, incessant Tormentor.

   Hence we may plainly see, that God's bringing a sensible Creature into
   Existence is his bringing the Power of Desire into a creaturely State;
   and the Power and Extent of its own working Desire is the Bounds or
   Limits of its own creaturely Nature. And, therefore every intelligent
   Creature, of whatever Rank in the Creation, is and can be nothing else,
   in its creaturely or natural State, but a State of Want; and the higher
   its natural State is supposed to be, the higher is its Want, and the
   greater its Torment, if left only in its natural State. And this is the
   Reason of the excessive Misery and Depravity of the fallen Angels.

   Now the Contrariety that is in Desire, and must be in it, because it is
   a Desire, and the only Ground of all Sensibility, is plainly shown you
   by the most undeniable Appearance in outward or material Nature. All
   that is done in outward Nature is done by the working of Attraction.
   And all Attraction is nothing else but an inseparable Combination and
   incessant Working of three contrary Properties, or Laws of Motion. It
   draws, it resists its own Drawing; and from this Drawing and Resisting,
   which are necessarily equal to one another, it becomes an orbicular, or
   whirling Motion, and yet draws and resists, just as it did before.

   Now this threefold Contrariety in the Motions, or Properties of
   Attraction, by which all the Elements of this material World are held
   and governed, and made to bring forth all the Wonders in all Kinds of
   animate and inanimate Things, this Contrariety, being the only possible
   Ground of all material Nature, is a full Demonstration, (1) That
   Contrariety is the one only possible Ground of Nature and all natural
   Life, whether it be eternal or temporal, spiritual or material; (2)
   That no other Contrariety is, or can be in the Properties or Laws of
   Attraction in this material Nature, but that one and the same
   Contrariety, which was from Eternity in spiritual Nature, is
   inseparable from it, and can be nowhere but in it. For Time can only
   partake of Eternity, it can have nothing in it but the Working of
   Eternity, nor be any Thing but what it is by the Working of Eternity in
   it. It can have nothing that is its own, or peculiar to it, but its
   transitory State, and Form, and Nature. It is a mere Accident, has only
   an occasional Existence; and whatever is seen, or done in it, is only
   so much of the Working of Eternity seen and done in it.

   For Attraction, in the material World, has not only nothing material in
   it, but is impossible to be communicated to Matter; or rather Matter
   has no possible Capacity to receive Attraction. It can no more receive
   or obey the Laws of Attraction, than it can make Laws for Angels. It is
   as incapable of moving, or stirring itself, as it is of making
   Syllogisms. For Matter is, in itself, only Death, Darkness, and
   Inactivity, and is as utterly incapable of moving itself, as it is of
   illuminating or creating itself; nothing can be done in it, and by it,
   but that which is done by something that is not material.

   Therefore, that which is called the Attraction of Materiality, is in
   itself nothing else but the Working of the spiritual Properties of
   Desire, which has in itself those very three inseparable Contrarieties,
   which make the three Contrarieties in the Motions of Attraction.
   Material Nature, being an accidental, temporary, transitory Out-Birth
   from eternal Nature, and having no Power of existing, but under it and
   in Dependence upon it, the spiritual Properties of eternal Nature do,
   as it were, materialize themselves for a Time, in their temporary
   Out-Birth and force Matter to work as they work, and to have the same
   contradictory Motions in it, which are essential to eternal Nature.

   And thus the three inseparable, contrary Motions of Matter, are in the
   same Manner, and for the same Reason, a true Ground of a material
   Nature in Time, as the three inseparable, contrary, contradictory
   Workings of Desire, are a true Ground of spiritual Nature in Eternity.
   And you are to observe, that all that is done in Matter and Time, is
   done by the same Agents, or spiritual Properties, which do all that is
   naturally done in Eternity, in Heaven or in Hell. For nothing is the
   Ground of Happiness and Glory in Heaven, nothing is the Ground of
   Misery, Woe and Distraction in Hell, but the Working of these same
   contrary Properties of Desire, which work Contrariety in the Attraction
   of Matter and bring forth all the Changes of Life and Death in this
   material System. They are unchangeable in their Nature, and are
   everywhere the same; they are spiritual in Hell, and on Earth, as they
   are in Heaven. Considered as in themselves, they are everywhere equally
   good and equally bad; because they are everywhere equally the Ground
   and only the Ground for either Happiness or Misery. No possible
   Happiness, or Sensibility of Joy for any Creature, but where these
   contrary Properties work, nor any Possibility of Misery but from them.

   Now Attraction, acting according to its three invariable, inseparable
   Contrarieties of Motion, stands in this material Nature, exactly in the
   same Place and for the same End, and doing the same Office, as the
   three first Properties of Desire do in eternal or spiritual Nature. For
   they can be, or do nothing with Regard to Earth and Time, but that same
   which they are, and do in Heaven and Eternity.

   In eternal Nature, the three contrary Properties of Desire, answering
   exactly to the three contrary Motions of material Attraction, are in
   themselves only Resistance, Rage, and Darkness, and can be nothing
   else, till the supernatural Deity kindles its Fire of Light and Love in
   them; and then all their raging Contrarieties are changed into
   never-ceasing Sensibilities of Unity, Joy, and Happiness.

   Just so, in this material System, suppose there to be nothing in it but
   the contrary Motions of Attraction, it could be nothing else but Rage
   against Rage in the Horror of Darkness.

   But when the same supernatural Light, which turns the first fighting
   Properties of Nature into a Kingdom of Heaven, gives forth something of
   its Goodness into this World, through the kindled Body of the Sun, then
   all the fighting, contradictory Motions of Attraction, serve only to
   bring new Joys into the World, and open every Life, and every Blessing
   of Life, that can have Birth in a System of transitory Matter.

   Theogenes. Oh Theophilus, you quite surprise me by thus showing me,
   with so much Certainty, how the Powers of Eternity work in the Things
   of Time. Nothing is done on Earth, but by the unchangeable Workings of
   the same spiritual Powers, which work after the same Manner, both in
   Heaven and in Hell. I now sufficiently see how Man stands in the midst
   of Heaven and Hell, under an absolute Necessity of belonging wholly to
   the one, or wholly to the other, as soon as this Cover of Materiality
   is taken off from him.

   For Matter is his only Wall of Partition between them, he is equally
   nigh to both of them; and as Light and Love make all the Difference
   there is between Heaven and Hell, so nothing but a Birth of Light and
   Love in the Properties of his Soul, can possibly keep Hell out of it,
   or bring Heaven into it.

   I now also see the full Truth and Certainty of what you said of the
   Nature and Power of Divine Love, viz., "that it is perfect Peace and
   Joy, a Freedom from all Disquiet, making every Thing to rejoice in
   itself; that it is the Christ of God, and wherever it comes, it comes
   as the Blessing and Happiness of every natural Life; as the Restorer of
   every lost Perfection; a Redeemer from all Evil; a Fulfiller of all
   Righteousness; and a Peace of God, which passes all Understanding." So
   that I am now, a thousand Times more than ever, athirst after the
   Spirit of Love. I am willing to sell all, and buy it; its Blessing is
   so great, and the Want of it so dreadful a State, that I am even afraid
   of lying down in my Bed, till every working Power of my Soul is given
   up to it, wholly possessed and governed by it.

   Theophilus. You have Reason for all that you say, Theogenes; for were
   we truly affected with Things, as they are our real Good or real Evil,
   we should be much more afraid of having the Serpents of Covetousness,
   Envy, Pride, and Wrath, well nourished and kept alive within us, than
   of being shut up in a Pest-house, or cast into a Dungeon of venomous
   Beasts. On the other Hand, we should look upon the lofty Eloquence, and
   proud Virtue of a Cicero, but as the Blessing of Storm and Tempest,
   when compared with the heavenly Tranquillity of that meek and lowly
   Heart, to which our Redeemer has called us.

   I said the Serpents of Covetousness, Envy, Pride, and Wrath, because
   they are alone the real, dreadful, original Serpents; and all earthly
   Serpents are but transitory, partial, and weak Out-Births of them. All
   evil, earthly Beasts, are but short-lived Images, or creaturely
   Eruptions of that hellish Disorder, that is broken out from the fallen
   spiritual World; and by their manifold Variety, they show us that
   Multiplicity of Evil, that lies in the Womb of that Abyss of dark Rage,
   which (N.B.) has no Maker, but the three first Properties of Nature,
   fallen from God, and working in their Darkness.

   So that all evil, mischievous, ravenous, venomous Beasts, though they
   have no Life, but what begins in and from this material World, and
   totally ends at the Death of their Bodies, yet have they no Malignity
   in their earthly, temporary Nature, but from those same wrathful
   Properties of fallen Nature, which live and work in our eternal fallen
   Souls. And therefore, though they are as different from us, as Time
   from Eternity, yet wherever we see them, we see so many infallible
   Proofs of the Fall of Nature, and the Reality of Hell. For was there no
   Hell broken out in spiritual Nature, not only no evil Beast, but no
   bestial Life, could ever have come into Existence.

   For the Origin of Matter, and the bestial, earthly Life, stands thus.
   When the Fall of Angels had made their Dwelling-Place to be a dark
   Chaos of the first Properties of Nature left to themselves, the
   infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God created, or compacted this
   spiritual Chaos into a material Heaven, and a material Earth, and
   commanded the Light to enter into it. Hence this Chaos became the
   Ground, or the Materiality of a new and temporary Nature, in which the
   heavenly Power of Light, and the Properties of Darkness, each of them
   materialized, could work together, carrying on a War of Heaven against
   Earth; so that all the evil Workings of fallen spiritual Nature, and
   all the Good that was to overcome it, might be equally manifested both
   by the good and bad State of outward Nature, and by that Variety of
   good and bad living Creatures, that sprung up out of it; to stand in
   this State, viz., of a spiritual Chaos changed into a Materiality of
   Light striving against Darkness, till the omnipotent Wisdom and
   Goodness of God, through the Wonders of a first and second Adam, shall
   have made this Chaotic Earth to send as many Angels into the highest
   Heaven, as fell with Lucifer into the hellish Chaos.

   But to return. I have, I hope, sufficiently opened unto you the
   malignant Nature of that Self, which dwells in, and makes up the
   working Life of every Creature that has lost its right State in God;
   viz., that all the Evil that was in the first Chaos of Darkness, or
   that still is in Hell and Devils, all the Evil that is in material
   Nature and material Creatures, whether animate, or inanimate, is
   nothing else, works in, and with nothing else, but those first
   Properties of Nature, which drive on the Life of fallen Man in
   Covetousness, Envy, Pride, and Wrath.

   Theogenes. I could almost say, that you have shown me more than enough
   of this Monster of Self, though I would not be without this Knowledge
   of it for half the World. But now, Sir, what must I do to be saved from
   the Mouth of this Lion, for he is the Depth of all Subtlety, the Satan
   that deceiveth the whole World. He can hide himself under all Forms of
   Goodness, he can watch and fast, write and instruct, pray much, and
   preach long, give Alms to the Poor, visit the Sick, and yet often gets
   more Life and Strength, and a more immovable Abode, in these Forms of
   Virtue, than he has in Publicans and Sinners.

   Enjoin me therefore whatever you please; all Rules, Methods, and
   Practices, will be welcome to me, if you judge them to be necessary in
   this Matter.

   Theophilus. There is no need of a Number of Practices, or Methods in
   this Matter. For to die to Self, or to come from under its Power, is
   not, cannot be done by any active Resistance we can make to it by the
   Powers of Nature. For Nature can no more overcome or suppress itself,
   than Wrath can heal Wrath. So long as Nature acts, nothing but natural
   Works are brought forth; and therefore the more Labour of this Kind,
   the more Nature is fed and strengthened with its own Food.

   But the one true Way of dying to Self is most simple and plain, it
   wants no Arts or Methods, no Cells, Monasteries, or Pilgrimages, it is
   equally practicable by every Body, it is always at Hand, it meets you
   in every Thing, it is free from all Deceit, and is never without
   Success.

   If you ask, What is this one true, simple, plain, immediate and
   unerring Way? It is the Way of Patience, Meekness, Humility, and
   Resignation to God. This is the Truth and Perfection of dying to Self;
   it is nowhere else, nor possible to be in any Thing else, but in this
   State of Heart.

   Theogenes. The Excellence and Perfection of these Virtues I readily
   acknowledge; but alas, Sir, how will this prove the Way of overcoming
   Self to be so simple, plain, immediate, and unerring, as you speak of?
   For is it not the Doctrine of almost all Men, and all Books, and
   confirmed by our own woeful Experience, that much Length of Time, and
   Exercise and Variety of Practices and Methods are necessary, and scarce
   sufficient to the Attainment of any one of these four Virtues?

   Theophilus. When Christ our Saviour was upon Earth, was there any Thing
   more simple, plain, immediate, unerring, than the Way to Him? Did
   Scribes, Pharisees, Publicans, and Sinners, want any Length of Time, or
   Exercise of Rules and Methods, before they could have Admission to him,
   or have the Benefit of Faith in him?

   Theogenes. I don't understand why you put this Question; nor do I see
   how it can possibly relate to the Matter before us.

   Theophilus. It not only relates to, but is the very Heart and Truth of
   the Matter before us: It is not appealed to, by Way of Illustration of
   our Subject, but is our Subject itself, only set in a truer and
   stronger Light. For when I refer you to Patience, Meekness, Humility,
   and Resignation to God, as the one simple, plain, immediate, and
   unerring Way of dying to Self, or being saved from it, I call it so for
   no other Reason, but because you can as easily and immediately, without
   Art or Method, by the mere Turning and Faith of your Mind, have all the
   Benefit of these Virtues, as Publicans and Sinners, by their turning to
   Christ, could be helped and saved by him.

   Theogenes. But, good Sir, would you have me then believe, that my
   turning and giving up myself to these Virtues is as certain and
   immediate a Way of my being directly possessed and blessed by their
   good Power, as when Sinners turned to Christ to be helped and saved by
   him? Surely this is too short a Way, and has too much of Miracle in it,
   to be now expected.

   Theophilus. I would have you strictly to believe all this, in the
   fullest Sense of the Words, and also to believe, that the Reasons why
   you, or any others are for a long Time vainly endeavouring after, and
   hardly ever attaining these First-rate Virtues, is because you seek
   them in the Way they are not to be found, in a Multiplicity of human
   Rules, Methods, and Contrivances, and not in that Simplicity of Faith,
   in which, those who applied to Christ, immediately obtained that which
   they asked of Him.

   "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
   refresh you." How short and simple and certain a Way to Peace and
   Comfort, from the Misery and Burden of Sin! What becomes now of your
   Length of Time and Exercise, your Rules and Methods, and round-about
   Ways, to be delivered from Self, the Power of Sin, and find the
   redeeming Power and Virtue of Christ? Will you say, that turning to
   Christ in Faith was once indeed the Way for Jews and Heathens to enter
   into Life, and be delivered from the Power of their Sins, but that all
   this Happiness was at an End, as soon as Pontius Pilate had nailed this
   good Redeemer to the Cross, and so broken off all immediate Union and
   Communion between Faith and Christ?

   What a Folly would it be to suppose, that Christ, after his having
   finished his great Work, overcome Death, ascended into Heaven, with all
   Power in Heaven and on Earth, was become less a Saviour and gave less
   certain and immediate Helps to those, that by Faith turn to him now,
   than when he was clothed with the Infirmity of our Flesh and Blood upon
   Earth? Has He less Power, after he has conquered, than whilst he was
   only resisting and fighting our Enemies? Or has He less good Will to
   assist his Church, his own Body, now he is in Heaven, than he had to
   assist Publicans, Sinners, and Heathens before he was glorified, as the
   Redeemer of the World? And yet this must be the Case, if our simply
   turning to Him in Faith and Hope, is not as sure a Way of obtaining
   immediate Assistance from him now, as when he was upon Earth.

   Theogenes. You seem, Sir, to me to have stepped aside from the Point in
   Question, which was not, Whether my turning or giving myself up to
   Christ, in Faith in him, would not do me as much Good as it did to
   them, who turned to him when He was upon Earth? But whether my turning
   in Faith and Desire, to Patience, Meekness, Humility, and Resignation
   to God, would do all that as fully for me now, as Faith in Christ did
   for those who became his Disciples?

   Theophilus. I have stuck closely, my Friend, to the Point before us.
   Let it be supposed, that I had given you a Form of Prayer in these
   Words. O Lamb of God, that takest away the Sins of the World; Or, O
   Thou Bread that camest down from Heaven; Or, Thou that art the
   Resurrection, and the Life, the Light and Peace of all holy Souls, help
   me to a living Faith in Thee. Would you say, that this was not a Prayer
   of Faith in and to Christ, because it did not call Him Jesus, or the
   Son of God? Answer me plainly.

   Theogenes. What can I answer you, but that this is a most true and good
   Prayer to Jesus, the Son of the living God? For who else but He was the
   Lamb of God, and the Bread that came down?

   Theophilus. Well answered, my Friend. When therefore I exhort you to
   give up yourself in Faith and Hope, to Patience, Meekness, Humility,
   and Resignation to God, what else do I do, but turn you directly to so
   much Faith and Hope in the true Lamb of God? For if I ask you, what the
   Lamb of God is, and means, must you not tell me, that it is, and means,
   the Perfection of Patience, Meekness, Humility, and Resignation to God?
   Can you say, it is either more or less than this? Must you not
   therefore say, that a Faith of Hunger and Thirst, and Desire of these
   Virtues, is in Spirit and Truth, the one very same Thing, as a Faith of
   Hunger and Thirst, and Desire of Salvation through the Lamb of God? And
   consequently, that every sincere Wish and Desire, every inward
   Inclination of your Heart, that presses after these Virtues, and longs
   to be governed by them, is an immediate direct Application to Christ,
   is worshipping and falling down before him, is giving up yourself unto
   him, and the very Perfection of Faith in him?

   If you distrust my Words, hear the Words of Christ himself. "Learn of
   me," says He, "for I am meek and lowly of Heart, and ye shall find Rest
   unto your Souls." Here you have the plain Truth of our two Points fully
   asserted, First, That to be given up to, or stand in a Desire of,
   Patience, Meekness, Humility, and Resignation to God, is strictly the
   same Thing, as to learn of Christ, or to have Faith in Him. Secondly,
   That this is the one simple, short, and infallible Way to overcome, or
   be delivered from all the Malignity and Burden of Self expressed in
   these Words, "and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls."

   And all this, because this simple Tendency, or inward Inclination of
   your Heart to sink down into Patience, Meekness, Humility, and
   Resignation to God, is truly giving up all that you are, and all that
   you have from fallen Adam; it is perfectly leaving all that you have,
   to follow and be with Christ, it is your highest Act of Faith in him
   and Love of Him, the most ardent and earnest Declaration of your
   cleaving to him with all your Heart, and seeking for no Salvation but
   in him, and from him. And therefore all the Good, and Blessing, Pardon,
   and Deliverance from Sin that ever happened to anyone from any Kind, or
   Degree of Faith and Hope, and Application to Christ, is sure to be had
   from this State of Heart, which stands continually turned to him in a
   Hunger, and Desire, of being led and governed by his Spirit of
   Patience, Meekness, Humility, and Resignation to God. Oh Theogenes,
   could I help you to perceive or feel what a Good there is in this State
   of Heart; you would Desire it with more Eagerness, than the thirsty
   Hart desireth the Water-Brooks, you would think of nothing, desire
   nothing, but constantly to live in it. It is a Security from all Evil,
   and all Delusion; no Difficulty, or Trial, either of Body or Mind, no
   Temptation either within you, or without you, but what has its full
   Remedy in this State of Heart. You have no Questions to ask of any
   Body, no new Way that you need inquire after; no Oracle that you need
   to consult; for whilst you shut up yourself in Patience, Meekness,
   Humility, and Resignation to God, you are in the very Arms of Christ,
   your whole Heart is his Dwelling-Place, and He lives and works in you,
   as certainly as he lived in, and governed that Body and Soul, which he
   took from the Virgin Mary.

   Learn whatever else you will from Men and Books, or even from Christ
   Himself, besides, or without these Virtues, and you are only a poor
   Wanderer in a barren Wilderness, where no Water of Life is to be found.
   For Christ is nowhere, but in these Virtues, and where they are, there
   is He in his own Kingdom. From Morning to Night, let this be the Christ
   that you follow, and then you will fully escape all the religious
   Delusions that are in the World, and what is more, all the Delusions of
   your own selfish Heart.

   For to seek to be saved by Patience, Meekness, Humility, and
   Resignation to God, is truly coming to God through Christ; and when
   these Tempers live and abide in you, as the Spirit and Aim of your
   Life, then Christ is in you of a Truth, and the Life that you then
   lead, is not yours, but it is Christ that liveth in you. For this is
   following Christ with all your Power: You cannot possibly make more
   Haste after Him, you have no other Way of walking as he walked, no
   other Way of being like Him, of truly believing in him, of showing your
   Trust in him, and Dependence upon him, but by wholly giving up yourself
   to That, which He was, viz., to Patience, Meekness, Humility, and
   Resignation to God.

   Tell me now, have I enough proved to you, the short, simple, and
   certain Way of destroying that Body of Self, which lives and works in
   the four Elements of Covetousness, Envy, Pride, and Wrath?

   Theogenes. Enough of all Reason. But as to Covetousness, I thank God, I
   cannot charge myself with it, it has no Power over me, nay I naturally
   abhor it. And I also now clearly see, why I have been so long
   struggling in vain against other selfish Tempers.

   Theophilus. Permit me, my Friend, to remove your Mistake. Had
   Covetousness, no Power over you, you could have no other selfish
   Tempers to struggle against. They are all dead, as soon as Covetousness
   has done working in you. You take Covetousness to relate only to the
   Wealth of this World. But this is but one single Branch of it, its
   Nature is as large as Desire, and wherever selfish Desire is, there is
   all the evil Nature of Covetousness.

   Now Envy, Pride, Hatred, or Wrath, can have no Possibility of Existence
   in you, but because there is some selfish Desire alive in you, that is
   not satisfied, not gratified, but resisted or disappointed. And
   therefore so long as any selfish Tempers, whether of Envy, Uneasiness,
   Complaint, Pride, or Wrath, are alive in you, you have the fullest
   Proof, that all these Tempers are born and bred in and from your own
   Covetousness, that is, from that same selfish bad Desire, which when it
   is turned to the Wealth of this World is called Covetousness. For all
   these four Elements of Self, or fallen Nature, are tied together in one
   inseparable Band, they mutually generate, and are generated from one
   another, they have but one common Life, and must all of them live, or
   all die together. This may show you again the absolute Necessity of our
   one simple and certain Way of dying to Self, and the absolute
   Insufficiency of all human Means whatever to effect it.

   For consider only this, that to be angry at our own Anger, to be
   ashamed of our own Pride, and strongly resolve not to be weak, is the
   Upshot of all human Endeavours; and yet all this is rather the Life,
   than the Death of Self. There is no Help, but from a total Despair of
   all human Help. When a Man is brought to such an inward full
   Conviction, as to have no more Hope from all human Means, than he hopes
   to see with his Hands, or hear with his Feet, then it is, that he is
   truly prepared to die to Self, that is, to give up all Thoughts of
   having or doing any Thing that is good, in any other Way but that of a
   meek, humble, patient, total Resignation of himself to God. All that we
   do before this Conviction, is in great Ignorance of ourselves, and full
   of Weakness and Impurity. Let our Zeal be ever so wonderful, yet if it
   begins sooner, or proceeds further, or to any other Matter, or in any
   other Way, than as it is led and guided by this Conviction, it is full
   of Delusion. No Repentance, however long or laborious, is Conversion to
   God, till it falls into this State. For God must do all, or all is
   nothing; but God cannot do all, till all is expected from Him; and all
   is not expected from Him, till by a true and good Despair of every
   human Help, we have no Hope, or Trust, or Longing after any Thing but a
   patient, meek, humble, total Resignation to God.

   And now, my dear Friends, I have brought you to the very Place for
   which I desired this Day's Conversation; which was, to set your Feet
   upon sure Ground, with Regard to the Spirit of Love. For all that
   Variety of Matters through which we have passed, has been only a
   Variety of Proofs, that the Spirit of Divine Love can have no Place, or
   Possibility of Birth in any fallen Creature, till it wills and chooses
   to be dead to all Self, in a patient, meek, humble Resignation to the
   good Power and Mercy of God.

   And from this State of Heart also it is, that the Spirit of Prayer is
   born, which is the Desire of the Soul turned to God. Stand, therefore,
   steadfastly in this Will, let nothing else enter into your Mind, have
   no other Contrivance, but everywhere, and in every Thing, to nourish
   and keep up this State of Heart, and then your House is built upon a
   Rock; you are safe from all Danger; the Light of Heaven, and the Love
   of God, will begin their Work in you, will bless and sanctify every
   Power of your fallen Soul; you will be in a Readiness for every Kind of
   Virtue and good Work, and will know what it is to be led by the Spirit
   of God.

   Theogenes. But, dear Theophilus, though I am so delighted with what you
   say, that I am loath to stop you, yet permit me to mention a Fear that
   rises up in me. Suppose I should find myself so overcome with my own
   Darkness and selfish Tempers, as not to be able to sink from them into
   a Sensibility of this meek, humble, patient, full Resignation to God,
   what must I then do, or how shall I have the Benefit of what you have
   taught me?

   Theophilus. You are then at the very Time and Place of receiving the
   fullest Benefit from it, and practicing it with the greatest Advantage
   to yourself. For though this patient, meek Resignation is to be
   exercised with Regard to all outward Things, and Occurrences of Life,
   yet it chiefly respects our own inward State, the Troubles,
   Perplexities, Weaknesses, and Disorders of our own fallen Souls. And to
   stand turned to a patient, meek, humble Resignation to God, when your
   own Impatience, Wrath, Pride, and Irresignation, attack yourself, is a
   higher and more beneficial Performance of this Duty, than when you
   stand turned to Meekness and Patience, when attacked by the Pride, or
   Wrath, or disorderly Passions of other People. I say, stand turned to
   this patient, humble Resignation, for this is your true Performance of
   this Duty at that Time; and though you may have no comfortable
   Sensibility of your performing it, yet in this State you may always
   have one full Proof of the Truth and Reality of it, and that is, when
   you seek for Help no other Way, nor in any Thing else, neither from Men
   nor Books, but wholly leave and give up yourself to be helped by the
   Mercy of God. And thus, be your State what it will, you may always have
   the full Benefit of this short and sure Way of resigning up yourself to
   God. And the greater the Perplexity of your Distress is, the nearer you
   are to the greatest and best Relief, provided you have but Patience to
   expect it all from God. For nothing brings you so near to Divine
   Relief, as the Extremity of Distress; for the Goodness of God hath no
   other Name or Nature, but the Helper of all that wants to be helped;
   and nothing can possibly hinder your finding this Goodness of God, and
   every other Gift and Grace that you stand in Need of; nothing can
   hinder or delay it, but your turning from the only Fountain of Life and
   living Water, to some cracked Cistern of your own Making; to this or
   that Method, Opinion, Division, or Subdivision amongst Christians,
   carnally expecting some mighty Things either from Samaria, or
   Jerusalem, Paul or Apollos, which are only and solely to be had by
   worshipping the Father in Spirit and in Truth, which is then only done,
   when your whole Heart and Soul and Spirit trusts wholly and solely to
   the Operation of that God within you, in whom we live, move, and have
   our Being. And be assured of this, as a most certain Truth, that we
   have neither more nor less of the Divine Operation within us, because
   of this or that outward Form, or Manner of our Life, but just and
   strictly in that Degree, as our Faith, and Hope, and Trust, and
   Dependence upon God, are more or less in us.

   What a Folly then to be so often perplexed about the Way to God? For
   nothing is the Way to God, but our Heart. God is nowhere else to be
   found; and the Heart itself cannot find Him, or be helped by any Thing
   else to find Him, but by its own Love of Him, Faith in Him, Dependence
   upon Him, Resignation to Him, and Expectation of all from Him.

   These are short, but full Articles of true Religion, which carry
   Salvation along with them, which make a true and full Offering and
   Oblation of our whole Nature to the Divine Operation, and also a true
   and full Confession of the Holy Trinity in Unity. For as they look
   wholly to the Father, as blessing us with the Operation of his own
   Word, and Spirit, so they truly confess, and worship the holy Trinity
   of God. And as they ascribe all to, and expect all from this Deity
   alone, so they make the truest and best of all Confessions, that there
   is no God but one.

   Let then Arians, Semi- Arians, and Socinians, who puzzle their
   laborious Brains to make Paper-Images of a Trinity for themselves, have
   nothing from you but your Pity and Prayers; your Foundation standeth
   sure, whilst you look for all your Salvation through the Father,
   working Life in your Soul by his own Word, and Spirit, which dwell in
   Him, and are one Life, both in Him and you.

   Theogenes. I can never enough thank you, Theophilus, for this good and
   comfortable Answer to my scrupulous Fear. It seems now, as if I could
   always know how to find full Relief in this humble, meek, patient,
   total Resignation of myself to God. It is, as you said, a Remedy that
   is always at hand, equally practicable at all Times, and never in
   greater Reality, than when my own Tempers are making War against it in
   my own Heart.

   You have quite carried your Point with me. The God of Patience,
   Meekness, and Love, is the one God of my Heart. It is now the whole
   Bent and Desire of my Soul, to seek for all my Salvation in and through
   the Merits and Mediation of the meek, humble, patient, resigned,
   suffering Lamb of God, who alone hath Power to bring forth the blessed
   Birth of these heavenly Virtues in my Soul. He is the Bread of God,
   that came down from Heaven, of which the Soul must eat, or perish and
   pine in everlasting Hunger. He is the Eternal Love and Meekness, that
   left the Bosom of his Father, to be Himself the Resurrection of
   Meekness and Love in all the darkened, wrathful Souls of fallen Men.
   What a Comfort is it, to think that this Lamb of God, Son of the
   Father, Light of the World, who is the Glory of Heaven, and Joy of
   Angels, is as near to us, as truly in the midst of us, as he is in the
   midst of Heaven; and that not a Thought, Look, and Desire of our Heart,
   that presses toward Him, longing to catch, as it were, one small Spark
   of his heavenly Nature, but is in as sure a Way of finding Him,
   touching Him, and drawing Virtue from Him as the Woman who was healed,
   by longing but to touch the Border of his Garment.

   This Doctrine also makes me quite weary and ashamed of all my own
   natural Tempers, as so Many Marks of the Beast upon me; every Whisper
   of my Soul that stirs up Impatience, Uneasiness, Resentment, Pride, and
   Wrath within me, shall be rejected with a Get thee behind me, Satan,
   for it is his, and has its whole Nature from him. To rejoice in a
   Resentment gratified, appears now to me to be quite frightful. For what
   is it, in reality, but rejoicing that my own Serpent of Self has new
   Life and Strength given to it, and that the precious Lamb of God is
   denied Entrance into my Soul. For this is the strict Truth of the
   Matter. To give into Resentment, and go willingly to gratify it, is
   calling up the Courage of your own Serpent, and truly helping it to be
   more stout and valiant, and successful in you.-- On the other Hand, to
   give up all Resentment of every Kind, and on every Occasion, however
   artfully, beautifully, outwardly coloured, and to sink down into the
   Humility of Meekness under all Contrariety, Contradiction, and
   Injustice, always turning the other Cheek to the Smiter, however
   haughty, is the best of all Prayers, the surest of all Means to have
   nothing but Christ living and working in you, as the Lamb of God, that
   taketh away every Sin that ever had Power over your Soul.

   What a Blindness was it in me, to think that I had no Covetousness
   because the Love of Pelf {money or gain} , was not felt by me! For to
   covet, is to desire. And what can it signify whether I desire This or
   That? If I desire any Thing but that which God would have me to be and
   do, I stick in the Mire of Covetousness, and must have all that Evil
   and Disquiet living and working in me, which robs Misers of their Peace
   both with God and Man.

   Oh sweet Resignation of myself to God, happy Death of every selfish
   Desire, blessed Unction of a holy Life, the only Driver of all Evil out
   of my Soul, be thou my Guide and Governor wherever I go! Nothing but
   thou can take me from myself, nothing but thou can lead me to God; Hell
   has no Power where thou art; nor can Heaven hide itself from thee. Oh
   may I never indulge a Thought, bring forth a Word, or do any Thing for
   myself or others, but under the Influence of thy blessed Inspiration!

   Forgive, dear Theophilus, this Transport of my Soul; I could not stop
   it. The Sight, though distant, of this heavenly Canaan, this Sabbath of
   the Soul, freed from the miserable Labour of Self, to rest in Meekness,
   Humility, Patience, and Resignation under the Spirit of God, is like
   the joyful Voice of the Bridegroom to my Soul, and leaves no Wish in
   me, but to be at the Marriage Feast of the Lamb.

   Theophilus. Thither, Theogenes, you must certainly come, if you keep to
   the Path of Meekness, Humility, and Patience, under a full Resignation
   to God. But if you go aside from it, let the Occasion seem ever so
   glorious, or the Effects ever so wonderful to you, it is only preparing
   for yourself a harder Death. For die you must to all, and every Thing
   that you have worked or done under any other Spirit, but that of
   Meekness, Humility, and true Resignation to God. Every Thing else, be
   it what it will, hath its Rise from the Fire of Nature, it belongs to
   nothing else, and must of all Necessity be given up, lost, and taken
   from you again by Fire, either here or hereafter.

   For these Virtues are the only Wedding Garment; they are the Lamps and
   Vessels well furnished with Oil.

   There is nothing that will do in the Stead of them; they must have
   their own full and perfect Work in you, if not before, yet certainly
   after the Death of the Body, or the Soul can never be delivered from
   its fallen wrathful State. And all this is no more than is implied in
   this Scripture Doctrine, viz., that there is no Possibility of
   Salvation, but in and by a Birth of the meek, humble, patient, resigned
   Lamb of God in our Souls. And when this Lamb of God has brought forth a
   real Birth of his own Meekness, Humility, and full Resignation to God
   in our Souls, then are our Lamps trimmed, and our Virgin-hearts made
   ready for the Marriage Feast.

   This Marriage Feast signifies the Entrance into the highest State of
   Union, that can be between God and the Soul, in this Life. Or in other
   Words, it is the Birth-Day of the Spirit of Love in our Souls, which
   whenever we attain it, will feast our Souls with such Peace and Joy in
   God, as will blot out the Remembrance of every Thing, that we called
   Peace or Joy before.

   In the Letter on the Spirit of Love, you have been shown, according to
   the Mystery of all Things opened by the Goodness of God in the blessed
   Behmen, the Time and Place of its Birth. That it neither does, nor can
   possibly begin any sooner, than at the Entrance or Manifestation of the
   Divine Light, in the three first wrathful, self-tormenting Properties
   of Nature, which are and must be the Ground of every natural Life, and
   must be Darkness, Rage, and Torment, till the Light of God, breaking in
   upon them, changes all their painful working into the strongest
   Sensibilities of Love, Joy, and Triumph, in the Perception and
   Possession of a new Divine Life.

   Now all that we have said To-day of the Necessity of the fallen Souls
   dying to Self, by Meekness, Patience, Humility, and full Resignation to
   God is strictly the same Thing, and asserted from the same Ground as
   when it was then said, that the three first Properties of Nature must
   have their wrathful Activity taken from them, by the Light of God
   breaking in upon them, or manifesting itself in them. Now this was
   always the State of Nature, it never was a State of Wrath, because it
   never was without the Light of God in it. But the natural, creaturely
   Life, having a Possibility of falling, and having actually fallen from
   God, has found and felt what never ought to have been found and felt,
   viz., what Nature is in itself, without the Manifestation of the Deity
   in it.

   Therefore, as sure as the Light of God, or the Entrance of the Deity
   into the three first Properties of Nature, is absolutely necessary to
   make Nature to be a heavenly Kingdom of Light and Love, so sure and
   certain is it, that the creaturely Life, that is fallen from God under
   the wrathful first Properties of Nature, can have no Deliverance from
   it, cannot have a Birth of heavenly Light and Love, by any other
   possible Way, but that of dying to Self, by Meekness, Humility,
   Patience, and full Resignation to God.

   And the Reason is this. It is because the Will is the Leader of the
   creaturely Life, and it can have nothing but that to which its Will is
   turned. And therefore it cannot be saved from, or raised out of the
   Wrath of Nature, till its Will turns from Nature, and wills to be no
   longer driven by it. But it cannot turn from Nature, or show a Will to
   come from under its Power, any other Way, than by turning and giving up
   itself to that Meekness, Humility, Patience, and Resignation to God,
   which so far as it goes, is a leaving, rejecting, and dying to all the
   Guidance of Nature.

   And thus you see, that this one simple Way is, according to the
   immutable Nature of Things, the one only possible and absolutely
   necessary Way to God. It is as possible to go two contrary Ways at
   once, as to go to God any other Way than this. But what is best of all,
   this Way is absolutely infallible; nothing can defeat it. And all this
   infallibility is fully grounded in the two-fold Character of our
   Saviour (1) As he is the Lamb of God, a Principle, and Source of all
   Meekness, and Humility in the Soul, and (2) As he is the Light of
   Eternity, that blesses eternal Nature, and turns it into a Kingdom of
   Heaven.

   For in this two-fold Respect, he has a Power of redeeming us, which
   nothing can hinder; but sooner or later, he must see all his and our
   Enemies under his Feet, and all that is fallen in Adam into Death must
   rise and return to a Unity of an Eternal Life in God.

   For, as the Lamb of God, he has all Power to bring forth in us a
   Sensibility and a Weariness of our own wrathful State, and a
   Willingness to fall from it into Meekness, Humility, Patience, and
   Resignation to that Mercy of God which alone can help us. And when we
   are thus weary and heavy laden, and willing to get Rest to our Souls,
   in meek, humble, patient Resignation to God, then it is, that He, as
   the Light of God and Heaven, joyfully breaks in upon us, turns our
   Darkness into Light, our Sorrow into Joy, and begins that Kingdom of
   God and Divine Love within us which will never have an End.

   Need I say more, Theogenes, to show you how to come out of the Wrath of
   your evil earthly Nature, into the sweet Peace and Joy of the Spirit of
   Love? Neither Notions, nor Speculations, nor Heat, nor Fervour, nor
   Rules, nor Methods can bring it forth. It is the Child of Light, and
   cannot possibly have any Birth in you, but only and solely from the
   Light of God rising in your own Soul, as it rises in heavenly Beings.
   But the Light of God cannot arise, or be found in you, by any Art or
   Contrivance of your own, but only and solely in the Way of that
   Meekness, Humility, and Patience, which waits, trusts, resigns to, and
   expects all from the inward, living, life-giving Operation of the
   Triune God within you, creating, quickening, and reviving in your
   fallen Soul that Birth and Image, and Likeness of the Holy Trinity, in
   which the first Father of Mankind was created.

   Theogenes. You need say no more, Theophilus; you have not only removed
   that Difficulty which brought us hither, but have, by a Variety of
   Things, fixed and confirmed us in a full Belief of that great truth
   elsewhere asserted, namely "That there is but one Salvation for all
   Mankind, and that is the Life of God in the Soul. And also, that there
   is but one possible Way for Man to attain this Life of God, not one for
   a Jew, another for a Christian, and a third for a Heathen. No, God is
   one, and the Way to it is one, and that is, the Desire of the Soul
   turned to God."

   Therefore, dear Theophilus, adieu. If we see you no more in this Life,
   you have sufficiently taught us how to seek, and find every kind of
   Goodness, Blessing, and Happiness, in God alone.


   The End of the Third D IALOGUE



                                     FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
