     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Complete Works of Thomas Manton, D.D. Vol. I
      Creator(s): Manton, Thomas (1620-1677)
     Print Basis: London: James Nisbet & Co. (1870)
   CCEL Subjects: All
     __________________________________________________________________

THE COMPLETE WORKS

    OF

                              THOMAS MANTON, D.D.

With Memoir of the Author

  BY THE REV. WILLIAM HARRIS, D.D.

And an Essay

  BY THE REV. J. C. RYLE, B.A.,

    VICAR OF STRADBROKE, SUFFOLK.

VOLUME I.

CONTAINING

   MEMOIR BY REV. DR HARRIS.

   A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION OF THE LORD'S PRAYER.

   ON CHRIST'S TEMPTATION AND TRANSFIGURATION.

   ON REDEMPTION BY CHRIST AND HIS ETERNAL EXISTENCE.

LONDON:

JAMES NISBET & CO, 21 BERNERS STREET.

  1870.

   MR KYLE'S Essay will form the Prefatory matter to Vol. II.--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

CONTENTS.

   PAGE
   MEMOIR BY THE REV. WILLIAM HARRIS, D.D.                  vii
   A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION OF THE LORD'S PRAYER.

   Preface,
                                                            3

   Introduction,
                                                            4

   "Our Father which art in Heaven"
                                                            39

   "Hallowed be thy name,"
                                                            66

   "Thy kingdom come,"
                                                            90

   "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven,"
                                                            120

   "Give us this day our daily bread,"
                                                            149

   "And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors,"
                                                            167

   "And lead us not into temptation,"
                                                            199

   "But deliver us from evil,"
                                                            232

   "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,"
                                                            243

   "Forever. Amen."
                                                            253
   CHRIST'S TEMPTATION AND TRANSFIGURATION.

   To the Reader,
                                                            257

   The Temptation of Christ,
                                                            259

   Sermon

   I. Mat. iv. 1,
                                                            259

   II. Mat. iv. 2-4,
                                                            267

   III. Mat. iv. 5, 6,
                                                            276

   IV. Mat. iv. 7,
                                                            286

   V. Mat. iv. 8, 9,
                                                            301

   VI. Mat. iv. 10,
                                                            313

   VII. Mat. iv. 11,
                                                            323

   The Transfiguration of Christ,
                                                            337

   Sermon

   I. Mat. xvii. 1; Luke ix. 28,
                                                            337

   II. Mat. xvii. 2; Luke ix. 29,
                                                            347

   III. Mat. xvii. 3; Luke ix. 30, 31,
                                                            358

   IV. Mat. xvii. 4; Luke ix. 32, 33,
                                                            370

   V. Mat. xvii. 5,
                                                            382

   VI. Mat. xvii. 5,
                                                            392

   VII. Mat. xvii. 6-8,
                                                            402
   CHRIST'S REDEMPTION AND ETERNAL EXISTENCE.

   To the Christian Reader,
                                                            415

   Sermon

   I. Col. i. 14,
                                                            417

   II. Col. i. 15,
                                                            427

   III. Col. i. 16,
                                                            434

   IV. Col. i. 17,
                                                            444

   V. Col. i. 18,
                                                            453

   VI. Col. i. 18,
                                                            464

   VII. Col. i. 19; ii. 9,
                                                            476

   VIII. Col. i. 20,
                                                            494
     __________________________________________________________________

SOME MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE AND CHARACTER

    OF THE

  REVEREND AND LEARNED

                              THOMAS MANTON, D.D.

  BY WILLIAM HARRIS, D.D. [1]

   THOUGH the lives of great and excellent persons have been always
   reckoned a useful piece of history, and scarce anything is read with
   greater entertainment, yet it has often happened that they have been
   undertaken with great disadvantage, and not till the best means of
   collecting proper materials, either by the neglect of their friends, or
   the distant publication of their works, have been in a great measure
   lost. So it was in the Life of the famous Mr Richard Hooker, which was
   not undertaken by Dr Walton till near seventy years after his death. By
   this means there is reason to fear some memorable passages were past
   recovery, after all inquiry, in the lately-published account of that
   extraordinary person, Mr John Howe, by Dr Calamy. And thus it has
   proved in the present case. One cannot but wonder that the life of a
   person of so great worth and general esteem, and who bore so great a
   part in the public affairs of his own time, was never attempted while
   his most intimate friends, and they who were best acquainted with the
   most remarkable passages concerning him, were yet alive. It has been
   thought, however, not improper upon this occasion to retrieve that
   error as far as may be, and lay together in one view what can be now
   gathered from some of his relations yet living, from his own writings,
   and the memoirs of those who published his works and were contemporary
   with him. And it is to be hoped that this short and imperfect account,
   drawn up under disadvantage indeed, but with strict regard to truth,
   may do some justice to the memory of so excel lent a person and the
   interest he espoused, and give some entertainment and instruction to
   the world.

   Dr Thomas Manton was born in the year 1620, at Lawrence-Lydiat, in the
   county of Somerset. His father and both his grandfathers were
   ministers. He had his school-learning at the free school of Tiverton,
   in Devonshire. He run through his grammatical studies, and was
   qualified to enter upon academical learning at the age of fourteen,
   which was very unusual in those days, when the methods of
   school-learning were more difficult and tedious, and youth designed for
   the university were commonly detained to eighteen or nineteen years of
   age. But his parents, either judging him too young, or loth to part
   with him so soon, kept him some time longer before he was sent to
   Oxford. He was placed in Wadham College in the year 1635; and, after
   preparatory studies, he applied himself to divinity, which was the work
   his heart was chiefly set upon, and which he designed to make the
   business of his life. [2] By a course of unwearied diligence, joined
   with great intellectual endowments, he was early qualified for the work
   of the ministry, and took orders much sooner than was usual, and than
   he himself approved upon maturer thoughts and after he had more
   experience. There is a remarkable passage to this purpose in his
   Exposition of James, in which he expresses the humble acknowledgment of
   his fault, and which has proved monitory and affecting to others. He
   delivered it with tears in his eyes. It is on the 19th verse of the
   first chapter, Be slow to speak.' I remember.' says he, my faults this
   day; I cannot excuse myself from much of crime and sin in it. I have
   been in the ministry these ten years, and yet not fully completed the
   thirtieth year of my age--the Lord forgive my rash intrusion.' He was
   ordained by the excellent Joseph Hall, then Bishop of Exeter,
   afterwards removed to Norwich, who took particular notice of him upon
   that occasion, and expressed his apprehensions that he would prove an
   extraordinary person.' [3] The times when he first entered into the
   ministry were full of trouble, the king and parliament being at open
   variance, and hostilities breaking out on both sides. He was confined
   to Exeter when it was besieged by the king's forces. After its
   surrender he went to Lime. He preached his first sermon at Sowton, near
   Exeter, on those words, Judge not, that ye be not judged,' a copy of
   which is now in the hands of a relation. It was some time before he had
   any fixed place for the exercise of his minis try. He first began at
   Culliton, in Devonshire, where he preached a weekly lecture, and was
   much attended and respected. There he had an occasion of reforming the
   disorderly practice of those who, after the example of a leading
   gentleman, fell to their private devotion in the congregation after the
   public worship was begun. At his coming to London, he was soon taken
   notice of as a young man of excellent parts and growing hopes. Here he
   neither wanted work, nor will to perform it, for he was in the vigour
   of his youth, and applied himself to it with great diligence and
   pleasure, for which he was remarkable all his life. About this time he
   married Mrs Morgan, who was a daughter of a genteel family of Manston,
   in Sidbury, Devon, and not Mr Obadiah Sedgwick's daughter, whom he
   succeeded in Covent Garden, as Mr Wood mistakes it. She was a meek and
   pious woman, and though of a weak and tender constitution, outlived the
   doctor twenty years, who was naturally hale and strong.

   He had not been above three years in the ministry, before he had his
   first settlement, which was at Stoke Newington, in Middlesex, near
   London. He was presented to this living by the Honourable Colonel
   Popham, in whom he had a most worthy and kind patron; [4] and was
   highly honoured and esteemed by him and his religious lady. It was here
   he began and finished his excellent exposition of the Epistle of James
   on his week-day lectures, which he carried on without an assistant,
   besides his constant preaching both parts of the Lord's-day. This
   exposition has been thought by good judges to be one of the best models
   of expounding Scripture, and to have joined together with the greatest
   judgment the critical explication and practical observations upon the
   several parts. Some time after, he went through the Epistle of Jude.
   This, though excellent in its kind, is not so strictly expository, but
   more in a sermon way, which he says was more in compliance with the
   desires of others than with his own judgment. This was almost finished
   while he continued at Newington, and was dedicated to the Lady Popham.
   It is worth observing with what respect and sense of obligation he
   treats the colonel and his lady, and so contrary to the modern modish
   way of address--with what faithfulness at the same time he warns them
   of their temptations and danger. I shall only give the reader a taste
   of his spirit and expression in his younger years. By this
   inscription,' says he to the colonel, the book is become not only mine,
   but yours. You own the truths to which I have witnessed; and it will be
   sad for our account in the day of the Lord, if, after such solemn
   professions, you and I should be found in a carnal and unregenerate
   state. Make it your work to honour him who has advanced you. The
   differences of high and low, rich and poor, are only calculated for the
   present world, and cannot outlive time. The grave takes away the civil
   differences; skulls wear no wreaths and marks of honour; the small and
   great are there; the servant is free from his master. So at the day of
   judgment I saw the dead, both great and small, stand before the Lord.
   None can be exempt from standing before the bar of Christ. When the
   civil difference ceases, the moral takes place; the distinction then
   is, good and bad, not great and small. Then you will see that there is
   no birth like that to be born again of the Spirit, no tenure like an
   interest in the covenant, no estate like the inheritance of the saints,
   no magistracy like that whereby we sit at Christ's right hand judging
   angels and men. How will the faces of great men gather blackness, who
   now flourish in the pomp and splendour of an outward estate, but then
   shall become the scorn of God, and of saints and angels--and these holy
   ones shall come forth and say, "Lo, this is the man who made not God
   his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and
   strengthened himself in his wickedness!" Wealth and power are of no use
   in that day, unless it be to aggravate and increase the judgment. Many
   who are now so despicable and obscure that they are lost in the tale
   and count of the world, shall then be taken into the arms of Christ; he
   will not be ashamed to confess them before men and before his
   Father--"Father, this is one of mine." So also in heaven there are none
   poor; all the vessels of glory are filled up. If there is any
   difference in degree, the foundation of it is laid in grace, not in
   greatness. Greatness hath nothing greater than a heart to be willing,
   and a power to be able, to do good. Then it is a fair resemblance of
   that perfection which is in God, who differs from man in nothing so
   much as in the eternity of his being, the infiniteness of his power,
   and the unweariedness of his love and goodness. It is a fond ambition
   of men to sever these things. We all affect to be great, but not good;
   and would be as gods, not in holiness, but in power. Nothing has cost
   the creature dearer: it turned angels into devils, and Adam out of
   Paradise. You will bear with my plainness and freedom--other addresses
   would neither be comely in me nor pleasing to you. Our work is not to
   flatter greatness, but, in the Scripture sense, not in the humour of
   the age, to level mountains.'

   In his epistle to Lady Popham he tells her, It is a lovely conjunction
   when goodness and greatness meet together. Persons of estate and
   respect have more temptations and hindrances than others, but greater
   obligations to own God. The great Landlord of the world expects rent
   from every cottage, but a larger revenue from great houses. Now usually
   it falls out so, that they who hold the greatest farms pay the least
   rent. Never is God more neglected and dishonoured than in great men's
   houses, and in the very face of all his bounty. If religion chance to
   get in there, it is soon worn out again. Though vice lives long in
   families, and runs in the blood from father to son, it is a rare case
   to see strictness of religion carried on for three or four descents. It
   was the honour of Abraham's house, that from father to son, for a long
   while, they were heirs of the same promise. But where is there such a
   succession in the families of our gentry? The causes of which he
   reduces to "plenty, ill-governed," which disposes to vice, as a rank
   soil is apt to breed weeds, and to a certain "false bravery of spirit,"
   which thinks strictness inglorious, and the power of religion a mean
   thing; and to "the marriage of children into carnal families," wherein
   they consult rather with the greatness of their houses than the
   continuance of Christ's interest in their line and posterity. How
   careful are they that they match in their own rank for blood and
   estate! Should they not be as careful for religion also? All this is
   spoken, madam, to quicken you to greater care in your relation, and
   that you may settle a standing interest for Christ, so hopefully
   already begun in your house and family. Though your course of life be
   more private and confined, yet you have your service. The Scripture
   speaks of women gaining upon their husbands, seasoning the children,
   encouraging servants in the ways of godliness, especially of their own
   sex. It is said of Esther (chap. iv. 16), " I also and my maidens will
   fast likewise." These maidens were either Jews (and then it shows what
   servants should be taken into a nearer attendance, such as savour of
   religion), or else, which is more probable, such as she had instructed
   in the true religion; for they were appointed her by the eunuch, and
   were before instructed in the court fashions (chap. ii. 9). But that
   did not satisfy. She takes them to instruct them in the knowledge of
   the true God; and, it seems, in her apartments had opportunity of
   religious commerce with them in the worship of God.'

   He continued seven years at Newington, and possessed the general
   respect of his parishioners, though there were several persons of
   different sentiments from himself. Being generally esteemed an excel
   lent preacher, he was often employed in that work in London on the
   week-days; and other weighty affairs sometimes called for his
   attendance there. The custom of preaching to the sons of the clergy
   began in his time. Dr Hall (afterwards Bishop of Chester, and son of
   the famous Bishop Hall of Norwich) preached the first sermon to them,
   as Mr Manton did the second. The sermon is printed at the end of the
   third volume, in folio, upon Ps. cii. 28. He was several times, though
   not so often as some others, called to preach before the Parliament,
   and received their order in course for printing his sermons; though, I
   think, he never published but two of them himself. Some of them are
   printed among his posthumous works. In all of them the wisdom and
   judgment of Dr Manton, in the suitableness of the subject to the
   circumstances of the times, and the prudent management of it to the
   best advantage, are very visible; particularly after he had given his
   testimony among the London ministers against the death of the king, he
   was appointed to preach before the Parliament. His text was, Deut.
   xxxiii. 4, 5, Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
   congregation of Jacob; and he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of
   the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.' When they
   were highly offended at this sermon, some of his friends advised him to
   withdraw, for some in the House talked of sending him to the Tower, but
   he never flinched, and their heat abated.

   His removal from Newington to Covent Garden was occasioned by the great
   age of Mr Obadiah Sedgwick, who was now disabled for his work. The
   people growing uneasy, several worthy persons were proposed for the
   place, but Mr Sedgwick would not be prevailed with to resign till Mr
   Manton was mentioned, and to that he readily yielded. He was presented
   to the living, with great respect and satisfaction, by his noble and
   generous patron, the Earl, afterwards Duke, of Bedford, who greatly
   esteemed him to his dying day, and sent him, as a mark of his respect,
   a key of the garden which then belonged to Bedford House, either to
   walk in it at his leisure, or as a convenient passage to the Strand. He
   had in this place a numerous congregation of persons of great note and
   rank, of which number was oftentimes the excellent Archbishop Usher,
   who used to say of him, that he was one of the best preachers in
   England,' and that he was a voluminous preacher;' not that he was ever
   long and tedious, but because he had the art of reducing the substance
   of whole volumes into a narrow compass, and representing it to great
   advantage. Mr Charnock used to say of him, that he was the best
   collector of sense of the age.'

   Dr Manton had a great respect for Mr Christopher Love, who was beheaded
   in the year 1651, by the then Parliament, for being concerned with some
   others in sending remittances abroad to support the royal family in
   their distress. I am informed that he attended him on the scaffold at
   Tower Hill, and that Mr Love, as a token of his respect, gave him his
   cloak. The doctor was resolved to preach his funeral sermon, which the
   Government understanding, signified their displeasure, and the soldiers
   threatened to shoot him; but that did not daunt him, for he preached at
   St Lawrence Jury, where Mr Love had been minister, to a numerous
   congregation, though not graced with the pulpit cloth, or having the
   convenience of a cushion. He was too wise to lay himself open to the
   rage of his enemies; but the sermon was printed afterwards, under the
   title of The Saint's Triumph over Death.' Lord Clarendon [5] speaks of
   Mr Love in terms of great disrespect, upon the report of a sermon he
   preached when he was a young man, at Uxbridge, at the time of the
   treaty. How far he might fail in his prudence in so nice a
   circumstance, I am not able to say; but it appears, from the accounts
   of them who well knew him, and by the resentment his death generally
   met with at that time, as well as by several volumes of sermons printed
   after his death, that he was a person of worth and esteem. It was
   certainly a rash and ungenerous censure in the noble author, of one he
   knew so little at that time, and who afterwards lost his life for
   serving the royal family.

   The Government afterwards, for what reason it was best known to
   themselves, seemed at least to have an esteem for him, though he was
   far from courting their favour. When Cromwell took on him the
   Protectorship, in the year 1653, the very morning the ceremony was to
   be performed, a messenger came to Dr Manton, to acquaint him that he
   must immediately come to Whitehall. The doctor asked him the occasion:
   he told him he should know that when he came there. The Protector
   himself, without any previous notice, told him what he was to do, that
   is, to pray upon that occasion. [6] The doctor laboured all he could to
   be excused, and told him it was a work of that nature which required
   some time to consider and prepare for it. The Protector replied that he
   knew he was not at a loss to perform the service he expected from him;
   and opening his study-door, he put him in with his hand, and bid him
   consider there, which was not above half an hour. The doctor employed
   that time in looking over his books, which, he said, was a noble
   collection. It was at this time, as I am informed, that the worthy
   Judge Rookesby had the misfortune, by the fall of a scaffold, to break
   his thigh, by which he always went lame, and was obliged to have one
   constantly to lead him. He was an upright judge, and a wise and
   religious person; he was constant to his principles, and always
   attended the preaching of good old Mr Stretton to his dying day.

   About this time the doctor was made one of the chaplains to the
   Protector; and appointed one of the committee to examine persons who
   were to be admitted to the ministry, or inducted into livings; as he
   was afterwards appointed one in 1659, by an act of that Parliament in
   which the secluded members were restored. And though this proved
   troublesome to him, considering his constant employment in preaching,
   yet he has been heard to say, that he very seldom absented himself from
   that service, that he might, to his power, keep matters from running
   into extremes; for there were many in those days, as well as in these,
   who were forward to run into the ministry, and had more zeal than
   knowledge; and perhaps sometimes persons of worth liable to be
   discouraged. There is a pretty remarkable instance of his kind respect
   to a grave and sober person, who appeared before them (cap in hand, no
   doubt), and was little taken notice of, but by himself: he, seeing him
   stand, called for a chair, in respect to his years and appearance; at
   which some of the commissioners were displeased. This person appeared
   to be of a Christian and ingenuous temper; for, after the Restoration,
   he was preferred to an Irish bishopric, perhaps an archbishopric; for
   he used to give in charge to Bishop Worth, whose occasions often called
   him over to England, that on his first coming to London he should visit
   Dr Manton, and give his service to him, and let him know, that if he
   was molested in his preaching in England, he should be welcome in
   Ireland, and have liberty to preach in any part of his diocese
   undisturbed. What interest he had in the Protector he never employed
   for any sordid ends of his own, who might have had anything from him,
   but purely to do what service he could to others: he never refused to
   apply to him for anything in which he could serve another, though it
   was not always with success. He was once desired by some of the
   principal Royalists to use his interest in him for sparing Dr Hewit's
   life, who was condemned for being in a plot against the then
   Government; which he did accordingly. The Protector told him, if Dr
   Hewit had shown himself an ingenuous person, and would have owned what
   he knew was his share in the design against him, he would have spared
   his life; but he was, he said, of so obstinate a temper, that he
   resolved he should die. The Protector convinced Dr Manton before he
   parted that he knew how far he was engaged in that plot.

   While he was minister at Covent Garden, he was invited to preach before
   the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and the Companies of the city,
   upon some public occasion, at St Paul's. The doctor chose some
   difficult subject, in which he had opportunity of displaying his
   judgment and learning, and appearing to the best advantage. He was
   heard with the admiration and applause of the more intelligent part of
   the audience; and was invited to dine with my Lord Mayor, and received
   public thanks for his performance. But upon his return in the evening
   to Covent Garden, a poor man following him, gently plucked him by the
   sleeve of his gown, and asked him if he were the gentleman who had
   preached that day before my Lord Mayor. He replied, he was. Sir,' says
   he, I came with earnest desires after the word of God, and hopes of
   getting some good to my soul, but I was greatly disappointed; for I
   could not understand a great deal of what you said; you were quite
   above me.' The doctor replied, with tears in his eyes, Friend, if I did
   not give you a sermon, you have given me one; and, by the grace of God,
   I will never play the fool to preach before my Lord Mayor in such a
   manner again.' Upon a public fast at Covent Garden church, for the
   persecuted Protestants in the valleys of Piedmont, Dr Manton had got Mr
   Baxter, who happened to be then in London, and Dr Wilkins, who was
   afterwards Bishop of Chester, to assist him. Mr Baxter opened the day,
   and preached upon the words of the prophet Amos, chap. vi. 6: But they
   are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph.' He, after his manner,
   took a great compass, and grasped the whole subject. Dr Manton
   succeeded him, and had chosen the same text: he was obliged often to
   refer to the former discourse, and to say, every now and then, As it
   has been observed by my reverend brother.' Dr Wilkins sat cruelly
   uneasy, and reckoned that between them both he should have nothing left
   to say; for he had got the same text too. He insisted upon being
   excused, but Dr Manton obliged him to go up into the pulpit; and by an
   ingenious artifice, he succeeded admirably. Before he named his text,
   he prepared the audience by expressing the fears of their
   narrow-spiritedness, and little concern for the interest of God in the
   world: For,' says he, without any knowledge or design of our own, we
   have all three been directed to the same words.' Which, spoken with the
   majesty and authority peculiar to the presence and spirit of that
   excellent person, so awakened the attention, and disposed the minds of
   the people, that he was heard with more regard, and was thought to do
   more good than both the former, though he had scarce a single thought
   throughout the sermon distinct from the other two.

   In the year 1660 he was very instrumental, with many other Presbyterian
   divines, in the restoration of King Charles II. It must be owned, by
   impartial judges, that the Presbyterian party, who had the greatest
   influence in the nation at that time, had the greatest share in that
   change; nor could all the Episcopal party in the three kingdoms have
   once put it into motion, or brought it to any effect, without them,
   though they had all the favour and preferment bestowed upon them
   afterwards; which, whether it were more just or politic, more agree
   able to the laws of equity or the rules of prudence, I leave to the
   reader to determine. [7] Perhaps, if the king had been brought in upon
   the conditions the noble Earl of Southampton would have proposed, and
   which were approved by the Earl of Clarendon, when it was too late, it
   had prevented a great deal of the arbitrary and violent proceedings of
   that loose and luxurious reign, and contributed to the safety and
   happiness of the prince, and people too. He was one of the divines
   appointed to wait upon the king at Breda, where they were well
   received, and for some time after greatly caressed. The doctor was
   sworn one of the king's chaplains by the Earl of Manchester, Lord
   Chamberlain, who truly honoured him. He was one of the commissioners at
   the Savoy Conference, and used his utmost endeavours in that
   unsuccessful affair. Dr Reynolds, afterwards Bishop of Norwich, joined
   with those divines who were for alterations in ecclesiastical affairs.
   He was the first who received the commission from the Bishop of London,
   of which he immediately acquainted Dr Manton. The original letter is
   now in my hands, and expresses the candour and goodness of that
   excellent person, and his great respect for Dr Manton. It is in these
   words:--

   SIR, This morning the Bishop of London sent me the commission about
   revising the Liturgy under the great seal, to take notice of; with
   direction to give notice to the commissioners who are not bishops. I
   went to Mr Calamy, and it is desired that we meet to-morrow morning at
   nine o'clock, at his house, in regard of his lameness, to advise
   together, and send a joint letter to those who are out of this town. He
   and I desire you not to fail; and withal to call upon Dr Bates and Dr
   Jacomb in your way, to desire their company. So, with my best respects,

   I remain your most loving brother,

   Edward Reynolds, B.N.

   London, April 1, 1660.'

   He was offered at this time the deanery of Rochester, which Dr Harding
   was in great fear he would accept, and plied him with letters to come
   to some resolution; having reason to hope that, upon his refusal, he
   should obtain it, as he afterwards did. The doctor kept it some time in
   suspense, being willing to see whether the king's declaration could be
   got to pass into a law, which they had great encouragements given them
   to expect, and which would have gone a great way towards uniting the
   principal parties in the nation, and laying the foundation of a lasting
   peace. [8] Many persons who had, in the former times, purchased
   bishops' and deans' lands, earnestly pressed him to accept the deanery,
   with hopes they might find better usage from him in renewing their
   leases, and offered their money for new ones, which he might have taken
   with the deanery, and quitted again in 1662, there being then no assent
   and consent imposed; but he was above such underhand dealings, and
   scorned to enrich himself with the spoils of others. When he saw the
   most prudent and condescending endeavours, through the violence and
   ambition of some leading men, availed nothing to the peace of the
   church and the happiness of the nation, he sat down under the
   melancholy prospect of what he lived to see come to pass, namely, the
   decay of serious religion, with a flood of profaneness and a violent
   spirit of persecution. The greatest worth and the best pretensions met
   with no regard where there were any scruples in point of ceremony and
   subscription.

   In the interval between the Restoration and his ejectment, he was
   greatly esteemed by persons of the first quality at court. Sir John
   Baber used to tell him, that the king had a singular respect for him.
   Lord Chancellor Hyde was always highly civil and obliging to him. He
   had free access to him upon all occasions, which he always improved,
   not for himself, but for the service of others. I shall only give a
   single instance. Mr James, of Berkshire, who was afterwards known by
   the name of Black James, an honest and worthy person, was at the point
   of being cast out of his living, which was a sequestration. He came to
   London to make friends to the Lord Chancellor, but could find none
   proper for his purpose. He was at length advised to go to Dr Manton, to
   whom he was yet a stranger, as the most likely to serve him in this
   distress. He came to him late in the evening, and when he was in bed.
   He told his case to Mrs Manton, who advised him to come again in the
   morning, and did not doubt but the doctor would go with him. He
   answered, with great concern, that it would be too late; and that if he
   could not put a stop to it that night, he and his family must be
   ruined. On so pressing a case the doctor rose, and, because it rained,
   went with him in a coach to the Lord Chancellor, at York House; who
   spying the doctor in the crowd, where many persons were attending,
   called to him to know what business he had there at that time of night.
   When he acquainted him with his errand, my lord called to the person
   who stamped the orders upon such occasions, and asked him what he was
   doing? He answered, that he was just going to put the stamp to an order
   for passing away such a living.' Upon which he bid him stop; and upon
   hearing further of the matter, bid the doctor not trouble himself, his
   friend should not be molested. He enjoyed it to the time of his
   ejectment, in 1662, which was a great support to a pretty numerous
   family. Upon his refusing the deanery, he fell under Lord Clarendon's
   displeasure, so fickle is the favour of the great; and he once accused
   him to the king for dropping some treasonable expressions in a sermon.
   The king was so just and kind as to send for him, and ordered him to
   bring his notes. When he read them, the king asked, whether upon his
   word this was all that was delivered; and upon the doctor's assurance
   that it was so, without a syllable added to it, the king said, Doctor,
   I am satisfied, and you may be assured of my favour; but look to
   yourself, or else Hyde will be too hard for you.'

   In whatsoever company he was, he had courage, as became a faithful
   minister of Christ, to oppose sin; and upon proper occasions, to
   reprove sinners. Duke Lauderdale, who pretended to carry it with great
   respect to him, in some company where the doctor was present, behaved
   himself very indecently: the doctor modestly reproved him, but the duke
   never loved him afterward. He was once at dinner at Lord Manchester's
   in Whitehall, when several persons of great note began to drink the
   king's health, a custom which then began to be much in vogue, and was
   commonly abused to great disorders. When it came to him, he refused to
   comply with it, apprehending it beneath the dignity of a minister to
   give any countenance to the sinful excess it so often occasioned in
   those times. It put a stop to it at that time, and Prince Rupert, who
   was present, inquired who he was. Many of the Scotch nobility greatly
   respected him, particularly the Duchess of Hamilton, who attended his
   ministry. Notwithstanding the great and weighty affairs then on foot,
   which took up a great part of his time, he never omitted his beloved
   work of constant preaching, to the time of his ejection, in 1662. He
   then usually resorted to his own church, where he was succeeded by Dr
   Patrick, the late Bishop of Ely. It happened cross, that Dr Patrick
   receiving a scurrilous letter from an unknown person, full of
   reflections upon himself, had so little wisdom at that time as to
   charge it upon Dr Manton, in a letter to him, with very unbecoming
   reflections. This occasioned his not attending any more his preaching;
   for no man living more abhorred a base and unworthy action. Having this
   occasion of speaking a little to his disadvantage, I shall take the
   opportunity of doing a piece of justice to the memory of that learned
   person, who has since, by many books of devotion, and excellent
   paraphrases and commentaries on the scripture, as well as by his
   exemplary life, done so much good to the world, and deserved so well of
   the Christian church. It has been generally allowed, that Dr Patrick
   wrote the first volumes of the Friendly Debate,' in the heat of his
   youth, and in the midst of his expectations; which by aggravating some
   weak and uncautious expressions, in a few particular writers, designed
   to expose the Nonconformist ministry to contempt and ridicule. The
   design was afterwards carried on by a worse hand, and with a more
   virulent spirit, [9] a method altogether unreasonable and unworthy,
   because it will be always easy to gather rash and unadvised expressions
   from the weaker persons of any party of men, and only serves to expose
   religion to the scorn and contempt of the profane. But Bishop Patrick
   in his advanced age, and in a public debate in the House of Lords,
   about the Occasional Bill,' took the opportunity to declare himself to
   this purpose: That he had been known to write against the Dissenters
   with some warmth, in his younger years; but that he had lived long
   enough to see reason to alter his opinion of that people, and that way
   of writing; and that he was verily persuaded there were some who were
   honest men and good Christians, who would be neither, if they did not
   ordinarily go to church, and sometimes to the meeting; and on the other
   hand, some were honest men and good Christians, who would be neither,
   if they did not ordinarily go to the meetings and sometimes to church.'
   A rare instance this of retractation and moderation; which I think
   redounds greatly to his honour, and is worthy of imitation.

   But to return to the history. After he ceased to attend upon Dr
   Patrick's ministry, he used to preach on the Lord's-day evenings in his
   own house to his family, and some few of his neighbours; and some time
   after, on Wednesday mornings, when the violence of the times would
   allow it. Upon the increase of his hearers, he was obliged to lay two
   rooms into one; which yet, by reason of the number of the people, and
   the straitness of the place, proved very inconvenient to him,
   especially in hot weather, and prejudicial to his health. He had lived
   in that respect and good-will in the parish, that his neighbours were
   generally civil to him, and gave him no trouble. Only a little before
   his ejectment, one Bird, a tailor, a zealous stickler for the Common
   Prayer, complained to Dr Sheldon, then Bishop of London, that Dr Manton
   deprived him of the means of his salvation; meaning the use of the
   Common Prayer. Well,' says the bishop, all in good time; but you may go
   to heaven without the Common Prayer.' There was one Justice Ball,
   within a few doors of him, who often threatened him, and was at last as
   good as his word. He was sometimes in danger from the churchwardens, of
   which number there were always three. The Duke of Bedford having always
   the choice of one, took care to have him a friend to the doctor; and
   his well-known respect to him gave him countenance and protection from
   the malice of the meaner people. His meeting afterwards adjoined to
   Lord Wharton's house in St Giles's, which he allowed him the
   convenience of, whether he was in town or not. The good-natured Earl of
   Berkshire lived next door, who was himself a Jansenist Papist, and
   offered him the liberty, when he was in trouble, to come to his house;
   which it was easy to do, by only passing over a low wall which parted
   the gardens.

   Not long after the Act of Ejectment, when the Government was forming a
   plot for the Presbyterians, for they had none of their own, in a debate
   in the House of Lords, Dr Ward, bishop of Salisbury, said, It was time
   to look after them, when such men as Dr Manton refused to take the
   oaths;' which slander was soon contradicted by Lord Chamberlain
   Manchester, who assured the House of the falseness of the charge; and
   that he himself had administered the oath to him when he was sworn one
   of His Majesty's chaplains. The doctor took notice of this as very
   disingenuous, because, not long before, the bishop and he had met at
   Astrop Wells; and the bishop had treated him with great civility, and
   entered into particular freedoms with him. The doctor, indeed, was in
   his judgment utterly against taking the Oxford oath, viz., That it is
   not lawful, upon any pretence whatsoever, to take up arms against the
   king; and, that we will not at any time endeavour any alteration of the
   government in Church or State.' And when some few of his brethren were
   satisfied to take it upon an explication allowed them by the Lord
   Keeper Bridgman, that is, that the oath meant only unlawful endeavours,
   the famous Mr Gouge came from Hammersmith with a design to take it; but
   calling upon Dr Manton to know his opinion of it, he was so well
   satisfied with the reasons of his judgment, that he was perfectly easy
   in his mind, and never took it afterwards.

   In the year 1670, the meetings seemed for some time to be connived at,
   and were much attended. I remember to have heard some of the worthy
   ejected ministers speak of this period with particular pleasure; they
   observed that, after the looseness and excess which followed the
   Restoration, the reproaches and persecutions of the Nonconformists, for
   several years, and the late terrible judgments of plague and fire,
   multitudes everywhere frequented the opened meetings, some from
   curiosity, and some upon better motives; and many were delivered from
   the prejudices they had entertained, and received the first serious
   impressions upon their minds. God remarkably owned their ministry at
   that time, and crowned it, under all their disadvantages, with an
   extraordinary success. Soon after this indulgence expired, the doctor
   was taken prisoner, on a Lord's-day, in the afternoon, just after he
   had done his sermon. The door happened to be opened to let a gentleman
   out, at the very time the Justice and his attendants were at the door;
   who immediately rushed in, and went up-stairs; but finding the doctor
   in his prayer, they stayed till he had done, and then took the names of
   the principal persons. The doctor being warm with preaching, they were
   so civil to take his word to come to them after some convenient time.
   He went to them to a house in the Piazzas, where many persons of note
   were gathered together; among whom was the then Duke of Richmond. After
   some discourse, they tendered him the Oxford oath. Upon his refusing to
   take it, they threatened to send him to prison. It was thought they
   questioned their own skill to draw up a warrant which would be
   sufficient to hold him; and that it was afterward drawn up by the Lord
   Chief-Justice Vaughan. They dismissed him, however, at that time, upon
   his promise to come to them within two or three days; and then gave the
   warrant to a constable, and committed him to the Gatehouse; only
   allowing him a day's respite, till his room could be got ready. This
   imprisonment, by the kind providence of God, was more favourable and
   commodious than could have been thought, or than his enemies designed,
   or than he expected. The keeper of the prison at that time was the Lady
   Broughton, who was noted for her strictness and severity in her office,
   though she carried it quite otherwise towards the doctor; for she
   allowed him a large handsome room joining to the Gatehouse, with a
   small one sufficient to hold a bed. For some time it was not thought
   prudent to admit any to come to him, but his wife and servant who
   attended him. It is worth notice here, that the doctor could not omit
   his delightful work of preaching, though to so small a congregation;
   which he did, according to his former custom, both parts of the
   Lord's-day and once on a week-day. After some time his children, and
   some few friends, to the number of twelve or fifteen, were admitted to
   hear him preach. The Lady Broughton was highly civil and obliging, and
   placed a great confidence in him. When she designed to go for a little
   time into the country, she would have ordered the keys of the common
   jail to be brought to him every night; the doctor, smiling, told her
   that he, being a prisoner himself, could not think it proper to be the
   keeper or jailer to others. However, no person had the opening and
   shutting of the door of the house where he was but his own servant, so
   that he might have gone out of prison when he pleased, for any
   restraint he was under. When the town was pretty empty, he ventured,
   once with his keeper and once without, to visit his worthy friend Mr
   Gunston of Newington, who was agreeably surprised to see him, as he had
   a very high and hearty respect for him. Thus like Joseph, [10] he found
   favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison;' and the keeper of the
   prison' would have committed to his hands all the prisoners who were in
   the prison.' This, it must be owned, was a milder confinement and
   gentler usage than many others met with in those days, who lay under
   long and close confinements, and suffered confiscation of goods, and
   banishment, and death. This Protestant persecution fell short indeed of
   dragooning and dungeons and galleys in France, and of the racks and
   tortures of the Inquisition in Spain; but that a person of Dr Manton's
   worth and merit should be thought to deserve such treatment from a
   Government which he helped to lay the foundations of, and which he not
   only never injured, but had served in circumstances of danger and
   importance, when others of less desert and pretensions had all the
   opportunities of public service, and all the favour and preferment, I
   believe will appear shocking, at this distance, to all impartial lovers
   of liberty and of their country, and fix a brand for ever upon the
   gratitude and politics of those times.

   Some time after his imprisonment, when the indulgence was renewed, he
   preached in a large room taken for him in Whitehart Yard, not far from
   his house; but there also he was at length disturbed. A band of rabble
   came on the Lord's-day morning to seize him; but the doctor, having
   notice of it overnight, escaped their fury. Mr James Bedford was got to
   preach for him, who had taken the Oxford oath. When they found
   themselves disappointed, they were in a great rage, and took the names
   of several; but did not detain the minister, for their malice was
   levelled against the doctor. The good Lord Wharton was there, whom they
   pretended not to know; and upon his refusing to tell them his name,
   they threatened to send him to prison; but they thought better of it.
   The place was fined forty pounds, and the minister twenty, which was
   paid by Lord Wharton.

   Sir John Baber, his near neighbour, and who owed all his preferment at
   court to the doctor's interest there, continued his hearty friend,
   though a great courtier. He often visited the doctor, by which means he
   had opportunity of greater intelligence than most others. About this
   time there happened some difference among the ministers of the city,
   about the manner of addressing the king for his indulgence. Some
   contended earnestly to have it expressed more largely, and others
   opposed it; for though they always thought they had a right to their
   liberty, they feared giving any countenance to the dispensing power, or
   advantage to the Papists; which were things well known to be in view,
   and much at heart at that time. The difference came to be known at
   court, and there were apprehensions of ill consequences. Sir John Baber
   carried Dr Manton and Dr Bates to Lord Arlington's, at Whitehall, who
   was then Secretary of State, it was supposed, by his order. When they
   were together, the king, to their great surprise, came into the
   room--it was thought by design. Dr Bates pressed Dr Manton to address
   the king for his indulgence; which he did in a few words, and with
   great caution; but it was kindly accepted by the king, and well
   approved by the ministers, when it was communicated to them; and put a
   happy end to their contentions about it. [11] It was by the means of
   Sir John Baber that Dr Manton and Mr Baxter were invited to confer with
   the Lord Keeper Bridgman, about a comprehension and toleration, in the
   year 1668. They afterwards met with Dr Wilkins and Dr Burton. Proposals
   were drawn up and corrected by mutual consent; in pursuance of which
   the excellent Judge Hale prepared a bill to be laid before the next
   session of Parliament; but it was rejected upon the first motion by the
   High Church party. [12] In the year 1674, Dr Manton and Mr Baxter, with
   Dr Bates and Mr Pool, met with Dr Tillotson and Dr Stillingfleet, to
   consider of an accommodation, by the encouragement of several Lords,
   spiritual and temporal. They canvassed several draughts, and at length
   all agreed in one; but when it came to be communicated to the bishops,
   several things in which they had agreed could not be obtained, and the
   whole design miscarried. So easy a thing it has ever been found for
   wise and sober men to adjust matters of difference, and agree upon
   terms of accommodation; when nothing will satisfy unreasonable
   prejudice, and where the lust of power, and the bias of interest,
   strongly lead men the other way.

   When the indulgence was more fully fixed in 1672, the merchants, and
   other citizens of London, set up a lecture at Pinner's Hall. Dr Manton
   was one of the six first chosen, and opened the lecture. He was much
   concerned at the little bickerings which began there in his time, and
   afterward broke out into scandalous contentions, and an open division
   at last. Mr Baxter was often censured for his preaching there; and once
   published a sheet upon that occasion, which he called, An Appeal to the
   Light.' His preaching upon these words, And ye will not come unto me,
   that you might have life,' in which he fully justified the great God,
   and laid the blame of men's destruction upon themselves, though it was
   followed by another upon these words, Without me you can do nothing,'
   occasioned a great clamour against him among some people of which he
   complained to Dr Manton. The doctor, on his next turn, in the close of
   his sermon, pretty sharply rebuked them for their rash mistakes, and
   unbecoming reflections upon so worthy and useful a person. It was
   observed, that his reproof was managed with so much decency and wisdom,
   that he was not by any reflected upon for his freedom therein. He has
   been heard to express his esteem of Mr Baxter in the highest terms;
   namely, that he thought him one of the most extraordinary persons the
   Christian church had produced since the apostles' days; and that he did
   not look upon himself as worthy to carry his books after him. This was
   the opinion of one who knew him with the greatest intimacy for many
   years, and was a great judge of true worth.

   When he first began to grow into ill health, he could not be persuaded
   by his friends and physicians to forbear preaching for any considerable
   time; which had been the delightful work of his life. He was at length
   prevailed with to spend some time at Woburn, with Lord Wharton, for the
   benefit of the air. But finding little good by it, he returned to town
   on the beginning of the week, in order to administer the Lord's Supper
   the next Lord's-day, of which he gave notice to his people; but he did
   not live to accomplish it. The day before he took his bed, he was in
   his study, of which he took a solemn leave, with hands and eyes lift up
   to heaven, blessing God for the many comfortable and serious hours he
   had spent there, and waiting in joyful hope of a state of clearer
   knowledge and higher enjoyments of God. At night he prayed with his
   family under great indisposition, and recommended himself to God's wise
   disposal; desiring, If he had no further work for him to do in this
   world, he would take him to himself;' which he expressed with great
   serenity of mind, and an unreserved resignation to the divine good
   pleasure. When he went to bed he was suddenly seized with a kind of
   lethargy, by which he was deprived of his senses, to the great grief
   and loss of his friends who came to visit him. He died October 18th,
   1677, in the fifty-seventh year of his age, and lies interred in the
   chancel of the church of Stoke Newington.

   Dr Bates preached his funeral sermon, who had a most affectionate
   esteem for him, very frequently visited him, always advised with him in
   matters of moment, and, for some years after his death, would weep when
   he spoke of him. He says of him:-- [13] His name is worthy of precious
   and eternal memory. God had furnished him with a rare union of those
   parts which are requisite to form an eminent minister of his word. A
   clear judgment, a rich fancy, a strong memory, and happy elocution met
   in him; and were excellently improved by his diligent study. In
   preaching the word he was of conspicuous eminence; and none could
   detract from him, but from ignorance or envy. He was endowed with an
   extraordinary knowledge of the scripture; and in his preaching, gave
   such perspicuous accounts of the order and dependence of divine truths,
   and with that felicity applied the scripture to confirm them, that
   every subject, by his management, was cultivated and improved. His
   discourses were so clear and convincing, that none, without offering
   violence to conscience, could resist their evidence; and from hence
   they were effectual, not only to inspire a sudden flame, and raise a
   short commotion in the affections, but to make a lasting change in the
   life. His doctrine was uncorrupt and pure; the truth according to
   godliness. He was far from the guilty, vile intention to prostitute the
   sacred ordinances for acquiring any private secular advantage; neither
   did he entertain his hearers with impertinent subleties, empty notions,
   intricate disputes, dry and barren, without productive virtue; but as
   one who always had in his eye the great end of his ministry, the glory
   of God, and the salvation of men. His sermons were directed to open
   their eyes, that they might see their wretched condition as sinners, to
   hasten their flight from the wrath to come, and make them humbly, and
   thankfully, and entirely receive Christ as their Prince and
   all-sufficient Saviour; and to build up the converted in their holy
   faith, and more excellent love, which is the "fulfilling of the law:"
   in short, to make true Christians eminent in knowledge and universal
   obedience.

   And as the matter of his sermons was designed for the good of souls, so
   his way of expression was proper for that end. His style was not
   exquisitely studied, not consisting of harmonious periods, but far
   distant from vulgar meanness. His expression was natural and free,
   clear and eloquent, quick and powerful; without any spice of folly; and
   always suitable to the simplicity and majesty of divine truth. His
   sermons afforded substantial food with delight, so that a fastidious
   mind could not disrelish them. He abhorred a vain ostentation of wit in
   handling sacred truths, so venerable and grave, and of eternal
   consequence. His fervour and earnestness in preaching was such as might
   soften and make pliant the most stubborn and obstinate spirit. I am not
   speaking of one whose talent was only voice, who laboured in the pulpit
   as if the end of preaching were the exercise of the body, and not for
   the profit of souls. But this man of God was inflamed with holy zeal,
   and from thence such expressions broke forth as were capable of
   procuring attention and consent in his hearers. He spake as one who had
   a living faith within him of divine truth. From this union of zeal with
   his knowledge, he was excellently qualified to convince and convert
   souls. His unparalleled assiduity in preaching declared him very
   sensible of those dear and strong obligations which lie upon ministers
   to be very diligent in that blessed work. This faithful minister
   abounded in the work of the Lord; and, which is truly admirable, though
   so frequent in preaching, yet was always superior to others, and equal
   to himself. He was no fomentor of faction, but studious of the public
   tranquillity; he knew what a blessing peace is, and wisely foresaw the
   pernicious consequences which attend divisions.

   Consider him as a Christian, his life was answerable to his doctrine.
   This servant of God was like a fruitful tree, which produces in the
   branches what it contains in the root. His inward grace was made
   visible in a conversation becoming the gospel. His resolute contempt of
   the world secured him from being wrought upon by those motives which
   tempt low spirits from their duty. He would not rashly throw himself
   into troubles, nor, spreta conscientia, avoid them. His generous
   constancy of mind in resisting the current of popular humour, declared
   his loyalty to his divine Master. His charity was eminent in procuring
   supplies for others, when in mean circumstances himself. But he had
   great experience of God's fatherly provision, to which his filial
   confidence was correspondent. I shall finish my character of him by
   observing his humility. He was deeply affected with the sense of his
   frailty and unworthiness. He considered the infinite purity of God, and
   the perfection of his law, the rule of duty; and by that humbling light
   discovered his manifold defects. He expressed his thoughts to me a
   little before his death. "If the holy prophets were under strong
   impressions of fear upon extraordinary discoveries of the divine
   presence, how shall we poor creatures appear before the holy and
   dreadful Majesty? It is infinitely terrible to appear before God, the
   Judge of all, without the protection of the blood of sprinkling, which
   speaketh better things than that of Abel." This alone relieved him, and
   supported his hopes. Though his labours were abundant, yet he knew that
   the work of God, passing through our hands is so blemished, that
   without appealing to pardoning mercy and grace, we cannot stand in
   judgment.' This was the subject of his last public sermon, upon 2 Tim.
   i. 18, which was published from his notes, with the second edition of
   his funeral sermon.

   Mr Collins, a man of a most sweet and obliging temper, as well as of
   great abilities and worth, on his turn to preach at the merchants'
   lecture, after the doctor's death, took great notice of it, and was
   much affected with the loss of so valuable a person. Good old Mr Case
   used to say, long before his death, that he should live to preach his
   funeral sermon; and he did preach upon that occasion, when he was
   almost dead himself, for he was above eighty years of age. His text
   was, 2 Kings x. 32; In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short.'
   After he had considered the text, he came to speak of several worthy
   ministers cut off by death about that time, as well as others cut off
   by the laws which forbade their preaching. The last he named was Dr
   Manton. At the mention of his name he stopped, and wept for some time
   before he could proceed; and then said, If I had mentioned no other but
   Dr Manton, I might well say, that God began to cut England short;' with
   other expressions of his love and esteem. He had always a high opinion
   of the doctor's preaching, and would often urge him to print. When the
   doctor answered him that he had not time, in the midst of such constant
   employments, to prepare anything, with due care, for the public view;
   he would reply, You need only send your notes to the press, when you
   come out of the pulpit.' Dr Manton wrote a very ingenious and serious
   preface to Mr Case's Meditations, drawn up when he was prisoner in the
   Tower, and published under the title of Correction, Instruction;' which
   is a very useful practical book upon the subject of afflictions. He
   also wrote a preface to the second edition of Smectymnus;' to Mr
   Clifford's Book of the Covenant;' to Ignatius Jourdain's Life;' Mr
   Strong's Sermons of the Certainty and Eternity of Hell Torments;' and
   to the second edition, in quarto, of the Assembly's Confession of
   Faith,' &c.

   His works were published by several principal ministers of that time,
   and it will entertain the reader to see the high apprehensions they had
   of him, and the beautiful variety in which they represent them. They
   have indeed drawn their own character, as well as his, in the different
   turn of their mind and manner of expression. The first which came out
   was Twenty Sermons,' in quarto, in the year 1678. Dr Bates gives this
   fine and beautiful account of them: The main design of them is to
   represent the inseparable connexion between Christian duties and
   privileges, wherein the essence of our religion consists. The gospel is
   not a naked, unconditionate offer of pardon and eternal life in favour
   of sinners, but upon the most convenient terms for the glory of God and
   the good of men, enforced by the strongest obligations upon them to
   receive humbly and thankfully those benefits. The promises are attended
   with commands to repent and believe, and persevere in a uniform
   practice of obedience. The Son of God came into the world, not to make
   God less holy, but to make us holy; and not to vacate our duty, and
   free us from the law as a rule of obedience, for that is both
   impossible, and would be most infamous and reproachful to our Saviour.
   To challenge such an exemption in point of right is to make ourselves
   gods; to usurp it in point of fact is to make ourselves devils. But his
   end was to enable and induce us to return to God as our rightful Lord
   and proper felicity, from whom we rebelliously and miserably fell, in
   seeking for happiness out of him. Accordingly, the gospel is called the
   law of faith, as it commands those duties upon motives of eternal hopes
   and fears, and as it will justify or condemn men with respect to their
   obedience or disobedience, which is the proper character of a law.
   These things are managed in the following sermons in that convincing,
   persuasive manner as makes them very necessary for these times, when
   some who aspire to extraordinary heights in religion, and esteem
   themselves favourites of heaven, yet wofully neglect the duties of the
   lower hemi sphere, as righteousness, truth, and honesty; and when
   carnal Christians are so numerous, who despise serious godliness as a
   solemn hypocrisy, and live in open violation of Christ's precepts, and
   yet presume to be saved by him.

   I shall only add further, they commend to our ardent affections and
   endeavours true holiness, as distinguished from the most refined
   unregenerate morality. The doctor saw the absolute necessity of this,
   and spake with great jealousy of those who seemed in their discourses
   to make it their highest aim to improve and cultivate some moral
   virtues, as justice, temperance, benignity, &c., by philosophical
   helps, representing them as becoming the dignity of our nature,
   agreeable to reason, and beneficial to society, and but transiently
   speaking of the operations of the Holy Spirit, which are as requisite
   to free the soul from the chains of sin as to release the body at last
   from the bands of death; who seldom preach of evangelical graces, faith
   in the Redeemer, the love of God for his admirable wisdom in our
   salvation, zeal for his glory, humility in ascribing all we can return
   in grateful obedience to the most free and powerful grace of God in
   Christ, which are the vital principles of good works, and derive the
   noblest forms to all virtues. Indeed, men may be composed and
   considerate in their words and actions, may abstain from gross
   enormities, and do many praiseworthy actions, by the rules of moral
   prudence, yet without the infusion of divine grace to cleanse their
   stained nature, to renew them according to the image of God shining in
   the gospel, to act them from motives superior to all that moral wisdom
   propounds,--all their virtues, of what elevation soever, though in a
   heroic degree, cannot make them real saints. As the plant-animal has a
   faint resemblance of the sensitive life, but remains in the lower rank
   of vegetables, so these have a shadow and appearance of the life of
   God, but continue in the corrupt state of nature. The difference is
   greater between sanctifying saving grace, wrought by the special power
   of the Spirit, with the holy operations flowing from them, and the
   virtuous habits and actions which are the effect of moral counsel and
   constancy, than between true pearls produced by the celestial beams of
   the sun, and counterfeit ones formed by the smoky heat of the fire.' No
   doubt the proper Christian graces require the influence of the Divine
   Spirit, and are the effect of nobler motives than mere pagan morality.

   In 1679 was published, in octavo, Eighteen Sermons on the Second
   Chapter of the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, containing the
   Description, Rise, Growth, and Fall of Antichrist; with divers Cautions
   and Arguments to establish Christians against the Apostasy of the
   Church of Rome.' This was well fitted for common use, and very
   seasonable at that time. In the preface to this volume, Mr Baxter says
   of him, How sound he was in judgment against extremes in the
   controversies of these times; how great a lamenter of the scandalous
   and dividing mistakes of some self-conceited men; how earnestly
   desirous of healing our present breaches, and not unacquainted with the
   proper means and terms; how hard and successful a student; how frequent
   and laborious a preacher; and how highly and deservedly esteemed, is
   commonly known here. The small distaste which some few had of him, I
   took for a part of his honour, who would not win reputation with any by
   flattering them in their mistakes, or unwarrantable ways. He used not
   to serve God with that which cost him nothing; nor was of their mind
   who cannot expect or extol God's grace without denying those endeavours
   of men to which his necessary grace exciteth them. He knew that,
   "without Christ we can do nothing;" and yet that, "by Christ
   strengthening us, we can do all things" which God hath made necessary
   to be done by us. He was not of their mind who think it derogatory to
   the honour of Christ to praise his works in the souls and lives of any
   of his servants; and that it is to the honour of his grace that his
   justified ones are graceless, and that their Judge should dishonour his
   own righteousness, if he make his disciples more righteous personally
   than the scribes and pharisees; and will say to them, "Well done, good
   and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, enter
   thou into the joy of thy Lord." He knew how to regard the righteousness
   and . intercession of Christ, with pardon of sin and divine acceptance,
   instead of legal personal perfection, without denying either the
   necessity or assigned office of our faith and repentance, and
   evangelical sincerity in obeying Him who redeemed and justifies us. He
   knew the difference between man's being justified from the charge of
   being liable to damnation as Christless, impenitent, unbelieving, and
   ungodly; and being liable to damnation for mere sin as sin, against the
   law of innocence, which required of us no less than personal, perfect,
   and perpetual obedience. He greatly lamented the wrong which truth and
   the church underwent from those who neither know such difference, nor
   have humility enough to suspect their judgment, nor to forbear reviling
   those who have not as confused and unsound apprehensions and
   expressions as themselves.'

   In the year 1684 Dr Bates published his Exposition of the Lord's
   Prayer,' in octavo. In 1685 Mr Hurst published, in octavo, Several
   Discourses tending to promote Peace and Holiness among Christians;' and
   dedicated them to Arthur, Earl of Anglesea, to whom he was chaplain. In
   the same year was published, Christ's Temptations and Transfiguration
   explained and improved; and Christ's Eternal Existence and the Dignity
   of his Person asserted and proved, in opposition to the Socinians,' in
   octavo. Dr Jacomb, who published this volume, says of him, That he did
   not so much concern himself in what is polemical and controversial; but
   chose rather, in a plain way, as best suiting with sermon-work, to
   assert and prove the truth by scripture testimony and argument; and
   that he has done to the full.' In 1703 was published, A Practical
   Exposition of Isaiah liii.' This, though published last, was earlier
   written than any of the other; for so he speaks in the preface to the
   Exposition of James, I have the rather chosen this scripture, that it
   might be an allay to those comforts, which, in another exercise, I have
   endeavoured to draw out of Isaiah liii. I would, at the same time s
   carry on the doctrine of faith and manners, and show you your duty,
   together with your encouragement; lest, with Ephraim, you should only
   love to tread out the corn, and refuse to break the clods. We are all
   apt to divorce comfort from duty, and content ourselves with a barren,
   unfruitful, knowledge of Christ; as if all He required of the world
   were only a few naked, cold, unactive apprehensions of his merit, and
   all things were so done for us, that nothing remained to be done by us.
   This is the wretched conceit of many in the present age; and,
   therefore, they abuse the sweetness of grace to looseness, and the
   power of it to laziness. Christ's merits, and the Spirit's efficacy,
   are the common places from whence they draw all the defence and excuse
   of their own wantonness and idleness.'

   Besides these lesser volumes, there are five large volumes in folio.
   The first was, Sermons upon the 119th Psalm,' published in the year
   1681. Dr Bates says, They were preached by him in his usual course of
   three times a week; which I do not mention to lessen their worth, but
   to show how diligent and exact he was in performing his duty. I cannot
   but admire the fecundity and variety of his thoughts; that though the
   same things so often occur in the verses of this psalm, yet, by a
   judicious observing the different arguments and motives whereby the
   psalmist enforces the same request, or some other circumstance, every
   sermon contains new conceptions, and proper to the text.' Mr Alsop says
   of them, The matter of them is spiritual, and speaks the author one
   intimately acquainted with the secrets of wisdom. He writes like one
   who knew the psalmist's heart, and felt in his own soul the sanctifying
   power of what he wrote. Their design is practical, beginning with the
   understanding, dealing with the affections, but still driving on the
   design of practical holiness. The manner of handling is not inferior to
   the dignity of the matter; so plain, as to accommodate the most sublime
   truths to the meanest spiritual capacity; and yet so elevated, as to
   approve itself to the most refined understanding; which knows how to be
   succinct without obscurity; and, where the weight of the argument
   requires it, to enlarge without nauseous prolixity. He studied more to
   profit than please; and yet an honest heart will be then best pleased
   when most profited. He chose rather to speak appositely than elegantly,
   and yet the judicious account propriety the greatest elegance. He
   laboured more industriously to conceal his learning than others to
   ostentate theirs; and yet, when he would most veil it, the discerning
   reader cannot but discover it, and rejoice to find such a mass and
   treasure of useful learning couched under a well-studied and artificial
   plainness. I have admired, and must recommend to the observation of the
   reader, the fruitfulness of the author's holy invention, accompanied
   with solid judgment, in that whereas the coincidence of the matter in
   this psalm might have superseded his labours in very many verses; yet,
   without force, or offering violence to the sacred text, he has, either
   from the connexion of one verse with its predecessor, or the harmony
   between the parts of the same verse, found out new matter to entertain
   his own meditations, and the reader's expectations.'

   The second volume was published in 1684, and contains sermons on the
   whole of the 25th of Matthew and 17th of John, and the 6th and 8th of
   the Romans, and the 5th of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. Dr
   Collings, who seems to have written the preface to this volume, says,
   In all his writings one finds a quick and fertile invention, governed
   with a solid judgment; and the issue of both expressed in a grave and
   decent style. He had a heart full of love and zeal for God and his
   glory; and out of the abundance of his heart his mouth continually
   spake. So frequent, and yet so learned and solid, preaching by the same
   person was little less than miraculous. He was a good and learned, a
   grave and judicious, person; and his auditory never failed, though he
   laboured more than most preachers, to hear from him a pious, learned,
   and judicious discourse. He is one of those authors upon the credit of
   whose name not only private and less intelligent people, but even
   scholars, may venture to buy any book which was his.' The third volume
   was published in 1689, and contains sermons upon the 11th chapter of
   the Epistle to the Hebrews; with a treatise of the Life of Faith, and
   another of Self-denial; and some preparatory sermons for the Lord's
   Supper, and sermons before the Parliament. It was dedicated to King
   William, soon after the Revolution, by Mr Howe, in as noble and
   masterly a preface as is, perhaps, anywhere to be met with. The fourth
   volume was published in 1693, and contains sermons upon several texts
   of scripture. It is directed to the Lord Philip Wharton, by Mr William
   Taylor, who was many years my lord's chaplain, and transcribed a great
   part of the doctor's notes for the press, and was himself a person of
   great integrity and wisdom. He tells my lord, Though his preaching was
   so constant, yet in all his sermons may be observed a solidity of
   judgment, exactness of method, fulness of matter, strength of argument,
   persuasive elegance, together with a serious vein of piety running
   through the whole, as few have come near him, but none have exceeded
   him.' Mr Alsop says of this volume:--Acquired learning humbly waits
   upon divine revelation; great ministerial gifts were managed by greater
   grace. A warm zeal, guided by solid judgment; a fervent love to saints
   and sinners, kindled by a burning zeal for the interest of a Saviour;
   and a plain elegance of style adapted to the meanest capacity, and yet
   far above the contempt of the highest pretender.' The fifth volume was
   published in 1701, and contains sermons on the 5th chapter to the
   Ephesians, on the 3d of the Philippians, on the 1st chapter of the
   Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and on the 3d chapter of the First
   Epistle of John, with one hundred and forty sermons on particular
   texts. This volume, though it appeared last, and after so many others,
   is so far from running dregs, that, in my opinion, it contains some of
   his ripest and most digested thoughts; and is preferable, both for the
   subject and management, to any one of the former. This was directed to
   the excellent Sir Thomas Abney, then Lord Mayor of London, and to the
   Lady Abney, by Mr Howe; in which he expresses his sense of Dr Manton in
   this remarkable paragraph: And that an eminent servant of Christ, who,
   through a tract of so many years, hath been so great and public a
   teacher and example of the ancient seriousness, piety, righteousness,
   sobriety, strictness of mariners, with most diffusive charity (for
   which London has been renowned, for some ages, beyond most cities in
   the world), should have his memory revived by such a testimony from
   persons under your character, and who hold so public a station as you
   do in it, can never be thought unbecoming, as long as clearly explained
   and exemplified religion, solid useful learning, and good sense, are in
   any credit in the world.'

   There are some sermons of his in the several volumes of the Morning
   Exercises;' for Dr Manton was too considerable to be missed in any
   design which was set on foot for the public good. There is one in that
   at St Giles's, on Man's Impotency to Help himself out of the Misery he
   is in by Nature;' another in that at Cripplegate, about Strictness in
   Holy Duties;' a third in the Supplement, concerning The Improvement of
   our Baptism;' and a fourth in that against Popery, upon The Sufficiency
   of the Scripture.' There is also a funeral sermon for Mrs Jane
   Blackwel, upon The Blessed Estate of them who Die in the Lord,' in the
   year 1656. These sermons, with the two before the House of Commons,
   [14] and one on the death of Mr Love, including the Exposition on James
   and Jude, were all he published himself; [15] and are written with a
   correct judgment and beautiful simplicity. His other works were all
   printed from his sermon-notes, prepared for the pulpit; and whosoever
   shall consider the greatness of the number and variety of the subjects,
   the natural order in which they are disposed, and the skilful
   management; the constant frequency of his preaching, and the affairs of
   business in which he was often engaged, will easily be able to make a
   judgment of his great abilities and vast application, and to make the
   requisite allowances for posthumous works; especially when he tells us
   that he was humbled with the constant burden of four times a week
   preaching;' [16] and to the last, three times; and that where the style
   seems too curt and abrupt, know that I sometimes reserved myself for
   sudden inculcations and enlargement.' And though, as they now appear,
   they have been well received, and very useful to younger ministers and
   Christian families, yet I believe I might safely venture to say, that
   if he had had the same leisure to compose and polish, he was capable of
   equalling any performances of that kind of the celebrated writers of
   the age; and that hardly any, under his disadvantage, and so constantly
   employed, would have exceeded his. As no man of the age had a greater
   number of his sermons published after his death, perhaps it will not
   displease the reader to see his own judgment of posthumous writings.
   Let it not stumble thee,' says he, that the piece is posthumous, and
   comes out so long after the author's death; it were to be wished that
   they who excel in public gifts would during life publish their own
   works, to prevent spurious obtrusions upon the world, and to give them
   their last hand and polishing, as the apostle Peter was careful to
   write before his decease (2 Pet. i. 12). But usually the Church's
   treasure is most increased by legacies. As Elijah let fall his mantle
   when he was taken up into heaven, so God's eminent servants, when their
   persons could no longer remain in this world, have left behind them
   some worthy pieces, as monuments of their graces, and zeal for the
   public welfare. Whether it be out of a modest sense of their own
   endeavours, as being loth, upon choice and of their own accord, to
   venture abroad into the world; or whether it be that being occupied and
   taken up with other labours; or whether it be in conformity to Christ,
   who would not leave his Spirit till his departure; or whether it be out
   of hope that their works would find a more kindly reception after their
   death, the living being more liable to envy and reproach, but when the
   author is in heaven, the work is more esteemed upon earth; whether for
   this or that cause, usual it is that not only the life, but the death
   of God's servants have been profitable to the Church. By that means
   many useful treatises have been freed from that privacy and obscurity
   to which, by the modesty of their authors, they had formerly been
   confined.' [17]

   He was a person of general learning, and had a fine collection of
   books, which sold for a considerable sum after his death; among which
   was the noble Paris edition of the Councils,' in thirty volumes, in
   folio, which the bookseller offered him for sixty pounds, or his
   Sermons on the One Hundred and Nineteenth Psalm. He began to transcribe
   them fair, but finding it too great an interruption in the frequent
   returns of his stated work, Vie chose rather to pay him in money. His
   great delight was in his study, and he was scarce ever seen without a
   book in his hand, if he was not engaged in company. He had diligently
   read the Fathers, and the principal schoolmen, which was a fashionable
   piece of learning in those times. And though he greatly preferred the
   plainness and simplicity of the former to the art and subtilty of the
   latter, yet he thought that we were more properly the Fathers, who
   stood on their shoulders, and have the advantage of seeing farther, in
   several respects, than they did. Perhaps scarce any man of the age had
   more diligently studied the scripture, or was a greater master of it.
   He had digested the best critics and commentators, and made a vast
   collection of judicious observations of his own, which appears in the
   pertinent and surprising use of the scripture upon all occasions, and
   the excellent glosses which are everywhere to be found in his writings.
   As he had a great reverence for the scripture himself, so he was
   observed to show a great zeal against using scripture phrases lightly
   in common conversation, or without a due regard to the sense and
   meaning of them, as a profanation of the scripture and a great
   dishonour to God. Dr Bates used to say, that he had heard the greatest
   men of those times sometimes preach a mean sermon, but never heard Dr
   Manton do so upon any occasion.' This will appear the less surprising,
   if we consider the great care he took about them. He generally writ the
   heads and principal branches first, and often writ them over twice
   afterwards, some copies of which are now in being. When his sermon did
   not please him, nor the matter open kindly, he would lay it aside for
   that time, though it were Saturday night, and sit up all night to
   prepare a sermon upon an easier subject, and more to his satisfaction.
   If a good thought came into his mind in the night, he would light his
   candle, and put on his gown, and write sometimes for an hour together
   at a table by his bedside, though the weather was ever so cold. He was
   well read in all the ancient and modern history, which he made his
   diversion, and in which he took a particular pleasure. This, by the
   advantage of an excellent judgment and strong memory, made his
   conversation very instructing and entertaining, and recommended him
   particularly to young gentlemen, who used to visit him after their
   travels. He would discourse with them as if he had been with them upon
   the spot, and bring things to their remembrance which they had forgot;
   and sometimes, to their great surprise, show a greater acquaintance
   with things abroad, attained by reading, than they had got by all the
   labour and expense of travelling. The celebrated Mr Edmund Waller, who
   first refined the English poetry, and brought it to the ease and
   correctness in which it now appears, used to say of him, upon this
   account, that he never discoursed with such a man as Dr Manton in all
   his life.' By this means he became a great judge of men and things; and
   was often resorted to by persons of the greatest note and figure in the
   world. He took his degree of Bachelor of Arts in the year 1639, and was
   created Bachelor of Divinity in 1654, and by virtue of His Majesty's
   letters was created Doctor of Divinity at the same time with Dr Bates,
   and several of the Royalists, in 1660. [18] It was pleasantly said upon
   this latter occasion, that none could say of him that Creatio fit ex
   nihilo, having both learning and a degree before.

   He was a strict observer of family religion. His method was this: he
   began morning and evening with a short prayer, then read a chapter, his
   children and servants were obliged to remember some part of it, which
   he made easy and pleasant to them by a familiar exposition; then he
   concluded with a longer prayer. Notwithstanding the labours of the
   Lord's-day, he never omitted, after an hour's respite, to repeat the
   heads of both his sermons to his family, usually walking, and then
   concluded the day with prayer and singing a psalm. His great
   acquaintance with the scriptures, and deep seriousness of mind,
   furnished him with great pertinency and variety of expression upon all
   occasions, and preserved a great solemnity and reverence in all his
   addresses to God. His prayer after sermon usually contained the heads
   of his sermon. He was noted for a lively and affectionate manner of
   administering the Lord's Supper. He consecrated the elements of bread
   and wine apart; and whilst they were delivering, he was always full of
   heavenly discourse. He would often utter, with great fervour, those
   words: Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, transgression,
   and sin?' and illustrate, in an affecting manner, the glory of the
   divine mercy to the lost world, in the death of Christ; and
   pathetically represent the danger of those who neglect and slight their
   baptismal covenant, and how terrible a witness it would be against them
   at the day of judgment.

   Monday was his chief day of rest, in which he used to attend his
   visitors. On his Wednesday lecture several persons of considerable
   quality and distinction, who went to the Established Church on the
   Lord's-day, would come to hear him. One observing to him that there
   were many coaches at his doors on those days, he answered, smiling, I
   have coach-hearers, but foot-payers;' and yet he was far from the love
   of filthy lucre; for when it was proposed to him to bring his hearers
   to a subscription, he would not yield to it, but said his house should
   be free for all, as long as he could pay the rent of it. Some of his
   parishioners, and others who attended his ministry, used to present
   him, about Christmas, with what they collected among themselves, which
   was seldom above twelve or thirteen pounds. He had several persons of
   the first rank who belonged to his congregation, as the Countesses of
   Bedford, Manchester, Clare; the Ladies Baker, Trevor, the present Lord
   Trevor's mother; the Lord and Lady Wharton, and most of their children,
   &c. By this means he had always a considerable collection for the poor
   at the sacrament, which was a great pleasure to him. He used to say
   sometimes, pleasantly, that he had money in the poor's bag when he had
   little in his own. This he sometimes distributed among poor ministers,
   who were, many of them, at that time, in strait circumstances, as well
   as the poor of the congregation. Though he was a man of great gravity,
   and of a regular unaffected piety, yet he was extremely cheerful, and
   pleasant among his friends, and upon every proper occasion. His
   religion sat easy, and well became him, and appeared amiable and lovely
   to others. He greatly disliked the forbidding rigours of some good
   people, and the rapturous pretensions of others; and used to say he had
   found it, by long observation, that they who would be over-godly at one
   time, would be under-godly at another.

   I shall conclude with this summary account of his person and character.
   He was of a middle stature, and of a fair and fresh complexion, with a
   great mixture of majesty and sweetness in his countenance. In his
   younger years he was very slender, but grew corpulent in his advanced
   age; not by idleness or excess, [19] for he was remarkably temperate
   and unweariedly diligent. He had naturally a little appetite, and
   generally declined all manner of feasts; but by a sedentary life, and
   the long confinement of the five-mile-act, which, he used to complain,
   first broke his constitution. In short, perhaps few men of the age in
   which he lived had more virtues and fewer failings, or were more
   remarkable for general knowledge, fearless integrity, great candour and
   wisdom, sound judgment, and natural eloquence, copious invention, and
   incredible industry, zeal for the glory of God, and good-will to men;
   for acceptance and usefulness in the world, and a clear and unspotted
   reputation, through a course of many years, among all parties of men.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] This Memoir was originally prefixed to a second edition of Manton's
   works, of which only the first volume appears to have been
   published.--ED.

   [2] Anthony Wood (Athen Oxon.,' p. 600) says he was accounted in his
   college a hot-headed person--which is as remote from what was known to
   be the true character of Dr Manton as it is agreeable to his own. If he
   had not been a hot-headed writer, he would not everywhere appear so
   full of prejudice and spite, nor have thrown out so many rash and
   injudicious reflections upon the best men of the Established Church who
   had any degree of temper and moderation, as well as upon the
   Nonconformists, and reserved his kindness and tenderness to the
   Popishly-affected and Nonjurors.

   [3] Mr Wood, ubi supra, says he became a preacher, though not in holy
   orders, at Culliton, in Devonshire; and afterwards, that he took orders
   at Westminster, from Thomas, Bishop of Galloway, in the beginning of
   1660. He seems to suppose that he had preached without orders all that
   time, when he was certainly ordained by Bishop Hall before he was
   twenty. And though he was ordained only to Deacon's orders, he never
   would submit to any other ordination. His judgment was, that he was
   properly ordained to the ministerial office, and that no power on earth
   had any right to divide and parcel it out.

   [4] See Dedication to the Epistle of James.'

   [5] History, in folio, vol. ii., pp. 445, 446; vol. iii., pp. 337, 338.

   [6] Whitlock, who was present, says, He recommended His Highness, the
   Parliament, the Council, and forces, and the whole Government and
   people of the three nations, to the blessing and protection of
   God.'--Memorials, p. 661.

   [7] See Bishop Burnet's History of his Own Times,' p. 89.

   [8] The declaration was drawn up by Lord Chancellor Hyde, and
   contained, among other things, the following concessions:--That no
   bishops should ordain or exercise any part of jurisdiction, which
   appertaineth to the censures of the church, without the advice and
   assistance of the presbyters: that chancellors, commissaries, and
   officials should be excluded from acts of jurisdiction; and the power
   of pastors in their several congregations restored; and that liberty
   should be granted to all ministers to assemble monthly for the exercise
   of their pastoral persuasive power, and the promoting of knowledge and
   godliness in their flocks; that ministers should be free from the
   subscription required by the canon, and from the oath of canonical
   obedience; and that the use of the ceremonies should be dispensed with,
   where they were scrupled.

   [9] Dr Samuel Parker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford.

   [10] Gen. xxxix. 21, 22.

   [11] Dr Manton gives a particular account of this interview, in a
   letter to Mr Baxter.--Life, Part III., p. 37.

   [12] Dr Calamy's Abridgment, vol. i.. pp. 317, 342.

   [13] Dr Bates's Works, p. 771.

   [14] One is Meat for the Eater; or, Hopes of Unity in and by Divided
   and Distracted Times,' on Zech. xiv. 10. The other is England's
   Spiritual Languishing, with the Causes and Cure,' on Rev. ii. 3.

   [15] Anthony Wood mentions Smectymnus Redivivus,' in answer to The
   Humble Remonstrance,' Lond. 1653, which I have never seen.

   [16] See Preface to the Exposition on James.

   [17] Epistle to Dr Sibb's Comment on the First Chapter of the Second
   Epistle to the Corinthians.

   [18] Anthony Wood's Fasti Oxon.

   [19] Anthony Wood (Athen Oxon.,' p. 600), says, When he took his
   degree at Oxford, he looked like a person rather fatted for the
   slaughter, than an apostle; being a round, plump, jolly man; but the
   Royalists resembled apostles by their macerated bodies and
   countenances.' Which, besides the injurious falsehood of the
   insinuation, is a coarse and butcherly comparison. I doubt it would not
   be safe to make that the standing measure of apostolical men.
     __________________________________________________________________

A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION

OF

THE LORD'S PRAYER
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE.

   SUCH is the divine matter and admirable order of the Lord's Prayer, as
   became the eternal wisdom of God, that composed and dictated it to his
   disciples. In it are opened the fountains of all our regular petitions,
   and the arguments contained to encourage our hopes for obtaining them.
   In our addresses to men, our study is to conciliate their favourable
   audience; but God is most graciously inclined and ready to grant our
   requests, therefore we are directed to call upon him by the title of
   Our Father in heaven,' to assure us of his love and power, and thereby
   to excite our reverent attention, to raise our affections, to confirm
   our confidence in prayer. The supreme end of our desires is the glory
   of God, in conjunction with our own happiness: this is expressed in the
   two first petitions, that his name may be hallowed,' and his kingdom
   come,' that we may partake of its felicity. In order to this, our
   desires are directed for the means that are proper and effectual to
   accomplish it. And those are of two kinds--the good things that conduct
   us, and the removal of those evils that obstruct our happiness. The
   good things are either, the spiritual and principal means to prepare us
   for glory, an entire, cordial, and constant obedience to the divine
   commands, expressed in the third petition, Thy will be done on earth,
   as it is in heaven;' or, natural and subservient, the supports and
   comforts of this life, which are contained in the fourth petition, Give
   us this day our daily bread.' The removal of evils is disposed
   according to the order of the good things we are to seek: we pray that
   our sins may be forgiven, the guilt of which directly excludes from his
   glorious kingdom; that we may be preserved from temptations, that with
   draw us from observing the divine commands; and to be delivered from
   all afflicting evils, that hinder our arrival at our blessed end. The
   conclusion is to strengthen our faith, by ascribing to our heavenly
   Father, the kingdom, power, and glory, and to express our ardent
   desires of his blessing, by saying, Amen.

   This divine comprehensive prayer is the subject of the following
   sermons, wherein the characters of Dr Manton's spirit are so
   conspicuous, as sufficiently discover them to be his; and the reader is
   assured they have been diligently compared with his own copy.

   WILLIAM BATES.
     __________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION.

   But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet; and when thou hast
   shut the door, pray to thy Father, &c.--Mat. VI. 6-8.

   I INTEND to go over the Lord's Prayer; and, to make way for it, I shall
   speak a little of these foregoing verses, wherein our Lord treats of
   the duty of prayer, and the necessity of being much therein.

   In the beginning of this chapter our Lord taxeth the hypocrisy of the
   Pharisees, which was plainly to be seen in all their duties their alms,
   their prayers, and their fasting.

   I. For their alms: Christ deals with that in the first four verses. It
   seems it was their fashion, when they gave alms, to sound a trumpet;
   and their pretence was to call all the poor within hearing, or to give
   notice that such a rabbi giveth alms to-day. Now, our Lord showeth that
   though this were the fair pretence to call the poor, yet their heart
   was merely upon their own glory, their own esteem with men; and
   therefore he persuades his disciples to greater secrecy in this work,
   and to content themselves with God's approbation, which will be open,
   and manifest, and honourable enough in due time, when the archangel
   shall blow the trumpet to call all the world together, 1 Thes. iv. 16,
   and Christ shall publish their good works in the hearing of men and
   angels: Mat. xxv. 34-36. Thus he deals with them upon the point of
   alms.

   II. For their prayers: Christ taxeth their affectation of applause,
   because they sought out places of the greatest resort,--the synagogues
   and corners of the streets,--and there did put themselves into a
   praying posture, that they might be seen of men, and appear to be
   persons of great devotion, and so might the better accomplish their own
   ends, their public designs upon the stage (for the Pharisees were great
   sticklers at that time), and also their private designs upon widows'
   houses, that they might be trusted with the management of widows' and
   orphans' estates, as being devout men, and of great sanctity and
   holiness.

   In which practice there was a double failing:--

   1. As to the circumstance of place, performing a personal and solitary
   prayer in a public place, which was a great indecorum, and argued the
   action to be scenical, or brought upon the stage merely for public
   applause. And certainly that private praying which is used by men in
   churches doth justly come under our Lord's reproof.

   2. Their next failing was as to their end: Verily they do it to be seen
   of men.'

   Object. But what fault was there in this? Doth not Christ himself
   direct us, in his Sermon, Mat. v. 16, Let your light so shine before
   men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
   is in heaven'? And yet the Pharisees are here taxed for praying,
   fasting, and giving alms, that they might be seen of men; how can these
   places stand together?

   By way of answer:--

   1. We must distinguish of the different scope and intention of Christ
   in these two places. There, Christ's scope is to commend and enjoin
   good works to be seen of men, ad edificationem, for their edification;
   here, his scope is to forbid us to do good works to be seen of men, ad
   ostentationem, for our own ostentation: There, Christian charity to the
   souls of men is commended; and here, vainglory is forbidden.

   2. Again, good works are to be distinguished. Some are so truly and
   indeed; others only in outward show and appearance. Good works, that
   are truly so and indeed, Christ enjoins there; hypocritical and feigned
   acts, that are only so in outward show and semblance, are forbidden
   here. To pray is a good work, take inward and outward acts of it
   together, and so it is enjoined. But hypocritical and superstitious
   prayer, which hath only the face and show of goodness, this is
   forbidden.

   3. We must distinguish of the ends of good works; principal and
   subordinate; adequate and inadequate. First, the principal and primary
   end of good works must not be that we may be seen of men, but the glory
   of God; but now the subordinate, or less principal end, may be to be
   seen of men. Again, it must not be our adequate end, that is, our whole
   and main intention and scope; but a collateral and side end it may be.
   It is one thing to do good works, only that they may be seen; it is
   another thing to do good works, that they may not only be seen, but
   also be imitated, to win others by them to give glory to God. It is one
   thing to do good works for the glory of God, another thing to do them
   for the glory of ourselves. We may do good works to be seen in the
   first respect, but not in the last. We may not pray with the Pharisees
   merely to be seen of men, yet we may let our light shine before men, to
   draw them to duty, and give more glory to God.

   4. Again, there Christ speaks of the general bent of our conversation,
   and here only of particular and private duties. It would argue too much
   hypocrisy to do these in public, though the whole frame and course of
   our carriage before men must be religious in their sight. And that is
   agreeable to what the apostle saith, 2 Cor. viii. 21, We should provide
   for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the
   sight of men.' And, Phil. ii. 15, Christians are advised there to be
   blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst
   of a crooked and perverse generation, shining among them as lights in
   the world.' That which is obvious to the sight and observance of men,
   must be such as will become our holy calling. But our private and
   particular duties, which are to pass between God and us, these must be
   out of sight. I hope another man may approve himself to be honest and
   religious to me, though he doth not fall down and make his personal and
   private prayers before me. But to leave no scruple, if possible;

   5. We must distinguish of the diverse significations of that phrase
   which is used here, opos, that we may be seen. There is a twofold sense
   of opos, or that. It may be taken two ways, as they speak, either
   causally or eventually. Causally, and then it implies and imports the
   end and scope why we do such a thing, namely, for this very purpose,
   that we may obtain it. And thus the Pharisees here did pray, opos, that
   they might be seen of men, that is, this was their main end and scope.
   Thus that is taken causally. Secondly, that sometimes is taken
   eventually, and then it doth not import the end and scope, but only the
   event that will fall out and follow upon such a thing. Thus that is
   often taken in scripture. John ix. 39: Christ saith there, For judgment
   I am come into the world, that they which see not, might see; and that
   they which see, might be made blind.' It was not Christ's scope to do
   so, but Christ foresaw that this would be the event of his coming into
   the world, and, therefore, he saith, that, &c. So Luke xiv. 10: Christ
   tells them there, But when thou art bidden to a feast, go and sit down
   in the lowest room, that when he that bade thee comes, he may say unto
   thee, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have worship in the
   presence of them that sit at meat with thee.' That is taken eventually,
   not causally; for Christ doth not bid them there to set themselves at
   the lower end of the table, for this very end, or to make this their
   scope: that is the thing he forbids--affectation of precedency; but
   that, hoc est, then it will follow, that is, this is likely to be the
   event; then the master of the house will come to you if you do this.
   Not that it should be your scope to feign humility, that you may obtain
   the highest place at the table. And so may Christ's words be taken, Let
   your light so shine.' &c. This will fall out upon it then--men will be
   conscious to your Christian carriage and gracious behaviour, and by
   that means God will be much honoured and glorified. There it is taken
   eventually, but here it is taken causally. The Pharisees did it that
   they might be seen of men; that is, this was their scope and principal
   intention. And thus may you reconcile these two places of scripture.

   Well, now, Christ having taxed them for these two faults: for their
   undue place, the synagogue and corners of the streets being unfit for a
   private and personal act of worship; and for their end, that they might
   be seen of men,--he saith, They have their reward.' That is, the whole
   debt is paid, they can challenge nothing at God's hands. God will be
   behindhand with none of his creatures. As they have what they looked
   for, so they must expect no more, they must be content with their
   penny. The phrase is borrowed from matters of contract between man and
   man, and is a word proper to those which give a discharge for a debt.
   As creditors and money-lenders, when they are paid home the full sum
   which is due to them, then they can exact no more; so here they must be
   contented with the empty, windy puffs of vainglory, and to feed upon
   the unsavoury breath of the people: they can expect no more from God,
   for the bond is cancelled, and they have received their full reward
   already. Briefly, here is the difference in the several rewards that
   the hypocrites and the children of God have: the hypocrites, they are
   all for the present, and have their reward, and much good may it do
   them; there is not a jot behind, it will be in vain to expect any more:
   but now, for the children of God, your Father will reward you; they
   must expect and wait for the future. And yet in scripture we read
   oftentimes that the children of God have their reward in this life; but
   then the word in the original is e'chousi, which signifieth they have
   but in part; not the word which is used here, ape'chousi, which
   signifies they have what is due, it is fulfilled, paid them. So those
   expressions in scripture are to be taken: Ye have eternal life,' and he
   hath,' and that ye may have.' It is often spoken in scripture of the
   children of God, so that they seem to have their reward too. They have
   their reward, but it is partially, not totally: there is something, the
   best things, yet behind. A child of God, he hath promises,
   first-fruits, some beginnings of communion with God here, but he looks
   for greater things to come.

   Well, then, Christ, having disproved the practice of the Pharisees,
   seeks to set his own disciples right in the management of their
   prayers, as well as in their alms. Pharisaism is very natural in the
   best. We are apt to be haunted with a carnal spirit in the best duties;
   not only in alms, where we have to do with men, but in prayer, where
   our business lieth wholly with God; especially in public prayer; even
   there much of man will creep in. The devil is like a fly, which, if
   driven from one place, pitcheth upon another; so drive him out of alms,
   and he will seek to taint your prayers.

   Therefore Christ, to rectify his disciples in their personal and
   solitary prayers, instructs them to withdraw into some place of recess
   and retirement, and to be content with God for witness, approver, and
   judge. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet; and when
   thou hast shut thy doors, pray to thy Father which is in secret,' &c.

   In which words you may observe:--

   I. A supposition concerning solitary prayer: But thou, when thou
   prayest.'

   II. A direction about it: Enter into thy closet, and shut thy door, and
   pray to thy Father which is in secret.'

   III. Encouragement to perform it: And thy Father, which seeth in
   secret, shall reward thee openly.' Where two things are asserted:--

   1. God's sight: He is conscious to thy prayers when others are not.

   2. God's reward: He will reward thee openly.'

   To open the circumstances of the text:--

   In the supposition, But thou, when thou prayest,' observe:--

   1. Christ takes it for granted that his disciples will pray to God. He
   doth not say, if thou prayest, but when thou prayest, as supposing them
   to be sufficiently convinced of this duty of being often with God in
   private.

   2. I observe, again, Christ speaks of solitary prayer, when a man
   alone, and without company, pours out his heart to God. Therefore
   Christ speaks in the singular number: When thou prayest;' not plurally
   and collectively, when ye pray, or meet together in prayer. Therefore
   he doth not forbid public praying in the assemblies of the saints, or
   family-worship; both are elsewhere required in scripture. God hath made
   promises to public and church prayer, praying with men or before men:
   Mat. xviii. 19, When two or three are met together, and shall agree on
   earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for
   them of my Father which is in heaven.' And when they shall agree in one
   public prayer, it seems to have a greater efficacy put upon it--when
   more are interested in the same prayer--when, with a combined force,
   they do as it were besiege the God of heaven, and will not let him go
   unless he leaves a blessing. Look, as the petition of a shire and
   county to authority is more than a private man's supplication, so when
   we meet as a church to pray, and as a family, there is combined
   strength. And in this sense, that saying of the schoolmen is orthodox
   enough--viz., that prayer made in the church hath a more easy audience
   with God. Why? Because of the concurrence of many which are met there
   to worship God. Christ doth not intend in this any way to jostle out
   that which he seeks to establish elsewhere. Let your intentions be
   secret, though your prayers be public and open in the family or
   assemblies of the saints.

   II. Let us open the direction our Lord gives about solitary prayer. The
   direction is suited so as to avoid the double error of the Pharisees;
   their offence as to place, and as to the aim and end.

   1. Their offence as to the place: Enter into thy closet, and shut thy
   door.' These words are not to be taken metaphorically, nor yet pressed
   too literally. Not metaphorically, as some would carry them. Descend
   into thy heart, be serious and devout with God in the closet of thy
   soul, which is the most inward recess and retiring-place of man. This
   were to be wanton with scripture. The literal sense is not to be left
   without necessity, nor yet pressed too literally, as if prayer should
   be confined to a chamber and closet. Christ prayed in the mountain,
   Mat. xiv. 23; and Gen. xxiv. 63, Isaac went into the field to meditate.
   The meaning is, private prayer must be performed in a private place,
   retired from company and the sight of men as much as may be.

   2. Christ rectifieth them as to the end: Pray to thy Father which is in
   secret;' that is, pray to God, who is in that private place, though he
   cannot be seen with bodily eyes; wherein Christ seems secretly to tax
   the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who did rather pray to men than to God,
   who was invisible; because all their aim was to be approved of men, and
   to be cried up by them as devout persons. So that what the Lord saith
   concerning fasting, Zech. vii. 5, 6, When ye fasted and mourned in the
   fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast
   unto me, even to me? and when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did
   not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?' So here, was this
   unto God? No, though the force and sound of the words carried it for
   God, yet they were directed to men. When God is not made both the
   object and aim, it is not to him; when you seek another paymaster, you
   decline God, yea, you make him your footstool, a step to some other
   thing.

   III. Here are the encouragements to this personal, private, and
   solitary prayer; and they are taken from God's sight, and God's reward.

   1. From God's sight: Thy Father seeth in secret;' that is, observeth
   thy carriage. The posture and frame of thy spirit, the fervour and
   uprightness of heart which thou manifestest in prayer, is all known to
   him. Mark, that which is the hypocrite's fear, and binds condemnation
   upon the heart of a wicked man, is here made to be the saints' support
   and ground of comfort--that they pray to an all-seeing God: 1 John iii.
   20, If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and
   knoweth all things.' Their heavenly Father seeth in secret; he can
   interpret their groans, and read the language of their sighs. Though
   they fail as to the outside of a duty, and there be much brokenness of
   speech, yet God seeth brokenness of heart there, and it is that he
   looks after. God seeth. What is that? He seeth whether thou prayest or
   no, and how thou prayest. (1.) He seeth whether thou prayest or no:
   mark that passage, Acts ix. 11, The Lord said to Ananias, Arise, and go
   into the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of
   Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus; for behold, he prayeth.' Go into
   such a city, such a street, such a house, such a part, in such a
   chamber, behold he prayeth. The Lord knew all these circumstances. It
   is known unto him whether we toil or loiter away our time, or whether
   we pray in secret; he knows what house, in what corner of the house,
   what we are doing there. (2.) He seeth how you pray: Rom. viii. 27. It
   is propounded as the comfort of the saints, And he that searcheth the
   heart knoweth what is the mind of the spirit.' God knoweth you
   thoroughly, and can distinguish of your prayers, whether they be
   customary and formal, or serious acts of love to God, and communion
   with him.

   2. The other thing which is propounded here is God's reward: And he
   will reward them openly.' How doth God reward our prayers? Not for any
   worth or dignity which is in them. What merit can there be in begging?
   What doth a beggar deserve in asking alms? But it is out of his own
   grace and mercy, having by promise made himself as it were a debtor to
   a poor, faithful, and believing supplicant. But he will reward thee
   openly.' How is that? Either by a sensible answer to thy prayers, as he
   doth often to his children, by granting what they pray for; as when
   Daniel was praying in secret, God sent an angel to him, Dan. ix. 20; or
   by an evident blessing upon their prayers in this world, for the
   conscionable performance of this duty. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that
   were men of much communion with God, were eminently and sensibly
   blessed; they were rewarded openly for their secret converse with him;
   or it may be, by giving them respect externally in the eyes of others.
   A praying people dart conviction into the consciences of men. It is
   notable that Pharaoh in his distress sent for Moses and Aaron, and not
   for the magicians. The consciences of wicked men are open at such a
   time, and they know God's children have special favour and great
   audience with him; and he having the hearts of all men in his hands,
   can manage and dispose respect according as he pleaseth. And when they
   are in distress, this honour God hath put upon you, they shall send for
   you to pray with them; and those which honour him, though but in
   secret, God will openly put honour upon them: 1 Sam. ii. 30. But
   chiefly this is meant at the day of judgment; then those which pray in
   secret their heavenly Father will reward them openly. When thou
   relievest the poor, and showest comfort to the needy, they cannot
   recompense thee; but then thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection
   of the just, Luke xiv. 14. There is the great and most public reward of
   Christians: 1 Cor. iv. 5, Then he will bring to light the hidden things
   of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart; and then
   shall every man have praise with God;' that is, every man that is
   praiseworthy, however he be mistaken and judged of the world; for the
   apostle speaks it to comfort them against the censures of men. And
   mark, this is opposed to the reward which the Pharisees pleased
   themselves with: it was much with them to be well thought of in such a
   synagogue, or before such a company of men; but your Father, which
   seeth in secret, will reward you openly;' that is, not only in the eyes
   of such a city or town, but before all the world.

   The point is this:--

   Doct. That private, solitary, and closet-prayer is a duty very
   necessary and profitable.

   It is a necessary duty; for Christ supposeth it of his disciples, to
   whom he speaks: But thou, when thou prayest,' &c. And it is profitable,
   for unto it God makes promises: You have a Father which seeth in
   secret, and one day shall be owned before all the world.

   First, It is a duty necessary; and that will appear:--

   1. From God's precept. That precept which requireth prayer, requireth
   secret and closet-prayer; for God's command to pray first falls upon
   single persons, before it falls upon families and churches, which are
   made up of single persons. Therefore where God hath bidden thee to
   pray, you must take that precept as belonging to you in particular. I
   shall give some of the precepts: Col. iv. 2, Continue in prayer, and
   watch in the same with thanksgiving;' and 1 Thes. v. 17, Pray without
   ceasing.' These are principally meant of our personal addresses to God,
   every man for himself; for injoining with others, the work is rather
   imposed upon us than taken up upon choice. And that can only be at
   stated times, when they can conveniently meet together; but we
   ourselves are called upon to continue to pray, and that without
   ceasing; that is, to be often with God, and to keep up not only a
   praying frame, but a constant correspondence with him. Surely every man
   which acknowledged a God, a Providence, and that depends upon him for
   blessings, much more every one that pretends he hath a Father in
   heaven, in whose hands are the guidance of all the things of the world,
   is bound to pray personally and alone, by himself to converse with God.

   2. I shall argue it from the example of Christ, which bindeth us, and
   hath the force of a law in things moral. As Christ's word is our rule,
   so his practice is our copy. This is true religion, to imitate him whom
   we worship. In this you must do as Christ did. Now we often read that
   Christ prayed alone--he went aside to pray to God; therefore, if we be
   Christians, so it should be with us: Mark i. 35, And in the morning,
   rising up a great while before day, he went out and departed into a
   solitary place, and there prayed.' He left the company of his
   disciples, with whom he often joined, that he might be alone with God
   betimes in the morning. And again you have it: Mat. xiv. 23, And when
   he had sent the multitude away, he went up into a mountain apart to
   pray; and when the evening was come, he was there alone.' And, Luke vi.
   12, it is said, He went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all
   night in prayer to God.' You see Christ takes all occasions in retiring
   and going apart to God. Now the pattern of Christ is both engaging and
   encouraging.

   It is very engaging. Shall we think ourselves not to need that help
   which Christ would submit unto? There are many proud persons which
   think themselves above prayer. Christ had no need to pray as we have;
   he had the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily; yet he was
   not above prayer. And if he had need of prayer, he had no need of
   retirement to go and pray alone; his affections always served, and he
   was not pestered with any distraction, and all places and companies
   were alike to him; and yet he would depart into a solitary place that
   he might be private with God.

   Then the pattern of Christ is very encouraging; for whatever Christ
   did, he sanctified in that respect--his steps in every duty leave a
   blessing. Look, as Christ sanctified baptism by being baptized himself,
   and made the water of baptism to be saving and comfortable for us; and
   the Lord's supper, by being a guest himself, and eating himself at his
   own table, so he sanctified private prayer: when he prayed, a virtue
   went out from him, he left a strength to enable us to pray. And it is
   encouraging in this respect, because he hath experimented this duty. He
   knows how soon human strength is spent and put to it, for he himself
   hath been wrestling with God in prayer with all his might. His
   submitting to these duties gave him sympathy; he knows the heart of a
   praying man when wrestling with God with all earnestness; therefore he
   helpeth us in these agonies of spirit. Again, his praying is an
   encouragement against our imperfections. Christians, when we are alone
   with God, and our hearts are heavy as a log and stone, what a comfort
   is it to think Christ himself prayed, and that earnestly, and was once
   alone wrestling with God in human nature! Mat. xiv. 23. And when the
   enemy came to attack him, he was alone, striving with God in prayer. He
   takes all occasions for intercourse with God; and if you have the
   Spirit, you will do likewise.

   3. I might argue from God's end in pouring out the Holy Ghost;
   wherefore hath God poured out his Spirit? Zech. xii. 11-14, I will pour
   out the Spirit of grace and of supplication,' &c. He poureth out the
   Spirit, that it may break out by this vent: the Spirit of grace will
   presently run into supplication; the whole house of Israel shall mourn.
   There is the church, they have the benefit of the pouring out of the
   Spirit; and every household hath benefit, that he and his family may
   mourn apart, and every person apart; that we may go and mourn over our
   case and distempers before God, and pour out our hearts in a holy and
   affectionate manner. This argument I would have you to note, that this
   was God's end in pouring out his Spirit, for a double reason, both to
   take off excuses, and to quicken diligence.

   Partly, to take off excuses, because many say they have no gifts, no
   readiness and savouriness of speech, and how can they go alone and pray
   to God? Certainly men which have necessities, and a sense of them, can
   speak of them in one fashion or other to God; but the Spirit is given
   to help. Such is God's condescension to the saints, that he hath not
   only provided an advocate to present our petitions in court, but a
   notary to draw them up; not only appointed Christ for help against our
   guilt and unworthiness, but likewise the Spirit to help us in prayer.
   When we are apt to excuse ourselves by our weakness and insufficiency,
   he hath poured out the Holy Ghost, that we may pray apart. Partly to
   this end, the more to awaken our diligence, that God's precious gift be
   not bestowed upon us in vain, to lie idle and unemployed, he hath
   poured out the Spirit; and therefore we should make use of it, not only
   that we may attend to the prayers of others, and join with them, but
   that we may make use of our own share of gifts and graces, and open and
   unfold our own case to God.

   4. That it is a necessary duty, I plead it from the practice of saints,
   who are a praying people. Oh how often do we read in scripture that
   they are alone with God, pouring out their souls in complaints to him!
   Nothing so natural to them as prayer; they are called a generation of
   them that seek God:' Ps. xxiv. 6. As light bodies are moving upward, so
   the saints are looking upward to God, and praying alone to him. Daniel
   was three times a day with God, and would not omit his hours of prayer,
   though his life was in danger, Dan. vi. 10; and David, Seven times a
   day do I praise thee,' Ps. cxix. 164; and Cornelius, it is said that he
   prayed to God always, Acts x. 2, not only with his family, but alone in
   holy soliloquies. He was so frequent and diligent, that he had gotten a
   habit of prayer--he prayed always. Well, then, if this be the temper of
   God's people, then to be altogether unlike them--when we have no
   delight in these private converses with God, or neglect them, it gives
   just cause of suspicion.

   5. Our private necessities show that it is a necessary duty, which
   cannot be so feelingly spoken to and expressed by others as by
   ourselves; and, it may be, are not so fit to be divulged and
   communicated to others. We cannot so well lay forth our hearts with
   such largeness and comfort in our own concernments before others. There
   is the plague of our own hearts, which every one must mourn over: 1
   Kings viii. 38. As we say, no nurse like the mother; so none so fit
   humbly with a broken heart to set forth our own wants before the Lord
   as ourselves. There is some thorn in the flesh that we have cause to
   pray against again and again: For this I sought the Lord thrice,' saith
   St Paul, 2 Cor. xii. 7, 8. We should put promises in suit, and lay open
   our own case before the compassions of God. It is a help sometimes to
   join with others; but at other times it would be a hindrance. We have
   peculiar necessities of our own to commend to God, therefore must be
   alone.

   Secondly, This closet and solitary prayer, as it is a necessary duty,
   so it is a profitable one.

   1. It conduceth much to enlargement of heart. The more earnest men are,
   the more they desire to be alone, free from trouble and distraction.
   When a man weeps, and is in a mournful posture, he seeks secrecy, that
   he may indulge his grief. They were to mourn apart: Zech. xii., and
   Jer. xiii. 17, My soul shall weep sore for your pride in secret
   places.' So here, when a man would deal most earnestly with God, he
   should seek retirement, and be alone. Christ in his agonies went apart
   from his disciples. When he would pray more earnestly, it is said, He
   was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast:' Luke xxii. 41. It is
   said, He went apart.' Strong affections are loth to be disturbed and
   diverted, therefore seek retirement. And, it is notable, Jacob, when he
   would wrestle with God, it is said, Gen. xxxii. 24, And Jacob was left
   alone, and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the
   day.' When he had a mind to deal with God in good earnest, he sent away
   all his company.

   A hypocrite, he finds a greater flash of gifts in his public duties,
   when he prays with others, and is the mouth of others; but is slight
   and superficial when alone with God; if he feels anything, a little
   overly matter serves the turn. But usually God's children most
   affectionately pour out their hearts before him in private; where they
   do more particularly express their own necessities, there they find
   their affections free to wrestle with God. In public we take in the
   necessities of others, but in private our own.

   2. As it makes way for enlargement of heart on our part, so for secret
   manifestations of love on God's part. Bernard hath a saying, The
   church's Spouse is bashful, and will not be familiar and communicate
   his loves before company, but alone.' The sweetest experiences which
   God's saints receive many times are when they are alone with him. When
   Daniel was praying alone with great earnestness, the angel Gabriel was
   sent, and caused to fly swiftly to him to tell him his prayers were
   answered: Dan. ix. 21. And Cornelius, while he was praying alone, an
   angel of God came unto him, to report the hearing of his prayers: Acts
   x. 3; and, ver. 9, Peter, when he was praying alone, then God instructs
   him in the mystery of the calling of the Gentiles: then had he that
   vision when he was got upon the top of the house to pray. Before we are
   regenerated, God appeareth to us many times when we do not think of it;
   but after we are regenerated, usually he appeareth upon more eminent
   acts of grace--when we are exercising ourselves, and more particularly
   dealing with God, and putting forth the strength of our souls to take
   hold of him in private.

   3. There is this profit in it: It is a mighty solace and support in
   affliction, especially when we are censured, scorned, and despised of
   men, and know not where to go to find a friend with whom we may unbosom
   our sorrow. Then to go aside, and open the matter to God, it is a
   mighty ease to the soul: Job xvi. 20, My friends scorn me; but mine eye
   poureth out tears unto God.' When we have a great burden upon us, to go
   aside and open the matter to God, it gives ease to the heart, and vent
   to our grief; as Hannah in great trouble falls a-praying to God, and
   then was no more sad: 1 Sam. i. 13. As the opening of a vein cooleth
   and refresheth in a fever, so when we make known our case to God, it is
   a mighty solace in affliction.

   4. It is a great trial of our sincerity, of our faith, love, and
   obedience, when we are alone, and nobody knows what we do, then to see
   him that is invisible: Heb. xi. 27;--when we are much with God in
   private, where we have no reasons but those of duty and conscience to
   move us. Carnal hypocrites will be much in outward worship. They have
   their qualms, and pray themselves weary, and do some thing for fashion
   sake when foreign reasons move them; but will they so pray as to
   delight themselves in the Almighty? Will they always call upon God? Job
   xxvii. 10. That delight in God, which puts us upon converses with God,
   affects privacy.

   5. It is a profitable duty, because of the great promises which God
   hath made to it. This secret and private prayer in the text shall have
   a public reward; it will not be lost, for God will reward it openly. So
   Job xxii. 21: Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace; thereby
   good shall come unto thee.' Frequent correspondence with, and constant
   visits of God in prayer, what peace, comfort, quickening brings it into
   the soul! So Ps. xlix. 32: His soul shall live that seeks the Lord.'
   Without often seeking to God, the vitality of the soul is lost. We may
   as well expect a crop and harvest without sowing, as any liveliness of
   grace where there is not seeking of God. Could a man take notice of
   another in a crowd, whose face he never saw before? So, will God own
   and bless you in the crowds of the assemblies of his people, if you
   mind not this duty when you are alone?

   APPLICATION.

   Use 1. To reprove those which neglect closet-addresses to God; they
   wrong God and themselves.

   They wrong God; because this is a necessary part of the creature's
   homage, of that duty he expects from them, to be owned not only in
   public assemblies, but in private. And they wrong themselves; because
   it brings in a great deal of comfort and peace to the soul; and many
   sweet and gracious experiences there are which they deprive themselves
   of, and a blessing upon all other things.

   But more particularly to show the evil of this sin:--

   1. It is a sin of omission; and these sins are very dangerous, as well
   as sins of commission. Natural conscience usually smites more for sins
   of commission, than for sins of omission. To wrong and beat a father
   seems a more heinous and unnatural act, than not to give him due
   reverence and attendance. We are sensible of sins of commission; but
   yet God will charge sins of omission as well as commission upon you;
   and so will conscience too when it is serious, when, against the plain
   knowledge of God's will, you can omit such a necessary part of God's
   worship: James iv. 17, To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it
   not, to him it is sin,' --that is, it will be sin with a witness.
   Conscience will own it so, when it is awakened by the word, or by
   providence, or great affliction, or cast upon your death-bed. How will
   your own hearts reproach you then, that have neglected God, and lost
   such precious hours as you should have redeemed for communion with him!
   Sins of omission argue as great a contempt of God's authority as sins
   of commission; for the same law which forbids a sin, doth also require
   a duty from us.

   And sins of omission argue as much hatred of God as sins of commission.
   If two should live in the same house, and never speak to one another,
   it would be taken for an argument of as great hatred as to fight one
   with another. So, when God is in us and round about us, and we never
   take time to confer with him, it argues much hatred and neglect of him.

   And sins of omission are an argument of our unregeneracy, as much as
   sins of commission. A man which lives in a course of drunkenness,
   filthiness, and adultery, you would judge him to be an unregenerate
   man, and that he hath such a spot upon him as is not the spot of God's
   children. So, to live in a constant neglect of God, is an argument of
   unregeneracy, as much as to live in a course of debauchery. The
   apostle, when he would describe the Ephesians by their unconverted
   state, describes it thus: Eph. ii. 12, That they lived without God in
   the world.' When God is not owned and called upon, and unless the
   restraints of men, the law of common education, and customs of nations
   call for it, they live without God. So Ps. xiv. 1: They are corrupt,
   they have done abominable works; there is none that doeth good, they
   are altogether become filthy.' Every unregenerate man is that atheist.
   There is some difference among unregenerate men. Some are less in the
   excesses and gross outbreakings of their sins and folly. Some sin more,
   some less; but they all are abominable on this account, because they do
   not seek after God. And the apostle makes use of that argument to
   convince all men to be in a state of sin: Rom. iii. 11, There is none
   that seeketh after God.' The heart may be as much hardened by omissions
   (yea, sometimes more), than by commissions. As an act of sin brings a
   brawniness and deadness upon the heart, so doth the omission of a
   necessary duty. Not only the breaking of a string puts the instrument
   out of tune, but its being neglected and not looked after. Certainly by
   experience we find none so tender, so holy, so humble, and heavenly, as
   they which are often with God. This makes the heart tender, which
   otherwise would grow hard, dead, and stupid.

   2. It is not only an omission in general, but an omission of prayer,
   which is, first, a duty very natural to the saints. Prayer is a duty
   very natural and kindly to the new creature. As soon as Paul was
   converted, the first news we hear of him, Acts ix. 11, Behold, he
   prayeth.' As soon as we are new-born, there will be a crying out for
   relief in prayer. It is the character of the saints: Ps. xxiv. 6, This
   is the generation of them that seek thee,' a people much in calling
   upon God. And the prophet describes them by the work of prayer: Zeph.
   iii. 10, My supplicants'; and, Zech. xii. 10, I will pour upon them the
   Spirit of grace and supplication.' Wherever there is a spirit of grace,
   it presently runneth out into prayer. Look, as a preacher is so called
   from the frequency of his work, so a Christian is one that calleth upon
   God. Every one that calleth on the name of the Lord, shall be saved:'
   Rom. x. 13. In vain he is called a preacher that never preacheth, so he
   is in vain called a Christian that never prayeth. As things of an airy
   nature move upward, so the saints are carried up to God by a kind of
   naturality, when they are gracious. God hath no tongue-tied or dumb
   children; they are all crying, Abba, Father.' Then it is an omission of
   a duty which is of great importance as to our communion with God, which
   lieth in two things--fruition and familiarity; in the enjoyment of God,
   and in being familiar and often with him. Fruition we have by faith,
   and familiarity is carried on by prayer. There are two duties which are
   never out of season, hearing and prayer, both which are a holy dialogue
   betwixt God and the soul, until we come to vision, the sight of him in
   heaven. Our communion with God here is carried on by these two duties:
   we speak to God in prayer, God answereth us in the word; God speaks to
   us in the word, and we return and echo back again to him in prayer.
   Therefore the new creature delighteth much in these two duties. Look,
   as we should be swift to hear,' James ix. 19, until we come to seeing,
   we should take all occasions, and be often in hearing. So in prayer we
   speak to God, and therefore should be redeeming time for this work. In
   the word God comes down to us, and in prayer we get up to God;
   therefore, if you would be familiar and often with God, you must be
   much in prayer. This is of great importance. You know the very notion
   of prayer. It is a visiting' of God: Isa. xxvi. 16, O Lord, in trouble
   have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer when thy chastening
   was upon them.' Praying to God, and visiting of God, are equivalent
   expressions. Now it argueth very little friendship to God, when we will
   not so much as come at him. Can there be any familiarity, where there
   is so much distance and strangeness as never to give God a visit?

   3. It is the omission of personal and secret prayer, which in some
   respects should be more prized than other prayer.

   Partly, because here our converse with God is more express as to our
   own case. When we join with others, God may do it for their sakes, but
   here, Ps. cxvi. 1, I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and
   my supplication.' When we deal with him alone, we put the promises in
   suit, and may know more it is we that have been heard. We put God more
   to the trial; we see what he will do for us, and upon our asking and
   striving.

   Partly, here we are more put to the trial what love we will express to
   our Father in secret, when we have no outward reasons, no inducements
   from respects of men to move us. In public duties (which are liable and
   open to the observance of others), hypocrites may put forth themselves
   with great vigour, quickness, and warmth, whereas in private addresses
   to God, they are slight and careless. A Christian is best tried and
   exercised in private, in those secret intercourses between God and his
   own soul; there he finds most communion with God, and most enlargement
   of heart. A man cannot so well judge of his spirit, and discern the
   workings of it in public, because other men's concernments and
   necessities, mingled with ours, are taken in, and because he is more
   liable to the notice of others. But when he is with God alone, he hath
   only reasons of conscience and duty to move him. When none but God is
   conscious and our own hearts, then we shall see what we do for the
   approbation of God, and acceptance with him.

   And partly, in some respects, this is to be more prized, because
   privacy and retiredness is necessary, and is a great advantage, that
   men's spirits may be settled and composed for the duty. Sinful
   distractions will crowd in upon us when in company, and we are thinking
   of this and that. How often do we mingle sulphur with our
   incense--carnal thoughts in our worship! How apt are we to do so in
   public duties! But in private we are wholly at leisure to deal with God
   in a child-like liberty. Now, will you omit this duty where you may be
   most free, without distraction, to let out the heart to God?

   And partly, because a man will not be fit to pray in public and in
   company, which doth not often pray in secret: he will lose his savour
   and delight in this exercise, and soon grow dry, barren, sapless, and
   careless of God. Look, as in the prophet Ezekiel, you read there that
   the glory of the Lord removed from the temple by degrees: it first
   removed from the holy place, then to the altar of burnt-offerings, then
   to the threshold of the house, then to the city, then to the mount
   which was on the east side of the city; there the glory of the Lord
   stood hovering a while, as loth to be gone, to see if the people would
   get it back again; this seems to be some emblem and representation of
   God's dealing with particular men. First, God is cast out of the
   closet, private intercourses between God and them are neglected; and
   then he is cast out of the family, and within a little while out of the
   congregation; public ordinances begin to be slighted, and to be looked
   upon as useless things; and then men are given up to all profaneness
   and looseness, and lose all: so that religion, as it were, dieth by
   degrees, and a carnal Christian loseth more and more of the presence of
   God. And, therefore, if we would be able to pray in company, we must
   often pray in secret.

   4. Consider the mischief which followeth neglect of private converse
   with God. Omissions make way for commissions. If a gardener withholds
   his hand, the ground is soon grown over with weeds. Restrain prayer and
   neglect God, and noisome lusts will abound. Our hearts are filled with
   distempers when once we cease to be frequent with God in private. It is
   said of Job, chap. xv. 4, Thou restrainest prayer before God.' That
   passage is notable, Ps. xiv. 4: They eat up my people as they eat
   bread, and call not upon the Lord.' Omit secret prayer, and some great
   sin will follow; within a little while you will be given up to some
   evil course or other: either brutish lusts, oppression, or violence; to
   hate the people of God, to join in a confederacy with them which cry up
   a confederacy against God. The less we converse with God in private,
   the more is the awe of God lessened. But now, a man which is often with
   God dareth not offend him so freely as others do. As they which are
   often with princes and great persons are better clothed and more neat
   in their apparel and carriage, so they which are often conversing with
   God grow more heavenly, holy, watchful, than others are; and when we
   are not with God, not only all this is lost, but a great many evils to
   be found. It is plainly seen by men's conversations how little they
   converse with God.

   But now, to avoid the stroke of this reproof, what will men do? Either
   deny the guilt, or excuse themselves.

   First, Some will deny the guilt. They do call upon God, and use private
   prayer, therefore think themselves to be free from this reproof. Yea,
   but are you as often with God as you should be?

   There are three sorts of persons:--

   1. Some there are that omit it totally, cannot speak of redeeming any
   time for this work. These are practical atheists, without God in the
   world:' Eph. ii. 12. They are heathens and pagans under a Christian
   name and profession. We should pray without ceasing:' 1 Thes. v. 17;
   that is, take all praying occasions; therefore they which pray not at
   all, all the week long God hears not from them, surely come under the
   force of this reproof.

   2. There are some which perform it seldom. Oh, how many days and weeks
   pass over their heads and God never hears from them! The Lord complains
   of it, Jer. ii. 32: They have forgotten me days without number.' It was
   time out of mind since they were last with

   3. The most do not perform it so often as they should. And therefore
   (that I may speak with evidence and conviction) I shall answer the
   case; what rules may be given; how often we should be with God and when
   we are said to neglect God.

   [1.] Every day something should be done in this kind. Acts x. 2:
   Cornelius prayed to God always, every day he had his times of
   familiarity with God. Daniel, though with the hazard of his life, would
   not omit praying three times a day:' Dan. vi. 10. And David speaks of
   morning, evening, and noon:' Ps. lv. 17. Though we can not bind all men
   absolutely to these hours, because of the difference of conditions,
   employments, and occasions, yet thus much we may gather from hence,
   that surely they which are most holy will be most frequent in this
   work.

   [2.] Love will direct you. They which love one another, will not be
   strange one to another: a man cannot be long out of the company of him
   whom he loveth. Christ loved Lazarus, and Mary, and Martha, John xi. 5,
   and therefore his great resort was to Bethany, to Lazarus' house.
   Surely they which love God will have frequent recourse to him. In the
   times of the gospel, God trusts love: we are not bound to such
   particular rules as under the law. Why? For love is a liberal grace,
   and will put us upon frequent visits, and tell us when we should pray
   to God.

   [3.] The Spirit of God will direct you. There are certain times when
   God hath business with you alone; when he doth (as it were) speak to
   you as to the prophet in another case, Ezek. iii. 22, Go forth into the
   plain in the desert, and there I will talk with thee.' So, get you to
   your closets, I have some business to speak with you. Thou saidst, Seek
   ye my face: my heart answered. Thy face, Lord, will I seek:' Ps. xxvii.
   8. God invites you to privacy and retirement; you are sent into your
   closet to deal with God about the things you heard from the pulpit.
   This is the actual profit we get by a sermon, when we deal seriously
   with God about what we have heard. When God sends for us (as it were)
   by his Spirit, and invites us into his presence by these motions, it is
   spiritual clownishness to refuse to come to him.

   [4.] Your own inward and outward necessities will put you in mind of
   it. God hath not stated what hours we shall eat and drink; the seasons
   and quantity of it are left to our choice. God hath left many wants
   upon us, to bring us into his presence. Sometimes we want wisdom and
   counsel in darkness: James i. 5, If any lack wisdom, let him ask of
   God, which giveth to all men liberally.' It is an occasion to bring us
   to God: God is the best casuist to resolve our doubts and guide us in
   our way. Sometimes we lack strength to withstand temptations; the
   throne of grace was set up for a time of need, Heb. iv. 16, when any
   case is to be resolved, and comfort to be obtained. We want comfort,
   quickening, counsel, and all to bring us to God. So for outward
   necessities too. Certainly if a man doth but observe the temper of his
   own heart, he cannot neglect God, but will find some occasion or other
   to bring him into his presence, some errand to bring him to the throne
   of grace. We are daily to beg pardon of sin, and daily to beg supplies.
   Now, certainly, when you do not observe these things, you neglect God.

   Secondly, Others, to avoid it, will excuse themselves. Why, they would
   pray to God in private, but either they want time, or they want a
   convenient place, or want parts and abilities. But the truth is, they
   want a heart, and that is the cause of all; and, indeed, when a man
   hath no heart to the work, then something is out of the way.

   1. Some plead they want time. Why, if you have time for other things,
   you should have a time for God. Shall we have a season for all things,
   and not for the most necessary work? Hast thou time to eat, drink,
   sleep, follow thy trading (how dost thou live else?), and no time to be
   saved--no time to be familiar with God, which is the great est business
   of all? Get it from your sleep and food, rather than be without this
   necessary duty. Jesus Christ had no such necessity as we have, yet it
   is said, Mark i. 35, He arose a great while before day, and went out,
   and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.' Therefore, must
   God only be encroached upon the lean kine devour the fat--Sarah thrust
   out instead of Hagar--and religion be crowded out of doors? Felix illa
   domus, ubi Martha queritur de Maria,--That is a happy house where
   Martha complains of Mary. Martha, which was cumbered with much service,
   complained of Mary that she was at the feet of Jesus Christ, hearkening
   to his gracious counsel; but in most houses Mary may complain of
   Martha; religion is neglected and goes to the walls.

   2. Some want a place. He that doth not want a heart will find a place.
   Christ went into a mountain to pray, and Peter to the top of the house.

   3. Many say they want parts, they cannot tell how to pray. Wherefore
   hath God given his Spirit? In one fashion or other a man can open his
   case to God; he can go and breathe out his complaints, the Lord will
   hear breathings. Go, chatter out thy requests to thy Father: though you
   can but chatter like a crane,' yet do it with fervency and with a
   spirit of adoption. We have not only Christ given us for an advocate,
   but the Holy Ghost to help our infirmities. He hath given us the Spirit
   of his Son, whereby we may cry, Abba, Father:' Gal. iv. 6. A child can
   acquaint a father with his wants.

   Use 2. To exhort God's children to frequency in this duty, and to much
   watchfulness and seriousness in the performance of it.

   First, To frequency. For arguments again to press you:--

   1. It argueth more familiarity to pray to God alone than in company. He
   that goeth to a prince alone, and upon all occasions hath access to him
   in private, when company is gone, hath nearer friend ship and a greater
   intimacy with him than those which are only admitted to a speech with
   him in the company of others; so, the oftener you are with God alone
   the more familiar. He loves to treat with you apart, as friends are
   most free and open to one another when they are alone.

   2. Then you will have a more sensible answer of your own prayers; you
   will see what God hath done upon your requests. Dan. ix. 21, 22. Daniel
   was praying for the church, and an angel comes and tells him, It is for
   thy prayers and supplications that I am come.' Therefore surely a man
   would take some time to go and plead the promises with God. But
   further, by way of means:--

   [1.] Consider the omnipresence of God, which is the argument in the
   text: He is in secret, and seeth in secret.' If men were convinced of
   that, they would make conscience of secret prayer. Look, as Jesus
   Christ says of himself, John xvi. 32, You leave me alone, and yet I am
   not alone, for the Father is with me.' So when you are alone you are
   not alone; there is a Father in secret; though nobody to see and hear,
   yet God is there. We are apt to think all is lost which men are not
   conscious to, and done in their sight. Acts x. 4: Thy prayers and thine
   alms are come up for a memorial before God.' God keeps a memorial of
   your private prayers; there is a register kept in heaven, and never a
   prayer lost.

   [2.] Consider the excellency of communion with God. Jer. ii. 32: Can a
   maid forget her ornaments, and a bride her attire?' Women are very
   curious and careful of their ornaments, and will not forget their
   dressing-attire, especially a bride upon the wedding-day, she that is
   to be set forth in most costly array--she makes it her business to put
   on jewels, to be seen in all her glory. God is as necessary to us as
   ornaments to a bride. We should be as mindful of communion with God as
   a bride of her dressing-ornaments. Yet they have forgotten me days
   without number.' Whatever is forgotten, God must not be forgotten.

   [3.] Make God a good allowance; resolve to be much in the practice of
   it. It is best to have set times for our religious worship. For persons
   which are sui juris, at their own dispose, it is lawful and very
   convenient to dedicate a certain part and portion of our time to the
   Lord of time. Lazy idle servants must be tasked and required to bring
   in their tale of brick; so it is good to task the heart, to make God a
   fair, and reasonable, and convenient allotment of some part of our
   time. David had his fixed hours: Three times a day will I call upon
   thee.' And Daniel had his set times; he prayed three times a day.
   Though we cannot charge you to observe these hours, yet you should make
   a prudent choice yourselves, and consecrate such a part of time as will
   suit with your occasions, your course of life, according to your
   abilities and opportunities. It is an expression of love to God to give
   him somewhat that is your own; and it will be of exceeding profit to
   you, and make your communion with him more seasonable and orderly. This
   will make you careful and watchful how you spend your other hours, that
   you may not be unfit when times of prayer come. 1 Pet. iii. 7:
   Husbands, dwell with your wives according to knowledge, that your
   prayers be not hindered.' But do not propose a task too great for your
   strength, and perplex yourselves with such an unreasonable allowance as
   will not suit with your occasions. Men create a trouble to themselves,
   and bind themselves with chains of their own making when they propose
   more duty than they can well discharge.

   The Second Part of the Use.

   Do it seriously, with caution, and warily. Here Christ gives direction:
   When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut thy door, and then
   think of thy Father which is in secret.' We need a great deal of
   caution; for:--

   1. When you shut the door upon all others, you cannot shut the devil
   out of your closets; he will crowd in. When you have bolted the door
   upon you, and shut other company out, you do not lock out Satan; he is
   always at hand, ready to disturb us in holy duties; wherever the
   children of God are, he seeks to come at them. When the sons of God met
   together, Satan was in the midst of them: Job i. He meets in
   congregations, he gets into the closet. When Joshua the high priest was
   ministering before the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand, ready to
   resist him: Zech. iii. 1.

   2. There needs caution; because in private duties there may be many
   failings and evils, which we are apt to be tainted with in our private
   addresses to God.

   [1.] There may be danger of ostentation; therefore Christ gives
   direction here, that it should be managed with the greatest secrecy,
   both as for place, time, and voice. Let none but God be conscious to
   our drawing aside that we may be alone. Withdraw yourselves out of the
   sight and hearing of others, lest pride and ostentation creep upon you.
   The devil will seek to blast this serious acknowledgment to God, one
   way or other.

   [2.] There may be customariness, for fashion sake. It is said of
   Christ, that he went into the synagogue on the Sabbath-day, as his
   custom was.' We may use accustomed duties; but we must not do them
   customarily, and for fashion sake, no more than Christ himself did; for
   though this was his custom, yet he was not customary in these his
   synagogue attendances. We are very apt to do so, because we have used
   it for these many years. Men go on in a tract of duty, and regard not
   the ends of worship--Zech. vii. 3--they come with a fond scruple and
   case of conscience to the prophet: they had an old custom among them to
   fast for the destruction of the temple; now when the temple was built
   again, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have
   done these so many years?'

   [3.] Much slightness and perfunctoriness of heart you may be guilty of.
   Such is the wickedness of men, that they think God will be put off with
   anything; and though they would set off themselves with applause in the
   hearing of others, yet how slight are they apt to be when they deal
   with God alone! Consider, you must sanctify the name of God in private,
   as well as in public; you must speak to God with reverence and fear,
   and not in an overly fashion. Take heed of this slightness; it is a
   great wrong to the majesty of God. When they offered a sickly offering,
   saith God, I am a great King, and my name is dreadful among the
   heathen:' you do not consider my majesty.

   [4.] There may be this evil: resting in the work, in the tale and
   number of your prayers: Luke xviii. 12, I fast twice in the week.' Man
   is very apt to rest and dote upon his own worth, and to build all his
   acceptance with God upon it; to come to God, and challenge him for a
   debt, as the Pharisee did. It is very natural to rest in those duties,
   and make them an excuse for other things.

   [5.] There may be pride, even in the exercise of our gifts. There is a
   delight in duties, which seems spiritual many times when it is not; as
   when a man delighteth in the exercise of his own gifts, rather than in
   communion with God; when there is a secret tickling of heart with a
   conceit of our own worth; as when, in the carriage of a duty, we come
   off roundly, and parts have their free course and career. This
   complacency and pride, it may be not only in public, where we have
   advantage to discover ourselves with applause, but in private, between
   God and our souls. When a man is conceited of his gifts, they may end
   in the private exercise of them, to the wrong of God. When invention is
   quick and free, he may have such a delight as may make him rest in the
   work, as it is a fruit of parts, rather than as a means of communion
   with God. Therefore there needs a great deal of caution when we are
   alone with our heavenly Father.
     __________________________________________________________________

   But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they
   think they shall be heard /or their much speaking. Be not ye,
   therefore, like unto them; for your Father knoweth what things ye have
   need of, before ye ask him. MAT. VI. 7, 8.

   OUR Lord having spoken of the ostentation of the Pharisees, and their
   vainglory, he cometh here to dissuade from another abuse, and that is
   babbling and lip-labour. They prayed to be seen of men; but the
   heathens were guilty of another abuse. Here take notice:--

   1. Of the sin taxed.

   2. The reasons which our Lord produceth against it.

   First, the sin taxed is set forth by a double notion. Here is
   battologia and polulogia: the first we translate, vain repetitions;'
   and the last, much speaking.' Both may well go together; for when men
   affect to say much, they will use vain repetitions, go over the same
   things again and again, which is as displeasing to God as it is irksome
   to prudent and wise men.

   But let us see a little what these words signify. The first word is
   battologia, which we translate vain repetitions.' Battus was a foolish
   poet, that made long hymns, consisting of many lines, but such as were
   often repeated, both for matter and words; and Ovid brings in a foolish
   fellow, that would be often repeating the same words, and doubling them
   over:--

   Montibus, inquit, erant, et eraut sub montibus illis.'

   And again:

   Et me mihi perfide prodis?

   Me mihi prodis? ait.'

   And from thence this word is taken, which is here used by the
   evangelist: battologia, or idle babbling over the same thing. And the
   scripture representeth this vain going over of the same things: Eccles.
   x. 14, A fool also is full of words; a man cannot tell what shall be;
   and what shall be after him, who can tell?' The most judicious
   interpreters do conceive there is a mimesis, an imitation of the fool's
   speaking. Groundless, fruitless repetitions are here reproved, or the
   tumbling out of many insignificant words, and the same over and over
   again; this is vain repetition. But the other word which Christ useth
   to tax the same abuse is polulogia, much speaking.' It signifieth
   affectation of length in prayer, or using many words, not out of
   fervency of mind, but merely to prolong the duty, as if the length of
   it made it more powerful or acceptable with God, or a more comely piece
   of worship. This is what our Lord here reproves; vain repetitions and
   much speaking.

   Secondly, here are the reasons produced against it; they are two:--

   1. That it is a heathenish custom, and that grounded upon a false
   supposition. The heathens were detestable to the Jews, and therefore
   their customs should not be taken up, especially when grounded upon an
   error, or a misapprehension of the nature of God. Now the heathens
   think they shall be heard for their much speaking, for their mere
   praying and composing hymns to their gods, with thundering names
   repeated over and over again.

   2. It is inconsistent with the true nature of God: ver. 8, Be not
   therefore like unto them; for your Father knoweth what things you have
   need of, before you ask him.' Here we learn three things:--(1.)
   Christianity and true religion takes up God under the notion of a
   father, that hath a care of his children. This will decide many
   questions about prayer, and what words we should use to God in the
   duty: go to God as children to their father. (2.) He is represented as
   an omniscient God--one that knows all things, our wants and
   necessities. (3.) As an indulgent father, who hath a propense and ready
   mind to help us, even before we ask.

   From the words thus opened, that which we may observe is this, viz.:--

   Doct. That certainly it is a sin needlessly to affect length of speech,
   or vain repetitious in prayer.

   Our Lord dissuadeth us from it here, and his authority should sway with
   us. He knew the nature of prayer better than we do; for he appointed
   it, and he was often in the practice and observance of it. So we are
   directed to the contrary: Eccles. v. 2, Be not rash with thy mouth, and
   let not thine heart be hasty to utter anything before God: for God is
   in heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few.'
   Remember, you have to do with a great God, and do not babble things
   over impertinently in his ears. It is a truth evident by the light of
   nature: Paucis verbis rem divinam facito (Platinus). If you be to
   worship God, a needless prolixity doth not become addresses to him.

   But because this text may be abused, I shall endeavour to clear it a
   little further. There are two extremes: the slight and careless spirit,
   and babbling.

   1. There is the slight and careless spirit, who doth the work of an age
   in a breath, and is all for starts and sudden pangs, which pass away
   like a flash of lightning in a dark room; whose good thoughts are gone
   as soon as they rush into the heart. A poor, barren, and slight spirit,
   which is not under the influence and power of that celestial love which
   keeps the soul in converse with God, cannot endure to be any while with
   God. Alas! we need stroke upon stroke to fasten anything upon the
   heart. We are like green wood, that will not presently take fire, until
   it lie long there, and be thoroughly and well warmed; so until we have
   gone far in the duty, we can hardly get any warmth of heart. They which
   are short in prayer had need of much habitual preparation of heart.

   2. The babbler is another extreme, who thinks the commendation of a
   duty is to be long in it, and affects to say much rather than well;
   whereas serious and short speech makes the best prayer: Prov. x. 19, In
   the multitude of words there wanteth not sin;' either to God or men, it
   is true; but especially when affected. So they do but beat the air,
   rather than pray to God.

   These, then, are the two extremes: shortness, out of barrenness or
   slightness; or length, out of affectation; and we must carefully avoid
   these. Christ would not justify that shortness which comes from
   slightness and barrenness of heart, nor, on the other side, indulge the
   affectation of length in prayer.

   Therefore let us a little see:--

   I. What is the sin.

   II. Give you the force of our Lord's reasons here urged, or how
   conclusive our Saviour's arguments are against this practice.

   I. What is the sin? That is necessary to be known; for all repetitions
   are not vain, nor is all length in prayer to be accounted babbling.

   First, for repetitions:

   1. When they express fervency and zeal, they may be used. And so we
   read, Christ prayed over the same prayer thrice: Mat. xxvi. 44, O my
   Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.' And another
   evangelist showeth that he did this out of special fervency of spirit:
   Luke xxii. 44, Being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly.' And so we
   read of the prophet Daniel, chap. ix. 17-19, O our God, hear the prayer
   of thy servant; O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; O Lord, hear;
   Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not for thine own. sake, O
   my God.' All this was out of vehemency; he goes over and over again the
   same request. When we use many words of the same kind and
   signification, and it be out of vehemency and fervency of spirit, it is
   not forbidden.

   2. This repetition is not to be disproved [20] when there is a special
   emphasis and spiritual elegancy in it, as Ps. cxxxvi., you have it
   twenty-six times repeated, for his mercy endureth for ever;' because
   there was a special reason in it, his purpose there being to show the
   unweariedness and the unexhausted riches of God's free grace, that,
   notwithstanding all the former experiences they had had, God is where
   he was at first. We waste by giving, our drop is soon spent; but God is
   not wasted by bestowing, but hath the same mercy to do good to his
   creatures as before. Though he had done all those wonders for them, yet
   his mercy was as ready to do good to them still. All along God saved
   and blessed his people, for his mercy endureth for ever.' But as there
   are repetitions which have their use, so there are useless tautologies
   and vain repetitions. And such they are when they neither come from the
   heart nor go to the heart; when they come not from the abundance of the
   heart, but rather the emptiness of the heart; because we know not how
   to enlarge ourselves to God, therefore fall upon idle and useless
   repetitions of the same words and requests. As a man that hath small
   skill in music doth only play over the same note, so when men have not
   a full spiritual abundance, they waste themselves in prayer in these
   idle repetitions. And then they go not to the heart, they do not
   conduce to warm the affections. A vain, clamorous ingeminating the same
   thing, without faith and without wisdom, merely to fill up the tale of
   words, or to wear out a little time in a religious exercise, that is it
   which is here condemned under the notion of vain repetitions.

   Secondly, For the other word, polulogi'a, or much speaking.' Every long
   prayer is not forbidden; for our Lord Jesus himself continued all night
   in prayer:' Luke vi. 12. And in extraordinary duties of fasting, length
   seems to be very necessary: Esther iv. 16, They fasted and prayed
   together for three days and nights, without eating any bread.' And
   Solomon prayed long at the dedication of the temple.

   But that which is forbidden is, when men speak words without need and
   without affection; a needless lengthening out of prayer, and that upon
   a conceit that it is more acceptable to God.

   1. In the general, prayer should be short, as all examples of scripture
   teach us. And the Lord's Prayer, you see how concise and short it is,
   for presently upon this our Lord teacheth his disciples to pray; for
   prayer is a spending rather than a feeding duty. Those which affect
   long speaking many times run into this: they make it a feeding duty,
   for they mingle exhortations with prayer, which is a great abuse. A man
   can bear up under the hearing of the word for an hour or two better
   than half an hour in prayer, with that necessary vigour of spirit which
   God hath required. Therefore the general rule is, let your words be
   concise, but full of affection. Look, as in vast and great bodies, the
   spirits are more diffused and scattered, and therefore they are more
   inactive than those which are of a smaller compass; so, in a long
   prayer, there may be more of words, but less of life.

   2. The affectation of prolixity is naught. Usually it comes from some
   evil ground, either from pride and ostentation of gifts;--thus we read
   the Pharisees were taxed for making long prayers, Mat. xxiii. 14, that,
   under the colour of them, they might devour widows' houses; that is, be
   credited and trusted with the management of their estates;--or else it
   may come from superstition, such as is in the heathens, who had
   unworthy thoughts of God, as if he were harsh and severe, and delighted
   in much speaking, and needed to be quickened;--or it may come from
   folly, for folly abounds in words, though it be scanty in true
   affection and hearty respect to God. A wise man is content with words
   enough to express his mind: choice and measure of speech discovereth
   wisdom.

   3. So much time should be spent in prayer, and so many words are
   necessary as may be convenient and profitable both for ourselves and
   others. For ourselves, when we are alone, so much as may express faith,
   and may argue a great plea in the promises, and so much as may reach
   fervent desire. While the fervency continues, the speech should
   continue; and so much as may express our filial dependence, that we
   have a sense that God is our Father, which are the ends for which
   prayer was appointed. And so as it may suit with the conveniency of
   others, that they may be warmed, but not tired, and may not be exposed
   to the temptations of weariness, and wanderings, and distractions in
   their mind, when things are spun out unto an unreasonable length; for
   then it is neither pleasing to God nor profitable to men. Thus I have
   stated the offence our Lord forbids, what are those vain repetitions
   and idle babblings, such as arise from weariness of soul and misconceit
   of God, or some other base grounds; not that plentiful expression which
   comes from a large and free heart, pouring out itself before the Lord.
   And if we be swayed by his authority, these things should be regarded
   by us, and we should remedy these sins in prayer.

   II. Let us come to examine our Lord's reasons which are produced
   against it, and see how conclusive they are in the case, and you will
   discern the drift of Christ's speech.

   Our Lord reasons:--

   First, From the practice of the heathens: But when ye pray, use not
   vain repetitions, as the heathens do.' In this reason several
   propositions are couched and contained, which deserve to be weighed by
   us.

   1. This is implied: that the heathens had a sense of the necessity of
   worship, as well as the being of a God. Though natural light be
   inferioris hemisphrii, of the lower hemisphere, and chiefly reacheth
   to duties of the second table, of commerce between man and man; for
   that light which was left in the heart of man since the fall, more
   directly respects our carriage towards men, and there it is more clear
   and open; yet it so far reaches to the duties of the higher hemisphere,
   as that there is some discerning too of the duties of the first table,
   of piety as well as honesty; as that there is a God; and if there be a
   God, he is to be worshipped; for these two notions live and die
   together. The rude mariners were sensible of a divine power which was
   to be called upon and consulted with in case of extremity, and that the
   way of commerce was by worship: Jonah i. 5, when the storm arose, they
   called every man upon his god.'

   2. Though heathens were sensible of the being of a God and the
   necessity of worship, yet they were blind and dark in worship; for
   Christ saith, Be not as the heathen; for they think they shall be heard
   for their much speaking.' Usually a half light misleads men. The
   heathens, though they had some notions of an eternal Power, yet when
   they came to perform their worship, Rom. i. 21, They glorified him not
   as God; but became vain,' en tois dialogismois, in their imaginations;'
   that is, in their practical inferences. They saw an infinite, eternal
   Power, which was to be loved, trusted, worshipped; but when they came
   to suit these notions to practice, to love, trust, and worship him,
   there they were vain, frivolous, and had misconceits of God.

   3. Their errors in worship were many. Here our Lord takes notice but of
   one, that they thought to be heard for their much speaking. And there
   the original mistake of the heathens, and that which compriseth all the
   rest, was this, a transformation or changing of God into the likeness
   of man, which is very natural and incident to us. Upon all occasions we
   are apt to misconceive of God, and to judge him according to our own
   model and scantling: Ps. l. 21, Thou thoughtest I was altogether such
   an one as thyself.' So did these. Because man is wrought upon by much
   speaking, and carried away with a flood of words, therefore they
   thought so it would be with God. This transformation of the divine
   nature into an idol of our own shaping and picturing, the turning of
   God into the form of a corruptible man, this hath been the ground of
   all the miscarriage in the world.

   But more particularly: their error in this matter was charging weakness
   and harshness upon God, or not worshipping him according to his
   spiritual nature.

   [1.] Charging weakness upon God, as if many words did help him to
   understand their meaning, or to remember their petitions the better.
   Hence that practice of Baal's priests, 1 Kings xviii. 26, They called
   on the name of Baal from morning till night, O Baal, hear us.' They
   were repeating and crying again and again, O Baal,' as if their clamour
   would awaken their god. Whence Elijah's sarcasm, He sleepeth, and must
   be awaked.' As those that for two hours together cried out, Great is
   Diana of the Ephesians! Great is Diana of the Ephesians!' Acts xix. 34.

   [2.] Their ascribing harshness to God, as if he were hard to be en
   treated, and delighted in the pain of his creatures, and would be more
   affected with them, because they wearied themselves with the
   irksomeness of a long prayer. Penal satisfactions are very natural.
   Superstition is a tyranny; it vexeth the soul with unreasonable duty,
   affects outward length to the weariness of the flesh. The general
   conceit is, that man thinks God must be served with some self-denial,
   and the flesh must be displeased; but it shall be displeased but in a
   little, and in an outward way, as Baal's priests gashed themselves; as
   if God were pleased with our burdensome and long exercises.

   [3.] There was error in it. They did not conceive aright of the
   spiritual nature of God; as if he were pleased with the mere task, a
   long hymn, and an idle repetition of words, without sense and
   affection. Whereas the Lord doth not measure prayers by prolixity, but
   by the vehemency; not by the labour of the external work, but by the
   inward affection manifested therein. And words are only accepted with
   him as they serve to quicken, continue, or increase our affection.

   Secondly, Our Saviour's next reason is drawn from verse 8: Be not ye
   like unto them; for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of
   before you ask him.' It is inconsistent with the true notion of God.
   Here are three propositions, all which are of force to draw us off from
   babbling, or affectation of many words in prayer. As:--

   1. That God is a Father, and that both by creation and covenant. By
   creation, to all mankind; so he will be ready to sustain that which he
   hath made. He that hath given life will give food; he that hath given a
   body will give raiment. Things expect supply thence from whence they
   received their being. But much more by covenant; so he is our Father in
   Christ: Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
   us,' Isa. lxiii. 16. Well, but what is this to the present purpose,
   that God is a Father? This is a check to babbling; therefore we should
   go to him in an unaffected manner, with a child-like spirit and
   dependence, with words reverent, serious, and plain. Children do not
   use to make starched speeches to their fathers when they want bread,
   but only express their natural cry, and go to them for such things as
   they stand in need of. There they speak, and are accepted; and a word
   from a child moves the father more than an orator can move all his
   hearers. Even such a naked address should we make to God in a plain
   mariner; for when we come to pray, Christ would have us take up God in
   the notion of a father, and to behave ourselves in a natural way to
   him; for affected eloquence or loquacity in prayer is one of the main
   things Christ here disproves. [21] Prayer ought to be simple and plain;
   therefore the great business of the Spirit of adoption' is to make us
   cry, Abba, Father:' Rom. viii. 15.

   2. He is such a Father as is not ignorant of our wants. The care of his
   providence is over all the creatures he hath made. God hath an
   inspection over them, to provide necessaries for them; much more over
   his people. His eyes run to and fro, to find them out in all the places
   of their dispersion; and he doth exercise his power for their relief: 2
   Chron. xvi. 9. Now this thought should be rooted in our hearts when we
   come to pray to God: I go to a Father, which hath found me out in the
   throng of his creatures, and knows what is good for me. This is a great
   ground why we should not use battology, because God knows what my needs
   are. Words are not required for God's sake, but for ours; not to inform
   God, but that we may perform our duty the better. Well, then, so far as
   they are useful, so far they should be used; to bound our thoughts, to
   warm our affections, to strengthen our faith. (1.) To bound our
   thoughts; for an interruption in speech is sooner discerned that an
   interruption in meditation. (2.) And to warm our affections. Words at
   first are vent to affection, but afterwards they continue to increase
   the affection; as a hearth is first warmed by the fire, and then it
   serves to keep in the fire. (3.) And they conduce to strengthen our
   faith, while we plead promises in God's hearing. We wrestle with God,
   that we may catch a heat ourselves. And therefore words should be only
   used as they conduce to the strengthening our faith, or continuing our
   affection to God; longer than they serve that end in prayer, they are
   babbling and vain repetitions, and much speaking, which Christ here
   forbids. Consider, there is not a change in God, but a change in us,
   wrought by prayer. It is neither to give information to God, that he
   may know our meaning, nor to move him and persuade him to be willing by
   our much speaking, but only to raise up our own faith and hope towards
   God.

   3. He is such a Father as is not unwilling to relieve us. Your heavenly
   Father is very ready to give you such things as you stand in need of,
   as Christ expresseth it, Mat. vii. 11, If ye, being evil, know how to
   give good things unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly
   Father give good things to them that ask him?' And, Luke xi. 13, it is,
   How much more shall your heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit?' When
   you come to beg for grace, consider what earthly parents would do for a
   child. Their affections are limited, they are in part corrupt; and poor
   straitened creatures have not such bowels of compassion as God; and
   yet, when a child comes to them with a genuine cry, with a sense of his
   want and confidence of his father, he cannot harden his bowels against
   his child. This also checks much speaking; for we do not pray to stir
   up mercy in him, as if he needed much entreaty, and were severe, and
   delighted to put the creature to penance. No, he is ready before we
   ask; he knows our wants and needs, and is ready to supply us with those
   things we stand in need of, only will have this comely order observed.
   Some times he prevents our prayers before we ask: Before they call, I
   will answer; and I am found of them that sought me not.' Before we can
   have a heart to come, the Lord prevents us with his blessing. And
   sometimes he gives us what we ask. This is the condescension of God,
   that when you call he will answer; and when you cry, he doth in his
   providence say, What will you have, poor creatures?' And he gives more
   than we ask; as Solomon asked wisdom, and God gave him more than he
   asked--wisdom, riches, and honour.

   Object. But here is an objection. These notions seem not only to
   exclude long prayer and much speaking, but all prayer. If God know our
   wants, and is so ready to give, whether we ask or no, what need we open
   them to him in prayer at all?

   I answer, it is God's prescribed course, and that should be enough to
   gracious hearts that will be obedient to their Father. Whatever he
   intends, though he knows our wants and resolves to answer them, yet it
   is a piece of religious manners to ask what he is about to give: Jer.
   xxix. 11, I know my thoughts towards you, thoughts of peace, yet will I
   be inquired of you for these things.' God knows his own thoughts, hath
   stated his decrees, and will not alter the beautiful course of his
   providence for our sakes, yet he will be sought unto. So Ezek. xxxvi.:
   God purposed to bless them, and therefore promiseth, I will do thus and
   thus for you'; yet, verse 37, I will yet for this be inquired of by the
   house of Israel, to do it for them.' I will do it, but you shall milk
   out the blessing by prayer. This course is also necessary, and that
   both for his honour, and our profit and comfort.

   1. It is necessary for his honour, that God may still be acknowledged,
   that the creature may be kept up in a constant dependence upon God, and
   may go about nothing, but may ask his leave, counsel, and blessing:
   Prov. in. 6, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
   paths.' We ask God's leave that we may do such a thing, for he hath the
   dominion over all events. And if we are doubtful, we ask his counsel,
   whether we may stay here or there, or dispose of ourselves and
   families, and we ask his blessing upon our resolution. Now that we may
   know God doth all, that he governeth all human affairs, that we may
   live upon his allowance and take our daily bread from his hands, and
   that we may see we hold all these things from our great landlord,
   therefore we pray unto him. We are robbers and thieves if we use the
   creature without his leave. God is the great owner of the world, who
   gives us our daily bread, and all our supplies; therefore he will have
   it asked, that we may acknowledge our dependence.

   2. It is most for our profit. Partly, that our faith should be
   exercised in pleading God's promise, for there we put the promise in
   suit. Faith .is begotten in the word, but it is exercised in prayer;
   therefore it is called the prayer of faith.' In the word, we take
   Christ from God; in prayer we present Christ to God. That prayer which
   is effectual, it is an exercise of faith: Rom. x. 14, How shall they
   call on him, in whom they have not believed?' And as it concerns our
   faith, so also our love, which is both acted and increased in prayer.
   It is acted, for it is delight in God which makes us so often converse
   with him. Thus the hypocrite: Job xxvii. 10, Will he always call upon
   the Lord? Will he delight himself in the Almighty?' They that love God
   cannot be long from him, they that delight in God will be often
   unbosoming themselves to him. It doth also increase our love, for by
   answers of prayer we have new fuel to keep in this holy fire in our
   bosoms. We pray, and then he gives direct answers: Ps. cxvi. 1, I love
   the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplication.' So our
   hope is exercised in waiting for the blessing prayed for: Ps. v. 3, O
   Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look
   up.' That looking up is the work of hope, when we are looking and
   waiting to see what comes in from pleading promises. It is much too for
   our peace of conscience, for it easeth us of our burthens. It is the
   vent of the soul, like the opening of a vein in a fever. When our
   hearts swell with cares, and we have a burthen upon us, and know not
   what to do, we may ease ourselves to God: Phil. iv. 6, Be careful for
   nothing; but in everything, by prayer and supplication, with thanks
   giving, let your requests be made known to God; and the peace of God
   shall keep your hearts.' Oh, blessed frame, that can be troubled at
   nothing here in this world, where there are so many businesses,
   encounters, temptations! What is the way to get this calmness of heart?
   Be much in opening your hearts to God. Let your requests be made known
   to God. Look, as in an earthquake, when the wind is imprisoned in the
   bowels of the earth, the earth heaves, and shakes, and quakes, until
   there be a vent, and the wind be got out, then all is quiet; so we have
   many tossings and turmoilings in our minds, till we open and unbosom
   ourselves to God, and then all is quiet. Also it prepareth us for the
   improvement of mercies, when we have them out of the hands of God by
   prayer: 1 Sam. i. 27, 28, For this child I prayed,' said Hannah, and I
   will lend him unto the Lord.' Those mercies we expressly prayed for we
   are more thoroughly obliged to improve for God. What is won with prayer
   is worn with thankfulness.

   APPLICATION.

   Use 1. To caution us against many abuses in prayer, which may be
   disproved and taxed, either formally, or by just consequence. I shall
   instance in five.

   1. An idle and foolish loquacity, when men take a liberty to prattle
   anything in God's hearing, and do not consider the weight and
   importance of prayer, and what a sin it is to be hasty to utter any
   thing before God:' Eccles. v. 2. It is great irreverence and contempt
   of the majesty of God, when men go hand over head about this work, and
   speak anything that comes into their mind. As men take them selves to
   be despised when others speak unseemly in their presence, surely it is
   a lessening and a despising of God, when we pour out raw, tumultuous,
   undigested thoughts, and never think of what we are to speak when we
   come to God: Ps. xlv. 1, My heart is inditing a good matter.' The word
   signifieth, it boils or fries a good matter.' It is an allusion to the
   Mincah, or meat-offering, which was to be boiled or fried in a pan,
   before it was to be presented to the Lord, that they might not bring a
   dough-baked sacrifice and offering to the Lord. Such ignorant, dull,
   senseless praying, it is a blaspheming of God, and a lessening of the
   majesty of God.

   2. A frothy eloquence, and an affected language in prayer, this
   directly comes under reproof. As if the prayer were more grateful to
   God, and he were moved by words and strains of rhetoric, and did accept
   men for their parts rather than graces. Fine phrases, and quaint
   speeches, alas! they do not carry it with the Lord. They are but an
   empty babble in his ears, rather than a humble exercise of faith, hope,
   love, and child-like affections, and holy desires after God. If we
   would speak with God, we must speak with our hearts to him, rather than
   with our words. This is a sin of curiosity, as the other was of
   neglect. It is not words, but the spirit and life which God looks
   after. Prayer, it is not a work of oratory, the product of memory,
   invention, and parts, but a filial affection, that we may come to .him,
   as to a father, with a child-like confidence. Therefore, too much care
   of verbal eloquence in prayer, and tunable expressions, is a sin of the
   same nature with babbling. Though men should have the wit to avoid
   impertinent expressions and repetitions, yet when prayer smells so much
   of the man rather than of the Spirit of God, alas! it is but like the
   unsavoury belches of a rotten breath in the nostrils of God. We should
   attend to matter, to the things we have to communicate to God, to our
   necessities, rather than to words.

   3. Heartless speaking, filling up the time with words, when the tongue
   outruns the heart, when men pour their breath into the air, but their
   hearts are dead and sleepy, or their hearts keep not time and pace with
   their expressions. We oftener pray with our tongues than with our
   minds, and from our memories than our consciences, and from our
   consciences than our affections, and from our affections, as presently
   stirred, than from our hearts renewed, bended, and inclined towards
   God. Be the prayer long or short, the heart must keep pace with our
   tongues. As the poet said, disticha longa facit, his distichs were
   tedious,' so it is tedious and irksome to God, unless we make
   supplication in the spirit: Eph. vi. 18. Remember God will not be
   mocked.

   4. When men rest in outward vehemency and loud speech, saith
   Tertullian, Quibus arteriis opus est, si pro sono audiamur! What lungs
   and sides must we have, if we be heard to speak to heaven by the noise
   and sound!' In some there is a natural vehemency and fierceness of
   speech, which is rather stirred up by the heat and agitation of the
   bodily spirits than any vehemency of affection. There is a contention
   of speech, which is very natural to some, and differeth much from that
   holy fervour, the life and power of prayer, which is accompanied with
   reverence and child-like dependence upon God. It is not the loud noise
   of words which is best heard in heaven, but the fervent affectionate
   cries of the saints are those of the heart rather than of the tongue.
   Exod. xiv. 17, it is said, Moses cried to the Lord.' We do not read of
   the words he uttered; his cry was with the heart. There is a crying
   with the soul and with the heart to God: Ps. x. 17, Lord, thou hast
   heard the desire of the humble.' It is the desires God hears: Ps.
   xxxix. 9, Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not
   hid from thee.' The Lord needs not the tongue to be an interpreter
   between him and the hearts of his children. He that hears without ears
   can interpret prayers though not uttered by the tongue. Our desires are
   cries in the ears of the Lord of hosts. The vehemency of the affections
   may sometimes cause the extension of the voice, but alas! without this
   it is but a tinkling cymbal.

   5. Popish repetition, and loose shreds of prayer often repeated, as
   they have in their liturgy over and over again; their Gloria Patri, so
   often repeated; their Lord have mercy; and in their prayer made to
   Jesus, sweet Jesus, blessed Jesus; and going over the Ave Maria, and
   this to be tumbled over upon their beads, and continuing prayer by tale
   and by number: surely these are but vain repetitions, and this is that
   much speaking which our Lord aims at. Thus I have despatched the abuses
   of prayer.

   Use 2. To give you direction in prayer, how to carry yourselves in this
   holy duty towards God in a comely manner.

   I shall give you directions:--

   1. About our words in prayer.

   2. About our thoughts in prayer.

   3. About our affections in prayer.

   First, about our words. There is a use of them in prayer, to excite,
   and convey, and give vent to affection: Hosea xiv. 2, Take with you
   words, and turn to the Lord, and say, Take away all iniquity, and
   receive us graciously.' Surely the prophet doth not only prescribe that
   they should take affections, but take with them words. Words have an
   interest in prayer.

   Now, these may be considered either when we are alone or in company.

   1. When we are alone. Here take the advice of the Holy Ghost: Eccles.
   v. 2, God is in heaven, and thou art upon earth, therefore let thy
   words be few.' How few? Few in weight, conscience, reverence. Few in
   weight, affecting rather to speak matter than words; concisely and
   feelingly, rather than with curiousness, to express what you have to
   say to God. Few in conscience. Superstition is a bastard religion, and
   is tyrannous, and puts men upon tedious services, and sometimes beyond
   their strength. Therefore pray neither too short nor too long; do it
   not merely to lengthen out the prayer, or as counting it the better for
   being long. The shortness and the length must be measured by the
   fervency of our hearts, our many necessities, and as it tendeth to the
   inflaming our zeal. As it can get up the heart, let it still be
   subservient to that. Few with reverence, and managed with that gravity,
   awfulness, and seriousness as would become an address to God. As
   Abraham, Gen. xviii. 31, had been reasoning with God before, therefore
   he saith, Let not God be angry if I speak to him this once,' when he
   renewed the suit. Thus alone.

   2. In company. There our words must be apt and orderly, moving as much
   as may be, not to God, but to the hearers; managed with such reverence
   and seriousness as may suit with the gravity of the duty, and not
   increase, but cure the dulness of those with whom we join. And what if
   we did in public duties choose out words to reason with' God, as Job
   saith, chap. ix. 14, Choose out my words to reason with him;'--if we
   did use preparation, and think a little before hand, that we may go
   about the duty with serious advice, and not with indigested thoughts?
   But this hath the smallest interest in prayer.

   Secondly, Our thoughts; that we may conceive aright of God in prayer,
   which is one of the greatest difficulties in the duty.

   1. Of his nature and being.

   2. Of his relation to us.

   3. Of his attributes.

   First, Of the nature and being of God. Every one that would come to God
   must fix this in his mind, that God is, and that God is a spirit; and
   accordingly he must be worshipped as will suit with these two notions.
   Heb. xi. 6, He that cometh to God must believe that God is,' and then
   that God is a spirit; for it is said, John iv. 24, God is a spirit, and
   they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.' Oh,
   then, whenever you come to pray to God, fix these two thoughts, let
   them be strong in your heart: God is; I do not speak to an idol, but to
   the living God. And God is a spirit; and therefore not so much pleased
   with plausibleness of speech, or tunable cadency of words, as with a
   right temper of heart. Alas! when we come to pray, we little think God
   is, or what God is. Much of our religion is performed to an unknown
   God, and, like the Samaritans, we worship we know not what. It is not
   speculations about the divine nature, or high-strained conceptions,
   which doth fit us for prayer: the discoursing of these things with some
   singularity, or terms removed from common understanding, this is not
   that which I press you to; but such a sight of God as prompteth us to a
   reverent and serious worshipping of him. Then we have right notions of
   God in prayer, when we are affected as Moses was, when God showed him
   his back-parts, and proclaimed his name: Exod. xxxiv., He made haste,
   bowed his head, and worshipped.' When our worship suiteth with the
   nature of God, it is spiritual and holy, not pompous and theatrical.
   Well, then, these two things must be deeply imprinted in our minds that
   God is, and that he is a spirit; and then is our worship right.

   For instance:--

   [1.] For the first notion, God's being. Then is our worship right, when
   it doth proclaim to all that shall observe us, or we that observe
   ourselves, there is a great, an infinite, eternal power, which sits at
   the upper end of causes, and governeth all according to his own
   pleasure. Alas! the worship of many is flat atheism; they say in their
   hearts either there is no God, or believe there is no God. Therefore,
   do you worship him as becomes such a glorious being? Is his mercy seen
   in your faith and confidence, his majesty in your humility and
   reverence, his goodness in your soul's rejoicing, his greatness and
   justice in your trembling before his throne? The worship must be like
   the worshipped, it must have his stamp upon it.

   [2.] For the other notion, God is a spirit, therefore the soul must be
   the chief agent in the business, not the body, or any member of the
   body. Spirits they converse with spirits: the body is but employed by
   the soul, and must not guide and lead it, but be led by it. Therefore
   see whether there be the spirit, otherwise that which is most essential
   to the worship is wanting. To have nothing employed but the tongue, and
   the heart about other business, is not to carry your selves as to a
   God, and a God that is a spirit. Recollect yourselves; where is my soul
   in this worship, and how is it affected towards God?

   Secondly, As there must be thoughts to direct us in his being and
   nature, so also in his relation as a father, as one that is inclinable
   to pardon, pity, and help you. We have the spirit of adoption given us
   for this very end and purpose, that we may cry, Abba, Father;' and,
   Gal. iv. 16, Because you are sons, therefore he hath sent forth the
   Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father;' and, Rom.
   viii. 15, We have received the Spirit of adoption, crying, Abba,
   Father;' that we may come to God in a child-like manner, dealing with
   him as with a father, acquainting him with our wants, necessities,
   burdens, with a hope of relief and supply.

   Object Ay, saith a distressed soul, if my heart be thus carried up to
   God, if I could discern such a Spirit of adoption prompting me to go to
   God as a father, then it would be better with me.

   To this I answer:--

   1. Many times there is a child-like inclination where there is not a
   child-like familiarity and boldness. What is that child-like
   inclination? The soul cannot keep away from God, and that is an
   implicit owning him as a father: Jer. iii. 19, Thou shalt call me, My
   father; and shalt not turn away from me.' It is a child-like act to
   look to him for all our supplies, and to recommend our suit. As when a
   child wants anything, he goes to his father.

   2. There is a child-like reverence many times when there is not a
   child-like confidence. The soul hath an awe of God when it cannot
   explicitly own him as our God and Father, yet it owns him in the
   humbling way: Luke xv. 18, I have sinned against heaven and before
   thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son.' Though we cannot
   confidently approach to God as our reconciled Father, yet we come with
   humility and reverence. Lord, I would fain be, but I deserve not to be,
   called thy child.

   3. There is a child-like dependence upon God's general offer, though we
   have not an evidence of the sincerity of our particular claim. God
   offereth to be a Father in Christ to all penitent believers. Now, when
   a broken-hearted creature comes to God, and looks for mercy upon the
   account of the covenant, though he cannot see his own interest; for
   then we come to God, though not as our Father, yet as the God and
   Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;' and that is a relief in prayer, as
   Eph. i. 3, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;'
   and, ver. 17, The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory;'
   and, Eph. iii. 14, I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ.' Mark, when we come to him as the Father of Christ, we believe
   what God offereth in the covenant of grace--namely, that he will deal
   kindly with us as a father with his children; that he will be good to
   those that come to him by Christ. The term Father is not only to be
   considered with respect to the disposition or qualification of the
   persons, but the dispensation they are under. It is the new covenant.
   In the new covenant God under takes to be fatherly--that is, to pity
   our miseries, to pardon our sins, to heal our natures, to save our
   persons. Now all that come for refuge to take hold of this hope set
   before them, may come to God as a father, if they believe the gospel in
   general, though they are not assured of God's love to themselves.

   4. There may be a child-like love to God, when yet we have not a sense
   and assurance of his paternal love to us. God hath a title to our
   choicest and dearest love before we can make out a title to his highest
   benefits. We owe our hearts to him: Prov. xxxiii. 26, My son, give me
   thy heart.' If you give him your hearts, you are sons, though you know
   it not. God may be owned as a father, either by our sense of his
   fatherly love, or by our choice and esteem of him, optando, si non
   affirmando. Come as fatherless without him: Hosea xiv. 3; or, to speak
   it in other words, the unutterable groans of the Spirit do discover the
   spirit of adoption, as well as the unspeakable joys of the Spirit: 1
   Pet. i. 8. There is an option and choice, though we be not assured of
   our special relation.

   5. God is glorified by an affiance, and a resolute adherence, where
   there is no assurance. When you are resolved, let him deal with you as
   an enemy, you will stick to him as a father: Job xiii. 15, Though he
   slay me, yet will I trust in him.' Faith can take God as a friend and
   father, and put a good construction upon his dealings, when he seems to
   come against us as an enemy. And we give glory to God when we can
   adhere to him as our only happiness, and trust his fatherly kindness
   and goodness, though he cover himself with frowns, and hide himself
   from our prayers; and you own him as the Father of mercies, though it
   may be you have no sense and feeling of his fatherly love to yon.

   6. There is a difference between the gift itself and the degree. We
   cannot say we have not the spirit of adoption because we have not so
   much of the spirit of adoption as others have--I mean as to the
   effects. We may have the Spirit as a sanctifier, though not as a
   comforter; though he doth not calm our hearts, and rebuke our fears,
   yet he doth sanctify us, and incline us to God. The Spirit was only
   given to Christ without measure, but to Christians in a different
   measure and proportion; and usually as you submit more to his gracious
   conduct, and overcome the enemies of your peace, the devil, the world,
   and the flesh. The impression is left upon some in a smaller, and upon
   others in a larger character. All are not of one growth and size; some
   are more explicitly Christians, others in a riddle. Much grace doth
   more discover itself than a little grace under a heap of imperfection.
   Some are more mortified and heavenly-minded than others.

   7. When all other helps fail, faith will make use of our common
   relation to God as a Creator, as we may come to him as the workmanship
   of his hands. It is better to do so than keep off from him; and we may
   come to him as the workmanship of his hands when we cannot come to him
   as children of his family. The church saith, Isa. lxiv. 8, Now, Lord,
   thou art our father: we are the clay, and thou our potter, and we all
   are the work of thy hand.' They plead for favour and mercy by that
   common relation, as he was their potter, and they his clay. And David,
   Ps. cxix. 73, Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me
   understanding, that I may learn thy commandments.' Surely it is some
   comfort to claim by the covenant of Noah, which was made with all
   mankind, when we cannot claim mercy by the covenant of Abraham, which
   was made with the family of the faithful. The scriptures warrant us to
   do so: Isa. liv. 9, For this is as the waters of Noah unto me.' All
   this is spoken to show that, one way or other, we should bring our
   hearts to depend upon him as a father, for succour and relief.

   Thirdly, His attributes. This text offereth three. God's omnisciency,
   He knows;' His fatherly care, Your Father knows what you stand in need
   of;' and his readiness to help, even before we ask.

   [1.] He is omniscient: He knows our persons, for Christ calleth his own
   sheep by name: John x. 3. He knoweth every one of us by head and by
   poll, by person and name. Yea, and he knows our state and condition:
   Ps. lvi. 8, Thou tellest my wanderings; put thou my tears into thy
   bottle; are they not in thy book?' All our wanderings he tells them;
   all our tears he hath a bottle for them; to show God's particular
   notice; they are metaphorical expressions. And he observes us in the
   very posture when we come to pray, and where. Acts ix. 11: Go to such a
   street, in such a place, and inquire for one Saul of Tarsus; for,
   behold, he prayeth.' The Lord takes notice, in such a city, in such a
   street, in such a house, in such a room, and what you are doing when
   you are praying. And he seeth, not only that you pray, but how you
   pray: Rom. viii. 27, And he that searcheth the heart, knoweth what is
   the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints,
   according to the will of God.' He can discern between lusts and groans,
   words and affections, and such words as are the belches of the flesh,
   and such as are the breathings of the spirit.

   [2.] There is his fatherly care, for it is said, Your Father knows what
   things you have need of.' He knows what pincheth and presseth you. It
   is said, 1 Pet. v. 7, Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for
   you.' It is not said, that he may take care of you, but he doth take
   care. God is aforehand with us, and our carking care doth but take the
   work out of God's hand which he is doing already. Our cares are
   needless, fruitless, burthensome; but his are assiduous, powerful,
   blessed. A small matter may occasion much vexation to us, but to him
   all things are easy. Upon these considerations, We should be careful
   for nothing, but make known our requests unto God:' Phil. iv. 6.
   Praying for what we want, and giving thanks for what we have; For your
   Father knoweth you have need of these things:' Mat. vi. 32. His
   fatherly love will not suffer him to neglect his children or any of
   their concernments. Therefore, if you have a temptation upon you to
   anxiety and carefulness of mind, and know not how to get out of such a
   strait and conquer such a difficulty, remember you have a father to
   provide for you: this will prevent tormenting thoughtfulness, which is
   good for nothing but to anticipate your sorrow.

   [3.] The next is, his readiness to help. This should be deeply
   impressed upon your minds, and you should habituate these thoughts, how
   ready God is to help and to run to the cry: Ps. xxxii. 5, I said, I
   will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
   iniquity of my sin.' Before his purpose could be brought to pass: Isa.
   lxv. 24, Before they call, I will answer, and whiles they are yet
   speaking, I will hear.' So Jer. xxxi. 20: I heard Ephraim bemoaning
   himself,' &c. God's bowels were troubled presently. He is more ready to
   give than you to ask. This will help and direct you mightily in the
   business of prayer; for God hath a care for his children, and is very
   ready to help the weak, and relieve them in all their straits.

   Thirdly, For directions about our affections in prayer: three things
   are required, viz., fervency, reverence, confidence.

   1. Fervency. That usually comes from two grounds, a broken hearted
   sense of our wants, and a desire of the blessing we stand in need of.
   For the broken-hearted sense of our wants, especially spiritual.
   Weaknesses are incident to the best. All Christians have continual need
   to cry to God. We have continual necessities both within and without.
   Go cry to God your Father without affectation, but not without
   affection, and seek your supplies from him. Let me tell you, the more
   grace is increased, the more sense of wants is increased; for sin is
   more hated, defects are less borne. And then, there must be a desire of
   the blessings, especially spiritual; our needs must stir up fresh
   longings and holy desires after God: Mat. vii. 7, Ask, seek, knock;'
   Luke xi. 8, For his importunity, he will rise and give.' We spend the
   earnestness of our spirits in other matters, in disputes, contests,
   earthly pursuits; our importunate earnestness runs in a worldly
   channel. No, no; it must be from simplicity and sincerity, pouring out
   your hearts before him; no sacrifice without fire: James v. 16, The
   effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.'

   2. Reverence. A reverent respectful carriage towards our heavenly
   Father: Ps. ii. 11, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
   trembling.' Mark, there is in God a mixture of majesty and mercy; so in
   us there must be of joy and trembling. God's love doth not abase his
   majesty, nor his majesty diminish his love. We ought to know our
   distance from God, and to think of his superiority over us; therefore
   we must be serious. Remember, God is greatly to be feared in the
   assembly of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are
   about him,' Ps. lxxxix. 7.

   3. With confidence: Eph. iii. 12, In whom we have boldness and access
   with confidence by the faith of him.' There is boldness in pouring out
   our requests to God, who will certainly hear us, and grant what is
   good. We must rely upon his goodness and power in all our necessities.
   He is so gracious in Christ that he will do that which is best for his
   glory and our good, and upon other terms we should not seek it. If you
   would not turn prayer into babbling, much speaking to affectation of
   words, take heed of these abuses, and labour to bring your hearts to
   God in this manner.
     __________________________________________________________________

  AN EXPOSITION

    OF

THE LORD'S PRAYER.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Our Father which art in heaven.

   I HAVE insisted upon the foregoing verses, which do concern the duty of
   prayer; let me now come to the Lord's Prayer itself. This prayer was
   formed and indited by Christ, and therefore to be highly esteemed by
   Christians: Jesus Christ, who was the wisdom of God, he knew both our
   necessities and the Father's good-will towards us; and therefore surely
   he would give us a perfect form and directory. We are not absolutely
   tied to this form. We do not read that it was ever used by the
   apostles, though we have many of their prayers upon record in the Acts
   and in the Epistles; yet they plainly differ as to the construction of
   the words; and this very prayer is diversely set down by the
   evangelists themselves: Mat. vi. 11, Give us this day our daily bread;'
   it is in other words, Luke xi. 3, Give us day by day our daily bread;'
   and ver. 12, And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors;' in
   Luke xi. 4, it is, And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every
   one that is indebted to us.' But, however, though we are not tied to
   this form, yet I think it may be humbly used; for Christ taught his
   disciples how to pray while as yet they were in their ignorance and
   tenderness, and had not received the Spirit. And God usually puts words
   into sinners' mouths: Hosea xi. 2, Take with you words, and say unto
   him, Receive us graciously.' Look, as Joseph is said to feed his father
   and his brethren as a little child is nourished (as it is in the
   margin), there is not only food provided, but it is put into their
   mouths, Gen. xlvii. 12; so did Christ teach his disciples to pray, not
   only as directing them what they should pray for, but putting a form of
   words into their mouths.

   In this prayer there are three parts observable:--

   1. The preface.

   2. The petitions themselves.

   3. The conclusion.

   In the preface we have a description of God, as always we should begin
   prayer with awful thoughts of God. God is described partly from his
   goodness and mercy--Our Father; and partly from his greatness and
   majesty--which art in heaven.

   I. His goodness and mercy: Our Father; where is set forth:--

   1. The relation wherein God standeth to his people, in the word Father.

   2. Their propriety and interest in that relation, wherein, not the
   particular interest of a single believer is asserted, My Father, but
   the general interest of all the elect in Christ, Our Father.

   I shall waive all which may be said concerning prayer in general;
   concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of a form in prayer; the
   disputes concerning the use of this form; as also all the disputes
   concerning the object of prayer, which we learn from hence to be God
   alone. Surely prayer is a sacrifice, and belongeth only to God; it
   cannot be made to any other but to him, who knoweth all the prayers
   that are made in the world at the same time, and the hearts of all
   those that pray. I will also waive what might be spoken concerning
   preparation before petition; for here there is a preface before the
   prayer itself. Neither shall I speak concerning the necessity of
   conceiving right thoughts of God in prayer; how we may conceive of his
   goodness, to beget a confidence; of his majesty, to beget an awe and
   reverence.

   That which I shall insist upon is, the notion and relation under which
   God is here expressed, which is that of Father--Our Father.

   Observe, those that would pray aright must address themselves to God as
   a father in Jesus Christ.

   Hypocrites, at the last day, will cry, Lord, Lord;' but Christ hath
   taught us to say, Our Father.'

   Here I shall:--

   I. Inquire in what sense God is a father.

   II. What encouragements we have from thence in prayer, when we can take
   him up under this notion and appellation.

   I. In what sense God is a father. This title may be given to God,
   either essentially, or with respect to personal relation.

   1. Essentially; and so it is common to all the persons in the
   Godhead--Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; all three are God, and our
   Father. And thus, not only the first Person, but the second, is called
   the Everlasting Father:' Isa. ix. 6. And the Holy Ghost, being author
   of our being, is called our Maker. But,

   2. It may be ascribed to God personally. And so the first Person is
   called God the Father; and that either with relation to Christ or to
   us.

   [1.] With relation to Christ, as the Son of God. So the first Person is
   called the Father, as he is the fountain of the Deity, communicating to
   and with him the divine essence: Ps. ii. 7, Thou art my Son, this day
   have I begotten thee.' The personal property of the Father is to beget;
   and of the Son, to be begotten. There is an, eternal now, wherein God
   is said to beget him. Thus he may be called the Father of Christ, as he
   is the second Person, and not only as incarnate and Mediator. Though
   God be Christ's Father, as second Person, yet they are all equal in
   power, dignity, and glory; but as Mediator, God is his Father in
   another respect. So it is said, John xiv. 28, My Father is greater than
   I'--not as God, for so he was equal; He thought it no robbery to be
   equal with God:' Phil. ii. 6. But greater than I;' that is, consider
   him as man and mediator, in the state of his humiliation; for it is
   notable to consider upon what occasion Christ speaks these words: If ye
   love me ye would rejoice because I said I go unto the Father; for my
   Father is greater than I;' that is, You admire me and prize my company
   exceedingly, because you see the power which I put forth in the
   miracles which I do; ye would rejoice if you understood it aright; he
   is infinitely more glorious than I appear in this state of abasement
   and humiliation. Thus, with respect to Christ, God, the first Person,
   may be called the Father.

   [2.] With respect to us; for the first person is not only the Father of
   Christ, but our Father: John xx. 17, I go to my Father, and your
   Father.' We share with Christ in all his relations. As God was his God
   by covenant, so he is our God. And in this sense, personally, it may be
   taken here; for our business lieth mainly with the first Person, with
   whom Christ intercedeth for us: 1 John ii. 1, We have an advocate with
   the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous.' Before whom doth he
   appear? Before the Father. And it is to him to whom we direct our
   prayers, though not excluding the other persons: Eph. iii. 14, I bow my
   knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.' Though it be not
   unlawful to pray to Christ, or to the Holy Ghost, for that hath been
   done by the saints. Stephen saith, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit;' and
   Jacob saith, The angel of the covenant bless the lads.' And all
   baptized persons are baptized in the name of the Son and Holy Ghost, as
   well as in the name of the Father. But usually Christian worship is
   terminated upon God the Father, as being chief in the mystery of
   redemption; and so it is said, Eph. ii. 18, Through him, by one Spirit,
   we have access to the Father.' We come to him through Christ, as the
   meritorious cause, who hath procured leave for us; and by the Spirit,
   as the efficient cause, who gives us a heart to come; and to the
   Father, as the ultimate object of Christian worship. Christ procureth
   us leave to come, and the Spirit gives us a heart to come: so that by
   the Spirit, through Christ, we have access to God. So that now you may
   see what is meant by the Father--Our Father.'

   But now let me distinguish again. God is a father to mankind, either:--

   1. In a more general consideration and respect, by creation; or,

   2. In a more special regard, by adoption.

   First, By creation God is a father. At first he gave a being to all
   things; but to men and angels he gave reason: John i. 4, And this life
   was the light of man.' Other things had life, but man had such a life
   as was light; and so by his original constitution he became to be the
   son of God. To establish the relation of a father, there must be a
   communication of life and likeness. A painter, that makes an image or
   picture like himself, he is not the father of it, for though there be
   likeness, yet no life. The sun in propriety of speech is not the father
   of frogs and putrid creatures, which are quickened by its heat; though
   there be life, yet there is no likeness. We keep this relation for
   univocal generations and rational creatures. Thus, by creation, the
   angels are said to be the sons of God: Job xxxviii. 7, When he was
   laying the foundations of the earth, the sons of God shouted for joy;'
   that is, the angels. And thus Adam also was called the son of God: Luke
   iii. 38. Thus, by our first creation, and with respect to that, all men
   are the sons of God, children of God. And (mark it) in respect of God's
   continual concurrence to our being, though we have deformed ourselves,
   and are not the same that we were when we were first created; yet
   still, in regard of some sorry remains of God's image, and the light of
   reason, all are sons of God, and God in a general sense is a father to
   us; yea, more a father than our natural parents are. For our parents,
   they concur to our being but instrumentally, God originally. We had our
   being, under God, from our parents: he hath the greatest hand and
   stroke in forming us in the belly, and making us to be what we are.
   Which appeareth by this: Parents, they know not what the child will be,
   male or female, beautiful or deformed; they cannot tell the number of
   bones, muscles, veins, arteries, and cannot restore any of these in
   case they should be lost and spoiled; so that he that framed us in the
   womb, and wonder fully fashioned us in the secret parts, he is our
   Father: Ps. cxxxix. 14. As the writing is rather the work of the penman
   than of the pen, so we are rather the workmanship of God than of our
   parents; they are but instruments, God is the author and fountain of
   that life and being which we still have. And again, consider, the
   better part of man is of his immediate creation, and in this respect he
   is called the Father of spirits:' Heb. xii. 9. They do not run in the
   channel of carnal generation or fleshly descent, but they are
   immediately created by God. And it is said, Eccles. xii. 7, The spirit
   returneth to God which gave it.'

   Well, then, you see how, in a general sense, and with what good reason,
   God may be called our Father. Those which we call fathers, they are but
   subordinate instruments; the most we have from them is our corruption,
   our being depraved; but our substance, and the frame and fashion of it,
   our being, and all that is good in it, that is from the Lord.

   Now, this is some advantage in prayer, to look upon God as our father
   by virtue of creation, that we can come to him as the work of his
   hands, and beseech him that he will not destroy us and suffer us to
   perish: Isa. lxiv. 8, But now, O Lord, thou art our father; we are the
   clay, and thou our potter; and we are all the work of thine hand.'
   There is a general mercy that God hath for all his creatures; and,
   therefore, as he gave us rational souls, and fashioned us in the womb,
   we may come to him and say, Lord, thou art our potter and we thy clay,
   do us good, forsake us not.

   What advantage have we in prayer from this common interest or general
   respect of God's being a father by virtue of creation?

   [1.] This common relation binds us to pray to him. All things which God
   hath made, by a secret instinct they are carried to God for their
   supply: Ps. cxlv. 15, The eyes of all things look up to thee.' In their
   way they pray to him and moan to him for their supplies, even very
   beasts, young ravens, and fowls of the air. But much more is this man's
   duty, as we have reason, and can clearly own the first cause. And
   therefore upon these natural grounds the apostle reasons with them why
   they should seek after God: Acts xiv. 17.

   [2.] As this common relation binds us to pray, so it draweth common
   benefits after it: Mat. vi. 25, 26, Is not the life more than meat, and
   the body than raiment? Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not,
   neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father
   feedeth them.' Where God hath given a life, he will give food; and
   where he gives a body, he will give raiment, according to his good
   pleasure. He doth not cast off the care of any living creature he hath
   made, as long as he will preserve it for his glory. Beasts have their
   food and provision, much more men, which are capable of knowing and
   enjoying God.

   [3.] It giveth us confidence in the power of God. He which made us out
   of nothing is able to keep, preserve, and supply us when all things
   fail, and in the midst of all dangers. Saints are able to make use of
   this common relation. And therefore it is said, 1 Pet. iv. 19, that we
   should commit our souls unto him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
   Creator.' The apostle speaks of such times when they carried their
   lives in their hands from day to day. They did not know how soon they
   should be haled before tribunals and cast into prisons. Remember, you
   have a Creator, which made you out of nothing; and he can keep and
   preserve life when you have nothing. Thus this common relation is not
   to be forgotten, as he gives us our outward life and being: Ps. cxxiv.
   8, Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.' As
   if the psalmist had said, as long as I see these glorious monuments of
   his power, these things framed out of nothing, shall I distrust God,
   whatever exigence or strait I may be reduced to?

   Secondly, More especially there is a particular sort of men to whom God
   is a father in Christ, and that is, to believers: John i. 12, To as
   many as received him, to them gave he power to be called the sons of
   God.' Those which in their natural state and condition were children of
   wrath, and slaves to sin and Satan, when they come, and are willing to
   welcome and receive Christ into their hearts, in a sense of their
   misery, are willing to make out after God and Christ; they have an
   allowance to call God Father, and may have child-like communion with
   him, and run to him in all straits, and lay open their necessities to
   him. 2 Kings iv. 19, When the child cried unto his father, he said,
   Carry him to his mother:' so when we are ill at ease and in any
   straits, this is the privilege of our adoption, that we have a God to
   go to; we may go to our Father and plead with him, as the church: Isa.
   lxiii. 16, Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of
   us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, Lord, art our father, our
   redeemer.' It is good to know God under this special relation of a
   father in Christ; and this is that which is the grace of adoption.
   Adoption is an act of free grace, by which we that were aliens and
   strangers, servants to sin and Satan, are, in and by Christ, made sons
   and daughters of God, and accordingly are so reckoned and treated with,
   to all intents and purposes. It is a great and special privilege, given
   to God's own children, by virtue of their interest in Christ; and
   therefore it is said, 1 John iii. 1, Behold, what love the Father hath
   bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!' That is,
   behold it as a certain truth, and admire it as a great privilege. This
   second relation is a very great privilege, and it will appear to be so,
   if we consider:--

   [1.] The persons that receive it. We that were aliens, and enemies, and
   bond-slaves; that were of another line and stock; that might say to
   corruption, Thou art my father; to the worm, Thou art my mother, and my
   sister:' Job xvii. 14. We that were cousin-germans to worms, a handful
   of enlivened dust, that we should be taken into such a relation to God!
   We that might say indeed to the devil, Thou art our father, and the
   lusts of our father we will do: John viii. 24. Satan is the sinners'
   father, and God disclaims them. The Lord disclaims the people which
   were brought out of the land of Egypt, when they rebelled against him:
   Exod. xxxii. 7, The Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, for thy
   people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted
   themselves.' Thy people, which thou hast brought, in scorn and disdain,
   as if God did disavow them from being his. And so it was with us all.
   When Adam had rebelled against God, God executed the law of the
   rebellious child against him, which was this, that he should be turned
   out of doors. So was Adam turned out of paradise, and lost his title
   and heritage; and we were reckoned to the devil. Now, behold, what
   manner of love was this, that we should be called the sons of God!'

   [2.] You will wonder at it, you will behold it as an excellent
   privilege, if you consider the nature of the privilege itself, to be
   sons and daughters of God, to be able to call God Father. This was
   Christ's own title and honour. When God had a mind to honour Christ, he
   proclaims it from heaven: Mat. iii. 17. This is my beloved Son, in whom
   I am well pleased.' Surely, if our hearts were as apprehensive of
   heavenly privileges as they are of earthly, we would admire it more.
   Earthly alliance, how is it prized! If a great man should match into
   our blood and line, what an honour and glory do we reckon it to us! 1
   Sam. xviii. 23, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's
   son-in-law?' Do we account this a small matter, to be related to kings,
   and princes, and potentates? No, no; we have high thoughts of it. And
   is not this an excellent thing, to be sons and daughters of God? In all
   other cases, if men have children of their own, they do not adopt. God
   had a Son of his own, in whom his soul found full delight and
   complacency; yet he would adopt and take us wretched creatures, he
   would invest us with the title of sons; and shall it be said of this
   and that believer, here is the son of God? O behold what manner of
   love! &c.

   [3.] Then do but consider the consequents of it, both in this life and
   the life to come. In this life, what immunities and privileges have we!
   Free access to God; we may come and treat with him when we please, as
   children to a father, when we stand in need of anything. We have
   received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father:' Rom.
   viii. 15. If we ail anything, we may go to our Father and acquaint him
   with our case and grief. And we shall have a child's allowance here in
   the world. The heirs of glory are well provided for in their nonage;
   they have aright to a large portion; all the good things of the world,
   meat, drink, marriage, such things they have by a son's right. They
   have a right to the creature, in and by him who is heir of all things,
   so they are established in their right which Adam lost: 1 Tim. iv. 3,
   4. And they are under the ministry of angels; the angels are sent forth
   to be their guardians, and to supply and provide for them.

   And then, in the life to come (for we are not only sons, but heirs), we
   have a right to the glorious inheritance! Rom. viii. 17, If children,
   then heirs, heirs of God.' Here all the children are heirs, male and
   female, every son and daughter an heir and joint-heirs with Christ. We
   do as it were divide heaven between us; we have a great, blessed, and
   glorious inheritance; poor despicable creatures, chosen heirs of a
   kingdom:' James ii. 5.

   [4.] You will see it was a very great privilege, if you consider how we
   come to be entitled to it: Eph. i. 5, Having predestinated us unto the
   adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, to himself.' We come to it in
   and by Jesus Christ. Christ was fain to come down, and to take a mother
   upon earth, that we might have a Father in heaven. He comes down, and
   was made a man; he became our brother, and so layeth the foundation for
   the kindred: Heb. ii. 11. Nay, not only incarnate, but he died to
   purchase this title for us. When the business was debated in the
   council of the Trinity, how lost man might be restored in blood, and
   have a right and interest in God; and when justice put in exceptions
   against us, Jesus Christ was content to be made under the law, that we
   might receive the adoption of sons:' Gal. iv. 4, 5. There could be no
   reconciliation, no amity, no alliance, until sin was expiated and
   justice satisfied; therefore Christ was not only made of a woman,' but
   made under the law;' first our brother by incarnation, and then our
   redeemer by his death and suffering. As under the law, if a man had
   waxen poor, the next of kin was to be his redeemer: Lev. xxv. 25; or if
   he had sold himself, ver. 47, one of his brethren was to redeem him.
   Christians, there was a kind of sale and forfeiture on our part of the
   inheritance and right and title of children; therefore Jesus Christ,
   when he became a man, jure propinquitatis, by virtue of his kindred and
   nearness to us, came to redeem his people, and purchase us to God. And
   this is the relation which is mainly intended in this place; for mark,
   Christ taught his disciples to pray, Our Father;' others, they cannot
   speak of this relation; and in them all that believe, and all that walk
   in the Spirit, these alone can come to God as a father.

   II. What advantage have we in prayer by taking up God under this notion
   and relation, when we can come to him and say, Our Father'?

   1. It conduceth to our confidence in prayer.

   2. It furthereth our duty.

   First, It conduceth to our confidence in prayer: for it is not an empty
   title or a naked relation; but this is the ground of all that favour
   and grace which we stand in need of, and receive from God. It is
   notable, 2 Cor. vi. 18, saith God, I will be a father unto you, and ye
   shall be my sons and daughters.' In other places it is said, Ye shall
   be called my sons; but here, You shall be my sons; you shall not only
   be called so, but be so. He will really perform all the parts of a
   father to us; yea, no father like God. The outward father is but a
   shadow; as in all comparisons, outward things are but the shadow and
   similitude , the reality is in inward things. A servant is not always a
   servant, there may be a release; a husband is not always a husband,
   there may be a separation by divorce; but a father is always a father,
   and a child a child. I am the true vine.' The outward vine is but a
   shadow, but Christ himself hath the true properties of a vine. So the
   outward father is but a shadow and similitude, the reality is in God;
   none so fatherly and kind as he: Mat. vii. 11, If ye, being evil, know
   how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
   Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?' There
   is a how much more upon the fatherly care of God. Natural parents,
   whose affections are stinted and limited, nay, corrupt and sinful, when
   a son comes for a fish, will not give him a scorpion, when he comes for
   bread, will not give him a stone. That were a monstrous thing, vile and
   unnatural. So Isa. xlix. 15: Can a woman forget her sucking-child, that
   she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may
   forget, yet will I not forget thee.' Passions in females are more
   vehement; the mother hath stronger affections. If the mother could do
   so as totally to forget that ever she had such a child, yet she would
   not forget her sucking-child--a poor, shiftless, helpless babe, that
   can do nothing without the mother, a child which never provoked
   her,--she would not forget such a child. They may forget, yet will I
   not forget thee. Certainly, God which hath left such an impression upon
   the hearts of parents, hath more of pity, bounty, and goodness in his
   own heart; for whatsoever of God is in the creature, is in God in a
   more eminent manner.

   But particularly, How will God perform the parts of a father?

   [1.] In allowing them full leave to come to him in all their
   necessities: Gal. iv. 6, Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the
   Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.' There is a
   spirit that attendeth upon this state. They which are sons shall have
   the spirit of sons, and God will incline their hearts to come and call
   to him for supplies. This is a great advantage. When he gives a spirit
   of prayer, then he will be ready to hear and grant our requests; not
   only to give us a heart to ask them, but to incline his ear: Luke xi.
   13, How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
   them that ask him?' When we ask for the highest blessing; when we come
   and are importunate with him, and will take no nay.

   [2.] In supplying all our wants: Mat. vi. 12, Your Father which is in
   heaven knoweth you have need of these things.' A father will not let
   his child starve--certainly none so fatherly as God. You have not such
   a father as is ignorant, regardless of your condition, but takes an
   exact notice of all your wants and pressures. It is notable to observe
   how God condescendeth to express the particular notice he taketh of the
   saints: Isa. xlix. 16, Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my
   hands.' As we use to tie things about our hands, that we may remember
   such a work and business; so God doth, as it were, put a print and mark
   upon his hands; to speak after the manner of men. Nay, Mat. x. 30, The
   hairs of their heads are numbered.' God hath a particular notice of
   their necessities; and Jesus Christ, he is his remembrancer, one that
   ever appeareth before him to represent their wants: Heb. ix. 24. As the
   high priest in the law was to go in with the names of the tribes upon
   his breast and shoulder when he did minister before God: Exod. xxviii.;
   which is a type how much we are in the heart of Christ, ever presenting
   himself before the Lord on the behalf of such and such a believer.

   [3.] Pitying our miseries. As he taketh notice of them, so he will pity
   their miseries, as a father pitieth his children when he seeth them in
   an afflicted condition: Ps. ciii. 13, Like as a father pitieth his
   children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.' Nay, he will pardon
   their sins: Mal. iii. 17, And I will spare them as a man spareth his
   own son which serveth him.' An only son needs not fear much if his
   father were to be his judge, though he hath done unworthily. They may
   exhaust and draw up all their pity, their bowls may shrink when they
   meet with multitude of provocations. Now, God will spare us as a man
   spares his only son--nay, not only his only son, but his dutiful son
   which serves him. Many times we forget the duty of children, but God
   will not forget the mercy of a father. I will go to my father,' saith
   the prodigal. He had forgotten the duty of a child, he went into a far
   country and wasted his patrimony, and that basely and filthily upon
   harlots; yet, upon his return, when he was a great way off, the father
   runs to meet him half-way, and kisseth him.

   [4.] In disciplining and treating us with much indulgence, and wisdom,
   and care. A father takes a great deal of pains in forming his child,
   and fashioning its manners and behaviour; so doth God with his
   children. If he afflicteth, it is as a father only, with purposes of
   good, and not so as an earthly father: Heb. xii. 10, For verily for a
   few days they chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our
   profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness,' They mingle a
   great deal of passion with their correction when they are inflamed; but
   God never mingleth passion with his rod. When he gives a bitter cup he
   is a father still: John xviii. 11.

   [5.] In providing able guardians for his children. None so attended as
   God's children are those which are adopted and taken into grace and
   favour with Christ: Heb. i. 14, Angels are ministering spirits, sent
   abroad for the heirs of salvation.' They have a guard of angels to
   watch over them, that they dash not their foot against a stone.

   [6.] In laying up an inheritance for them. The apostle saith, 2 Cor.
   xii. 14, Children ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents
   for their children.' Now, God hath laid up for us, as well as laid out
   much upon us: Luke xii. 32, Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's
   good pleasure to give you the kingdom.' He has a kingdom, a glorious
   inheritance to bestow upon us; and we are kept for that happy state.
   Though he hath an heir already, Jesus Christ, the heir of all things,
   yet God hath made us co-heirs with Christ:' Rom. viii. 17.

   Thus, then, it is a mighty advantage. If we did take up God in this
   notion, to look upon him as a father, it would increase our confidence
   and dependence upon him. This is a sweet relation: the reality is more
   in God than can be in an earthly father; for he is a father according
   to his essence, knowing our necessities, pardoning our sins, supplying
   our wants, forming and fashioning our manners, providing able guardians
   for ns, and laying up a blessed inheritance for us in heaven.

   Secondly, As it encourageth us to pray, so it furthereth our duty in
   prayer, that we may behave ourselves with reverence, love, and
   gratitude.

   [1.] With a child-like reverence and affection in prayer: Mal. i. 6,
   If, then, I be a father, where is mine honour? And if I be a master,
   where is my fear?' If we expect the supplies of children, we must
   perform the duty of children. God will be owned as a father, not with a
   fellow-like familiarity, but humbly, and with an awe of his majesty.

   [2.] With love. Now, our love to God is mainly seen by subjection and
   obedience to his laws. Thus Christ would have us take up God in prayer
   under such a relation, that we might mind our duty to him: 1 Pet. i.
   17, And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
   judgeth according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning
   here in fear.' We never pray aright but when we pray resolving to cast
   off all sin. How can we call him Father, whom we care not continually
   to displease from day to day? So the Lord treats his people: Jer. iii.
   5, 6, Thou hast said, Thou art my father. Behold, thou hast spoken and
   done evil things as thou couldest.' God takes it to be a contumely and
   reproach to himself when we do evil, yet come and call him Father. He
   takes it ill that men should come complimentally and flatter him with
   lying lips, and do not walk as children in holy obedience. Therefore,
   it is an engagement to serve God with holiness.

   [3.] With gratitude. When we come to pray, we must remember not only
   what we want, but what we have received, acknowledging we have all from
   him; he is our father: Deut. xxxii. 6, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
   foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy father that hath bought thee?
   Hath he not made thee and established thee?' We must acknowledge the
   good we have, as well as that we expect to come from him. Therefore, if
   we would have a praying frame, and be eased of our solicitude, and that
   anxious care which is a disparagement to providence, it is good to take
   up God under the notion of a father, which makes us rest upon him for
   all things: Mat. vi. 25, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall
   eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
   on.' Why?' For your heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of all
   these things.' You that are able fathers would think yourselves
   disparaged if that your children should filch and steal for their
   living, and beg and be solicitous, and go up and down from door to door
   for their maintenance and support, and not trust to your care and
   provision. A believer which knoweth he hath a heavenly Father will not
   be negligent in his calling, but be active and industrious in his way,
   and use those lawful means which, by the providence of God, he hath
   been brought up in; and then, be careful for nothing,' as the apostle's
   advice is, Phil. iv. 6, and in everything, by prayer and supplication,
   make your request known unto God.' Oh, could we turn carking into
   prayer, and run to our Father, it would be happy for us. Care, and
   diligence, and necessary provision, that is our work and labour: but,
   for the success and event of things, leave it to God. When we are
   carking in the world with such anxiousness, and troubled with restless
   thoughts, how we should be provided for in old age, and what will
   become of us and ours, we take God's work out of his hands. This is a
   disparagement to our heavenly Father, and a reproach to his providence
   and fatherly care. Well, then, certainly this is of great advantage in
   prayer.

   APPLICATION.

   Use. If it be a great advantage in prayer to take up God under the
   notion and relation of a father, then those that would pray aright, let
   this instruct and quicken them above all things. Clear up your
   adoption, that you may be able to call God Father, for otherwise, when
   you come to pray, it is a very lie to God. As Acts v. 4, when Ananias
   spake false to the apostle, saith Peter to him: Thou hast not lied unto
   men, but unto God.' Why? Because he knows all that is done in the
   world. But much more do they lie unto God here; this is a very disgrace
   and blasphemy, a contumely, rather than a prayer and supplication, when
   you will come and make God to father the devil's brats. When you that
   live in sin, and have no reverence and awe of God upon your hearts,
   shall come and pray to him, this is a lie which is told to the very
   face of God.

   But if this be a truth, that all those which would pray aright must
   clear up their adoption and get a sense of it, then here will doubts
   arise. Therefore here I shall handle three cases:--

   1. What shall natural men do? Must they desist from prayer? for they
   have no right to it.

   2. What shall they do which have not as yet received the testimony of
   the Spirit? For a child of God may have the right of children, yet have
   not a sense of his adoption.

   3. What are the evidences by which our adoption may be cleared up to
   us, how we may know we are taken into a child-like state?

   First, What shall natural men do? Must they desist from prayer? for
   they have no right to it.

   I answer, you may see here the miserable condition of wicked men, how
   much they are bound to pray, and yet what an impossibility lieth upon
   them of praying aright. Certainly none should desist from this duty of
   prayer because they cannot perform it aright, for though we have lost
   our power and fitness, yet there is no reason God should lose his right
   and his power to our obedience. There is an obligation and precept from
   God, as a father by creation, upon all mankind; all which are
   reasonable creatures, they are to own God as a father in this way. I
   say prayer is a homage we owe to God by natural right, therefore no
   doubt wicked men do sin when they cease to pray. It is one of the
   accusations brought against natural men, and is an aggravation of their
   sin: Ps. xiv. 1, They do not call upon God.' Rom. iii. 10, it is
   applied to natural men. This is the misery they have subjected
   themselves to, that their prayer is turned into sin. As a natural man
   must not omit hearing, because it is a means to bring him to be
   acquainted with God, though he cannot hear in faith, so he must not
   omit prayer, because it is one means to bring us to own God as a father
   by adoption. A man is not to turn the back upon him, but call him
   Father, as well as he can: Jer. iii, 19, But I said, How shall I put
   thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly
   heritage of the hosts of nations? And I said, Thou shalt call me, My
   Father, and shalt not turn away from me.' Better to own God any way,
   than not to own him at all, than not to inquire after him; to own him
   rationally, if not spiritually, to own him by choice, if not out of
   sense. If we cannot come and clear up our title to this great privilege
   by the spirit of adoption, yet any way Thou shalt not turn away from
   me.' We should not shut the door upon ourselves. It is required of a
   natural man, being weary of his sins, to fly to God in Christ Jesus,
   for his grace and favour, that he might become his God and Father.

   Secondly, What shall they do which have not as yet received the
   testimony of the Spirit, that do not know their adoption?

   I answer, a child of God may have the effects and fruits of adoption,
   yet not always the feeling of it, to witness to him that God hath taken
   him into a child-like relation to himself. Certainly they are in a very
   uncomfortable condition, for they want a help in prayer. Doubtless thou
   art our Father.' Oh, what an advantage is that! How much of eloquence
   and rhetoric is there in that, when we can speak to God as a father!
   Yet they are not to neglect their addresses to God, for this is a means
   to obtain the Spirit of adoption: Luke xi. 13, He will give the Spirit
   to them that ask him.' Therefore, in what ever condition we be, we must
   pray; otherwise we shut the door upon our hopes. You continue the want
   upon yourselves, and so wholly detain yourselves in a comfortless
   condition.

   There is a fourfold spiritual art we must use in prayer, when we have
   not the sense of our adoption, that we may be able to speak to God as
   our Father.

   [1.] Disclaim when you cannot apply. When you cannot clear up your own
   relation and interest, then disclaim all other confidences. If thou
   canst not say Father; yet plead fatherless; Hosea xiv. 3, In thee the
   fatherless find mercy.' Come as poor, helpless, shiftless creatures;
   seek peace and reconciliation with God in Christ. It may be God may
   take you into his favour. He is a Father of the fatherless.

   [2.] Own God in the humbling way. Learn the policy of the prodigal:
   Luke xv. 18, 19, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,
   and am no more worthy to be called thy son.' This is the policy and art
   of a humble faith, to call God Father. As Paul catcheth hold of the
   promise on the dark side: Jesus Christ came to save sinners;' and
   presently he addeth, whereof I am chief:' so a believer may come and
   say, Lord, I am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
   hired servants.'

   [3.] The third policy we should use in prayer is to call him Father in
   wish: Optando, si non affirmando. If we cannot do it by direct
   affirmation, let us do it by desire. Let us pray ourselves into this
   relation, and groan after it, that we may have a clearer sense that God
   is our Father in Christ.

   [4.] Faith hath one art more,--it maketh use of Christ Jesus. God hath
   a Son whose name signifieth much in heaven, therefore if you cannot
   come to him as your Father, come to him as the God and Father of our
   Lord Jesus Christ: Eph. iii. 14, For this cause I bow my knees to the
   God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.' Let Christ bring you into
   God's presence. He is willing to change relations with us. Take him
   along with you in your arms. Go to God in Christ's name: Whatsoever you
   ask in my name, shall be given to you.'

   Thirdly, But what are the evidences by which our adoption may be
   cleared up to us? How shall we know that we are taken into a child-like
   state?

   [1.] Consider how it is brought about. How do we come to be related to
   God by Christ Jesus? By receiving Christ, as he is offered in the
   gospel: John i. 12, To as many as received him, to them gave he power
   to become the sons of God.' It is a prerogative, and special grant to
   those which receive Christ, even those that believe in his name, that
   is, those who, out of a sense of their own need, and sight of Christ
   offered in the promise, do really consent to take him for the ends for
   which God offereth him, to wit, as Prince and Saviour, that he might
   give you repentance and remission of sins, not in pretence, but in your
   hearts. These have full liberty to call God Father, to come to treat
   and deal with him, though they have not a sense of the blessedness of
   their state, for this followeth believing: After you believed, you were
   sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise,' Eph. i. 13, 14.

   [2.] There is a witness which is given to the saints, that the thing
   may not always be dark and doubtful. The Holy Ghost is given as a
   witness. If you would know whether or no you are the children of God,
   see that of the apostle: Rom. viii. 16, The Spirit itself beareth
   witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.' As under the
   law, in the mouth of two witnesses every doubtful thing was to be
   established, Deut. xvii. 6, so here the Spirit beareth witness,
   together with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Our spirits
   alone may be lying, deceitful; we may flatter ourselves, and think we
   are the children of God, when we are children of the devil. All
   certainly comes from the Holy Ghost; and, therefore, the great question
   which is traversed to and fro in the heart, is, whether we be God's
   children? What is the Spirit's witness?

   (1.) He lays down marks in scripture, which are the ground and decision
   of this debate, for the scriptures are of the Holy Ghost's inditing,
   and so may be said to bear witness: Rom. viii. 14, For as many as are
   led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God:' 1 John iii. 10, In
   this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil:
   whosoever doth not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loveth
   not his brother.' Thus the Spirit beareth witness to our spirits, by
   laying down such marks as we, by our own spiritual sense and renewed
   conscience, feel to be right within ourselves. And this is the main
   thing called the witness of the Spirit.

   (2.) He worketh such graces as are peculiar to God's children, and are
   evidences of our interest in the favour of God; and therefore it is
   called the sanctification of the Spirit,' 2 Thes. ii. 13; and the
   renewing of the Holy Ghost,' Titus iii. 5. Look, as John knew Christ to
   be the Son of God by the Spirit's descending and abiding upon him, John
   i. 32, so by the Spirit's work, and the Spirit's inhabitation, we know
   whether we are the children of God or no; whether we dwell in God, and
   God in us, because of his Spirit that he hath given us;' that is,
   because of those graces wrought in us. And this is called the seal of
   the Spirit; for the Holy Ghost, stamping the impress of God upon the
   soul, working in us an answerable likeness to Christ, is said to be the
   seal; then we have God's impress upon us.

   (3.) The Spirit goes further: he helpeth us to feel and discover those
   acts in ourselves. There is a stupid deadness in the conscience, so
   that we are not always sensible of our spiritual acts. Hagar saw not
   the fountain near her until God opened her eyes, so we may not see the
   work of the Spirit without the light of the Spirit. We cannot own grace
   in the midst of so much weakness and imperfection; there is a misgiving
   of conscience: therefore the Spirit of sanctification is also a Spirit
   of revelation:' Eph. i. 17. The author of the grace is the best
   revealer and interpreter of it: he works, and he gives us a sight of
   it. As a workman that made a thing can best warrant it to the buyer, he
   knows the goodness and strength of it, and how it is framed and made;
   so the Holy Ghost, which works grace, he reveals and discovers this
   grace to us.

   (4.) The Spirit helps us to compare them with the rule, and accordingly
   to judge of their sincerity. The Spirit opens our under standings, that
   we may be able to discern the intent and scope of the scripture, that
   so we may not be mistaken. We must plough with God's heifer if we would
   understand the riddle: In thy light we shall see light.' We shall be
   apt to misapply the rule, so as to judge of our own actions: Rom. ix.
   1, I lie not, the Holy Ghost bearing me witness;' when he had spoken of
   some eminent thing wrought in him. We are apt to lie, and feign and
   misapply rules, comforts, and privileges; but now the Holy Ghost
   bearing witness with our spirits, by this means we come to have a
   certainty. There are so many circuits, wiles, turnings in the heart of
   man, that we are not competent judges of what is wrought in us;
   therefore it is usually ascribed to the Spirit to be the searcher of
   the heart: Ps. cxxxix. 7, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or
   whither shall I flee from thy presence?' Acts v. 4, Thou hast not lied
   unto men, but unto God.' The Holy Ghost is rather spoken of than any
   other person, because it is his personal operation to abide in the
   hearts of men, and to search and try the reins. It is more particularly
   ascribed to him, though it belongs to all the persons.

   (5.) As the Spirit helps us to compare that which is wrought with the
   rule, the impression or thing sealed with the stamp or the thing
   sealing, so he helps us to conclude rightly of our estate. For many
   times when the premises are clear, the conclusion may be suspended,
   either out of self-love, in case of condemnation; or out of legal fear
   and jealousy, in case of self-acquitment. Therefore the conclusion is
   of the Holy Ghost: 1 John iv. 13, Hereby we know that we dwell in him,
   and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.' There is a great
   deal ado to bring us to heaven with comfort. There needs a person of
   the Godhead to satisfy us as well as to satisfy God, and help us to
   determine concerning our condition.

   (6.) He enlivens and heightens our apprehensions in all these
   particulars, and so fills us with comfort, and raiseth our joy upon the
   feeling of the sense of the favour of God; for all this is the fruit of
   his operation. Therefore it is said, Rom. v. 5, The love of God is shed
   abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.' Those
   unspeakable glimpses of God's favour, and sweet manifestations of God's
   love in the conscience which we have, these are given by the Holy
   Ghost. There is not one act of the soul, but the Holy Ghost hath a
   stroke in it for our comfort. In every degree, all comes from God. So
   that if you would know what the witness of the Spirit is, consider What
   are the marks in scripture? what graces are wrought in your hearts? how
   doth the Spirit help you to discern those graces, to compare them to
   the rule, to make accordingly in these things a determination of our
   condition? and what joy and peace have you thereupon wrought in your
   hearts by the Holy Ghost? For an immediate testimony of the Spirit, the
   scripture knows of no such thing. All other is but delusion besides
   this.

   [3.] There are certain fruits and effects which do more sensibly
   evidence it unto the soul. What are those fruits of the Spirit of
   adoption in our hearts, by which we may further evidence it, whether we
   are the children of God or not?

   (1.) In prayer, by a kind of naturalness or delight in this duty of
   holy commerce with God: Rom. viii. 15, We have received the Spirit of
   adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father;' Gal. iv. 6, Because ye are
   sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
   crying, Abba, Father;' and Zech. xii. 10, I will pour upon the house of
   David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and
   of supplication.' Wherever the Spirit of God is dispensed, and dwelleth
   in the hearts of any, the heart of that man will be often with God. The
   Spirit of grace will put him upon supplication; he will be often
   acquainting God with his desires, wants, fears.

   (2.) You will be mainly carried out to your inheritance in heaven.
   Those which are the children of God do look after a child's portion,
   and will look for an estate in heaven, and cannot be satisfied with
   present things. Worldly men, they have their reward: Mat. vi. 2. They
   discharge God for other things. If they may have plenty, honour,
   worldly ease, and delights here, they never look after heaven. As a
   servant hath his reward from quarter to quarter, but a child waits
   until the inheritance comes, so when we are begotten for this lively
   hope, when there is a heavenly-mindedness in you, this is a fruit of
   the Holy Ghost wrought in the heart, by which you might know you are
   the sons of God: Rom. viii. 23, Having the first-fruits of the Spirit,
   we groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
   redemption of our body.'

   (3.) By a child-like reverence and dread of God, when we are afraid to
   offend God: Jer. xxxv. 5, 6. The sons of Rechab, their father had
   commanded them that they should drink no wine; now saith God by the
   prophet, Set pots full of wine, and cups, and say unto them, Drink ye
   wine;' that is, present the temptation. No, they would not: Our fathers
   have forbidden us.' So when a child of God is put upon temptation, his
   heart recoils, and reasons thus: How can I do this wickedness, and sin
   against God?' I dare not, my Father hath for bidden me. There is an awe
   of his heavenly Father upon him: 1 Pet. i. 17, If you call on the
   Father, who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man's
   work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear.'

   We now come to speak of the possessive particle--Our Father. The word
   is used for a double reason:--

   1. To comfort us in the sense of our interest in God.

   2. To mind us of the common interest of all the saints in the same God.
   It is not my or thy Father only, but our Father.

   First, Observe the great condescension of Christ, that poor creatures
   are allowed to claim an interest in God. If Christ had not put these
   words in our mouths, we never had had boldness to have gone to God, and
   said, Doubtless thou art our Father.' But he which was in the bosom of
   God, and knew his secrets, hath told us it is very pleasing to God we
   should use this compellation to him. This is a privilege which cannot
   be sufficiently valued; if we consider:--

   [1.] The unworthiness of the persons which enjoy it: poor dust and
   ashes, sinful creatures, that were children of the devil, that we
   should lay claim and title to God for our Father. And,

   [2.] If we consider the greatness of the privilege itself: Oh, behold
   what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be
   called his children!' 1 John iii. 1. We think it much when we can say,
   This field, this house is mine; but surely this is more, to say, This
   God is mine.

   Again, observe here that interest is a ground of audience. So Christ
   would have us begin our prayers, Our Father.' God's interest in us, and
   our interest in God. God's interest in us: when Christ mediates for his
   disciples, he saith, John xvii. 6, Thine they were, and thou gavest
   them me,' And David: Ps. cxix. 94, I am thine, save me.' That is his
   argument: the reason is, because God, by taking them for his own, binds
   himself to preserve and keep them. Everybody is bound to look to his
   own: He that provides not for his own is worse than an infidel.' Now
   what a sweet thing is it when we can go to God and say, We are thine!
   So it is the same, as to our interest in God. It is an excellent
   encouragement: Ps. xlii. 11, Hope thou in God,' saith David to his
   soul. Why? For he is my God. And elsewhere, reasoning with himself: Ps.
   xxiii. 1, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.' First, his
   covenant-interest is built, and then conclusions of hope. So 2 Sam.
   xxx. 6, David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.' It is sweet when
   we can go to God as our God. Luther was wont to say, God was known
   better by the predicament of relation than by his natural properties.
   Why is interest such a sweet thing? Because by this relation to God we
   have a claim to God, and to all that he can and will do. God hath made
   over himself, quantus quantus est, as great as great he is, for his use
   and comfort. Therefore the psalmist saith, Ps. xvi. 5, The Lord is the
   portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup.' A believer hath as sure a
   right and title to God, as a man hath to his patrimony to which he is
   born, or as any Israelite had to that share which came to him by lot;
   so he may lay claim to God, and live upon his power and goodness, as a
   man doth upon his estate.

   Well, then, labour to see God is yours, if you would find acceptance
   with him. It is not enough to know the goodness and power of God in
   general, but we must discern our interest in him, that we may not only
   say Father, but Our Father. It is the nature of faith thus to
   appropriate and apply: John xx. 28, My Lord and my God.' How is God
   made ours? How shall we know it, that we may come and lay our claim to
   him? Behold, Christ teacheth us here to say, Our Father, by taking hold
   of his covenant; and this is God's covenant notion, I will be your God,
   and you shall be my people.' When we give up ourselves to be God's,
   then he is ours. Resignation and appropriation go together. I am my
   beloved's;' there is the resignation of obedience: And he is mine;'
   there is the appropriation of faith. A believer cannot always say God
   is his, but, I am thine; however it be with him, he would be no other's
   but the Lord's. If he cannot say he is God's by an especial interest,
   yet he will be God's by the resignation of his own vows. He knows God
   hath a better right and title to him than he hath to himself.

   Quest. But how shall we know that we do indeed resign up ourselves to
   God?

   I answer, When we make him our chief good and our utmost end--that is,
   when we unfeignedly choose him for our portion, and set apart ourselves
   to act for his glory.

   1. When we choose and cleave to him as our all-sufficient portion: The
   Lord is my portion, saith my soul,' Lam. iii. 24. Sometimes the Lord
   speaks to us: I am thy reward, I am thy salvation,' Ps. xxxv. 3. So the
   soul speaks to God: Thou art my portion.' When we cleave to God, He is
   my portion for ever,' Ps. lxxiii. 25; Whom have I in heaven but thee?'
   &c. When our souls are satisfied in God, having enough in him, this is
   to give up ourselves to him.

   2. When we set apart ourselves to his use, to live and act for his
   glory, this is also entering into covenant with God. As in that formal
   matrimonial covenant that was used between the prophet and his wife,
   Hosea iii. 3, Thou shalt not be for another man, so will I also be for
   thee;' so in the covenant we resolve to renounce all others, and to
   live and act for God:: The Lord hath set apart him that is godly for
   himself,' Ps. iv. 3. When we are thus set apart for God, to serve him
   and glorify him by this special dedication of ourselves to his use,
   this is the act of grace on our part. We were God's by election; but he
   comes and takes possession for himself by the Spirit, and then the soul
   sets himself apart for God.

   Secondly, That all the saints have a common interest in the same God;
   therefore Christ taught us to say, Our Father.' They have one Father,
   as well as one Spirit--one Christ, one hope, and one heaven: Eph. iv.
   6. Questionless, it is lawful to say, My Father. Some have disputed it,
   because they suppose this expression is used to signify Christ's
   singular filiation: Christ could only say, My Father. But it is lawful,
   provided we do not say it exclusively, and appropriating it to
   ourselves. But here Christ, when he giveth us this perfect form,
   teacheth us to say, Our Father.' As the sun in the firmament is every
   man's, and all the world's, so God is every single believer's God--the
   God of all the elect. But why would Christ put this in this perfect
   pattern and form of prayer?

   [1.] To quicken our love to the saints in prayer. When we come to pray,
   there must be a brotherly love expressed; now that is a distinct thing
   from common love: Add to brotherly kindness, charity,' 2 Pet i. 7. When
   we are dealing with God in prayer, we must express somewhat of this
   brotherly love. How must we express it? In praying for others, as well
   as for ourselves. Necessity will put men upon praying for themselves,
   but brotherly love will put them upon praying for others. Wherein must
   brotherly kindness be expressed in prayer? In two things:--

   (1.) In a fellow-feeling of their miseries, in being touched with their
   necessities, as we would be with our own. To be senseless, it is a
   spiritual excommunication, a casting ourselves out of the body. Members
   must take care for one another. We must be grieved with their pains.
   Who is offended,' saith the apostle, and I burn not?' If there be any
   power in such a confession or title of a Father, we must be wrestling
   with God, how well soever it be with us, remembering we speak to him in
   whom others have a joint interest with ourselves.

   (2.) It must be expressed in wishing the same good to others as to
   ourselves. Many that pray in their own case, with what earnestness and
   importunity are they carried out! but how flat and cold in the case of
   others! Now, a good Christian must be as earnest with God for others as
   for himself. Look, what earnestness and needfulness of soul he showeth
   when he puts up prayers for himself; the same must he do for all
   saints:' Eph. vi. 18. Self-love and self-respect must not breathe only
   in our prayers; they must be carried out with as much earnestness as if
   we would go to God in our own case.

   [2.] Again, as it showeth us what brotherly love we should express in
   prayer, so it checketh many carnal dispositions which we are guilty of,
   and Christ would mind us of them. It checks strife and contention; we
   are brethren--have one common Father. Everywhere meekness and love: it
   is a qualification for prayer. Let the husband live with his wife
   according to knowledge, that their prayers be not hindered:' 1 Pet.
   iii. 7. If there be such brawls in the family, how can the husband and
   wife call upon God with such a united heart as is requisite? So, 1 Tim.
   ii. 8, I will that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without
   wrath and doubting.' Not only lift up pure' hands to God, and that
   without doubting;' there must be confidence in our prayers. But that is
   not all: but without wrath;' there must be nothing of revenge and
   passion mingled with your supplication. And then it checketh pride and
   disdain. Christ teacheth all, in all conditions, whether masters or
   servants, fathers or children, kings or beggars, all to say Our
   Father;' for we have all one Father. Thou hast not a better Christ, nor
   a better Father in heaven, than they have. The rich and the poor were
   to give one ransom under the law, Exod. xxx., to show they have all the
   same Redeemer. The weak should not despise nor disdain the strong, nor
   the rich be ashamed to own the poor as brethren. We should never be
   ashamed to own him as a brother whom God will own as a sou.

   Which art in heaven.

   WE have considered the title given to God with respect to his goodness
   and mercy: He is a Father--our Father.' Now, let us consider the titles
   given to him with respect to his greatness and majesty: Which art in
   heaven.' From thence note:--

   Doct. It is an advantage in prayer to look upon God as a Father in
   heaven.

   By way of explication, to show:--

   First, What is meant by heaven. There are three heavens in the
   computation of the scripture. There is, first, the lowest heaven, that
   where the fowls of the air are, whence the rain descendeth; therefore
   the fowls are called the fowls of heaven,' Job xxxv. 11; and, James v.
   18, Elijah prayed, and the heaven gave rain.' Secondly, the luminary
   heaven, where the sun, moon, and stars are: therefore it is said, Mark
   xiii. 25, The stars of heaven shall fall.' Thirdly, there is the
   highest heaven, or the heaven of the blessed, spoken of Mat. vii. 21:
   Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
   kingdom of heaven;' that is, into the third heaven, the glorious
   heaven, the blessed presence of God. Mat. xviii. 10: In heaven their
   angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven:' in
   heaven, that is, the third heaven.' So it is called by Paul, 2 Cor.
   xii. 2, which was the highest part, because he saw and heard things
   which it is not lawful for a man to utter. In this heaven God is.

   Secondly, How is God there, since he is everywhere?

   Negatively; It is not to be understood so as if he were included in
   heaven, or locally circumscribed within the compass of it; for the
   heaven of heavens cannot contain him:' 1 Kings viii. 27. In regard of
   his essence, he is in all places, being infinite and indivisible. He is
   not included within the heavens, nor excluded from earth, but filleth
   all places alike: Jer. xxiii. 24, Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith
   the Lord.' But yet in an especial manner is God present in heaven. That
   appears, because there is his throne: Ps. ciii. 19, He hath prepared
   his throne in the heavens.' Earthly kings, they have their thrones
   exalted higher than other places, but God's throne is above all, it is
   in heaven. He hath a more universal and unlimited empire than all the
   kings of the earth; so he hath a more glorious throne. Heaven is the
   most convenient place to set forth his majesty and glory to the world,
   because of the sublimity, amplitude, and purity of it. And so, Isa.
   lxvi. 1, Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is
   my footstool.' Heaven is his throne, because there is his majestical
   presence, more of his glory and excellency is discovered: and the earth
   is his footstool, because there, in the lowest part of the world, he
   manifesteth his powerful presence the lower creatures.

   Briefly, to conceive how God is in heaven, we must consider:--

   [1.] The several ways of his presence. He is in Christ, hypostatically,
   essentially, or (as the apostle speaks) bodily: Col. ii. 19, The
   fulness of God dwells in him bodily.' In the temple, under the law,
   there God was present symbolically, because there were the signs and
   tokens of his presence. The Jewish temple was a sacramental place and
   type of Christ, in whose name, and by whose merit, worship was
   acceptable to God. But now, in Christians, he is present energetically,
   and operatively, by his Spirit. And in heaven, he there dwells by some
   eminent effects of his wisdom, power, greatness, and goodness. God hath
   showed more of his workmanship in the structure of the heavens than in
   any other part of the creation, that being the most glorious part of
   the world: Ps. xix. 1-3, The heavens declare the glory of the Lord, and
   the firmament showeth his handiwork,' &c. Certainly it is meet God
   should dwell in the most glorious part of the world; now heaven is the
   most glorious part of the creation. Heathens in their straits would not
   look to the capitol where their idols were; but to heaven, where God
   hath impressed his majesty and greatness. Whenever we look upon these
   aspectable heavens, the vast expansion, the glorious luminaries, the
   purity of the matter, and sublimity of its posture, it cannot but raise
   our hearts to think of a glorious God that dwelleth there. When we come
   by a poor cottage, we guess the inhabitant is no great person; but when
   we see a magnificent structure, we easily imagine some person of
   account dwells there. So, though the earth doth declare the glory of
   God, and show much of his wisdom and power, yet chiefly the heavens,
   whenever we look upon them, we cannot choose but have awful thoughts,
   and be struck with a religious horror, at the remembrance of the great
   God, which has stretched out these heavens by his wisdom and power.

   [2.] Therefore God is said to dwell in heaven, because from thence he
   manifesteth his powerful providence, wisdom, justice, and goodness. God
   is not so shut up in heaven as not to mind human affairs, and to take
   notice of what is done here below: Ps. xi. 4, The Lord's throne is in
   heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men.' Though
   his throne be in heaven, yet his providence is every where; his eyes
   behold, he seeth how we behave ourselves in his presence; and his
   eyelids try the children of men. He may seem to wink now and then, and
   to suspend the strokes of his vengeance, but it is but for our trial.
   He owneth his children from heaven: Deut. xxvi. 15, Look down from thy
   holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people.' And from thence he
   punisheth the wicked: Rom. i. 18, The wrath of God is revealed from
   heaven.'

   [3.] There is God most owned by the saints and glorified angels,
   therefore he is said to dwell there; as a king is beloved by his
   subjects, but most immediately served and attended upon by those of his
   own court. So that in heaven, there we have the highest pattern of all
   that duty which doth immediately concern God. In this prayer, Hallowed
   be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done,' these three petitions
   concern God more immediately. Now before we put them up, Christ would
   have us think of our Father in heaven, praised by angels and saints
   that fall down before his throne, crying, Honour, glory, and praise.
   There he reigneth, his throne is there, and there he is perfectly
   obeyed and served without any opposition.

   [4.] There God is most enjoyed, and therefore he dwells there, for
   there he doth more immediately exhibit the fulness of his glory to the
   saints and angels. In heaven God is all in all. Here we are supplied at
   second or third hand: Hosea ii. 18, I will hear the heavens, and the
   heavens shall hear the earth,' &c. But there God is immediately and
   fully enjoyed. Here there are many wants and vacuities to be filled up;
   but in thy presence there is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand
   there are pleasures for evermore:' Ps. xvi. 11. Look, as when the flood
   was poured out upon the world, you read that the windows of heaven were
   opened,' Gen. vii. 11; the drops of rain were upon earth, but the
   cataracts and floodgates were in heaven; so when he raineth down drops
   of sweetness upon his people, the floodgates are above, they are
   reserved for that place where they are fully enjoyed.

   Thirdly, Why hath God fixed and taken up his dwelling-place in the
   heavens? I answer,

   [1.] Because mortal men they cannot endure his glorious presence: Deut.
   v. 23, When ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, for
   the mountain did burn with fire, ye said, Behold, the Lord our God hath
   showed us his glory, and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out
   of the midst of the fire: now therefore why should we die? For this
   great fire will consume us; if we hear the voice of the Lord our God
   any more, then we shall die.' Any manifestations of God, how easily do
   they overset and overcome us! A little spiritual enjoyment it is too
   strong for us. If God pour out but a drop of sweetness into the heart,
   we are ready to cry out, Hold, Lord, it is enough; our crazy vessels
   can endure no more. Therefore, when Christ was transfigured, the
   disciples were astonished and fell back; they could not endure the
   emissions and beamings out of his divine glory, because of the weakness
   and incapacity of the present state: therefore hath God a place above,
   where he discovereth his glory in the utmost latitude. It is notable in
   scripture, sometimes God is said to dwell in light,' 1 Tim. vi. 16; and
   sometimes to make darkness his dwelling-place,' Ps. xviii. 11. How doth
   he dwell in light, and how in darkness? Because of the glorious
   manifestations which are above, therefore it is said he dwells in
   light; and because of the weakness and incapacity of our comprehension,
   therefore he is said to dwell in darkness.

   [2.] To try our faith and our obedience, that he might see whether we
   would live by faith, yea or no; whether a believer would love him and
   obey him, though he were invisible and withdrawn within the curtain of
   heaven. You know when the Israelites saw the glory of God, then they
   cried, All that God hath commanded us we will do:' Deut. v. 27. But as
   soon as that manifestation ceased, they were as bad as ever. If all
   were liable to sense, there would be no trial of this world; but God
   hath shut up himself, that by this means the faith of the elect might
   be manifested: for faith is the evidence of things not seen:' Heb. xi.
   1. Where there is no sight there is exercise for faith. And that our
   love might be tried: 1 Pet. i. 8, Whom having not seen, ye love: in
   whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
   unspeakable, and full of glory.' And this is that which discovereth the
   faithless and disobedient world: Job xxii. 12-14, Is not God in the
   height of heaven? How doth God know? can he judge through the dark
   cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to him that he seeth not, and he
   walketh in the circuit of heaven.'

   [3.] It is fit there should be a better place into which the saints
   should be translated when the course of their obedience is ended: Eph.
   i. 3, He hath blessed us with spiritual blessings in heavenly places.'
   The main of Christ's purchase we have in heavenly places. It is fit the
   place of trial and place of recompense should differ; therefore the
   place of trial, that is God's footstool; and the place of recompense,
   that is God's throne. The world, that is a place of trial; it is a
   common inn for sons and bastards, for the elect and reprobate; a
   receptacle of man and beast: here God will show his bounty unto all his
   creatures; but now, in the place of his residence, he will show his
   love to his people. Therefore, when we have been tried and exercised,
   there is a place of preferment for us.

   Fourthly, What advantage have we in prayer by considering God in
   heaven? Very much, whether we consider God absolutely, or with respect
   to a mediator; both ways we have an advantage.

   .First, If we consider the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who have their
   residence in heaven; consider them without respect to a mediator. Why,
   the looking up to God in heaven:--

   [1.] It showeth us that prayer is an act of the heart, and not of the
   lips. That it is not the sound of the voice which can pierce the
   heavens, and enter into the ears of the Lord of hosts, but sighs and
   groans of the spirit. Christians! in prayer God is near to us, and yet
   far from us, for we must look upon him as in heaven, and we upon earth.
   How then should we converse with God in prayer? Not by the tongue only,
   but by the heart. The commerce and communion of spirits is not hindered
   by local distance; but God is with us, and we with him, when our heart
   goeth up.

   [2.] It teacheth the great work of prayer is to lift up the heart to
   God. To withdraw the heart from all created things which we see and
   feel here below, that we may converse with God in heaven: Ps. cxxiii.
   1, Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, thou that dwellest in the heavens;'
   and, Lam. iii. 41, Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in
   the heavens.' Prayer doth not consist in a multitude and clatter of
   words, but in the getting up of the heart to God, that we may behave
   ourselves as if we were alone with God, in the midst of glorious saints
   and angels. There is a double advantage which we have by this getting
   the soul into heaven in prayer. It is a means to free us from
   distractions and doubts. To free us from distractions and other
   intercurrent thoughts. Until we get our hearts out of the world, as if
   we were dead and shut up to all present things, how easily is the heart
   carried away with the thoughts of earthly concernments! Until we can
   separate and purge our spirits, how do we interline our prayers with
   many ridiculous thoughts! It is too usual for us to deal with God as an
   unskilful person that will gather a posy for his friend, and puts in as
   many or more stinking weeds than he doth choice flowers. The flesh
   interposeth, and our carnal hearts interline and interlace our prayers
   with vain thoughts and earthly distractions. When with our censer we
   come to offer incense to God, we mingle sulphur with our incense.
   Therefore we should labour all that we can to get the heart above the
   world into the presence of God and company of the blessed, that we may
   deal with him as if we were by him in heaven, and were wholly swallowed
   up of his glory. Though our bodies are on earth, yet our spirits should
   be with our Father in heaven. For want of practising this in prayer,
   these distractions increase upon us. So for doubts, when we look to
   things below, even the very manifestations of God to us upon earth, we
   have many discouragements, dangers without and difficulties within:
   till we get above the mists of the lower world, we can see nothing of
   clearness and comfort; but when we can get God and our hearts together,
   then we can see there is much in the fountain, though nothing in the
   stream; and though little on earth, yet we have a God in heaven.

   [3.] This impresseth an awe and reverence, if we look upon the glory of
   God manifested in heaven, that bright and luminous place. This is urged
   by the Holy Ghost: Eccles. v. 2, Thou art upon earth, and God is in
   heaven; therefore let thy words be few;' Gen. xviii. 27, Who am I that
   I should take upon me to speak unto the Lord, Who am but dust and
   ashes?' We are poor crawling worms, and therefore, when we think of the
   majesty of God, it should impress a holy awe upon us. Mean persons will
   behave themselves with all honour and reverence when they supplicate to
   men of quality; so should we to God, who is so high and so much above
   us; he is in heaven. It is a diminution of his greatness (Mal. i. 14)
   when we put off God with anything, and come slightly and carelessly
   into his presence.

   [4.] It teacheth us that all our prayers should carry a correspondence
   with our great aim. What is our great aim? To be with God in heaven, as
   remembering that is the centre and place of our rest, to which we are
   all tending: Col. iii. 1, If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
   things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.'
   We come to our Father which is in heaven. He will have his residence
   there, that our hearts might be there. Therefore the main things we
   should seek of God from heaven are saving graces, for these come down
   from above, from the Father of lights:' James i. 17. We have liberty to
   ask supplies for the outward life, but chiefly we should ask spiritual
   and heavenly things: Mat. vi. 22, 23, Your heavenly Father knoweth that
   ye have need of all these things.' What then? First seek the kingdom of
   God,' &c. If we have to do with a heavenly Father, our first and main
   care should be to ask things suitable to his being, and his excellency.
   If children should ask of their parents such a thing as is pleasing to
   their palate, possibly they might give it them; but when they ask
   instruction, and desire to be taught, that is far more acceptable to
   them. When we ask supplies of the outward life, food, raiment, God may
   give it us; but it is more pleasing to him when we ask for grace. In
   every prayer we should seek to be made more heavenly by conversing with
   our heavenly Father.

   [5.] It giveth us ground of confidence in God's power and absolute
   dominion over all things, for God is in heaven above all created
   beings: Ps. cxv. 3, Our God is in the heavens, and doth whatsoever he
   pleaseth.' So 2 Chron. xx. 6, Art not thou God in heaven? and rulest
   not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is
   there not power and might, so that none is able to with stand thee?'
   Oh, what an advantage is this in prayer, when we think of our
   all-sufficient God, who made heaven and earth, and hath fixed his
   throne there! What can be too hard for him?

   [6 .] Here is encouragement against carnal fear. Whatever the world
   doth against us, we have a Father in heaven, and this should bear us up
   against all their threatenings and oppositions. When there were tumults
   and confusions in the world, it is said, Ps. ii. 4, But God, which sits
   in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn.' An earthly parent may have a
   large heart, but a short hand; though they may wish us well, yet they
   cannot defend us, and bear us out in all extremities. But our Father in
   heaven will laugh at the attempts against his empire and greatness.
   Thus considering God absolutely, it is an advantage to reflect upon him
   as a Father in heaven.

   But I suppose this expression hath respect to a mediator. Therefore,

   Secondly, Let us look upon God with respect to a mediator, for so I
   think we are chiefly bound to consider our Father in heaven, because of
   Christ which sits there at his right hand: Heb. viii. 1. It is said
   there, He sat down on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in
   the heavens, a minister of the sanctuary.' Oh, this is comfortable to
   think of. In heaven we have a Saviour, Jesus Christ, representing our
   persons and presenting our prayers to God, by which means God is
   reconciled and well pleased with us. So that our duty in prayer is to
   look up to heaven, and to see Christ at God's right hand as our high
   priest, mediating for us that we may be accepted with God.

   A notable resemblance we have between God's presence in the tabernacle
   or temple, and God's presence in heaven.

   "In the temple you know there were three partitions. There was the
   outward court, and the sanctuary, as the apostle calls it, where the
   table of shew-bread was set, and there was the holy place, the holy of
   holies. Just so in heaven there are three partitions; there is the airy
   heaven, and the starry heaven, and the heaven of heavens: the lower
   heaven, which answers to the outward court; the starry heaven which
   answers to the sanctuary; and the heaven of heavens, which answers to
   the holy of holies by a fit analogy and proportion. Well, in the holy
   of holies, saith the apostle, there was the golden censer and the
   mercy-seat: Heb. ix. 4. There you find God conspicuously manifesteth
   his presence, and gives answers to his people: At the mercy-seat, there
   will I answer thee, saith the Lord.' So here, in this heaven of
   heavens, there is a mercy-seat, there is a throne of grace, and there
   God will answer. We may come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
   obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need:' Heb. iv. 16. Into
   this holy of holies none but the high priest did enter, and that once a
   year, after the sacrifice of atonement for the whole congregation: then
   the high priest was to come into the holy of holies, he was to pass
   through the veil with blood and with sweet incense in his hand. Just
   thus is Jesus entered into the heaven of heavens for us. He is gone
   there to present his blood and sufferings, to appear before God for us,
   to present himself as a sweet-smelling sacrifice: Heb ix. 24; Eph. v.
   2. Now the high priest, when he went with this blood in to the
   mercy-seat, he went in with the names of the twelve tribes upon his
   breast and shoulder, as Jesus also doth appear before God for us,
   representing our persons continually before his Father. Now about the
   mercy-seat, there were cherubims, and figures of angels; just about the
   ark, there they stooped down, to show the angels do attend about the
   throne, to despatch messages abroad into the world, and convey
   blessings to the saints. There is a throne of grace, a mercy-seat, a
   mediator there, angels at God's beck, ready to send up and down, to and
   fro, for the good of the saints. And mark, not only hath Jesus this
   liberty to enter into this heaven of heavens, but all the saints have a
   liberty to enter, and that not only at death, but in their life-time;
   for saith the apostle, Heb. x. 19, Having therefore boldness to enter
   into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus.' All of us, not only when we
   die, and personally go to God, do we enter into the holy of holies, but
   now we have boldness. It relateth to prayer, for the word signifieth
   liberty of speech. This holy of holies, which was closed and shut up
   against us before, is opened by the blood of Jesus; the veil is rent,
   and now all saints have a privilege to come freely to converse with
   God. It is good to observe the difference between the holy of holies,
   and the heaven of heavens. The Jews their sanctum sanctorum was
   earthly; but our holy of holies is heavenly. Into theirs, which was as
   it were God's bed-chamber, the common people were not admitted; none
   but the high priest could enter into the holy of holies. But now into
   ours all believers may enter and converse with God. There the high
   priest could enter but once a year; now we may come to the throne of
   grace as often as we have a cause to present to God. There the high
   priest he entered with the blood of beasts; but we enter by the blood
   of the Son of God. Oh, what a great privilege is this, that we have a
   Father in heaven! In this respect the holy place is now open to us.
   Though we have not a personal access till death, yet by the blood of
   Jesus we may come with boldness, presenting ourselves before the Lord
   with all our wants and desires. The great distance between heaven and
   earth shall not hinder our communion with God, if we have a friend
   above."

   Therefore it is very comfortable now to say, Our Father which art in
   heaven;' that is, our gracious and reconciled Father, in and by Christ.

   APPLICATION.

   If we have a Father in heaven, let us look up to heaven often.

   1. If we have a Father in heaven, and a Saviour at his right hand, to
   do all things that are needful for us, let us look upon the aspectable
   heavens with an eye of sense, with our bodily eyes. It is good to
   contemplate the glory of the heavenly bodies, or the outside of that
   court which God hath provided for the saints. It is not an idle
   speculation I press you to; the saints of God have thought it to be
   worthy of their morning and evening thoughts. It is notable, David
   doth, in two psalms especially, contemplate heaven; one seems to be a
   nightly, the other a morning, meditation. The night meditation you have
   Ps. viii. 3: When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
   moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained.' David was got abroad in
   a moon-shining night, looks up, and had his heart affected. But now the
   19th Psalm, that seems to be a morning meditation; he speaks of the sun
   coming out like a bridegroom from his chamber in the east,' and
   displaying his beams, and heat, and influences to the world; and then
   saith he, ver. 1, The heavens declare the glory of God.' Morning and
   evening, or whenever you go abroad to see the beauty of the outward
   heavens, say, I have a Father there, a Christ there; this is the
   pavement of that palace which God hath provided for the saints.
   Christians, it is a sweet meditation when you can say, He that made all
   things is there. It will be a delightful, profitable thing sometimes,
   with an eye of sense, to take a view of our Father's palace, as much as
   we can see of it here below.

   2. Let me especially press you to this: with an eye of faith to look
   within the veil; and whenever you come to pray, to see God in heaven,
   and Christ at his right hand. The great work of faith is to see him
   that is invisible; and the great duty of prayer is to get a sight of
   God in heaven, and Christ at his right hand. What Stephen did
   miraculously, or in an ecstasy, we must do graciously in prayer. Now it
   is said of Stephen, Acts vii. 56, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and
   the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.' There is a great
   deal of difference about Stephen's sight: how the heavens could be
   opened, which are a solid body, and cannot be divided as fluid air, and
   so come together again; how he could see the glory of God with his
   corporal senses, which is invisible; how he could see Christ at such a
   distance, the eye not being able to reach so far. Some think it to be a
   mere intellectual vision, or a vision of faith; that is, he did so
   firmly believe, and had the comfort of it in his heart, as if he had
   seen it with his eyes. So they think Stephen saw the glory of God, and
   Christ at his right hand, as Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced;
   that is, he saw it by faith. Some think it to be a prophetical vision,
   by seeing those things objected to his fancy by imaginary species; as
   Isaiah saw God in a vision--Isa. vi.--and as Paul's rapture. Some think
   it a symbolical vision; that he saw these things represented by some
   corporal images, as John saw the Holy Ghost descending in the form of a
   dove. Some think his bodily eyes did pierce the clouds, and got a sight
   of the glory of Christ. Whatever it be, there must be such a sight in
   prayer, something answerable to this. In a spiritual way, this must
   ever be done: Ps. v. 3, I will pray,' saith the psalmist, and look up.'
   There is a looking up required in all prayer, a seeing the invisible
   God by faith. If you would have God look down upon you from his holy
   habitation, you must look up with an eye of faith, and converse with
   God in heaven: Ps. lxiii. 4, I will lift up my hands in thy name.' If
   you would have God look upon you with an eye of compassion, you must
   look up, and see Christ at his right hand, by an eye of faith.

   3. Let us love our Father; love God in Christ, and love the place for
   his sake, where his residence is.

   [1.] Love God in Christ: Ps. lxxiii. 25, Whom have I in heaven but
   thee?' When God hath been so gracious to you! Christians, if I had no
   other argument to press you to love God but that he which is in heaven
   offereth to be your father in Christ Jesus, it might suffice; because
   it is a great condescension that the God of heaven will look upon poor
   broken-hearted creatures--that he whose throne is in heaven would look
   upon him that is of a trembling spirit: Isa. lxvi. 2. That the high and
   lofty One, that dwelleth in the high and holy place, will look to him
   that is of a contrite heart:' Isa. lvii. 15. That he that is the Lord
   of heaven and earth will be our Father, and own us and bless us! A
   great condescension on God's part, and a great dignity also is put upon
   us; and how should our hearts be affected with it! Therefore, though
   there be a great distance between heaven and earth, it should not
   lessen our affections to God. He is mindful of us, visits us at every
   turn; we are dear and tender to him; therefore let the Lord be dear to
   you. The butler, when he was exalted, forgot Joseph; but Christ is not
   grown stately with his advancement--he doth not forget us. Oh, let not
   us forget God. Let us manifest our love, by being often with him at the
   throne of grace, with our Father which is in heaven. A child is never
   well but when in the mother's lap or under the father's wing: so should
   it be with us, with a humble affection coming into the presence of God,
   and getting into the bosom of our heavenly Father. Never delight in
   anything so much as conversing with him, and serious addresses to him
   in prayer. Again:--

   [2.] Love the place for his sake; God is there, and Christ is there. We
   have cause to love the place for our own sakes; and in a short time, if
   you continue patient in well-doing, you will be with God. It is not
   only God's throne, but it is your house: 2 Cor. v. 1, We look for an
   house in heaven, not made with hands.' It is a place appointed for our
   everlasting abode; therefore all our hopes, desires, and delights
   should run that way. But chiefly I would press you to love it for his
   sake, the place where your heavenly Father dwells. God hath not taken
   his denomination from earth, which is the place of corruption; but from
   heaven, which is the place of glory and happiness. Oh, let us not
   forget our heavenly Father's house. We are too apt to say, It is good
   to be here. Christians, let us draw home apace; let us grow more
   heavenly-minded every day; seek the things which are above; prize it
   rather upon this occasion, because if we were more heavenly in the
   frame of our hearts, we would be more heavenly in our solemn approaches
   to God. What is the reason a man is haunted with the world, and things
   which are of a worldly interest and concern, when he comes to prayer?
   It is because his heart is taken with these things.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Hallowed be thy name.

   WE are now come to the first petition of the Lord's Prayer; there three
   things will fall under discussion:--

   I. The order of this petition.

   II. The necessity of putting up such a request to God.

   III. The sense and meaning of the petition itself.

   I. Of the order; it is the first of all the six. The petitions of the
   Lord's Prayer may thus be ranked:--The four first concern the obtaining
   of good; and the two last, the removal of evil--either the removal of
   evil past, and already committed, or the removal of evil future, and
   such as may be admitted by the temptation of the devil. Among the
   former, those things that do more immediately concern the glory of God,
   they have the first place. In this petition, the glory of God is both
   desired and promised on our part; for every prayer is both an
   expression of a desire, and also an implicit vow or a solemn obligation
   that we take upon ourselves to prosecute what we ask. Prayer, it is a
   preaching to ourselves in God's hearing. We speak to God to warm
   ourselves, not for his information, but for our edification.

   From the order observe:--

   Doct. That those things are to be desired in the first place, and with
   the greatest affection, which do concern the glory of God. The first
   petition is, Hallowed be thy name.'

   Here to show:--

   1. Why this petition is put first.

   2. Present some reasons of the point.

   First, This petition is put first, for a double reason:--

   1. Partly to show that this must be the end of all our requests. All
   that we desire and pray for, in behalf of ourselves and others, must be
   subordinate to this end. All these things must be asked, that by the
   accomplishment of them God may be brought more in request in the world.
   See all the other petitions in this prayer, how they are suited to this
   end in scripture. When we say, Thy kingdom come,' what do we beg that
   for, but ultimately the glory of God? Phil. ii. 10, 11, God hath given
   him a name which is above every name, that every tongue should confess
   that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.' When we
   say, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven,' it is still to the
   glory of God: Mat. v. 16, That our good works may still shine forth
   before men here upon earth, that they may glorify our Father which is
   in heaven.' When we ask our daily bread, and provisions for the present
   life, it is still that he may be glorified in our comfortable use of
   the creature: 1 Cor. x. 31, Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
   whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.' When we ask for the
   remission of sins, it is that God may be glorified in Christ: Rom. iii.
   25, 26, Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
   his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that
   are past, that he may be just,' &c. When we beg freedom from
   temptation, it is that we may not dishonour God: Prov. xxx. 9. Lest I
   be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor,
   and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.' Still that God may be
   glorified in every condition. When we ask deliverance from evil: Ps. l.
   15, Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou
   shalt glorify me.' So that the glory of God, in all requests that we
   make to him, like oil, still swims on the top, and must be the end of
   all the rest; for other things are but means in subordination to it.

   2. It notes that our chiefest care and affection should be carried out
   to the glory of God when we pray. We should rather forget ourselves
   than forget God. God must be remembered in the first place. There is
   nothing more precious than God himself, therefore nothing should be
   more dear to us than his glory. This is the great difference between
   the upright and the hypocrite: the hypocrite never seeks God but when
   his necessities do require it, not in and for himself; but when the
   upright come to seek God, it is for God in the first place--their main
   care is about God's concernments rather than their own. Though they
   seek their own happiness in him, and they are allowed so to do; yet it
   is mainly God's glory which they seek, not their own interests and
   concernments. See that: Ps. cxv. 1, Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord,
   but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.'
   It is not a doxology, or form of thanksgiving, but a prayer; not for
   our safety and welfare, so much as thy glory; not to reek and satisfy
   our revenge upon our adversaries; not for the establishment of our
   interest; but for the glory of thy grace and truth, that God may be
   known to be a God keeping covenant; for mercy and truth are the two
   pillars of the covenant. It is a great dishonouring of God when
   anything is sought from him "more than himself, or not for himself.
   Saith Austin, it is but a carnal affection in prayer when men seek self
   more than God. Self and God are the two things that come in
   competition. Now there are several sorts of self; there is carnal self,
   natural self, spiritual self, and glorified self. Above all these God
   must have the pre-eminence.

   [1.] Carnal self. By a foolish mistake we take our lusts to be
   ourselves: Col. iii. 5, Mortify your members here upon earth.' And
   these members he makes to be fornication, uncleanness, and the like.
   Our sins are as dear to us as any essential or integral part of the
   body; they are our members. Now, these should have no room in our
   prayers at all, though usually they have the first place: James iv. 3,
   Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
   upon your lusts.' Our prayers should be the breathings of the spirit,
   and usually they are but the belches and eructations of the flesh. And
   for these it is we are so instant and earnest with God. We would have
   God bless us in some revengeful and carnal enterprise. We deal with God
   as the thief that lighted his candle at the lamps of the altar. So many
   would make God a party in their carnal designs: Prov. xxi. 27, The
   sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; how much more when he
   bringeth it with a wicked mind?' It is an abomination when it is at the
   best; but when he hath an ill aim, then it is an abomination with a
   witness. Foolish creatures vainly imagine to entice heaven to their
   lure. Balaam builded altars and sacrificed, out of hope that God would
   curse his own people, and engage in Moab's quarrel; like the man in the
   Gospel that would make no other use of Christ than to compose his civil
   difference: Luke xii. 13. He comes to him as a man of authority,
   Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me.'
   We all look upon God, tanquam aliquem magnum, as Austin said he did in
   his infancy, as some great power that would serve all our carnal turns.
   In this sense we make God to serve our sins, Isa. xliii. 24, when we
   would have God to contribute to our lusts, to our pride, wantonness,
   revenge. This is such a foolish request, as if a wife should beg of her
   husband to give her leave to go on with her adulteries. Survey all the
   petitions which are in this present platform of prayer, there is not
   one that is calculated for such an evil purpose as our revenge, pomp,
   pride, pleasure. Carnal self surely must give way to God.

   [2.] There is a natural self, when we seek our own temporal felicity.
   Christ hath allowed these natural desires a room in our prayers; but
   they must keep their order and their place: first, God's glory; and
   then, our safety. The obtaining of natural good is put in the last
   place. And, therefore, when our thoughts only run upon temporal
   felicity and outward supplies, it is not prayer, but a brutish cry:
   Hosea vii. 14, They howl upon their beds for corn, wine, and oil.'
   Beasts are sensible of their pain, and are carried by natural instinct
   to seek their own welfare, as well as men. And, therefore, when this is
   our first and only request, it is a perversion of that order which
   Christ hath set down in this perfect form of prayer.

   [3.] There is spiritual self, which is valuable either in point of
   justification or acceptance with God, or in point of sanctification and
   conformity to him. Now, as these blessings cannot be severed from God's
   glory where they are really enjoyed, so they must not be severed in our
   prayers, nor preferred before it. To ask pardon as a separate benefit
   as it concerns our ease and quiet, not as it concerns God's glory, is a
   perversion and a diversion of our prayers. The main thing which God
   intends should be the main thing in our requests, is, the praise of his
   glorious grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved,' Eph.
   i. 6. And, therefore, this is the main thing which the soul intends:
   Ps. lxxix. 9, Help us, God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name;
   and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake.' The
   argument is not taken from themselves merely, or from their own misery,
   but from God's glory. If God could not be more glorified in our pardon
   and acceptance with him than in our death and damnation, it were an
   evil thing to desire pardon. But now when God hath abundantly cleared
   up this to us, that he is no loser by acts of mercy; that this
   conduceth more to the exalting of his great name, to accept poor
   sinners to mercy; the soul goeth with the more confidence to beg it of
   God, that he would purge us from our filthiness for his name's sake.
   But now men's thoughts are wholly taken up with their own peace and
   safety, and take no care for God's honour. This is but a selfish
   request, or an offer of nature after ease. For the other part, to ask
   for grace and conformity to God's will, merely as it is a perfection of
   our nature abstractly from God's glory, it is not a right request. It
   is contrary to the very nature of grace, whose tendency is to God in
   the first place, that his name may be glorified, that we should be to
   the praise of his glorious grace. Grace wrought in us is but a
   creature, and not to be preferred before the Creator. See how the
   apostle prays: 2 Thes. i. 11, 12, We pray always for you, that our God
   would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good
   pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power: that the
   name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him,
   according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.' That is a
   regular prayer, when all our spiritual interests are swallowed up in
   God, and we beg that his name may be glorified in us and upon us.

   [4.] There is glorified self, which standeth in the eternal fruition of
   God. Man was made for two ends--to glorify God, and to enjoy him. Now
   our crown of glory must be laid at God's feet; as the elders, Rev. iv.
   10, Saying, Thou art worthy, Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and
   power.' All our desires must give place to this, that he may be
   glorified in our eternal happiness; and we are to beg it no further
   than as it may stand with his honour. Man's chief end, and so his chief
   request, in respect of himself, is, to enjoy God; but with respect to
   God, so it is the highest only of subordinate ends; for the highest,
   chiefly and absolutely, is the glorifying of God.

   Well then, therefore, this is put first, to show that our chiefest care
   and affection should mainly run upon the glory of God, and that God
   might be advanced and lifted up on high.

   Secondly, To give you some reasons why those things which concern the
   glory of God must be sought in the first place, and with the greatest
   affection:--

   1. As we are reasonable creatures, it is fit it should be so. In all
   regular desires the end is first intended, and then the means. But now
   the glory of God, that is the end of all things: Prov. xvi. 4, The Lord
   hath made all things for himself;' that is, for his own glory, for the
   manifesting of his excellency. And so our redemption: Luke ii. 14,
   Glory be to God on high.' When God came to show his good will in
   Christ, it was to make way for his glory: as it begins in good will, so
   it must end in glory. This is the end of all the privileges we have by
   nature and grace. Now God's glory is the end of our being and service,
   and therefore must be first taken care of in our prayers; first his
   glory, and then our profit, for the end is the first thing in tended by
   any rational agent.

   2. As we are the children of God by adoption. The great duty of
   children is to honour their parents. God pleads for honour upon this
   account: Mal. i. 6, If I be father, where is my honour?' So that if you
   consent to the preface, and say, Our Father;' then the next request
   will be, Hallowed be thy name.' If we would own ourselves in such a
   relation, then we must make it our chief desire and care that God might
   be glorified by ourselves and others. Every kind of honour will not
   serve our heavenly Father. He must not be honoured as an ordinary
   father, in a common notion, but as an infinite and eternal Majesty; and
   to prefer anything to his interest or glory, or to equal anything to
   him, it is to make an idol of it, and to renounce him to be our father.
   The case of earthly parents is not always so. But now you renounce God
   when an idol is set in the throne; when any interest or concernment of
   yours is preferred before God, and before his interest and concernment.

   3. That which is of most value and consideration should be sought
   first. Now God's glory it hath an infinite excellency above all other
   things. The glory of God is of more worth than all creatures,--than
   their being and happiness. The end is more worthy than that which
   serveth and conduceth to the end. Meats and drinks they were made for
   the body, therefore are not so good as the body. Who would dig for iron
   with mattocks of gold? The means or instrument is better worth than the
   purchase. Now no matter what becomes of us, so God may be glorified. As
   it is said of David, Thou art better than ten thousand of us;'
   therefore, though they exposed their bodies to hazard, they thought it
   not safe for him. So is God better than the whole world of men or
   angels. Our first care must be that he may be glorified, then let other
   things succeed in their place.

   4. The example of Christ shows how much the glory of God should be
   cared for, and preferred before the creature's good: John xii. 27, 28,
   Father, save me from this hour.' There was the innocent and sinless
   inclination of his human nature. But for this cause came I unto this
   hour; Father, glorify thy name.' He doth not so earnestly insist upon
   that, but submits all his human concernments, though exceeding
   precious, that they might give way to the glory of God; and he had no
   respect to his own ease, or to the innocent inclination of his human
   nature, or to the felt comforts of the Godhead. Now Christ's example it
   is the best instruction. He taught us how we should behave ourselves to
   our heavenly Father; and, therefore, we should learn to prefer the
   honour of God before our own ease; and if God but get up, though we be
   kept low and poor, yet we should be contented. Look, as all natural
   things will act against their particular inclination for a general
   good; as to avoid a vacuity, the air will descend, and the water
   ascend, that there may not be a confusion or dissolution of the frame
   of nature: so hath Christ taught us still to prefer a general good.
   Father, glorify thyself;' that is it we must insist upon, though it be
   with our loss, suffering, trouble, yea, some times with our trouble of
   conscience, we must be content.

   5. From the nature of prayer. The whole spiritual life it is a living
   to God: Gal. ii. 19, I am dead to the law, that I might live unto God.'
   The whole tendency and ordination of all acts of the spiritual life
   they are to God. Even the natural life is overruled and directed to
   this end; there is an eating and drinking to God; the meat and drink we
   take, if God be not the last end of it, it is but a meat-offering and a
   drink-offering to our own appetite, and a sacrifice to Moloch. Now,
   much more in acts of immediate worship, there God will be principally
   regarded, for their respect and tendency is mainly to God. In our whole
   life we are God's, dedicated to him. Every godly man is set apart for
   God. A man that is a Christian must be holy in all manner of
   conversation,' 1 Pet. i. 15. A Christian must look upon himself as one
   that is dedicated to God, when he is at his meals, in his trade and
   calling; and grace is to run out in every act. But much more is this
   tendency of grace to bewray itself in our solemn sequestration of
   ourselves when we mate our nearer approaches to him: Lev. x. 3, I will
   be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people will
   I be glorified.' What is it to sanctify God? A thing is sanctified when
   it is set apart; and God is sanctified when we set apart ourselves
   wholly for him when he hath more than common affections and common
   respects. And therefore in prayer, in the first place, we should go to
   God for God, and surely in such a request we are likely to speed.

   6. Love to God, if it be unfeigned, and hath any strength in the soul,
   will necessarily put us upon this. Love seeks the good of the party
   beloved, as much or more than its own. Those which love have all things
   in common between them, and one counts it done to himself what is done
   to the other; so it is in the love between us and God. Look, as Christ
   loves the saints, and counteth whatever you do to them it is done to
   him, because done to those whom he loved--Mat. xxv.: so, reciprocally,
   the saint which loves God, what is done to God is done to us: when God
   is honoured, we are comforted as much or more than with our own
   benefit; and when God is dishonoured, we have the grief and sorrow: Ps.
   lxix. 9, The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon
   me.' Or if they hear God's name rent in pieces, and men dishonour him
   by their filthy lives, it goeth to their hearts; for God and they have
   but one common interest--nay, they prefer God's interest before their
   own or any other's: John xxi. 15, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me
   more than these?' By the world's maxim, love should begin at home; but
   by Christ's direction, it beginneth with God They are more tender of
   God's glory than their own lives and outward comfort: I count not my
   life dear to me,' saith Paul. Thus you see what reason there is why our
   main care and thoughts should be taken up about the concernments of
   God, and about the glory of his holy name.

   Use 1. To reprove us, that we are no more affected with God's glory.
   Oh, how little do we aim at and regard it in our prayers! We should
   seek it, not only above the profits and pleasures of this life, but
   even above life itself; yea, above life present and to come. But alas!
   since the fall, we are corrupt, and wholly poisoned with self-love; we
   prefer every base interest and trifle before God; nay, we prefer carnal
   self before God. Some are wholly brutish; and so they may wallow in
   ease and pleasure, and eat the fat and drink the sweet, never think of
   God, care not how God is dishonoured, both by themselves and others.
   And then some, oh, how tender are they in matters of their own
   concernment, and affected with it, more than for the glory of
   God!--John xii. 43. They are more affected with their own honour, and
   their own loss and reproach, than with God's dishonour or God's glory.
   If their own reputation be but hazarded a little, oh, how it stings
   them to the heart! But if they be faulty towards God, they can pass it
   over without trouble. A word of disgrace, a little contempt cast upon
   our persons, kindles the coals and fills us with rage; but we can hear
   God's name dishonoured, and not be moved with it. When they pray, if
   they beg outward blessings, if they ask anything, it is for their
   lusts, not for God; it is but to feed their pomp and excess, and that
   they may shine in the pomp and splendour of external accommodations. If
   they beg quickening and enlargement, it is for their own honour, that
   their lusts may be fed by the contributions of heaven; so, by a wicked
   design, they would even make God to serve the devil. The best of us,
   when we come to pray, what a deep sense have we of our own wants, and
   no desire of the glory of God! If we beg daily bread, maintenance, and
   protection, we do not beg it as a talent to be improved for our
   master's use, but as fuel for our lusts. If we beg deliverance, it is
   because we are in pain, and ill at ease; not that we may honour and
   glorify God, that mercy and truth may shine forth. If we beg pardon, it
   is only to get rid of the smart, and be enlarged out of the stocks of
   conscience. If they beg grace, it is but a lazy wish after
   sanctification, because they are convinced there is no other way to be
   happy. If they beg eternal glory, they do not beg it for God, it
   appears plainly, because they can be content to dishonour God long,
   provided they at length may be saved. Most of us pray without a heart
   set to glorify God, and to bring honour unto his great name. Though a
   man hath never so much sense and feeling in his prayer, yet if his
   heart be not duly set as to the glory of God, his prayer is turned into
   sin. It is not the manner or the vehemency only, for a carnal spring
   may send forth high tides of affection, and motions that come from lust
   may be earnest and very rapid; therefore it is not enough to have
   fervour and vehemency, but when our aim is to honour and glorify God:
   Zech. vii. 5, 6, When ye fasted, did ye at all fast unto me, even to
   me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did you not eat for
   yourselves, and drink for yourselves?'

   Use 2. For exhortation, to press us to seek the glory of God above all
   things. Take these arguments:--

   1. How necessary it is the Lord should have his glory. The world serves
   for no other purpose; it is made and continued for this end: Rev. iv.
   11, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power;
   for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
   were created.' All that God hath made, it was for his own glory; and,
   Rom. xi. 36, For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to
   whom be glory for ever. Amen.' Of him, in a way of creation; through
   him, by way of providential influence and supportation; that they may
   be to him in their final tendency and result. God did not make us for
   ourselves, but his own glory.

   2. It is a singular benefit to be admitted to sanctify God's name. Oh
   that poor worms should come and put the crown upon God's head! and that
   he will count anything we can do to be a glory to himself: 1 Chron.
   xxix. 14, But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able
   to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee, and
   of thine own have we given thee.'

   3. Consider how much it concerneth us, that we may make some
   restitution for our former dishonouring of God; therefore we should be
   more zealous in this work. How forward have we been to dishonour God in
   thought, word, and deed, before the Lord wrought upon us! There is not
   a mercy but we have abused it, nor anything we have meddled with, but
   one way or other we have turned it to the Lord's reproach and
   dishonour. Now when the Lord hath put grace in our hearts, when we are
   a people formed for his praise'--Isa. xliii.--when he hath made us
   anew, we should think of making some restitution, some amends to God,
   and should zealously affect his glory above all things.

   Use 3. For trial. Do we prefer the glory of God in the first place?
   Take these marks:--

   1. Then we would be content with our loss, provided the name of God may
   gain any respect in the world; and so he may be magnified, no matter
   what becomes of us, and our interest and concernment: Phil. i. 20. The
   apostle expresseth there a kind of indifferency: so Christ shall be
   magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death.' Oh, then it
   is a sign you make it your purpose, drift, and care, when you are
   contented to do or be anything that God will have you to be or do. This
   holds good, not only in temporal concernments, when you are content to
   want necessary food, &c., but it holds also in spiritual concernments:
   as to sense of pardon, though God should suspend the consolations of
   his Spirit, yet, if it be for the glory of his grace, I am to be
   content; nay, in some cases God's glory is more to be cared for than
   our own salvation, if they two could come in competition; but that case
   never falls out with the creature--our salvation is conjoined with the
   glory of God. But yet, in supposition, if it should, as Paul and Moses
   puts the supposition--Exod. xxxii. 32, Blot me, I pray thee, out of the
   book which thou hast written'--so God might be honoured in saving that
   people. So Rom. ix. 3, For I could wish that myself were accursed from
   Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.' It was not
   a rash speech, a thing spoken out of an unadvised passion: see but with
   what a serious preface it is ushered in, ver. 1, God is my witness, I
   lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.' He
   calls God to witness this was the real disposition of his heart, and he
   speaks advisedly, and with good deliberation.

   Object. But is it lawful thus to wish to be accursed? Certainly Paul
   could not wish himself to love Christ less, or to be less beloved of
   him; for these things we cannot part with .them without sin; but in our
   enjoyment of Christ there is a happy part, some personal happiness
   which resulteth to us. Now all this he could lay at God's feet. How so?
   What, for others? A regular love begins at home, and every man is bound
   to look to his own salvation first, and then the salvation of others.
   But that was not the case; it was not their salvation and Paul's
   salvation which was in competition, but the glory of God, and the
   common salvation of the Jews, and Paul's particular salvation. It was a
   mighty prejudice to the gospel that the people from whom Christ's
   messengers proceeded--for the law went out of Sion, the gospel came out
   from among the Jews--that so many of them were prejudiced, and a mighty
   eclipse to the glory of God. Now he could lay down all his personal
   happiness at God's feet, he speaks in supposition, if such a case falls
   out. But, however, this is a clear rule: the glory of God must be
   preferred before our own salvation. In some cases there will be need of
   this rule. For in stance, there is many a man that possibly is
   convinced of a false religion; and the first question men make is, if
   they can be saved in such a religion, but many men are hardened in
   Popery. When, therefore, a man is contented to continue in a false
   religion, and dishonour God with his compliance there, provided he may
   be saved, he prefers his own salvation before the glory of God; and in
   case of the delay of repentance, when men dally with God, and put off
   the work of returning to the Lord until another time, or hereafter it
   is time enough to repent, these men prize their salvation before the
   glory of God. If it were true upon that supposition, that if ever they
   shall be saved, they are contented God shall be dishonoured a great
   deal longer, and that if they be saved at length this will satisfy
   them.

   Quest. But how may we discern that we make the glory of God the first
   and chief thing we aim at in prayer?

   1. Partly by the work of your own thoughts. The end is first in
   intention, though last in execution. When you are praying for a public
   mercy against an enemy, what runs in your thoughts? Revenge, safety,
   and your own personal happiness, or God's glory? What wilt thou do, O
   Lord, unto thy great name?' Josh. vii. 9. Are you pleasing yourselves
   with suppositions of your escape and deliverance, and reeking your
   wrath upon your adversaries? So in prayer for strength and quickening,
   what is it that runs in your mind? Are you entertaining your spirit
   with dreams of applause, and feeding your minds with the sweetness of
   popular acclamation?

   2. By the manner of praying, absolutely for God's glory, but for all
   other things with a sweet submission to God's will: John xii. 27,
   Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this
   hour. Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven,
   saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.' Christ is
   absolute in the request, and he receives an answer. Is this enough? Do
   you mainly press God with this, that he might provide for his own
   glorious name, that his name might not lie under reproach? But now
   carnal aims do make affection impetuous and impatient of check and
   denial. Rachel must have children, or die. When the heart is set upon
   earthly success, pleasure, or comfort, then they cannot brook a denial
   without murmuring. The children of God only accept of God's glory, and
   in all other things they leave themselves to God's disposal, and
   therefore this is the main thing.

   3. Partly too by the disposition of your hearts when your prayers are
   accomplished, and God hath given any blessing you pray for. We do not
   ask it for God's glory, if we do not use it for God's glory. The time
   of having mercies is the time of trial, and therefore when we consume
   our mercies upon our lusts, when they do not conduce to check our sins,
   it is a sign God's glory is not the thing intended as it should be.

   Thus for the order of this petition.

   II. The necessity of putting up such a request to God. It is his charge
   to us in the third commandment, that we should sanctify his name: Thou
   shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.' The positive part
   of that commandment is, thou shalt sanctify it. Now here we make it
   matter of prayer to God: Hallowed be thy name.' From whence let me
   observe:--

   Doct. Those that would have God's name hallowed and glorified, must
   seriously deal with God about it.

   There are several reasons why we must put up such requests to God. I
   might argue from the utility and the necessity of it.

   First, The utility. We put up these requests to God:--

   1. That we may more solemnly warn ourselves of our own duty. In prayer
   there is an implicit vow, or solemn obligation, that we take upon
   ourselves to prosecute what they ask. It is a preaching to ourselves in
   God's hearing. So that every word we speak to God is a lesson to us,
   and our requests are so many exhortations to glorify his holy name.
   With what face can we ask that which we are wholly reckless and
   neglectful of? Then we shall certainly come under that character: Mat.
   xv. 7, 8, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and
   honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.' It is
   the greatest mockage of God to ask, unless we have a mind to pursue and
   diligently to attend to this work and business, that the name of God
   may be glorified in us and upon us.

   2. That we may have a due sense and grief for God's honour. God's
   children they are troubled to see God dishonoured. Lot's righteous soul
   was vexed, not with Sodom's injuries, but with Sodom's sins, 2 Pet. ii.
   8. And David saith: Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because men
   keep not thy law.' Ps. cxix. 136. Many will scarce weep for their own
   sins, where they have advantage of remorse of conscience; but when they
   are zealously affected with God's glory, they will weep for others'
   sins. When his name is torn and rent in pieces, it is a grief of heart
   to them. Now God will have us ask this, that this holy sense of
   spiritual grief may be kept up; for when it is become the matter of our
   requests, then we are interested in the glory of God. We are loth to
   see things miscarry where we have petitioned and begged for others; so
   when we have begged the glory of his name, it will further this
   spiritual sense and grief of heart when his name is dishonoured.

   3. That we may count it as great a blessing when God is glorified as
   when we are saved. Continue in prayer,' saith the apostle, and watch
   thereunto with thanksgiving.' When we have been instant with God in
   prayer, that he might be glorified, then we shall count it as great a
   blessing when he is glorified as when we are saved. Prayer makes way
   for the increase of our esteem, and engages us to observe the return.
   When we have asked it of God, we will be affected with it then. When we
   see all his works praise him, what a comfort will this be to the soul:
   Bless the Lord, O my soul.' Ps. ciii. 22.

   But secondly, Let me show the necessity of dealing with God about it.
   The necessity will appear both in respect of persons and things; when
   we beg that God's name may be hallowed, we beg dispositions of heart
   and occasions.

   First, The necessity will appear in respect of persons, both as to
   ourselves and others.

   First, In respect of ourselves, there is a great necessity that we
   should deal with God about the hallowing of his name; because we need
   direction, sincerity, quickening, submission to God, humility, and
   holiness.

   To instance in these six things:--

   1. We need direction. The habits of grace are God's gifts, and the
   exercise of grace is another thing; to actuate, quicken, guide, and
   direct it: 2 Thes. iii. 5, The Lord direct your hearts to the love of
   God.' And so in prayer, and in honouring of God. In prayer, we know
   not' how or what to pray for as we ought.' Though we have grace, yet we
   need direction. A ship that is well rigged, yet needs a skilful pilot:
   Rom. viii. 26, Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for we
   know not what we should pray for as we ought.' How much are we to seek
   to give God his due honour!' Of ourselves we cannot so much as think a
   good thought:' 2 Cor. iii, 5. There is an utter insufficiency in us to
   meditate of God, and conceive aright of his excellency, and give him
   the honour which is due to him. None of us but needs daily to go to
   God, that we may be taught how to hallow and sanctify his name.

   2. We need quickening, being so backward to this duty. All the lepers
   could beg help, and but one returned to give God the glory. There is
   much dulness and deadness of heart as to the praising of God, and
   glorifying of God. Self-love will put us upon other things; but it is
   grace must quicken us to glorify him and praise him. When we go to God
   for ourselves, our necessities will sharpen our affections, and put a
   shrill accent upon our prayers. But now when we beg of God for God,
   then there is a greater restraint upon us. And therefore David saith,
   Ps. li. 15, Open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
   praise.' We need God to open our mouths; that is, enlarge our hearts
   and quicken our affections. How apt are we to turn the back upon the
   mercy-seat! Ezek. xlvi. 9. If a man came in at the north gate he was to
   go out at the south gate, but never at the same door. Why? That he
   might not turn his back upon the mercy-seat. When we have prayed, we
   are apt to forget that God which hath blessed us; and therefore that
   our hearts might be enlarged and quickened, we need to go to God.

   3. We need uprightness and sincerity, that we may mind the glory of
   God. This is not a work of nature, but grace: Phil. ii. 21, All men
   seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.' There is the
   fruit and effect of nature, it puts men upon seeking their own things,
   worldly ease, profit, and pleasure. Every creature naturally seeks its
   own welfare; but to make the glory of God our great aim and pursuit, it
   is grace puts upon that. Water ascends no higher than it descends, so
   nature cannot rise beyond itself. The stream cannot rise above the
   fountain, and above the principle. A man that hath nothing but nature,
   he cannot unfeignedly seek the things which are of God. The old man
   with the deceitful lusts, that is the natural man. The upright heart,
   that unfeignedly seeks God, needs grace from above. Without influence
   from God, our actions cannot have a tendency to God. We shall prefer
   our interest before God's glory, if we have no higher principle than
   what our hearts furnish us with.

   4. We must go to God for submission. Now there is a double submission
   required, which if we have not, we shall find it marvellously difficult
   to glorify God. One, as to the choice of instruments; another, as to
   the way and means by which God will bring about his own glory.

   [1.] As to the choice of instruments. There is in us an envy, and
   wicked emulation. Oh, how hard a matter is it to rejoice in the gifts,
   and graces, and services of others, and be content with the
   dispensation, when God will cast us by as unworthy, and use others for
   the glorifying of his name! Therefore that we may refer the choice of
   instruments to God, we need go to him and say, Lord, hallowed be thy
   name;' do it which way, and by whom thou pleasest. We are troubled, if
   others glorify God, and not we, or more than we; if they be more holy,
   more useful, or more serious, self will not yield to this. Now by
   putting up this prayer to God, we refer it to him to choose the
   instrument whom he will employ. It was a commendable modesty and
   self-denial in John Baptist, which is described, John iii. 13, He must
   increase, I must decrease.' When we are contented to be abased and
   obscured, provided Christ may be honoured and exalted; and be content
   with such a dispensation, though with our loss and decrease. Many are
   of a private station, and straitened in gifts, and can have no public
   instrumentality for God; now these need to pray, Hallowed be thy name,'
   that they may rejoice when God useth others whom he hath furnished with
   greater abilities.

   [2.] A submission for the way; that we may submit to those unpleasing
   means and circumstances of his providence, that God will take up and
   make use of, for the glorifying of his holy name. Many times we must be
   content, not only to be active instruments, but passive objects of
   God's glory. And therefore if God will glorify himself by our poverty,
   or our disgrace, our pain and sickness, we must be content. Therefore
   we need to deal with God seriously about this matter, that we may
   submit to the Lord's will, as Jesus Christ did: John xii. 27, 28, Save
   me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour: Father,
   glorify thy name. And there was a voice from heaven that said, I have
   glorified it, and will glorify it again.' Put me to shame, suffering,
   to endure the cross, the curse, so thou mayest be glorified. This was
   the humble submission of Christ Jesus, and such a submission should be
   in us. The martyrs were contented to be bound to the stake, if that way
   God will use them to his glory. Phil. i. 20, saith Paul, So Christ
   shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death:' if
   my body be taken to heaven in glory, or whether it be exercised or worn
   out with ministerial labour. We need to deal with God that we may have
   the end, and leave the means to his own choosing; that God may be
   glorified in our condition, whatever it be. If he will have us rich and
   full, that he might be glorified in our bounty; if he will have us poor
   and low, that he may be glorified in our patience; if he will have us
   healthy, that he may be glorified in our labour; if he will have us
   sick, that he may be glorified in our pain; if he will have us live,
   that he may be glorified in our lives; if he will have us die, that he
   may be glorified in our deaths: and therefore, Whether we live or die,
   we are the Lord's:' Rom. xiv. 9. A Christian is to be like a die in
   the^hand of providence, content whether he be cast high or low, and not
   to grudge at it, whether he will continue us longer or take us out of
   the world. As a servant employed beyond the seas, if his master will
   have him tarry, there he tarries; if he would have him come home, home
   he comes: so that we had need to deal seriously with God about this
   submissive spirit.

   [5.] Humility; that we may not put the crown upon our own heads, but
   may cast it at the Lamb's feet; that we may not take the glory of our
   graces to ourselves. God's great aim in the covenant is, that no flesh
   should glory in itself; but whosoever glories, may glory in the Lord:'
   1 Cor. i. 27-31. He would have us still come and own him, in all that
   we are, and in all that we do. As the good servant gave account of his
   diligence, Luke xix. 16, he doth not say, My industry, but, Thy pound
   hath gained ten pounds.' And Paul was a zealous instrument, that went
   up and down doing good; he laboured more abundantly than they all: yet
   not I, but the grace of God, which was with me:' 1 Cor. xv. 10. In this
   case if we would honour and glorify God, we must do as Joab did, when
   he was likely to take Rabbah: he sent for David to gather up more
   forces, and encamp against the city and take it, Lest I take the city,
   and it be called after my name:' 2 Sam. xii. 28. How careful was he
   that his sovereign might have the honour! So careful should we be that
   the crown be set upon Christ's head, and that he may have the glory of
   our graces and services, that they may not be called after our own
   name, that God may be more owned in them than we. Now what more
   natural, than for creatures to intercept the revenues of the crown of
   heaven, and to convert them to their own use? It is a vile sacrilege,
   to rob God of the glory of that grace he hath bestowed upon us; and yet
   what more common? The flesh is apt to interpose upon all occasions; and
   therefore we need to put up this request, Hallowed be thy name.'

   [6.] There is holiness required, that we may not be a disgrace to God
   and a dishonour to him. The Lord saith, Ezek. xx. 9, That his name
   should not be polluted before the heathen, among whom they (his people)
   were.' The sin of God's people doth stain the honour of God, and
   profane his name. When men profess much to be a people near God, and
   live carnally and loosely, they dishonour God exceedingly by their
   conversation. Men judge by what is visible and sensible, and so they
   think of God by his servants and worshippers; as the heathens did of
   Christ in Salvian's time,--If he was a holy Christ, certainly
   Christians would live more temperately, justly, and soberly. They are
   apt to think of God by his worshippers, and by the people that profess
   themselves so near and dear to him; therefore it concerns us to walk
   so, that our lives may honour him: Mat. v. 16, Let your light so shine
   before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
   which is in heaven.' As the loins of the poor (saith Job) blessed him,
   Job xxxi. 20, namely, as they were fed and clothed by his bounty; so
   our lives may glorify God. David saith, Ps. cxix. 7, Then shall I
   praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I have learned thy
   righteous judgment.' There is no way to praise God entirely and
   sincerely until we have learned both to know and do his will. Real
   praise is the praise God looks after. Otherwise we do but serve Christ
   as the devil served him, who would carry him upon the top of the
   mountain, but it was with an intent to bid him throw himself down
   again. So we seem to exalt God much in our talk and profession; yea,
   but we throw him down, when we pollute him and deny him in our
   conversation. Our lives are the scandal of religion, and a pollution
   and blot to the name of God. So that with respect to ourselves, you
   see, what need we have to go to God. that he will give us grace that we
   may please him and glorify his name.

   Secondly, In regard of others. A Christian cannot be content to glorify
   God himself, but he would have all about him to glorify God. .As fire
   turns all things round about it into fire; and leaven, it spreads
   still, until it hath subdued the whole lump: so is grace a diffusive, a
   spreading thing. As far as we can reach and diffuse our influence, we
   would have God brought into request with all round about us. Being
   converted,' saith Christ to Peter, strengthen thy brethren.' So it will
   be where there is true grace. Mules, and creatures which are of a
   mongrel and bastard race, they beget not after their kind: so bastard
   Christians are not for the calling in of others, and the gaining of
   those about them. But a true Christian will be earnest, and much in
   this matter. Now their hearts are not in our power, but in God's;
   therefore we need to be much in prayer, and make this our main request,
   Lord, hallowed be thy name.' For hereby,

   1. We acknowledge God's dominion over the spirits of men, which is a
   great honour to God, and a quieting to us. It is a title often given to
   God in scripture, that he is the God of the spirits of all flesh.' If
   they had a magistrate to choose, they go to God: Num. xxvii. 16, Let
   the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the
   congregation.' If a judgment to be averted, Num. xvi. 22, O God, the
   God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be
   wroth with all the congregation?' This is a great honour to God, when
   we acknowledge the power and dominion that he hath over the hearts and
   spirits of men. To roll a stone is not so much as to rule the
   creatures; and to keep the sun in its course is not so much as to rule
   the spirits of men, and to work them to the glorifying of his holy
   name. God can turn the hearts of men this way and that way, according
   as he pleaseth: Prov. xxi. 1, The king's heart is in the hand of the
   Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it whithersoever he will.' As
   a man can dispose of a watercourse, turn it hither and thither as the
   necessities of his field or garden require, so can God draw out the
   hearts and respects of men. Surely there would not be so many disorders
   in the world if we did often reflect upon this attribute, or did deal
   .with God about his power over the spirits of men. We are wrathful, and
   think nothing but the confusion of men would serve the turn, and there
   is no riddance of our burden but by the destruction of those who stand
   in our way; whereas the conversion of men, a change of their spirits
   and hearts, would be a better cure, and bring more honour to God, and
   safety with it. The truth is, we look more to men than to God, and that
   is the reason why we pitch rather upon the destruction than the
   conversion of others. Destruction, that may be executed by the
   creature; but conversion, that is a power (to order and regulate the
   spirits of men) which God hath reserved in his own hands. One angel
   could destroy above a hundred and eighty thousand in Sennacherib's camp
   in one night; but all the angels, with their united strength, cannot
   draw in one heart to God. But now the God of the spirits of all flesh,
   who is too hard for him? Oh, did we often reflect upon this, we would
   be dealing with God about this matter, that he would work upon the
   spirits of men. If there be a wicked ruler, or an obstinate child or
   servant, &c., that he would sanctify himself upon them, and change
   their hearts.

   2. You discover much love to God, when, as you would not dishonour him
   yourselves, so you are careful others may not dishonour him. Praise
   him, all ye ends of the earth,' Ps. xcviii. 4, and c. 1. You would have
   all the world own him. Private spirits that would impale and enclose
   religion, that they may shine alone, they do not love God, but
   themselves, their own credit, and their own profit. Would to God all
   the Lord's people were prophets!' Num. xi. 29. That was a free and
   noble speech. God is resembled to the sun, be cause it is he that must
   shine alone; but the church is compared to the moon and stars, where
   all may shine, but every star in its own glory. True Christians would
   have all to be as they are, unless it be with respect to their bonds
   and incumbrances.

   3. You discover love to others, you would have them glorify God. The
   angels, they rejoice when a sinner is converted; they have a great love
   to souls, Luke xv. 7. And so do Christians; the more spiritual they
   are, the more they come near to the blessed spirits above, and the more
   affected they are with the good done to others, and with their
   conversion. Saith Paul, Rom. ix. 3: I could wish that my self were
   accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the
   flesh.' Such a zeal and entire affection he had to the souls of others,
   that he could lay all his personal happiness at Christ's feet. And thus
   you see what need we have to deal seriously with God in this business,
   if indeed we make this our aim. Especially those which are in public
   relations, as Paul was, which had an office put upon him to procure the
   salvation of others, how will their hearts run out upon it!

   Secondly, It is needful we should deal with God about the sanctifying
   of his name, as in regard of persons, so of things and events. God hath
   the disposal of all events in his own hands. There are many things
   which concern the glory of God that are out of our reach, and are
   wholly in God's hands; and therefore it discovers our love to his
   glory, and our submission to his wise and powerful government of all
   affairs, when we deal with God about it, and refer the matter to his
   disposal, and say, Lord, hallowed be thy name,' take the work into thy
   own hands. We discover our love to his glory, because we make it a part
   of our request that all these events may conduce to the glory of his
   majesty. As Joshua, when Israel fell before their enemies: Josh. vii.
   9, Lord, what wilt thou do for thy great name?' There was his trouble.
   And Moses: Num. xiv. 15, 16, What will the nations say round about?'
   Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which
   he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.' It
   goeth near to the heart of God's children when they see anything that
   will tend to God's reproach.

   But that is not all; it is not enough we discover that, but also our
   submission to his wise and powerful government, when we refer the
   matter to his disposal, and can see that he can work out his own ends
   out of all the confusions which happen there; out of sins, errors,
   wars, blood: Ps. lxxvi. 10, The wrath of man shall praise thee; the
   remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.' In the Septuagint it is, the
   wrath of man shall keep holy day to thee, shall increase a festival for
   thee. God many times gets up in the world upon Satan's shoulders. When
   matters are ravelled and disordered, he can find out the right end of
   the thread, and how to disentangle us again; and when we have spoiled a
   business, he can dispose it for good, and make an advantage of those
   things which seem to obscure the glory of his name.

   By the way, both these must go together, our love to his glory, and our
   submission to his providence. Our love to his glory; for we should not
   be altogether reckless and careless how things go; and yet not carking,
   because of the wisdom and power of his providence. The truth is, we
   should be more solicitous about duties than events. The glory of events
   belongeth to God himself, and we are not to take his work out of his
   hand, but mind him in it. Look, as some would learn their
   schoolfellows' lesson better than their own; so we would have things
   carried thus and thus. And so by murmuring we tax providence, rather
   than adore it, and we eclipse the glory of God. Yet we must be sensible
   of the reproaches cast upon God, and must pray to the Lord to vindicate
   and right his name, to take the way and means into his own hands.

   Thus you have seen the necessity of putting up such a request to God,
   Hallowed be thy name.'

   Use 1. Is for information. It informs us that whatever we be stow upon
   God, we have it from God at first: 1 Chron. xxix. 11, Of thine own have
   we given thee.' The King of all the earth, we cannot pay him any
   tribute but out of his own exchequer. When we are best affected to
   God's interest, and pray for God's concernments, we must beg the grace
   which maketh us to do so. It is his own gift. It is he must enable and
   incline us, quicken and direct us. So that in all things he is Alpha
   and Omega--we begin in him, whenever we end in him. And when we do most
   for God, we have all from him.

   Use 2. For direction in the matter of glorifying God, in four
   propositions.

   [1.] This life is not to be valued, but as it yieldeth us opportunities
   for this end and purpose, to glorify God. We were not sent into the
   world to live for ourselves, but for God. If we could make ourselves,
   then we could live to ourselves. If we could be our own cause, then we
   might be our own end. But God made us for himself, and sent us into the
   world for himself. Christ saith: John xvii. 4, Father, I have glorified
   thee on earth,' &c. It is not our duty only to glorify God in heaven,
   to join in concert with the angels in their hallelujahs above, where we
   may glorify him without distraction, weariness, and weakness; but here
   on earth, in the midst of difficulties and temptations. There are none
   sent into the world to be idle, or to bring forth fruit to themselves,'
   Hosea x. 1; to improve their pains [22] and strength, to promote merely
   their own interest; but God's glory must be our chief work and aim
   while we are here upon earth,--this must be the purpose and intent of
   our lives.

   [2.] Every man, besides his general calling, hath his own work and
   course of service whereby to glorify and honour God: John xvii. 4, I
   have finished the work which thou gavest me to do.' As in a great house
   one hath one employment, one another: so God hath designed to every man
   his work he hath to do, and the calling he must be in; some in one
   calling, and some in another; but they all have their ser vice and work
   given them to do for God's glory.

   [3.] In discharge of this work, as they must do all for God, so they
   can do nothing without God. Every morning we should revive the sense of
   it upon ourselves, as the care of our work and aim, so the sense of our
   impotency. This day I am to live with God; but how unable am I, and how
   easily shall I dishonour him!' The way of man is not in himself,' Jer.
   x. 23. When a Christian goeth abroad in the morning, he must remember
   he is at Christ's dispose; he is not to do as he pleaseth, but to be
   guided by rule, and act for God's glory, and fetch in strength from
   Christ: Col. iii. 17, Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the
   name of the Lord Jesus.' Not only in our duties or immediate converses
   with God, but in our sports, business, recreation. What is it to do
   things in the name of Christ,--that is, to do it according to Christ's
   will and command? He hath allowed us time for recreation, for
   conversing with God, and calling in Christ's help, and aiming at his
   glory. If we have anything to do for God, we must do it in his own
   strength, in every word and deed.

   [4.] You are directed again, when the glory of God and sanctifying of
   his name either sticks with us, or sticks abroad, God must be specially
   consulted with in the case. When our hearts are backward, then. Lord,
   open thou my lips;' Lord, affect me with a sense of thy kindness and
   mercy. When it sticks abroad, when such events fall out, as for a while
   God's name is obscured, and seems to be clouded, Lord, what wilt thou
   do for thy great name?'

   III. Having opened the order of the words, and the reasons of putting
   up such a request to God, I now come to the sense of the petition,
   Hallowed be thy name.' Four things will come under consideration:--

   1. What is meant by the name of God.

   2. What it is to hallow and sanctify it.

   3. I shall take notice of the form of the proposal, agiastheto,
   Hallowed.

   4. The note of distinction, thy name.

   First, What is meant by God's name?

   1. God himself.

   2. Anything whereby he is made known.

   [1.] God himself. Name, by an Hebraism, is put for the person itself.
   Thus: Rev. iii. 4, Thou hast a few names even in Sardis, which have not
   defiled their garments;' that is, many persons; so: Acts i. 15, it is
   said there, The number of the names together were about one hundred and
   twenty,' that is of persons. So it is used in the present case. God's
   name is put for God himself: Ps. xx. 1, The name of the God of Jacob
   defend thee!' That is, God himself. So: Ps. xliv. 5, Through thy name
   will we tread them under that rise up against us;' that is, by thee.
   And to believe in the name of Christ is to believe in Christ himself.
   Name is put for person, for the immediate object of faith is the person
   of Christ: John i. 12, To as many as received him, to them gave he
   power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
   name.'

   [2.] Anything whereby he is made known to us, Nomen quasi notamen. As a
   man is known by his name, so God's titles and attributes, his
   ordinances, his works, his word, are his name, chiefly the two latter.
   For his works, they are a part of the name of God: Ps. viii. 1, the
   burden of that psalm is twice repeated, O Lord, our Lord, how great is
   thy name in all the earth!' By the name there, is meant God made known
   in his works of creation and providence, for he speaks there of sun,
   moon, and stars, which proclaim an eternal power to all the world; and
   he speaks of such a name as is in all the earth. And, Ps. cxlvii. 19,
   20, He hath not dealt so with any nation,' and given them his word,
   statutes, and ordinances; every one hath not that privilege. But, How
   great is thy name in all the earth!' That is, how manifestly art thou
   made known by thy works! But above all, by name is meant his word: Ps.
   cxxxviii. 2, Thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.' There is
   more of God to be seen in his word, than in all the creatures of the
   world, and in all his other works besides. We understand more of God
   than can be taken up by the creation. It helps us to interpret the book
   of nature and providence; there we have his titles, attributes,
   ordinances; there we have his greatest work, in which he hath
   discovered so much of his name, the mystery of redemption, which is not
   elsewhere to be known. Thus by the name of God is meant God himself, as
   he hath made known himself in the word. We desire that he may be
   sanctified, that he may with honour and reverence be received
   everywhere.

   Secondly, The second thing to be explained, what is meant by hallowed?
   In scripture God is said sometimes to be magnified, sometimes to be
   justified, sometimes to be glorified, and sometimes to be sanctified.
   Now it is not here said, Magnificetur nomen tuum, or glorificetur, but
   sanctificetur--let thy name be sanctified. All these terms do express
   how God is to be honoured by the creature, and they have all distinct
   notions. God is said to be magnified: Luke i. 46, My soul doth magnify
   the Lord.' To magnify God argueth a high esteem or a due sense of his
   greatness. Again, God is said to be justified: Luke vii. 29, The people
   and the publicans justified God.' What is it to justify God? To justify
   is to acquit from accusation, and when that word is applied to God, it
   signifieth our owning of him notwithstanding the prejudices of the
   world against him. To glorify God is to make him known to others, and
   to bring him into request with others, for glory it is clara cum laude
   notitia, a public fame or knowledge of excellency. Thus Christ saith,
   John xvii. 10, I am glorified in them;' speaking of his apostles,
   because by their means he was made known to the world. All these are
   included in the word of the text. Yet there is somewhat more intended
   by to be sanctified. When is God then said to be sanctified?

   To hallow and to sanctify is to set apart from common use, and so to
   sanctify the name of God, is to use it in a separate manner, with that
   reverence and respect which is not used to anything else. So that when
   we pray that God's name may be hallowed or sanctified, we desire that,
   according as he hath made known himself in the word, so he may be
   known, reverenced, and esteemed in the world. Known to be the only true
   God: 1 Kings xviii. 36, Let it be known this day that thou art God in
   Israel,' and accordingly worshipped and glorified in the hearts and
   lives of men.

   The third thing to open is the form of proposal, agiastheto. It is not
   sanctificemus, let us hallow, but sanctificetur, let it be hallowed,
   for in this form of speech, all the persons concerned in this work are
   included--God, ourselves, and others.

   [1.] God is to be included in the prayer, that we may express our sense
   of his providence working all things for the glory of his holy name,
   yea, discovering his excellency, showing himself to be the holy God:
   Ezek. xxxviii. 23, I will magnify myself, and sanctify myself, and I
   will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that 1
   am the Lord.' The Lord magnifieth himself by the more eminent effects
   of his care and providence, but he sanctifieth himself chiefly by
   blessing and defending the godly, and by punishing and afflicting the
   wicked, for thereby he declareth his holiness, the purity of his
   nature, and his love to saints; so that when we say, Hallowed be thy
   name,' we mean, Lord, declare thyself to be a holy God, by putting a
   distinction between men and men in the course of thy providence, and
   owning thy people from heaven.

   [2.] We include ourselves when we say, Hallowed be thy name,' for it is
   especially the duty of God's people: Isa. xxix. 23, They shall sanctify
   my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of
   Israel.' It is our duty, by our religious carriage, to evidence that we
   have a holy God. This must be our first care, that we ourselves be
   sanctified, and to sanctify our sanctifier, the Holy One of Israel.
   Some, they would have God glorified by others, but do not look to
   themselves how they sanctify God. Now God hath made this to be a great
   part of our care, that his own people should not only magnify and
   glorify him, but sanctify him; therefore he rather makes them good than
   great. When he would make men great, then he shows his magnificence, to
   be the almighty disposer of the riches of the world; but when he makes
   them good, then he expects to be sanctified, that his people should
   discover that he is a holy One; that he is holy in himself, for we add
   nothing to him when we sanctify him, but only discover him to be such a
   one. In short, God sanctifieth us effectively by working grace and
   holiness in us, and we sanctify him relatively, objectively,
   declaratively, declaring him to be a holy God, and that we are a people
   belonging to this God.

   [3.] The speech is so formed that others may be included, and that we
   may express our sense of their dishonouring God, as a thing that is
   grievous to us, that we may show how near it goeth to our heart to see
   the ignorance, atheism, and blasphemy that is in the world. They would
   have the holy God to be sanctified abroad, either by the conversion of
   men, or by their punishment. And so it is meant: Isa. v. 16, God that
   is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.' That is, his holiness
   and hatred of sin shall appear, either in the conversion of obstinate
   sinners, that God may be sanctified by them, or else for punishment,
   that God may be sanctified upon them.

   Fourthly, The next thing is the note of distinction, Hallowed be thy
   name,' not ours. There seems to be a secret opposition between our name
   and the name of God. When we come to pray, we should distinctly
   remember whose name is to be glorified, that God may be at the end of
   every request. We beg of God many times, but we think of ourselves; our
   hearts run upon our own name, and upon our own esteem. How often do we
   come to him with a selfish aim, as if we would draw God into our own
   designs and purposes! None are so unfit to glorify God, and so
   unwelcome to him, as those that are so wedded and vehemently addicted
   to their own honour and esteem in the world. Therefore Christ, by way
   of distinction, by way of opposition to this innate disposition that is
   in us, he would have us to say, Hallowed be thy name.' That which gives
   most honour to God is believing: Rom. iv. 19, 20, Abraham was strong'
   in faith, giving glory to God.' Now, none so unfit for the work as they
   that seek glory for themselves: John v. 44, How can ye believe, which
   receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from
   God only?' Affectation of vainglory, or splendour of our own name, is a
   temper inconsistent with faith, which is the grace that gives honour to
   God. I say, when we hunt after respect from men, and make that the
   chiefest scope of our actions, God's glory will certainly lie in the
   dust; when we are to suffer ignominy and abasement for his sake, the
   care of God's glory will be laid aside. The great sin of the old world
   was this: Gen. xi. 4, Let us make us a name.' There are many conceits
   about that enterprise, what that people should aim at there in building
   so great and so vast a tower, before God confounded their tongues.
   Some, interpreting that place, Let us build us a tower even to heaven,'
   think this was their intention, to make a way into heaven. But it is
   not likely they would be so foolish that had so late experience of the
   flood, and, when the ark rested upon the top of the highest mountains,
   found themselves to be at so great and vast a distance from heaven.
   Some think it was (as Josephus) to secure themselves from another
   flood; but that was sufficiently done by God's promise, who had engaged
   to them he would no more destroy the earth by water; and if that were
   their intention, why should they build in the plain, between the two
   rivers of Tigris and Euphrates? Moses gives the main reason there, that
   they might have an immortal name among posterity. But now see how ill
   they reckon that do reckon without God. Those that are so busy about
   their own name, how soon will God blast them! When in any action we do
   not seek glory to God, but ourselves, it is the ready way to be
   destroyed. This was the means to bury them in perpetual oblivion.
   Nebuchadnezzar, when he re-edified the city, Dan. iv. 30: Is not this
   great Babylon that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the
   might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?' How doth God
   disappoint him, and turn him out among the beasts! Thus are we sure to
   be disappointed and blasted, when our hearts run altogether upon our
   own name. But now Christ saith thy name; when we are careful of that,
   this is the way to prosper.

   From the words thus illustrated, I shall only observe:--

   Doct. That God will be so glorified in the world as that his name may
   be hallowed or sanctified.

   Here I shall show:--

   1. How many ways God's name is sanctified.

   2. Why God will be so glorified as that he may be sanctified.

   First, How many ways is God's name sanctified? I answer, either upon
   us, or by us.

   [1.] Upon us, by the righteous executions and judgments of his
   providence: and so God is sanctified when he doth by a high hand of
   power recover and extort the glory of his holiness from the dead and
   stupid world; as by that notable stroke of the Bethshemites, when fifty
   thousand were slain for peeping into the ark: 1 Sam. vi. 20. This was
   the result of all: Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God?'
   There he discovered himself to be a holy God, to be one that hath a
   high displeasure against the creature's disobedience. Now when he doth
   by a high hand extort this from the wicked, or from his children, then
   he sanctifieth himself upon us.

   [2.] By us. And so he is sanctified in our thoughts, words, and
   actions; in our heart, tongue, or life.

   1. In our hearts: 1 Pet. 3, 15, Sanctify the Lord God in your heart.'
   How is God sanctified in our hearts?

   [1.] When we have awful thoughts of his majesty: Ps. cxi. 9, Holy and
   reverend is his name.' Not only when we speak of the name of God, but
   when we think of it, we should be seriously affected. But,

   [2.] More especially God is sanctified when, in straits, difficulties,
   and dangers, we can bear ourselves upon the power and sufficiency of
   God, and go on resolutely and cheerfully with our duty, notwithstanding
   discouragements. This is to sanctify the Lord God in our hearts. I
   shall prove it by two places where the phrase is used; one is, 1 Pet.
   iii. 15, Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you
   a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.' Mark, the
   Christians that did profess the name of God, which spake of God as
   their hope or object of their religion, were in great danger. Now what
   direction doth he give them, that they might not be afraid, but bear
   up? For he speaks before: Be not afraid of their terror, or be
   troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts.' See the same
   phrase used for the same purpose: Isa. viii. 13, Sanctify the Lord of
   hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.' He
   opposeth it plainly there to carnal fear: ver. 12, Say ye not a
   confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say a confederacy;
   neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; but sanctify the Lord of
   hosts himself, and let him be your fear.' How comes this direction to
   be used in the present case? Thus; to sanctify is to set apart; and to
   sanctify God is to set apart, as the alone object of fear and trust,
   that he alone is to be feared and trusted, so that we can see no match
   for God among the creatures; therefore we are to embolden ourselves in
   the Lord, and go on cheerfully, when we can counterbalance all fears
   and dangers with his surpassing excellency. To glorify God is to do
   that which simply and absolutely tendeth to the manifestation of his
   excellency, without any relation to the creature; but to sanctify God
   is to set God above the creature, to do that which tends to exalt his
   greatness and excellency from and above all terrors, and all the
   discouragements that we can have from the creature; it is to. ascribe
   that greatness, that power and glory, to God alone, which, cannot be
   ascribed to anything else, and so to go on cheerfully with our duty,
   whatever difficulties we meet with. Thus Moses was chidden, that was
   amazed with present difficulty: Num. xx. 12, And the Lord spake unto
   Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes
   of the children of Israel; therefore ye shall not bring this
   congregation into the land which I have given them.' Because they were
   discouraged, and thought they should never carry on their business,
   therefore God saith, Ye believe not to sanctify me:' you sanctify not
   God, or set him aloft, as the alone and supreme object of fear and
   trust. It is a practical acknowledgment of God's matchless excellency.
   Thus we sanctify God in our hearts.

   2. God is sanctified with our tongues, when we use God's name, titles,
   ordinances, and word, as holy things; when we speak of the Lord with
   reverence, and with great seriousness of heart, not taking his name in
   vain; especially when we are deeply affected with his praise. It is no
   slight thing to praise God. God's people, when they have gone about it,
   see a need of the greatest help: Ps. li. 15, O Lord, open thou my lips,
   and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.' And Ps. xlv. 1: My heart is
   inditing a good matter;' my heart fries or boils a good matter: when we
   will not give God dough-baked praise, nor speak of his name slightly,
   but so as becomes his greatness and surpassing excellency.

   3. In our actions. Our actions may be parted into two things,--worship,
   and ordinary conversation.

   (1.) In our worship, there God especially will be sanctified. Lev. x.
   3, I will be sanctified in all that draw near unto me.' God is very
   tender of his worship: sancta sanctis, holy things must be managed by
   holy men in a holy manner. Therefore, what is it to sanctify God when
   we draw nigh to him? To have a more excellent frame of heart in worship
   than we have about other things. As in prayer, the frame of our hearts
   must not be common; we must not go about it with such a frame of heart
   as we go about our callings, worldly business, and converses with men:
   but there must be some special reverence, such as is peculiar to him.
   When we draw near to God in the word, he will be sanctified. The word
   must be received with meekness, and by faith applied to our souls, as
   an instrument designed to our endless good. When we have a peculiar
   reverence for God, and a respect to God in all our approaches; Eccles.
   v. 1, Look to thy feet when thou goest to the house of God:' we must
   not go about these holy services hand over head, but with great caution
   and heed. Thus is God sanctified in worship, or in our immediate
   converse with him.

   (2.) In our ordinary conversation. Then God is sanctified; when our
   life is ordered so that we may give men occasion to say, that surely he
   is a holy God whom we serve. By two things you may know you sanctify
   God in your conversations: when you walk as remembering you have a holy
   God, and when you walk as discovering to others you have a holy God.

   [1.] When you walk as remembering yourselves that you have a holy God,
   therefore you must be watchful and strict. It is notable, when the
   Israelites were making a hasty promise, Joshua puts them in mind, chap.
   xxiv. 9, You cannot serve the Lord, for he is a holy God.' So we should
   remember when we give up ourselves to God, he is a holy and jealous
   God, that is narrowly observant, and he will not be put off with
   anything that is common.

   [2.] As discovering you have a holy God. A carnal worshipper profaneth
   the memory of God in the world. But now a Christian that walks
   according to his holy calling, that is holy in all manner of
   conversation, he discovereth what a God he hath. 1 Pet. ii. 9, That ye
   should show forth the praises of him, who hath called you out of
   darkness into his marvellous light.' We are not only to conceive and
   make use of them to beget fear and reverence in our hearts of the
   all-seeing God, but are to show them forth, to evidence them to others.
   We should discover more than a human excellency, that so those which
   look upon us may say, These are the servants of the holy God.

   Secondly, For the reasons why God will be so glorified, that he may be
   sanctified.

   1. Because this is the glory that is due to his name. Ps. xcvi. 8, Give
   unto the Lord the glory due to his name.' Every glory will not serve
   the turn, but such glory as is proper and peculiar for that God we
   serve. It is a stated rule in scripture, that respects to God must be
   proportioned to the nature of God. God is a spirit, therefore will be
   worshipped in spirit and truth. God is a God of peace, therefore lift
   up your hands without wrath and doubting. God is a holy God, therefore
   will be sanctified. They which worship the sun, among the heathens,
   they used a flying horse, as a thing most suitable to the swift motions
   of the sun. Well, then, they that will glorify and honour God with a
   glory due to his name, must sanctify him as well as honour him. Why?
   For God is glorious in holiness.' Exod. xv. 11. This is that which God
   counteth to be his chief excellency, and the glory which he will
   manifest among the sons of men.

   2. This is that glory which God affects, and therefore the saints will
   give it him, Isa. vi. 3. The holy angels, what do they cry out when
   they honour God? They do not acknowledge his power and dominion over
   all creatures as Lord of all; but they give him his peculiar glory,
   Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of his
   glory.' So David, Ps. ciii. 1, Bless the Lord, my soul; yea, all that
   is within me, bless his holy name.' That is the notion upon which he
   pitcheth, he would praise God with such praise as is welcome and
   acceptable to him.

   3. This is the attribute which is most eclipsed and most blotted out in
   the hearts of the sons of men, because of God's patience, because he
   doth not take vengeance of all the sins of men: Thou thoughtest I was
   altogether such a one as thyself,' Ps. 1. 21. Certainly if men did not
   blot and stain God in their thoughts, if they did not fancy an
   unreasonable indulgence, such as is not comely and proper to his
   majesty, they could not go on in sin, and think God could be so pure;
   therefore he will be so glorified, that he may be sanctified.

   Use. To press us so to glorify God, as we may also sanctify him. Let
   this be your care. To quicken you, remember--

   1. God is much offended with his people that do not sanctify him. Moses
   and Aaron, as choice and as dear to God as they were, yet you know what
   the Lord saith, Num. xx. 12, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me
   in the eyes of the children of Israel; therefore ye shall not bring
   this congregation into the land which I have given them.' When Moses
   and Aaron murmured, and spake unadvisedly, and did not sanctify him,
   nor carry God's excellency aloft, they shall not enter. And God
   remembereth this a great while after, in that, Deut. xxxii. 51, Because
   ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel, at the waters of
   Meribah-Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not
   in the midst of the children of Israel, thou shalt not go into the land
   which I give the children of Israel.' Well, then, though God's children
   should get to heaven, yet if they do not sanctify God they will want
   many a privilege. God will remember this against them; for he takes it
   ill when his people will not sanctify him as becoming his peculiar
   excellency.

   2. If you do not sanctify God, then you pollute God, and stain his
   memory in the world: Ezek. xxxvi. 20, Ye have profaned my holy name
   among the heathen.' How is God polluted? Not intrinsically; God cannot
   receive any pollution from us. It is here, as in that case, A man that
   lusteth after a woman, hath committed adultery already in his heart.'
   Mat. v. 28. The man pollutes the woman in his heart, while she remains
   spotless and undefiled. So in this case we blemish God in appearance,
   as much as in us lies we pollute and blot God, though he remains pure
   and undefiled. You make heathens think as if you had an unholy God.
   Well, then, glorify God.

   For directions:--

   1. Be holy. The praise of the wicked is a disgrace to him, it is an
   obscuring of his praise: 1 Pet. i. 15, As he which hath called you is
   holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.'

   2. Study his name, if ye would sanctify his name: Ps. ix. 10, They that
   know his name will put their trust in him.'

   3. Submit to his providence without murmuring. When we can speak well
   of him, though he seem to deal most hardly; as the Bethshemites, when
   there was such a slaughter made among them, fifty thousand slain; they
   do not say, murmuringly, Who can stand before this severe, cruel God?
   but before this holy God?' They own his holiness in the dispensation,
   though it were so dreadful, 1 Sam. vi. 20. It is a great glory to God
   when you own him as just in all his ways, when he deals most hardly.
   Whatsoever be our lot and portion, yet he is a holy God. But to cavil
   and murmur, it is to tax and blemish God before the world.

   4. Live to public ends, that is, to draw God into request with others.
   Let this be the aim of your conversation, not only to get holiness
   enough to bring you to heaven, but to allure others, and recommend God
   to them, that by the purity and strictness of your conversation you
   might gain upon others, and bring them to be in love with God, and
   acquainted with him.

   And lastly, Be sensible when God's name is dishonoured by your selves
   and others, not enduring the least profanation of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [22] Qu. gains'?--Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Thy kingdom come.

   THE first petition concerneth the end, the rest the means. Now, among
   all the means, none hath such a near and immediate respect to the glory
   of God as Christ's kingdom; for here there is more of God discovered,
   more of his infinite grace, justice, wisdom, and power than possibly
   can be elsewhere. All other things are for the church, and the church
   for Christ as head and king, and Christ for God, 1 Cor. iii. 22, 23. So
   that Christ's kingdom is the primary means of advancing God's glory;
   and therefore among all the means it must be sought in the first place.
   Mat. vi. 33, Seek first the kingdom of God.' First, not above the glory
   of God, it doth not come in competition with that, but above all other
   things whatsoever, before pardon and grace.

   In the words observe three things:--

   I. We grant a kingdom.

   II. By way of distinction and appropriation we say, thy kingdom.

   III. By way of supplication, we beg of God that it may come.

   The concession, the distinction, the supplication are the three things
   to be opened.

   I. First, The concession of a kingdom, which our heavenly Father hath.
   A kingdom in the general signifieth the government of a people under
   one head or governor; and therefore the term may be fitly applied to
   God, who alone is supreme, and we are all under his dominion.

   Now, God's kingdom is twofold:--

   1. Universal.

   2. More particular and special.

   First, There is a universal kingdom over all things; over angels and
   devils; over men elect and reprobate; over beasts and living creatures;
   and over inanimate things, sun, moon, and stars. This is spoken of: 1
   Chron. xxix. 11, Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou are exalted as
   head above all.' And again: Ps. ciii. 19, The Lord hath prepared his
   throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all.' There is no
   such monarch as God is, for largeness of empire, for absoluteness of
   power, and sublimity of his throne. This is not principally understood
   here, but is implied as a foundation and ground of faith, whereupon we
   may deal with God about that kingdom, which is specially intended in
   this request.

   Secondly, More particularly and especially, God hath a kingdom over a
   certain order and estate of men. Of this especial kingdom there are two
   notable branches and considerations. One is that administration which
   belongeth to the present life, and is called the kingdom of grace;' and
   the other belongeth to the life to come, and is called the kingdom of
   glory.'

   1. The kingdom of grace is spoken of in many places, specially that:
   Luke xvii. 20, 21, When he was demanded of the Pharisees when the
   kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The kingdom of
   God cometh not with observation. Neither shall they say, Lo here! or,
   lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you,' or among
   you.' He speaks of a kingdom of God that was already come among them in
   the dispensation of his grace by Christ. And, then, the other belongeth
   to the life to come, called the kingdom of glory: Mat. xxv. 34, Come,
   ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
   foundation of the world;' 1 Cor. xv. 50, Flesh and blood cannot inherit
   the kingdom of God.'

   Now, the kingdom of grace may be considered two ways,--as externally
   administered, and as internally received.

   [1.] As externally administered in the ordinances and means of grace,
   as the word and seals, and censures, and the like. In this sense it is
   said: Mat. xxi. 43, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
   given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.' The gospel or
   means of grace administered in the visible face of the church, they are
   called God's kingdom upon earth, and a very great privilege they are
   when they are bestowed upon any people. Surely, when Christ saith, The
   kingdom of God shall be taken from you,' he doth not mean it of the
   inward kingdom,--that they had not, that cannot be lost,--but of the
   outward and external means.

   [2.] As internally received; and then by it is meant the grace of God,
   which rules in the hearts of the elect, and causeth their souls to
   submit and subject themselves unto the obedience of Christ, and unto
   his sceptre, and to his word and Spirit, that this is that kingdom
   properly which is within us. This is the kingdom of God which
   consisteth in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,' Rom.
   xiv. 17. And this differeth from the kingdom of glory, not so much in
   nature as in degree.

   Well, then, that by the kingdom of God is here meant, not his general
   empire over all the world, and all the things of the world, though that
   be not wholly excluded, but his special kingdom, which he doth
   administer by Christ: and that either as externally managed by
   ordinances and visible means of grace, or as internally received and
   administered in the hearts of the elect. This is that kingdom we beg
   that it may nourish and get ground more and more.

   2. Then for the kingdom of glory, it is either begun and inchoate, or
   else consummate and perfect.

   [1.] It is begun and inchoate upon our translation to heaven in the
   very moment of death, in which Christ reigns in the other world in the
   spirits of just men made perfect--that is, being perfectly freed from
   sin, and admitted into the clear and immediate vision and fruition of
   God, though our bodies abide in the grave, expecting full redemption
   and deliverance. That there is such a kingdom carried on many
   scriptures intimate: Phil. i. 23, I desire to depart, and to be with
   Christ.' As soon as the saints are loosed from the body, they are with
   Christ under his government: Luke xxiii. 43. This day shalt thou be
   with me in paradise.' As soon as Christ died he was in paradise, and
   there was the good thief with him. The scriptures do not establish any
   such drowsy conceit as the sleep of souls, or such an estate wherein
   they do not enjoy God. We read of the spirits of just men made
   perfect,' which make up the congregation which is above, of which
   Christ is head: Heb. xii. 23. As the spirits of the wicked are in
   prison, 1 Pet. iii. 19, that is, in hell. This is the kingdom of glory
   begun.

   [2.] There is a kingdom of glory consummate, when sin and death is
   utterly abolished, and the elect perfectly separated from the
   reprobate, and conducted into heaven, and there remain with the Lord
   for ever. This is a kingdom: Mat. xxv. 34, Come, ye blessed of my
   Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you.' The full and final
   estate we enjoy after the general judgment and resurrection, that is
   called a kingdom. Well, now, you see what is meant by the kingdom we
   pray for.

   II. Secondly, Here is a note of distinction, thy kingdom, by which the
   kingdom here spoken of is limited by particular reference to God, not
   only to difference it from the kingdoms of men, which are subordinate
   to it, but those adverse kingdoms which are set up against God; as the
   kingdom of sin, Satan, antichrist, the destruction of which we intend
   when we pray for the advancement of God's kingdom, as I shall show you.

   III. Thirdly, Here is the supplication or the request which we make to
   God about this kingdom, elthe'to, let it come. What do we mean by that?
   This word must be applied to the several acceptations of Christ's
   kingdom.

   1. If you apply it to the external kingdom of grace, then when we say,
   Thy kingdom come, the meaning is, let the gospel be published, let
   churches be set up everywhere, let them be continued and maintained
   against all the malignity of the world, and opposition of the devil:
   and in the publication of the gospel, where the sound of it hath not
   been heard, that God would come there in the power of his Spirit, and
   draw people into communion with himself: Mat. xii. 28, If I cast out
   devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you,'
   --meaning in the public tenders thereof. Saith he, if this miracle doth
   clearly, as it doth in your consciences, evidence my mission, then you
   may know the kingdom of God is come--that is, that there is a
   publication of the gospel of grace. Then we pray for the continuance of
   this privilege, notwithstanding opposition, that Christ may stand his
   ground. This is that we seek of God, that he may maintain his interest
   among the nations of the world, that the gates of hell may not prevail
   against his kingdom.

   2. If you refer to the internal part of this kingdom, then we beg the
   beginning, the progress, and the final consummation of it. First, The
   beginning or the erection of a throne for Christ in our hearts, and the
   hearts of others, that he may fully exercise regal power. Secondly, The
   increase of this kingdom by holiness and obedience, and sincere
   subjection to him; for the kingdom of grace is so come already, that it
   will still be coming yet more and more. So long as we need to pray, so
   long shall we have cause to say, Thy kingdom come.' Thirdly, The
   consummation of it, when the fulness of glory in the second coming of
   Christ shall be revealed; when our head shall be glorious, and his day
   shall come, eme'ra kuri'ou. For the present it is man's day, so the
   scripture seems to call it; but then it is the day of the Lord, when
   all the devils shall stoop, and enemies receive their final doom, and
   the saints shall have the crown of glory put upon their heads in the
   sight of all the world.

   Well, the sum of all is this, that though this petition do mainly
   concern the special kingdom, which God administereth by Christ, yet
   God's universal kingdom, the kingdom of his power and providence, is a
   mighty support and prop to our faith in making this request to God.
   When we consider what an unlimited power God hath over all creatures,
   even devils themselves, to dispose of them for his own glory, and his
   church's good; we need not be discouraged though Christ's kingdom be
   opposed in the world, but should with the more confidence deal with God
   about it.

   That which I shall handle upon this petition will fall under these two
   points:--

   1. That God hath a kingdom, which he will administer and manage for his
   own glory.

   2. All those which are well affected to God's glory should desire the
   coming of this kingdom, and seriously deal with God about it.

   For the first, namely--

   Doct. 1. That God hath a kingdom, which he will administer and manage
   for his own glory.

   I speak not of the kingdom of his power and providence, but of the
   dispensation of grace by Christ. The evangelical gospel state is
   compared to a kingdom; as, Mat. iii. 2, The kingdom of heaven is at
   hand.' So to the disciples, Mat. x. 7, And as ye go, preach, saying,
   The kingdom of heaven is at hand.' And so Christ himself.

   It may be called so with very good reason, for in this kingdom there is
   a monarch, Jesus Christ, to whom all power and authority is given. God
   the Father calls him my king:' Ps. ii. 6, I have set my king upon my
   holy hill.' And this king hath his throne in the consciences of men,
   where thoughts are brought into captivity to him: 2 Cor. x. 5. And he
   hath his royal sceptre, Ps. ex. 3, which is called the rod of his
   strength.' And he hath his subjects, and they are the saints: Rev. xv.
   3, king of saints.' And he hath his laws and constitutions; we read of
   the law of faith,' and the law of liberty.' And in this kingdom there
   are privileges, and royal immunities; there is freedom from the curse
   of the law, and from the power of sin, and from the destructive
   influence of Satan and the world. And here are punishments and rewards
   both for body and soul; there is hell and heaven. Now, because all
   these things do so fitly suit, therefore is the gospel called a
   kingdom. It will not be amiss to insist upon some of these.

   1. The state of the gospel, or evangelical state, it is God's kingdom,
   in regard of the monarch whom God hath set up, that is, Jesus Christ,
   the great Lord of all things. There is no king like him: God hath made
   him higher than the kings of the earth.' Ps. lxxxix. 27. How doth he
   exceed all other monarchs and potentates in the world? Partly for
   largeness of command and territory. All kings and monarchs have certain
   bounds and limits by which their empire is terminated; but Christ is
   the true catholic king, his government runs throughout the whole
   circuit of nature and providence; he hath power over all flesh, John
   xvii. 2, yea, devils themselves are to stoop to him: Phil. ii. 10,
   every thing under the earth is to bow the knee to Christ. Partly for
   the excellency of his throne. This king hath a double throne, one in
   heaven, the other in the heart of a humble sinner, which is his second
   heaven: Isa. lvii. 15. And in both these respects there is no monarch
   like Christ. He hath prepared his throne in the heavens, and his
   kingdom ruleth over all,' Ps. ciii. 19. Earthly kings, that their
   majesty may appear to their subjects, have their thrones usually
   exalted; there were six steps to Solomon's throne; a description of it
   you have in 1 Kings x. 18, 19. But what is this to the throne of
   Christ, which God hath fixed above in the heavens? The whole globe of
   sea and earth is but as one point, and there are ten thousand times ten
   thousands of angels about his throne. The supporters of this throne are
   justice and mercy. And in regard of his other throne also in the hearts
   of men: the power of outward potentates reacheth but to the bodies of
   men, they can take cognisance of nothing but of external conformity to
   their laws: but Christ gives laws to the thoughts: 2 Cor. x. 5. So for
   his royal furniture: other princes, they have their chariots, and
   coaches, and horses, &c.; but he makes the clouds his chariot, and
   walketh upon the wings of the wind,' Ps. civ. 3. Riding up and down in
   the world, dispensing mercies and judgments. So for troops and armies
   to support his dignity, all the hosts of heaven are obedient to him;
   one angel in one night destroyed in Sennacherib's army an hundred
   fourscore and five thousand. Hostility against him must needs be
   deadly. He is above in heaven, and can rain down fire and brimstone
   upon us, and cannot be resisted. He is higher than the kings of the
   earth too, because none hath so good a right and title to rule as this
   king hath, whom God hath set upon his holy hill of Sion. God's dominion
   over the creatures is founded in creation. Other kings find their
   subjects; he makes them. He hath the first and chief right, there is
   nothing we have but he made. We depend upon him every moment for his
   providential assistance, therefore he hath the highest right and title.
   No creature can be sui juris, at his own dispose. And he hath a right
   by conquest and by purchase; he hath bought us, and given his life a
   ransom for many,' Mat. xx. 28. Christ is opposed there to worldly
   potentates; they must be served, but he came to minister. Subjects,
   their blood and lives must go to preserve the rights of the prince; but
   he gave his life. And he hath a right too by contract and covenant. All
   that are subjects of his kingdom have sworn allegiance. He hath such an
   absolute right that thou canst call nothing thy own. We think, indeed,
   our lips are our own, Ps. xii. 4: and our estates our own; as Nabal, 1
   Sam. xxv. 11, Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh?' &c.
   All you have it belongeth to this king by right of creation and
   providence. Therefore in all these respects he is higher than the kings
   of the earth.

   2. The gospel state is set forth as a kingdom, in regard of the
   subjects and their privileges. . The gospel doth not only reveal a
   king, but maketh all kings: He hath made us to be kings and priests,'
   &c., Rev. i. 5. All those that submit to him. So that, indeed, Christ
   may properly be styled Rex regum, King of kings. As the king of Assyria
   made his boast, Isa. x. 8, Are not my princes altogether kings?' A
   vaunting speech of his, that his princes and favourites were, for power
   and authority, as good as kings. But Christ may say so. Are not my
   subjects altogether kings? Not only kings in regard of their spiritual
   power and command they have over them selves, ruling their own spirits
   in the fear of God, while others are slaves to their base affections;
   but in point of their privileges. They have kingly privileges, they are
   made kings; they are royally attended by angels, they are sent forth to
   be as guardians to the heirs of promise: Heb. i. 14. They have royal
   immunities, from the curse of the law, from the damnable influence of
   sin; they may as well pluck Christ from the throne, as pluck the elect
   out of that state wherein they are. As David said, Is it a small thing
   to be the king's son-in-law?' so, is it a small thing to be the sons of
   God, co-heirs with Christ? This honour and glory doth God put upon his
   saints. And there is the greatest pleasure and contentment in this
   state; for this kingdom, which all the saints are interested in, it
   consisteth in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost:' Rom.
   xiv. 17. And surely these consolations of God should not be small to
   us. It is a state of most absolute freedom and sovereignty: John viii.
   36, If the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed.' Many
   a monarch which ruleth over men may be a captive to his own lusts; but
   these are free. There are the richest revenues and increase which
   belong to Christ's subjects. All things are yours; whether Paul, or
   Apollos,' &c.: 1 Cor. iii. 21. They are ours by covenant, and when they
   come into our possession, by the fair allowance of God's providence, we
   have them with a blessing, and may use them with a great deal of
   comfort.

   3. In regard of the laws and manner of administration. I shall not
   speak of the external political government of the church, which
   questionless is monarchical, I mean in regard of Christ the Head;
   though it be aristocratical in regard of officers, and, in some
   respect, democratical, with reference to the consent of the people in
   all church acts. But there are laws and sanctions by which this body of
   men and this kingdom is governed: James ii. 8, If ye fulfil the royal
   law.' It is called the royal law, not only as it requires noble work,
   but in regard of the dignity of the author, and firmness of the
   obligation. All the precepts of faith, repentance, and gospel-walking,
   are as so many royal edicts, which Christ hath set forth to signify his
   pleasure to his people. How slightly soever we think of these gospel
   injunctions, they are the laws and instructions of the great king.

   4. In regard of punishments and rewards. Christ, who is a king by
   nature, might rule us with a rod of iron; yet he is pleased to govern
   us as a father and prince, that he might cast the bands of a man upon
   us. Christ, as a king, punisheth, and, as a king, rewardeth: Prov. xvi.
   14, The wrath of a king is as messengers of death.' When a king is
   angry it is as if a messenger should come and tell us we must die. How
   great is the wrath of the king of kings! He cannot endure to be
   slighted in his regal power: Luke xix. 27, But those mine enemies,
   which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
   slay them before me.' Christ himself will see execution done, in his
   own sight and presence, upon those rebels that will not submit to his
   rule and government. How should the hearts of wicked men tremble, which
   have violated the laws of Christ, and affronted his authority, when
   they consider how odious this is, how certainly Christ will see
   execution done upon them! When Adonijah and his guests heard of Solomon
   sitting upon his throne, and the shouts and acclamations of joy and
   applause, they were stricken with fear, and fled every one several
   ways: 1 Kings i. 49. You that cherish your lusts, which stand out
   against the sovereignty of Christ, that will not let him rule over you,
   whose hearts say (though their tongues dare not), We will not have this
   man to reign over us;' you that seem to put him by his kingdom, he is
   furnished with absolute and irresistible power to destroy you, and will
   one day come and say, Bring forth these drunkards, worldlings,
   voluptuous, that would not I should reign over them; those that durst
   venture upon known sin against the checks of their own conscience: how
   will their hearts tremble in the last day at the shouts and
   acclamations of the saints, when they shall welcome this great king,
   when he shall come forth in all his royalty and sovereignty! And as for
   punishment Christ will show himself as a king, so for rewards. Kings do
   not give trifles. Araunah gave like a king to a king:' 2 Sam. xxiv. 23.
   He was of the blood-royal of the Jebusites, and he gave worthy of his
   extraction. And so Christ will give like a king. God propounds nothing
   that was cheap and unworthy, but he gives you a kingdom:' Luke xii. 32.
   The poor of this world are heirs of a kingdom,' the fairest kingdom
   that ever was, or ever will be; as poor and as despicable as now they
   are, yet they shall have a kingdom. What can you wish for and desire
   more than a kingdom? All shall reign with Christ for evermore; which
   shows the folly of carnal men that will hazard so great and so blessed
   hopes. Thus I have shown you why the gospel state is compared to a
   kingdom.

   Now, let me tell you it is a spiritual kingdom, not such as comes with
   observation. Jesus Christ, when he was inaugurated into the throne,
   when he was to sit down at God's right hand, how doth he manifest it?
   He gives gifts, as princes use to do at their coronation, but they are
   spiritual gifts: Eph. iv. 8. And he sent abroad ambassadors, poor
   fishermen, they and their successors, to go and treat with the world: 2
   Cor. v. 19. Indeed, they had a mighty power with them, as becoming such
   a great king, as was under the vail of meanness and weakness; it was
   carried on in a spiritual manner. And still he doth administer his
   kingdom, not by force; he rules not by the power of the sword, but by
   his word and Spirit, so he governeth his people. The publication of the
   gospel is a sending forth the rod of his strength:' Ps. ex. 2. And the
   Holy Ghost, as Christ's viceroy, he governeth them, and administereth
   all things that are necessary to his kingdom; he doth it by the Holy
   Ghost, as his deputy. The Father chooseth a sort of men, gives them to
   Christ; the Son dieth for them, that they may be subjects of his
   kingdom, and he commits them to be governed and ruled by the Holy
   Ghost: he useth the ministry of men, and so unites them to Christ; and
   Christ brings them to the Father by his intercession, committing them
   to his care and love; and by a final tradition at last, which is the
   last act of Christ's mediatorial kingdom, 1 Cor. xv. 24, he shall
   deliver them up to the Father. The Spirit, blessing the ministry of
   men, works faith, by which we are united to Christ; and Christ
   intercedes for us, and will bring us to God again. And in this
   spiritual manner is this kingdom carried on. So that if we would enter
   into this kingdom, we must go to God the Father, and confess we are
   rebels and traitors, but desire he would not enter into judgment with
   us, but seek to be reconciled to God the Father. Now, as God bade the
   friends of Job to go to Job, chap. xlii. 8, so God sends us to Christ,
   in whom alone he is well pleased with the creature. If we go to the
   Son, he refers us to the Spirit, to be reclaimed from our impurity and
   rebellion. If we go to the Spirit, he refers us to Moses and the
   prophets, pastors and teachers; there we shall hear of him in Christ's
   way, and there we feel the rod of Christ's strength, the efficacy of
   his grace put into our hearts.

   Thus are we brought into his kingdom, and made to be a mystical body
   and spiritual society, in whom Christ rules; and there we come to enjoy
   those freedoms I spake of; and our obedience to this kingdom is carried
   on in a spiritual manner. In worship, we give our homage to God; in the
   word, we come to learn his laws; in the sacraments, we renew our oath
   of allegiance to this king; in alms and charity, we pay him tribute; in
   prayer, we ask his leave, acknowledging his dominion; and praise, it is
   our rent to the great Lord, from whom we hold all things. And thus is
   Christ's kingdom carried on in a spiritual manner.

   Use 1. The use is to press you to come under this kingdom. Consider
   what God hath proffered to draw you off from your carnal delights and
   sinful pleasures: no less than a kingdom to bear you out, to call you
   off from your sins. Oh, do not answer, as the olive-tree and the vine
   in Jotham's parable: Judges ix. 9, Shall I leave my fatness, and go to
   be promoted over the trees?' God comes to a worldling, and makes him a
   proffer of this blessed state, which is represented by a kingdom Shall
   I leave all my sports and worldly hopes? (according as the man is
   affected) . Shall I renounce my pleasures, live a strict and austere
   life? Must I leave off projects, saith a worldling, and depend upon the
   reversion of heaven? Oh, consider it is for a glorious kingdom. Men
   will do much for an earthly crown, though lined with cares,--for this
   golden ball, which all hunt after, and doth occasion so many stirs in
   the world. Turn your ambition this way. You may aspire to a crown, to
   the kingdom of heaven, without the crime of treason. This is a faithful
   ambition: it is indeed treason against the kingdom of heaven, not to
   look after this crown, and plot, contrive, and act, and offer violence
   for the obtaining of it. And, therefore, come under this kingdom; if
   you do not, you will be left under the power of a worse: 2 Chron. xii.
   8, God saith, he would give them up to the king of Egypt; why?' They
   shall be his servants, that they may know my service, and the service
   of the kingdoms of the countries:' that they might see what difference
   there is between serving God and serving others. If you refuse God's
   government, you are under a worse, under sin, and the power of
   darkness; you are under your own lusts; nay, and by a just judgment God
   may give you over to live in bondage to unmerciful men. How many kings
   and lords doth he serve that will not serve one Lord? Oh, therefore,
   renounce those other lords that have dominion over you, and come under
   this kingdom which God hath set up.

   Use 2. To press the children of God:--

   1. To walk worthy of the gospel: it is a kingdom. The apostle hath an
   exhortation and charge to this purpose: 1 Thes. ii. 11, 12, That ye
   would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his kingdom and
   glory.' Walk in obedience to Christ, that is one thing. Christ is a
   king by a natural right; God hath chosen him, God hath set him upon his
   holy hill: The Lord hath made him to be head over all things,' Eph. i.
   22. Nay, the church chooseth Christ: They shall appoint to themselves
   one head,' Hosea i. 11. And, therefore, for you that are called to his
   kingdom and glory, that have entered into covenant with Christ, that
   have subscribed to him as head and king; for you to be disobedient,
   give way to sin, it is worse in you. Will ye go away also?' saith
   Christ to his disciples. Christ hath a right to reign over wicked men;
   but you have actually chosen him. Treason is less culpable, in those
   which have not submitted to a power and prince, and owned him for their
   king, than in those that have sworn faith and allegiance. You have
   passed under the bond of the holy oath; God hath called you to his
   kingdom and glory;' therefore you should be more obedient than to allow
   a disloyal thought or rebellious lust against Christ.

   2. As you should be more holy, wary, watchful, that you do not break
   the laws of Christ, for you have consented to him; so live as kings,
   exercising all acts of regality within your own souls, ruling your own
   spirits, exercising judgment over your own hearts, and over every
   affection that will not be bridled. It is a disgrace to the regal
   estate of the gospel for you to be over-mastered by a lust, to lie
   under the power of any sin; yet thus it is, God's children are
   conflicting with one sin or other more than the rest. So far you have
   not experience of that truth: John viii. 32, And ye shall know the
   truth, and the truth shall make you free.' A man that liveth in bondage
   to his lusts, how can he choose but doubt of those glorious privileges?
   Have you found the state of the gospel to be a kingdom? do you walk
   worthy of the gospel?

   3. It teacheth us contempt of the world and earthly things: Phil, iii.
   14, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God
   in Jesus Christ.' It is not for princes to embrace a dunghill, nor for
   eagles to catch flies. Remember, thou wilt one day be a king with God
   in glory, and therefore shouldst not be as low and base as the men of
   the world are, but walk worthy of God, who hath called you to a royal
   state.

   4. A generous confidence in the midst of the troubles and abasements of
   the world. What though you be accounted as the scurf and offscouring of
   all things? Though your outward condition be low and mean, know the
   worth of your high calling in Christ. How poor and despicable soever
   you are in this world, yet you are heirs of a crown and kingdom.
   Therefore remember you are princes, that walk up and down in disguise
   in a foreign country. If you are kept in a mean condition, it is but a
   disguise God hath put upon you. We are the sons of God, though for the
   present it doth not appear what we shall be. God's heirs make little
   show in the world. But there is a high dignity, a mighty privilege put
   upon you; you are called to be heirs of this kingdom, and this blessed
   and royal estate, which God hath provided for them that love him.

   Use 3. Are we translated into this kingdom? Col. i. 13, He hath
   delivered us out of the power of darkness, and translated us into the
   kingdom of his dear Son.' Every man naturally is under other lords, the
   devil hath dominion over him, and he is under the government of his own
   lusts; but now are we translated into the kingdom of Christ.

   The second point is:--

   Doct. 2. All those that are affected with God's glory should desire the
   coming of this kingdom, and seriously deal with God about it.

   None else can rescue and pluck them out of the power of darkness, and
   deliver them, from the thraldom of those other lords that hold them,
   and none else can defend and preserve them.

   I shall handle the point:--

   1. In a private respect.

   2. In a public respect.

   First, In a private respect. Every man should desire that the kingdom
   of God should come down and be set up in his own heart. Here I must
   repeat and apply the distinctions of Christ's kingdom. He is to desire
   the kingdom of grace and the kingdom of glory may come to himself and
   others.

   1. The kingdom of grace, that it may be begun, continued, and
   increased.

   First, That this kingdom may be begun, and a throne erected for Christ
   in our hearts. The great necessity of this request will be evidenced in
   these considerations:--

   [1.] That every man by nature is under another king, under the kingdom
   of sin and Satan. Satan is the monarch, and sin is the sceptre. Christ
   and the devil divide the world; either we belong to the one or the
   other. Now the devil, by reason of the fall of Adam, he hath the start
   of Christ, and the Lord Jesus coming to possess the heart, doth not
   seize upon it as a waste which belongeth to the next occupier, but he
   seizeth upon it as already possessed by Satan. The devil quietly ruleth
   in the hearts of the unregenerate; he keeps house, and all the goods
   are in peace, Luke xi. 21; and therefore wicked spirits are called, The
   rulers of the darkness of this world,' Eph. vi. 12. All the ignorant
   and carnal part of the world falls to his share, and he doth not easily
   quit possession. Christ indeed employeth men to wrestle with
   principalities and powers. The work of the ministry is to shake and
   batter the empire of the devil. You must be turned, you must be
   rescued. You must be turned: Acts xxvi. 18, To turn them from the power
   of Satan unto God.' You must be rescued and plucked out of this
   captivity by the strong hand: Col. i. 13, Who hath delivered us from
   the power of Satan;' who hath taken us out of darkness by a powerful
   rescue. Even as the Israelites were brought out of Egypt by a strong
   hand and stretched-out arm,' so are we brought out of the power of
   darkness. By such an irresistible power of grace must God recover you,
   otherwise men yield themselves up to his sceptre. Look, as the Spirit
   of God works holy motions and gracious desires in the hearts of God's
   children, so the devil is at work in the children of disobedience,'
   Eph. ii. 2, framing wicked devices, carnal desires, evil thoughts
   against God. Man is such a perfect slave to the devil that he can do
   nothing but sin.

   [2.] This kingdom which Satan exerciseth is an invisible kingdom. The
   devil doth not sensibly appear to his vassals and slaves. When Christ's
   kingdom and regiment was more external, so was the devil's also. As
   when God was served by sacrifices, and delivered his mind by oracles,
   so men did then more professedly own the devil by observing his
   prescribed rites of worship, and by being deluded by lying oracles, and
   answers to their prayers and questions. But now, since the kingdom of
   Christ is more spiritual, and managed by the Holy Ghost in the hearts
   of his saints, so is Satan's kingdom invisible. So that men may be
   Christ's subjects by external profession, and the devil's by internal
   obedience and constitution of mind, though they worship not by pagan
   rites, as he ruleth in their hearts, and takes them off from obeying
   the gospel they profess. The god of this world hath blinded their
   eyes:' 2 Cor. iv. 4. All carnal men, however they defy Satan, and
   abominate the thought of serving him, yet while they remain in their
   sin and ignorance, they still hold the crown upon the devil's head.
   Look, as God's subjects may own him in verbal pretence, yet their
   hearts may be far from him: Mat. xv. 8. So that wicked men may defy the
   devil in pretence and words, and cannot endure to hear of him; but they
   are under the god of this world, he hath blinded their hearts. So that
   this kingdom is to be fought for in the heart. Christ made a great
   inroad upon the devil, beat him out of his quarters; yet, as the sea
   gets in one place what it loseth in another, so though the devil hath
   lost ground in the Christian world as to external profession, whilst
   people renounce the superstitions of the Gentiles, yet still he gets
   ground in the hearts of wicked men by their carnal dispositions; his
   empire is upheld still, though professedly they are subjects of Christ.

   [3.] Until Satan be cast out of the throne, Christ can have no
   entertainment in the heart. The ark and Dagon cannot sink and stand
   together; either the ark must be removed, or Dagon will down upon his
   face: so 2 Cor. vi. 14, What communion hath Christ with Belial, and
   light with darkness?' It is impossible both kingdoms can stand
   together, or both kings be set up in the same heart. The marriage-bed
   will admit no partner nor rival. A man must be under Christ or Satan.
   Until he be cast out, Christ hath no room to be entertained: Mat. vi.
   24, No man can serve two masters; ye cannot serve God and Mammon.' Look
   upon the devil under that notion, as he is Mammon, as he doth entice to
   worldliness: it is impossible to serve him and Christ. Both masters
   have work enough for their servants, and their commands are contrary.
   If two masters consent to employ one man in the self-same business,
   though they are two men, yet they are but one master. But now to
   execute the wills of men which differ in their design, and which have a
   several and full interest in our labours and actions, it is as
   impossible as to move two contrary ways at once. Well, then, Mammon and
   Christ. Belial and Christ, divide the world. It is impossible to be
   under Belial and Christ; both have full work for us to do, and their
   designs are contrary. So that either it must appear we have changed
   masters, or we are under the power of the devil still. We must come out
   of the power of darkness, else we cannot be brought into the kingdom of
   the Lord Jesus, that we may obtain remission of sins.

   [4.] Satan may be cast out in part, and yet still retain a supreme
   interest in the heart. I prove it out of that parable, Mat. xii. 43-45:
   When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry
   places, seeking rest, but findeth none. Then he saith, I will return
   into my house, from whence I came out,' &c. Out of that parable we may
   plainly conclude there may be a shaking of Satan's empire, Satan may be
   cast out of a man in some sort, yet the man not plainly renewed. Well,
   how may he be cast out, and yet his empire remain unbroken? He may be
   cast out partly by conviction and illumination; yet as long as any lust
   remaineth there unmortified and unsubdued, he still keeps his
   sovereignty in the heart. Many begin to be troubled, and to be
   thoughtful about eternity, that see better, yet they do that which is
   worse in the issue. When there is a conflict between corruption and
   conviction, corruption carrieth it away. As iron often heated and often
   quenched is so much the harder; so, when they had some wamblings of
   conscience, and the heart begins to boggle, and after this sin breaks
   out the more. This is the scope of that place: they were convinced of a
   better estate, and had some thoughts of the Messiah, but did not give
   him entertainment. Again, the devil may be cast out in regard of some
   external reformation. A man may a little wash his polluted life and
   abstain from gross sins, yet Satan have full possession of the inner
   man. A man may abjure his former ill life, and for a while carry it
   fair, but afterwards retain his former filthiness, and keep a secret
   league with his lusts, and so he is en tangled again, and then his
   latter end is worse than his beginning;' and as it is in 2 Pet. ii. 22,
   The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed
   to her wallowing in the mire.' A prisoner which hath made some escape,
   if ever the gaoler get him into his clutches, is sure to be laden with
   irons; so one that hath had some partial reformation, oh, when the
   devil gets such a man into his power again, he is ten times worse than
   he was before.

   [5.] The difficulty of casting off the sovereignty of Satan, lieth
   partly in ourselves and partly in the devil.

   Partly in ourselves. As in the Israelites going out of Egypt, the
   difficulty lay, not only in gaining the consent of Pharaoh, for he
   pursues after them when they were gone, but also in persuading the
   people to give their consent--it was long ere Israel desired to be
   gone--so in our natural condition, the mind of man is so depraved that
   he thinks his bondage to be his freedom, and that there is no such
   merry life as to wallow in carnal satisfactions; and our affections are
   so far engaged to this sinful estate, that we dote upon our shackles,
   and are unwilling to hear of a change. The first step of coming out of
   this kingdom of darkness is when we find it to be a heavy burthen, and
   grow weary of the devil's government, though it be but out of a
   principle of self-love, Isa. xxvi. 13: O Lord, other lords besides thee
   have had dominion over us; but by thee only will we make mention of thy
   name.' Yea, but as soon as we begin to have any serious thoughts of
   that miserable state in which we are, Satan interposeth, dealing with
   us as Pharaoh did with the Israelites. The Israelites complain their
   bondage was very sore; what doth Pharaoh? He doubles the burthen: Exod.
   v. 17, You are idle,' &c.;--so that out of bondage of soul they would
   not hearken to Moses. Just so Satan deals with us. When souls begin to
   be serious, and to leave off fleshly and worldly lusts, and to give up
   themselves to God that they may be directed in the way of holiness and
   obtain eternal life, then he doubles our burthens. Corruptions are
   never more stirring than after some conviction: Rom. vii. 9, When the
   commandment came, sin revived, and I died;' not only as to a deeper
   sense of the guilt of it, but as to its struggling for life. The
   bullock at the first yoking is most unruly; so we which are
   unaccustomed to the yoke, when we begin once to take it upon us, there
   is a mighty backwardness. Fire at first kindling makes abundance of
   smoke; so when conviction is stirring, corruption is more exasperated.
   The devil is very jealous of the first beam of light which breaks into
   the heart, and of every ordinance which conveys it; therefore sets
   corruptions at work, that it may appear to be a vain hope of ever
   escaping his clutches: so men are tired and give over, and think it is
   to no purpose. But if light increases to more trouble, the devil seeks
   to elude the importunity of it by delay; as Pharaoh put off Moses and
   Aaron still by delay: or else by compromising and compounding the
   business; as Pharaoh, when he saw the people would go, God would have
   them go, then they shall not go far: Exod. viii. 28. So if men will be
   thinking of Christ's service, and coming under his government, they
   shall go, but not far; they shall come and pray, and come and hear now
   and then, and make a general profession, but not too far in Christ's
   quarters; he is afraid of that. Just as Pharaoh stood hucking still;
   they must go a good way into the wilderness, otherwise it should be an
   abomination to the Egyptians, yet their little ones must stay. If
   people will not only hear and pray, but begin to reform, and cleanse
   their lives, yet he must have a pledge, some lust, as a nest-egg, left
   in the heart, some darling sin that must keep up the devil's empire.
   Then they must leave their herds, then leave their flocks; no, not a
   hoof. Ah! how long is it, when we are under this power of darkness, ere
   we are free, and get rid of the government of Satan!

   [6.] We can never be sure that Satan is wholly cast out until Christ be
   seriously received and entertained as Lord and King, until he dwell and
   rule in the heart by faith. Alas! there may be some brabble now and
   then between us and our sins, and some partial dislikes; but until you
   heartily consent to take another king, that you will be governed and
   ordered by, you are not his subjects, but remain in the same state:
   John i. 12, As many as received him, to them gave he power to become
   the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.' We are
   children of the devil before, under his standard and government; but
   when we receive him, then we are under another king, another power:
   when we receive what God offered, receive Christ as Lord and King, when
   the whole soul opens the door to Christ, that the King of glory may
   come in, and dwell with us, and reign over us, then is his kingdom set
   up. The first offer of the gospel is Christ as Prince and Saviour: Acts
   v. 31. And the main thing the business sticks at is Christ's regal
   power: Luke xix. 14, We will not have this man to reign over us.' Now,
   when we receive him with all our hearts, and though before we had but
   mean thoughts of him, now he begins to be welcome to us, and with the
   dearest embraces of our souls we entertain him; and with a willing
   resignation we give up ourselves, not only by a consent of dependence,
   to rest upon him for reconciliation with God, but by a willing
   subjection to obey him, and give up the keys of the heart, and lay them
   at Christ's feet: as Paul, Acts ix. 16, Lord, what wilt thou have me to
   do?' When you desire nothing more but that his kingdom might come, the
   King of glory himself, than that he might bring righteousness, peace,
   and joy in the Holy Ghost; until then you are not entered into his
   kingdom.

   [7.] Christ is not received and entertained as Lord and King, but where
   his laws are obeyed: Col. ii. 6, As ye have therefore received Christ
   Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.' If you receive him as Lord and
   King, so also obey him. And Heb. xii. 28, We receiving a kingdom which
   cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably,
   with reverence and godly fear.' In this prayer, first, we say, Thy
   kingdom come,' and then presently we add, Thy will be done.' We do but
   prattle over the Lord's Prayer, and say it with our lips only, until we
   are resolved to do what God would have us to do--love and hate, fear
   and rejoice, as God directs. Until we are brought to this frame, we do
   not in good earnest say, Thy kingdom come.' An earthly king will do
   according to his will:' Dan. xi. 3. So Christ stands upon his will in
   his law. If you have taken God for your God, and Jesus Christ for your
   King, then say, with David, Ps. cxliii. 10, Teach me to do thy will,
   for thou art my God. J It is a universal maxim, His servants you are
   whom you do obey.' Where is your obedience? If subjects of grace, Every
   thought is brought in subjection:' 2 Cor. x. 5. You will watch not only
   against your irregular actions, but every thought which lifts up itself
   against the obedience of Christ. There will be a greater tenderness
   upon us not to break any of the holy laws which belong to Christ's
   government. Hereby you may know whether you come under another king, Do
   you fear a commandment? That is the description of a good man: Prov.
   xiii. 13. It is not he that feareth a punishment, but he that feareth a
   commandment, when the heart is brought under an awe of Christ's laws;
   so that when a man is tempted to sin, Oh, I dare not; the Lord hath
   commanded me the contrary. This is more than if a flaming sword stood
   in his way. When we have such workings of heart when we are tempted to
   this and that sin, so when we are doing any duty, though irksome to
   flesh and blood, yet it is the will of my Lord, to whom I have entirely
   given up myself in a way of subjection; this is a sign you are brought
   under his government.

   [8.] None can obey his laws but by the virtue and power of his Spirit.
   The new covenant, it is not only a law, but the law of the Spirit of
   life which is in Christ.' So it is called by the apostle, Rom. viii. 2.
   It is not a bare literal command that shall urge us to duty; but it
   giveth strength and efficacy to the heart. Other kings, they give laws,
   that men may keep them by their own strength; but now Christ, he would
   be owned as a king, not only in a way of subjection, but establish a
   constant dependence. He is a king, not only to require, but to give
   repentance, Acts v. 31; not only to make a law, but to write and work a
   sense of this new covenant-gift upon the heart, Heb. viii. 10. He doth
   not only set up his ordinances, laws, constitutions, but there is power
   goeth along with the dispensation of this kingdom, and thereby we are
   fitted and enabled to love, serve, and please God; and then are we
   under the kingdom of God, when we are under the spiritual power of it.
   It is not only necessary to obey his laws, but that we do it by virtue
   of his power and Spirit: The kingdom of God stands not in word, but in
   power,' 1 Cor. iv. 20. That we may both acknowledge his authority and
   wait for his strength. This is a true submission, when we look for all
   from him, and serve him in the strength of his own grace.

   [9.] All those that act through the virtue and power of his Spirit,
   they do unfeignedly seek his glory, and make Christ to be not only
   their principle, but their end; for having a new principle, they have a
   new tendency; acting in the power of the Spirit, their hearts are
   carried out to seek Christ's interest and Christ's glory. When they can
   say with the apostle, Phil. i. 21, To me to live is Christ,' when their
   whole business is to set up Christ. We set up ourselves in the room of
   Christ, if he be not at the end of all: 2 Thes. i. 11, 12, That God
   might fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
   faith with power, and that Christ may be glorified in you.' If you have
   the power of Christ's kingdom, this will be the immediate result and
   issue of it, that Christ may be honoured and set up, not only as a
   lawgiver and fountain of grace, but as the last end. If to us to live
   is Christ, then is the kingdom of God come into our heart. For this we
   pray, that the Lord would so break the yoke and government of Satan,
   that we may receive the Lord Jesus into our heart, that we may come
   under the awe of his laws, and in the power of his grace may seek his
   kingdom and glory.

   To conclude: All this grace is offered to you; if you refuse the offer,
   your condition is worse than if it had never been tendered to you. The
   Lord hath sent his Son to help you out of the power of the devil, and
   bring you in heart and life again to himself; if you refuse this, then
   This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
   love darkness rather than light:' John iii. 19. The Lord Jesus, when he
   comes in flaming fire to render vengeance, it shall be upon them that
   do not obey his government, 2 Thes. i. 8, that did not acknowledge God
   to be their sovereign. There will be a sore vengeance on them which had
   the gospel tendered, and this wonderful provision brought home to them,
   and left to their choice, and yet have turned their backs upon it.

   Secondly, We beg the continuance of it, that he would maintain this
   kingdom in our heart, and preserve us in this state; for those which
   can call God Father, are still to say, Thy kingdom come.' It is not
   enough to go to Christ to begin it, but to carry it on, and to keep and
   preserve us unto his heavenly kingdom,' 2 Tim. iv. 18; that we may not
   revolt to the devil's side after we have chosen God for our God, and so
   our latter end be worse than our beginning.

   Thirdly, We pray for the increase of it, that it may get ground more
   and more. There are some relics of the kingdom of darkness yet left,
   and there is something wanting to the kingdom of grace; we are troubled
   and molested still. Though sin doth not get the throne, though the
   regency of it is cast down, yet it is not cast out in regard of
   inherence. Sin shall not have dominion over you;' that is all we can
   hope for: Rom. vi. 14. We cannot hope for an extinction of sin, but
   only that it shall not have dominion. As the beasts in Dan. vii. 12,
   though their dominion was taken away, yet their lives were prolonged
   for a season and time. The reign, power, and dominion of sin is taken
   down, yet it continues for our exercise and molestation. Now, we desire
   he might rule in us by his grace, and that of the increase of his
   government there may be no end.

   II. For the kingdom of glory, which, in this private consideration (as
   it concerns each person), is to begin at death. And when we desire the
   coming of the kingdom of glory, we do two things: we express our
   readiness for it, or our desire after it.

   1. Our readiness for it; at least, the kingdom of God is ready for us
   if we were ready for it; as the apostle saith, 1 Pet. iv. 5. God is
   ready to judge, but we are not ready to be judged. And therefore we
   read of the kingdom of heaven prepared for us, and of men prepared for
   the kingdom of heaven. It is prepared for the saints: Mat. xxv. 34, A
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.' And the
   saints prepared for it: Rom. ix. 23, Vessels of mercy, which he had
   afore prepared unto glory,' And this is that which the apostle gives
   thanks for unto the Father: Which hath made us meet to be partakers of
   the inheritance of the saints in light,' Col. i. 12. Before we come to
   heaven, there is a right to heaven; we are made meet, more mortified
   and weaned from present things, often in communion with God here, and
   so for ever with the Lord hereafter. We are still to have our eyes to
   our rest and happy state, that we may be made ready for it. We express
   our readiness, or we beg it.

   2. That we may express our desires after the enjoyment of it. A
   Christian is to desire the company of Christ: Phil. i. 23, I desire to
   be dissolved, and to be with Christ;' and he is to hasten the coming of
   the day of God: 2 Pet. iii. 12.

   Now because this cannot be but by our death, therefore here we may
   examine a case or two.

   Case 1. First, about longing for death. Is it lawful to desire death?
   The law doth not only forbid acts, but thoughts and desires; therefore
   is it lawful to long for death?

   Ans. Yes; but yet we are not anxiously to long after it till the time
   come; not to grow weary of life out of desperation and tiresomeness of
   the cross, as Jonah did, chap. iv. 3; but in order to God s glory and
   accomplishment of our happiness. See more at large, Ps. cxix. verse 17.
   [23]

   Case 2. Secondly, Do all that have an interest in Christ desire to die?
   Is not death terrible? Certainly death, is terrible, both as a natural
   and a penal evil; as in itself it is the curse of the covenant; and as
   it depriveth us of life, the chiefest blessing. Yet we should train up
   ourselves in an expectation of death; we should look and long for it,
   that, when the time is come, we might be willing to give up ourselves
   into the hands of God. It is required of a Christian that he should not
   only be passive in his own death, to die in peace, but active. How? to
   hasten his death? No; but to resign up himself willingly into the hands
   of God, that his soul might not be taken away, but given up and
   commended to God. We should be willing to be in the arms of Christ, to
   be there where he is, to behold his glory. If Christ had such a
   goodwill to men as that he longed to be with us, solacing his heart
   with the thought of it before all worlds, Prov. viii. 31--he was
   thinking of us, how he should come down, and converse with men surely
   we should not be so backward to go to Christ. And, therefore, as
   Jacob's spirit revived when he saw the chariots Joseph sent to carry
   him into Egypt, so our hearts should be more cheerful and comfortable
   when death approacheth: especially since death is ours, it is changed;
   therefore we should be framing ourselves to such a temper of heart by
   degrees that we might be ready.

   Use 1. For reproof to those that would be glad in their hearts if
   Christ's kingdom would never come. As to the kingdom of grace, in the
   external administration, they hate the light, and will not come to the
   light, lest their deeds should be reproved:' John iii. 20. A wicked man
   is loth to be troubled. God's witnesses are the world's torment: Rev.
   xi. 10, They tormented them that dwelt on the earth.' A man that is
   bodily blind would have a fit guide; but these wretchedly blind
   sinners, nothing so troublesome and hateful to them as one that would
   lead them to the kingdom of God. And then as to internal grace, when
   this kingdom of heaven breaks in upon their hearts, when any light and
   power darts in, they seek to put it out; they resist the Holy Ghost,'
   Acts vii. 51, and refuse his call. And for the kingdom of glory, they
   say, It is good to be here,' and would not change their portion here
   for their portion in paradise.

   Use 2. To exhort us to desire the coming of Christ's kingdom to
   ourselves. If you have any love to the Lord's glory, or your own good,
   you should do it: Rev. iii. 20, Behold, I stand at the door and knock:
   if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
   will sup with him, and he with me.' Will you not open to God that hath
   the best right? Will you not set open the doors to the King of glory,
   when Christ comes to bring entertainment to you, to sup with you?
   Again, all men (will they, nill they) are subject to Christ: either
   they must come and touch his golden sceptre, or feel the bruises of his
   iron mace; they must own him as king: Every knee shall bow,' Phil. ii.
   10. Therefore be more willing to have the kingdom of glory come. Again,
   if God be not your king, you will have a worse master, every sin, every
   lust: Titus iii. 3, Serving divers lusts and pleasures.' You will be at
   the beck of every lust and carnal motion, and the devil will be your
   master to purpose; for upon the refusal of Christ's government, there
   is a judicial tradition, you are given up to your own heart's lusts:
   Ps. lxxxi. 12, Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own
   hearts' lusts, and they walked in their own counsels.' And to Satan, to
   be ensnared by him: 2 Tim. ii. 26, Taken captive by him at his will and
   pleasure.' Not to buffet them, as Paul was, but to ensnare and harden
   their hearts. Again, if you be not subject to God, you go about to make
   God subject to you in effect. You would have the kingdom of glory, and
   yet continue in your lusts: Isa. xliii. 24, Thou hast made me to serve
   with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.' When you
   would have God patient, hold his hand, and be merciful to you, and yet
   would continue in your lusts, then you make God serve with your sins.
   Again, many temporal inconveniences will follow, if we do not give way
   to the kingdom of Christ to seize upon us. When we make no difference
   between God's service and the service of other lords, then he gives us
   up to the service of men, to a foreign enemy, to an oppressive
   magistrate, or breaks the staff of government among men, that we might
   know what it is to be under his service and government. Therefore give
   willing entertainment to the kingdom of Christ.

   So much for the private consideration of this request, Thy kingdom
   come;' that is, to us and our persons, both the kingdom of grace and
   the kingdom of glory.

   Secondly, Having spoken of the kingdom of Christ in a private, now I
   come to speak of it in a public, consideration. And that is twofold:--

   1. The public visible administration of the kingdom of grace.

   2. The public and solemn administration of the kingdom of glory at the
   day of judgment, when enemies shall have their final doom, and saints
   have their crowns set upon their heads in the sight of all the world.

   I shall speak of both, but (because the discourse may be more fresh and
   lively) upon other texts.

   1. The public visible administration of the kingdom of grace, on Ps.
   li. 18, Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of
   thy Jerusalem.'

   2. The kingdom of glory, on Rev. xxii. 20, Surely I come quickly: Amen.
   Even so, come, Lord Jesus.'

   For the first. Though the church be never so afflicted, Ps. cii. 14,
   when all is defaced, as to external appearance, lying in a ruinous
   heap, yet it is beloved and pitied by God's servants: Thy servants take
   pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof.' There is nothing
   God's people desire so much as Zion's welfare: Ps. cvi. 5, That I may
   see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy
   nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.' And David in this
   psalm, Ps. li. 18, having prayed for himself, prayeth for mercy to the
   church and state: Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion; build thou
   the walls of thy Jerusalem.' But how cometh David, who was in the depth
   of private humiliation, so suddenly to fall upon the case of the
   church? There was a special reason for annexing this request to his own
   private complaints and confessions. The reasons will occasion so many
   observations.

   [1.] Because of the offence, scandal, and mischief done to the church
   by his fall; and to make amends, he prayeth the more earnestly, let not
   Zion fare the worse for my sake. From thence observe, that the sins of
   particular persons oft bring a mischief upon the whole community. David
   had made a breach in the walls of God's protection, and left them
   naked, and more in danger of judgment: Therefore do good,' &c.

   [2.] David was not only a private member, but a prince, and their sins
   have a more universal influence. The sins of magistrates draw down
   judgments on their people, all smart for their miscarriages. Hezekiah's
   pride cost Israel dear: 2 Chron. xxxii. 25, Wrath was upon him, and
   upon Judah and Jerusalem.' It did not stay upon his person. As a great
   oak cannot fall but all the shrubs about it suffer loss. But,

   [3.] David having some comfortable assurance of the pardon of his sins,
   doth now seek mercy for the church. From thence observe, that we are
   never fit to pray for the public, till we have made our peace with God;
   as the priests under the law offered sacrifice, first for their own
   sins, and then for the people's:' Heb. vii. 27.

   [4.] Because being brought by such a solemn but sad occasion into God's
   presence, he could not but have some thoughts of Zion. And from thence
   observe, that we should never come to God upon any private occasion but
   we should remember the public. We are to pray in love as well as faith.
   Christ hath not taught us to say, My Father,' but, Our Father,' to show
   that we should take in the interests and concernments of the whole
   body, that there may be a spirit of communion breathing in our prayers.
   David doth not only say, Have mercy upon me according to thy
   loving-kindness,' but, Do good unto Zion in thy good pleasure.' Every
   living member will be careful for the body. Members should be careful
   one for another, much more for the whole. Is any member pained or
   grieved?--all suffer. If the toe be trod upon, the tongue complaineth,
   you have hurt me; but now much more when all is concerned. Therefore we
   should not altogether seek our own things, but wrestle with God for the
   public.

   I. This reproveth divers sorts of people. Some are enemies to the
   public welfare, as vipers eat out the dam's belly,--especially enemies
   to Zion: Down with it, down with it, even to the ground!' What monsters
   hath this age brought forth! Others are indifferent and careless which
   goeth up, Christ or Antichrist; they only mind the matters of their own
   interest and concernment: All seek their own things.' As to the public
   interest of the church, let all go how it will. Let me tell you, to be
   selfish is a sort of self-excommunication; you cast yourselves out of
   the bundle of life. And to be senseless, it is an implicit renouncing
   the body. Others there are that are gracious, but full of discontent at
   some passages of providence, and these seem to have lost their public
   affections. It is a sad symptom when a praying people are discouraged
   from praying for public welfare. God is very tender of the prayers of
   his people; he is loth they should be lost, and sorry they cannot be
   granted. We may sin in ceasing to pray. It is a sad judgment when the
   hearts of God's people are taken off from praying. Again, those that
   pray too coldly for the public, not as those that would do their work.
   There is a great decay of the spirit of prayer, which is also a sad
   presage. But now to show you:--

   II. What we should pray for Zion.

   1. The dilatation or enlargement of it throughout the world. The more
   ample God's heritage is, the more is his glory known: Prov. xiv. 28, In
   the multitude of the people is the king's honour;' and the glory of a
   shepherd lieth in the number of his flock. So Christ's kingdom, the
   more it is enlarged, the more honour God hath: Ps. lxvii. 2, That thy
   way may be known among the heathen, and thy saving health among all
   nations.' Especially when the fulness of the Gentiles is brought in,
   Ps. liv. 2; and when the Jews are brought in, Hosea iii. 5. To be
   instrumental to enlarge Christ's kingdom, it is an honour to us to draw
   on Christ's triumphant chariot,--let us be sure to have a hand in it.
   These prayers, if sincere, are never in vain; if they profit not
   others, they promote the kingdom of God in ourselves.

   2. The preservation and defence of the churches already planted,
   frustrating the plots and power of the enemies: That God would be a
   wall of fire round about them,' Zech. ii. 5. Qui comminus arceat et
   eminus terreat. When at the weakest, God can protect them, bridling by
   his secret power the rage of adversaries, or defeating their attempts.

   3. For comfort and deliverance in afflictions. We should pity the
   distressed church, as before; that God would redeem them out of all
   their troubles. Every true member of the church hath life from Christ;
   and that life giveth feeling, and that feeling affection and sympathy
   to rejoice and mourn. They that mourn for Zion rejoice with her: Isa.
   lxvi. 10, Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that
   love her; rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her.'

   4. For the furniture of the church, a supply of all good, internal and
   external.

   [1.] Internal. That God would bless them with ordinances, enrich them
   with graces, preserve truth and unity, and continue his presence with
   them: his ordinances, that they may enjoy them in purity, that the
   word, seals, and censures may be rightly administered till the Lord
   come. These are things pertaining to the kingdom of God, concerning
   which Christ spake to the disciples: Acts i. 3. These are to be kept
   till Christ's appearing: 1 Tim. vi. 14. It is an honour to God, and of
   great profit to the church, and a rejoicing to God's people, to see
   them pure and unmixed: Though absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in
   the spirit, joying and beholding your order.' Col. ii. 5. And then that
   God would enrich them with his presence: Mat. xxviii. 20, Lo, I am with
   you always, even unto the end of the world.' It is God that giveth the
   increase: Paul may plant, and Apollos water; but God giveth the
   increase,' 1 Cor. iii. 6--for conviction, conversion, confirmation. It
   was not the ark, nor mercy-seat covered with cherubims, but the answer
   from between the cherubims, given immediately by God, that manifested
   his presence. It is not the sound of the gospel, or outward ministry,
   but the work of his Spirit: Ps. lxxxiv. 2, My soul longeth, yea, even
   fainteth for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh crieth out
   for the living God.' And Acts x. 44, it is said, The Holy Ghost fell on
   all them which heard the word.' And then for unity: Christ hath called
   us into a body, not only into a family, but into a body. It was
   Christ's own prayer: John xvii., Let them be one.' Disputes will not
   heal, but prayers may.

   [2.] For external helps. We should pray that God would give us pastors
   after his own heart: Mat. ix. 38, Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that
   he would send forth labourers into his harvest.' Men that will
   discharge their duty with all faithfulness, men whose hearts are set to
   the building up of Christ's kingdom, labourers. And then for schools of
   learning. A man that hath many orchards will also have seminaries of
   young plants to maintain them. Schools are seminaries, without which
   the church falleth to decay. And then for good magistrates, to
   patronise and protect God's people, and promote his work with them:
   Isa. xlix. 23, there is a promise, Kings shall be thy nursing-fathers,
   and their queens thy nursing-mothers,' &c. Rest from persecution is a
   great blessing: Acts ix. 31, Then had the churches rest, and were
   edified; and walking in the fear of God, and the comforts of the Holy
   Ghost, were multiplied.' It is a great mercy that the church hath any
   breathings. These are the things that we should pray for Zion.

   Thus much shall suffice to be spoken of the kingdom of Christ in a
   public consideration, with respect, first, to the public visible
   administration of the kingdom of grace.

   I come now to speak of the second, viz., the public and solemn
   administration of the kingdom of glory; and for that I shall insist on
   that portion of scripture: Rev. xxii. 20, Surely I come quickly. Amen.
   Even so, come, Lord Jesus.'

   Here you have--

   I. Christ's proclamation.

   II. The church's acclamation in answer thereunto.

   I. Christ's proclamation: Surely I come quickly.' Where take notice of
   two things:--

   1. His asseveration: Surely.

   2. His assertion: I come quickly.

   1. His asseveration: Surely. It is a certain truth, though we do not so
   easily receive it. All notable truths, about which there is the
   greatest suspicion in the heart of the creature, you will find them
   thus averred in scripture; as Isa. liii. 4, Surely he hath borne our
   griefs, and carried our sorrows.' The dying of the Son of God is so
   mysterious that the Holy Ghost propounds it with a note of averment,
   Surely; that is, how unlikely soever it seems, yet this is a certain
   truth. So here the coming of Christ is a thing so future, so little
   regarded by epicures and atheists, that it is propounded with a like
   note of averment, Surely I come quickly.' Herein secretly is our
   unbelief taxed, and also our confidence engaged.

   2. You have his assertion: I come quickly. Let me explain what is meant
   by the coming of Christ. There is a twofold coming of Christ--a
   personal, and a virtual. Some think that the virtual coming is here
   meant,--his coming in the efficacy of his Spirit, or in the power of
   his providence, to accomplish those predictions. Here are many things
   prophesied of, and behold, I come quickly;' you shall find these things
   presently produced upon the stage of the world. So some carry it. I
   think rather it is to be meant of his personal coming. There are two
   mystical scriptures which do express all the intercourse which passeth
   between God and the church in the world, and they are both closed up
   with a desire of Christ's coming. The Canticles is one, which declareth
   the communion and intercourse which is between Christ and his church;
   and you will find it thus closed up: Cant. viii. 14, Make haste, my
   beloved, and be thou like to a roe, or to a young hart upon the
   mountains of spices.' And so here, in this book of the Revelation,
   where are the like intercourses recorded, it is closed up with this:
   Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly.' The personal coming, I suppose, is
   here meant. Now Christ's personal coming, it is but twofold--the first,
   and the second. The scripture knows of no other coming: Heb. ix. 28, He
   shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation.' It is but a
   fond dream to think of a personal reign before Christ's coming to
   judgment. They reckon without book that look for any other. There was
   his first coming, which was to suffer; his second coming is to reign.
   The first his gracious, and this his glorious coming. The former is
   past, and the latter is yet expected.

   I come quickly.' How shall we make good that?

   [1.] In general, Christ's absence from the church is not long. Though
   you reflect upon the whole flux of time, from his ascension to his
   second coming, it is but a moment to eternity; some hundreds of years,
   that may be easily counted.

   [2.] It is no longer than need requires. The high priest, when he was
   gotten within the veil, was to tarry there until his ministration was
   ended, until he had appeared before God, and represented himself for
   all the tribes, then he was to come out to bless the people. Jesus
   Christ tarrieth within the veil but until all the elect be gathered. He
   is not slack,' 2 Pet. iii. 9, but we are hasty. Our times are present
   with us, but we must leave him to his own time to go and come.

   [3.] Christ speaks this of the latter end of the world, and then it
   will not be long when once he begins to set forth. The old prophecies
   are accomplishing apace; and how little preparation soever there seems
   to be for this work, it comes apace. It is said of the antichristian
   state, Her plagues shall come upon her in one day:' Rev. xviii. 8. And
   of the Jews it is said, A nation shall be born at once:' Isa. lxvi. 8.
   So much for the first part.

   II. Here is the church's acclamation: Amen. So, Lord Jesus, come
   quickly.' This acclamation is double:--

   1. Implicit, and enfolded in the word Amen.

   2. Explicit, and unfolded: Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly.'

   1. For the implicit acclamation of the church, in the word Amen. The
   word sometimes is taken nominally: Rev. iii. 14, Thus saith the Amen,
   the faithful and true Witness.' He that is Amen, as it is explained
   there, true and faithful, that will certainly give a being to his
   promises. Sometimes it is used adverbially, and translated verily. It
   is either an affectionate desire--Let it be,' or a great asseveration
   It shall be.' It hath in it an affectionate desire: Jer. xxviii. 6, the
   prophet said, Amen, the Lord do so, the Lord perform thy words,' &c.
   When he had prophesied peace to the people: Amen, the Lord perform thy
   words;' not to confirm the truth of his prophecy, but to express his
   own wish and hearty desire, if it might stand with the will of God.
   Then it expresseth a firm belief that it shall be done. Thus Christ
   often saith, Amen, verily, verily I say unto you,' by way of strong
   asseveration. Well, then, the church expresseth her faith and desire
   implicitly: Amen, Lord, that it were so; and surely, Lord, it shall be
   so; we believe it, and we desire it with all our hearts.

   2. Explicitly: Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly.' From this latter
   clause I might observe many things.

   [1.] The sweet and blessed harmony that is between Christ and the
   church. Christ's voice and the church's voice are unisons. Christ
   saith, I come.' And the church, like a quick echo, takes the word out
   of Christ's mouth, Even so, come.' There is the same Spirit in Christ
   and in the church; for it is his Spirit that resides with us. Christ,
   he speaks in a way proper to him, by way of promise, I come.' And the
   church in a way proper to her, by way of prayer, Even so, come.'

   [2.] I might observe that, in the close of the world, we should most
   earnestly desire Christ's coming. We have the advantage of former
   times. To us Christ saith, I come quickly.' Now the set time almost is
   come, therefore our pulses should beat more strongly in putting up this
   request to Christ. Tertullian shows that the primitive Christians did
   pray pro mora finis, that the end might not come too soon, Christ
   having as yet but a small interest in the world, they expecting
   enlargement upon earth; but we have more cause to look for the
   accomplishment of his kingdom in heaven. They expected the revelation
   of Antichrist, and we expect the destruction of Antichrist. They, that
   God might be known in the world; we, that he might be no longer
   dishonoured in the world. When great promises are near their
   accomplishment, there is a more lively spirit stirring in the hearts of
   the saints: Dan. ix. 2, 3, I understood by books the number of the
   years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, that
   he would accomplish, seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem. And
   I set my face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplication.'

   But quitting these notes, I shall mainly insist upon this point, viz.:

   Doct. That the church, and all the faithful members of it, do really
   and heartily desire Christ's second coming.

   They look for it, they long for it, they wait for it. They look for it:
   Phil. iii. 20, Our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look
   for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ.' They reckon upon it, as
   Rebekah espied Isaac afar off. He is gone within the veil, he is
   appearing before God, but he will come out again. When they see the
   clouds, upon these one day will our Saviour come. Then they long for
   it. It is their description: 2 Tim. iv. 8, They love his appearing.'
   Wicked men and guilty sinners hate and abhor it, he being to come to
   them as a terrible judge. Malefactors do not long for the assizes. But
   now the saints, who are absolved and washed in the blood of Christ, it
   doth them good to the heart to think of it, that one day Christ will
   appear in all his glory. And then they wait for it: 1 Thes. i. 10, They
   wait for his Son from heaven, even Jesus, who hath delivered us from
   wrath to come.' It is wrath to come,' something behind the coming of
   Christ, which makes it so terrible. Hell makes the day of judgment
   terrible. The devil could not endure to hear of Christ's coming, Mat.
   viii. 29, Art thou come to torment us?' &c. So wicked men have the
   spirit of the devil; it is a torment and bondage to them to think of
   the Judge's coming. But those which have their discharge, they wait for
   it. It supports and bears up their hearts in the midst of their present
   afflictions, and they go on cheerfully in their work, notwithstanding
   lets and troubles.

   To give some reasons why the faithful members of Christ so really and
   heartily desire Christ's second coming. They are of three sorts:--

   1 . Some in respect of the person who is to come.

   2. Some in respect of the persons which desire his coming.

   3. Some in respect of the coming itself.

   I. In respect of him who is to come.

   1. His person, that we may see him. The children of God have delighted
   to look upon him through a veil, and have had a kind of heaven upon
   earth from beholding his face in the glass of an ordinance. Looking
   upon him in the veil of ordinances hath been a mighty comfort and
   refreshing to them; now they would desire to see his person face to
   face. They know by hearsay this great Redeemer and Saviour of theirs;
   he wooeth them by proxy. As Eliezer, Abraham's servant, was to go
   abroad and seek for a match for his master's son, so the great business
   of the ministers of God is to set forth our Master's Son. Now the
   saints would fain see him. Nay, they have not only heard of him, but
   believed in him, and received him into their hearts. Nay, not only
   believed in him, but they have loved him greatly: 1 Pet. i. 8, Whom
   having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
   believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.' It hath
   been a ravishing thought to them to think of Christ. And they have
   tasted: 1 Pet. ii. 3, If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
   gracious.' And they have felt him in the drawings of the Spirit; they
   live by his life, they have found a virtue going out from him. Now all
   that they desire is, that they may see this great person, who hath been
   their Redeemer and Saviour.

   2. Consider him as in his person, so in his relations to them. Here are
   two titles: Even so, Lord Jesus.' He is Lord, and he is Jesus. He is
   Lord, as a master and husband; as Sarah called Abraham, Lord. As a
   Master: good servants will look for their master's coming: Mat. xxiv.
   46. And surely such a Master should be longed for and looked for, for
   when he comes, he will not come empty-handed: Behold, I come quickly,
   and my reward is with me,' Rev. xxii. 12. Here Christ's servants have
   their vales, but not their wages. Here they have present maintenance,
   that is all they have now, but then they shall have their reward and
   wages. Here they have their earnest, but then they shall have the full
   sum. Under the law masters were charged severely not to defraud their
   servants of their hire--why? He hath lift up his soul to him; that is,
   in the middle of his hard labours this was his comfort: when the work
   of the day was over, he should have his wages and his hire at night. So
   you have lift up your souls to him; the great pay-day will come, and
   this hath borne you up in all your labours and travail of your soul.
   Therefore, as he is our Lord, so we should look for him. And then as
   our Husband; this is a sweeter relation: The bride saith, Come,' Rev.
   xxii. 17. We are here contracted and betrothed to Christ: I will
   betroth thee to me,' Hosea ii. 19. But the day of solemn espousals is
   hereafter. Here we are betrothed to Christ in the covenant of grace;
   Christ hath taken a token from us, and left a token with us. He hath
   taken human flesh, carried our nature to heaven, that he might be
   mindful of us, and hath left the Spirit with us. Now there will be a
   longing, looking, and waiting for this day of solemn espousals. And as
   he is Lord, so he is Jesus, a Saviour. With what melting wishes doth
   the captive long for a Saviour and Redeemer! Now we look for a Saviour
   from heaven.' Christ is a Saviour now, but not a perfect Saviour to the
   uttermost; never till then. Therefore the day of judgment is called the
   day of redemption:' Eph. iv. 30. There is something left, that every
   coming of Christ might bring some benefit; something of misery left
   upon us to the last day. Here we have enemies within and without.
   Within, mighty lusts; and therefore his coming is like a refiner's
   fire,' Mal. iii. 2, and fullers' soap.' His first and second coming we
   find oft in the Old Testament put together. His coming is to present us
   holy, without spot and blemish:' Eph. v. 27. Our present state is but a
   convalescency, a recovery out of sickness by degrees. There is some
   fruit of sin left upon the body, until the day of the general
   resurrection, that we may have new matter of glorifying God just as we
   are entering into heaven. Therefore that every coming of Christ might
   bring us a new benefit, the body is to die. The old Adam is not quite
   abolished until God be all in all. And so for enemies without us. Here
   we dwell among wicked men, whose sins are a grievance to us, and whose
   injuries are a very great molestation and trouble. We live here, like
   Lot in Sodom: His righteous soul was vexed with their ungodly deeds.'
   their filthy conversation. But then there will be a perfect separation
   between the sheep and the goats. Here we are exposed to many
   persecutions; here Antichrist is but consuming; there he shall totally
   and utterly be abolished.

   II. If we respect the persons desiring this coming, there is some thing
   in them to move them to it. There is:--

   1. The Spirit of Christ.

   2. Certain graces which do necessarily issue themselves into this work.

   3. Certain experiences they have, which put them upon this longing.

   1. There is the Spirit of Christ: The Spirit and the bride saith,
   Come,' Rev. xxii. 17. The Holy Ghost breedeth this desire in the
   church. Nature saith, it is good to be here; but this is a disposition
   above nature, the Spirit in the bride. The flesh and corrupt nature
   saith, Depart;' but the Spirit saith, Come.' The great work of the
   Spirit is to bring us and Christ together; he comes from the Father and
   the Son, to bring us to the Father by the Son. All he doth is to bring
   Christ and the spouse together; therefore he enkindleth in the hearts
   of God's people a strong and earnest desire of his coming.

   2. There are graces planted in us; faith, hope, love, zeal. Faith, that
   is the ground of this desire. Christ saith he comes quickly; and this
   provokes and draws up the desire to believe Christ will be as good as
   his word: John xiv. 2, 3, I go to my Father, and will come again to
   receive you to myself.' Christ hath ever been plain-hearted with us: he
   saith, I come;' and the church saith, Amen,' in a way of faith, Even
   so, come.' If Christ had gone away in discontent, and with a
   threatening in his mouth that we should never have seen his face more,
   then we could have had but cold hopes and faint desires; but he parted
   in love, and left a promise with us. The church and the believing soul
   saith, I have his word for it: he hath ever been punctual hitherto, and
   kept his word to a tittle, and hath said, I will come again.' This
   upholdeth the hearts of believers during his absence; for they reason
   thus: What need had Christ to flatter or deceive us, or promise more
   than he will perform? Would we flatter a worm that we can easily crush?
   He can strike us dead if we do not please him; he hath been true in all
   things, and we have ever found him plain-hearted. .Then there is hope
   planted in the saints. Hope is faith's handmaid, it looks for that
   which we believe: faith determines the certainty of the thing, then
   hope looks for it. This grace was made on purpose that we might reach
   out to heaven and see if our beloved be coming, that we might expect
   our full and future happiness. God not only provides a glorious estate
   for us, but grace to expect it; he works this hope in us that we might
   look after it: 1 Pet. i. 3, He hath begotten us again unto a lively
   hope.' Then there is love in the saints to Christ. This is an affection
   of union, it desires to be with the party beloved; he desireth to be
   with us, and we with him. Love awakeneth earnest longings: Oh, come,
   come! why is his chariot so long a-coming?' As a loving wife stands
   upon the shore ready to welcome her expected husband, so doth love in
   the saints; they desire to be with Christ, therefore, they long for the
   kingdom of God coming to themselves out of love: Phil. i. 23, I desire
   to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.' And upon the same ground they
   desire the general resurrection of the church. Especially is this
   inflamed with the thoughts of Christ's love to us. He hath removed his
   bodily presence from us, yet he cannot be satisfied until he and we
   meet again: John xiv. 3, I will come again, and receive you to myself,
   that where I am, there ye may be also;' and John xvii. 24, And that you
   may be there with me, to behold my glory.' Christ is not satisfied in
   his glorious estate until we be with him, till he hath our company, and
   we be beatified with the sight of him. Before his coming in the flesh,
   he delighted to be with the saints before the world was: Prov. viii.
   31. And when the world was made, before his incarnation, he took
   pleasure to come and appear in the fashion of a man, and converse with
   his people in human shape. In the days of his flesh, he delighted to
   spend his time and busy himself among them that are faithful. And when
   he was to go from us, he did assure us of returning, and cannot be
   quiet until we be with him. So, reciprocally, and according to our
   measure, doth love work in us; we cannot be without Christ, therefore
   we long to be with him.

   Then zeal is planted in the saints, and a tenderness for his glory. It
   is not their interest only which makes them desire his coming, but that
   the king may sit upon the throne, that Christ may reign in the most
   perfect manner, that the day of manifestation may come, that all mists
   and clouds which are upon his person may vanish. The saints that love
   the glory of God as well as their own salvation, nay, above their own
   salvation, are longing for that time when Christ shall be seen in all
   his glory, that he may be dishonoured no more, that sin and opposition
   may have an end. Here God hath not his perfect glory, neither from us
   nor from the wicked, neither from angels nor devils: not his perfect
   glory from us, and therefore the saints long for that time when Christ
   may be more admired in them; it is the comfort of their souls that God
   is glorified in their glory, that there will a time come when he shall
   be admired and glorified in their glory, and when they shall praise him
   for evermore, without weakness and distraction. And then the wicked,
   that they may oppose and dishonour him no more, that the whole course
   of justice may be seen in the history of the world, which shall be
   produced at the day of judgment; that his power may be seen, when
   devils and all ungodly men are trodden underfoot, and all offences
   taken away, and all opposite powers are abolished. First, Christ would
   zealously affect us to the glory of God: Hallowed be thy name;' then he
   would have us pray, Thy kingdom come,' that our zeal for God's glory
   might make us earnest and instant for his kingdom. Then,

   3. There are certain experiences that we have here which set us
   a-longing and groaning for this time: Rom. viii. 23, We which have the
   first-fruits of the Spirit, groan within ourselves, waiting for the
   adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.' When they have tasted of
   the clusters of Canaan, oh, they long to see the land; they long that
   Jesus, the captain of their salvation, the spiritual Joshua, may lead
   them into the good land. The church hath here enjoyed Christ in her
   house: I brought him into my mother's house,' Cant. iii. 4. Now they
   would enjoy him in his own house, have a more plentiful enjoyment of
   him. Wherefore have we a taste, but to long for a fuller banquet? Why
   doth God give out such a pittance, but to awaken our desires to look
   for more? Indeed these beginnings are sweet, and are a wonderful mercy;
   to hear Christ say in a promise, Come to me, that you may have life.'
   But when once they have embraced this, they will be longing for another
   call, for the great voice to say, Come, ye blessed of my Father,' &c.
   When Christ biddeth them welcome into the kingdom of heaven, to the
   crown of glory; when we can get any joy in the Holy Ghost, a little
   peace of conscience, any sweet experience of our being cleansed from
   sin, this is reviving and comfortable. But why is this given, but to
   set us a-longing for the whole harvest? for this is but the
   first-fruits. It is sweet now to find pardon of sin, and any
   comfortable feeling of God's love in the conscience; to have any doubt
   resolved, any fear silenced and suppressed; to have a glimpse of the
   light of God's countenance, a little elevation of the heart in duty.
   Now this draws on the soul to long for more; for we begin then to
   think, What a sweet reviving will it be when we enjoy the full of all
   these things! If there be but one promise now set home upon our hearts,
   though here we have only the right, not enjoyment; if we have but our
   right cleared up to a promise, it is very reviving. God gives us this
   experience, that we may long to enjoy the thing promised, the full
   possession of it. When you have gone away feasted with loves at the
   Lord's table, thou hast said, One hour's communion with God is better
   than all the world. If thy heart was melted a little in duty, if it was
   affected with godly sorrow for sin, it hath yielded thee more comfort
   than all the mirth and music which fond worldlings cheer themselves
   withal, than all their jollity. Now this is but given as a foretaste,
   as a prelibation, and to awaken our desires after more. In the Lord's
   Supper many times we come and drink of that cup which God hath tempered
   for us; this is but a dark presignification of the new wine we shall
   drink in our Father's kingdom,' Mat. xxvi. 29, and of those eternal
   comforts we shall have there, and those unmixed joys in the presence of
   Christ. Therefore, because of the tastes they have had, and those
   beginnings of glory, their hearts will be more enlarged and drawn out
   to look for more, and long for that happy time when all this shall be
   accomplished.

   III. There may be arguments taken and drawn from the coming itself,
   that they long for his coming. Wherefore doth Christ come? what are the
   ends of it? It is to manifest his love to the saints mainly, as to
   punish his enemies and glorify his justice.

   1. I will mention the first; to gather the saints together, to draw all
   his scattered people into one holy body and communion: Ps. l. 5, Gather
   my saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by
   sacrifice.' Now they are scattered up and down, as God hath service for
   them to do; one here, another there: they are spread in several places,
   where they are like two or three berries in the upper most top of the
   bough. That psalm is generally acknowledged to be spoken of the day of
   judgment; then they are gathered to meet in one great assembly. The
   psalmist speaks of the great congregation of the righteous,' where the
   sinners shall not stand:' Ps. i. 5. At that great day when Christ
   comes, all the saints shall make but one assembly and one congregation.
   As the wicked shall be bundled together, and the tares cast into
   unquenchable fire, so all the saints shall be gathered together into
   one great assembly, and this glads their hearts. Therefore we are not
   feasted to the full, because we have not all our company; all the
   guests do not meet together until the day the Son of God comes to bless
   the elect.

   2. He comes to proclaim our pardon, and to pronounce the sentence of
   our acquittance juridically in court, as judge upon the throne. Our
   pardon is passed and sealed as to conscience, then he will blot out all
   our sins; therefore it is said, Acts iii. 19, That your iniquities may
   be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
   presence of the Lord.' He comes then to comfort and refresh the souls
   of the saints, by proclaiming their pardon in the ears of all the
   world. To whomsoever the throne of Christ is terrible, it should not be
   terrible to the saints: if he comes as a judge to them, he comes to
   acquit them upon the throne; he means no trouble to them.

   3. He comes to crown us. Certainly there is a longing for this day and
   coming; for what is his work? He comes to crown the saints: 2 Tim. iv.
   8, Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
   the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day.' Then he
   comes to put the crown of righteousness upon our heads, and invest us
   with all the fruits of his purchase; then the godly Christian comes to
   have his crown: 1 Pet. v. 4, When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye
   shall receive a crown of glory, that fadeth not away.' He that hath
   been careful to honour God in his relation, then the great Shepherd
   comes to put the crown of glory, which fades not away, upon his head.

   Are the children of God always in this frame, as to desire his coming?
   Many tremble at the thoughts of it, and can have no comfort, for want
   of assurance of God's love; and many times the saints do not feel such
   inclinations, and such ardent and strong desires.

   I answer:--

   1. The meanest saint hath some inclination this way; he cannot but
   desire Christ should come into his heart and bless him, in turning him
   from his sins; and that he should come to judgment, since comfort and
   reward is more naturally embraced than duty. Whoever is begotten to
   God, is begotten to a lively hope,' 1 Pet. i. 3; his heart is carried
   this way, though not with so much strength and lively motions as others
   are. Yet I grant,

   2. Sometimes there may be a drowsiness and indisposition, when their
   lamps are not burning, when they are grown careless and fallen asleep;
   as the wise virgins slept, as well as the foolish, by a sluggish
   security. And the saints may find themselves indisposed, possibly by
   the remission of their watchfulness; they may contract an
   indisposition, yet there is a spirit stirring this way, which begins
   with the new birth, and still continues, though it doth not always
   alike put forth itself. A wife desires her husband's coming home, yet
   it may be all is not in such good order. Now, all Christians desire the
   coming of Christ; but they are not so watchful, therefore are not so
   lively. Security brings deadness, until God awakens them by some sharp
   affliction. The needle that is touched with the loadstone yet may a
   little be discomposed and turned aside, but it settles again. This is
   the right posture and frame of a gracious soul, to be thus earnestly
   bent and carried out after the coming of Christ.

   3. I answer again: The church doth really and heartily desire this
   coming, though they may tremble at some circumstances of it. When we
   think of this great day, and of the book that shall be opened, and the
   impartial proceedings, there is some degree of bondage still left in
   the saints, that doth a little weaken their confidence and boldness. 1
   John iv. 18 we are told: Perfect love casteth out fear, because fear
   hath torment.' Until our graces are perfect, there is something of
   fear.

   APPLICATION.

   Use 1. To reprove those that do not desire the coming of Christ, but
   put off the thoughts of it. Why? Because it casts a damp upon their
   fleshly rejoicing; which put far away the day of the Lord, the evil
   day; it is so to them: Amos vi. 3. They wish it would never come, and
   would be glad in their hearts to hear such news. Why? For Christ's
   coming is their torment and burden; they look upon it as a day of
   vengeance and an evil day, therefore are loth to entertain the thought
   of it. Saith Austin, Canst thou pray that the kingdom of God may come,
   when thou art afraid the kingdom of God should come?' A carnal man
   cannot say the Lord's Prayer without being .afraid; they tremble at the
   remembrance of it; they are afraid it should be true, and afraid to be
   heard. If it might go by their voice, Christ should never come. The
   voice of corrupt nature is, Depart from us; and what can the Almighty
   do for them?' Job xxii. 17. Or if they do desire it, it is but in a
   slight, formal manner; as those in the prophet that would see the day
   of the Lord, yet they could not bear it: Amos v. 18, Woe unto you that
   desire the day of the Lord; to what end is it for you? The day of the
   Lord is darkness, and not light.' They little consider what they are
   doing, and what is their danger, when they are making such a prayer to
   God, Thy kingdom come.'

   Use 2. For trial. How are you affected towards the coming of Christ?
   Are you carried out with such an inclination and bent of heart, as the
   day of your perfection, and the day of your solemn enjoyment of God,
   requireth? Is the bent of your heart carried out to things to come? If
   there be looking, then there would:--

   1. Be a preparing. A man that expects and desires the coming of a great
   person to his house will make all things ready, is careful to furnish
   himself; when all is sluttish and nasty, and nothing of provision, do
   you look for your guest? What have you done as to the day of Christ's
   coming? Have you judged yourselves? 1 Cor. xi. 31, If we would judge
   ourselves, we should not be judged.' Have you ever seriously passed
   sentence upon yourselves, according to the law, that you may be found
   in Christ? Rom. viii. 1, There is no condemnation to them that are in
   Christ.' That you may have Christ's righteousness to bear you out in
   that day against Christ's judgment? Are you so as you would be found in
   him? Do you live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
   world'? Strict walking is a preparing and providing for this day; you
   do but provide for terror when you give way to sin: 2 Pet. iii. 10, 11,
   The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; therefore what
   manner of persons should ye be in all holy conversation and godliness,
   looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God?' We should
   be trimming up our lamps.

   2. What kind of entertainment do you give to Christ now? Do you
   entertain him for the present into your hearts, in his ordinances? A
   woman that never cares to hear from her husband, doth she long for his
   coming? Oh, be careful now to get Christ into your hearts!

   3. What doth this expectation produce? what revivings in the
   forethoughts of it? John viii. 56, Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and
   he saw it and was glad.' He means the day of his incarnation, the day
   of his abode in the world. Abraham foresaw, by the eagle eye of his
   faith, through all mists, clouds, veils, and ceremonies; he got a sight
   of Christ's day, and it did him good at heart. Do the apprehensions of
   it make your hearts spring and leap within you for joy? What groanings
   longings, what dealing with God about it doth it produce? Rom. viii.
   19, For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the
   manifestation of the sons of God.' What support and strength doth it
   give you against the burdens and sorrows of this present life, to
   remember Christ will come?

   Use 3. To press us to this sweet affection and disposition of the
   saints. I might mention the profit of it; this longing, looking, and
   waiting for the coming of Christ, it will make us heavenly in our
   conversation. Christ is there: where should we converse most but where
   Christ is? And it makes us faithful in improving our talents: Our Lord
   will come, and reckon with his servants,' Luke xix. 15.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [23] In a subsequent volume.--Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

   WE are come to the third petition, which is fitly subjoined to the
   former. In the preface we own our relation to God, Our Father.' In the
   first petition we express our care of his glory; in the second, our
   desires of his kingdom; and now we beg obedience to his will. We may
   judge of our respect to his name and kingdom by our obedience to his
   will, without which we neither sanctify his name nor submit to his
   kingdom. The kingdom of God implieth two things, his government over
   us, or the privileges which we enjoy thereby.

   1. As it is taken for his government over us, so there is a fair
   connexion between these two requests. Before, we pray that God would
   rule us, and now, for a soft and pliable heart, that we may be ruled by
   him. Christ is not our king when we do our own will. These two are
   distinct; government is one thing, and obedience to it another: as,
   Mat. vi. 33, The kingdom of God,' and the righteousness thereof,' they
   are distinguished. The kingdom of God we plead for in the second
   petition, and here for the righteousness thereof; that Christ may not
   be a titular prince and sovereign, as certainly he is, when we do our
   own will. Every sovereign stands upon his own will, and the more
   absolute, still the more his will is to be looked upon as a law and
   rule. Now, God being so absolute a sovereign, it is but fit his will
   should be done in the perfectest manner: Thy will be done in earth, as
   it is in heaven.'

   2. If you take the kingdom of God for the privileges of his government,
   especially if they be considered in their consummation and final
   accomplishment, for that which the scripture calls the kingdom of God,
   by doing God's will we enter into his kingdom: see Mat. vii. 21 , Not
   every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
   of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.'
   It is not the blandishment of a spiritual compliment, but a true and
   hearty subjection to the will of God, that availeth in God's kingdom,
   and is intended by this petitionary clause, Thy will be done.'

   Here consider--

   I. The substance of the petition.

   II. The circumstances thereof.

   The substance of the petition, Thy will be done.' The circum stances
   are two: The place where, which indeed intimateth the persons by whom,
   by men here upon earth' Then the manner is set down in a comparison,
   Upon earth, as it is in heaven.'

   Let me first open these passages, then observe somewhat.

   I. The substance of the petition, Thy will be done;' and there:--

   1. The matter about which it is conversant, the will of God.

   2. The request about it, Thy will be done.

   First, The matter of the request, Thy will. God's name was under
   consideration in the first petition, his kingdom in the second, and now
   his will. And then here is a note of appropriation, Thy will, in
   contradistinction to all others.

   God's will, it signifieth two things, either his decree concerning
   future events, or else that which God hath revealed concerning our
   duty--his intended or commanded will. The first is spoken of, Rom. ix.
   19, Who hath resisted his will?' that is, his decree and his purpose;
   and the second, his revealed pleasure concerning our duty, is spoken
   of, 1 Thes. iv. 3, This is the will of God, even your sanctification.'
   The will not of his purpose, but it is his law, his revealed pleasure.
   Now it is not meant here of God's decree or secret will. Why? God's
   secret will, that is not known, therefore how can it be done upon
   earth? To that all are subject,--reprobates, devils. But here this
   petition speaks of a will which is to be done in conformity to the good
   angels. Again, we may, without sin, will that which God wills not by
   his secret will, as the life of a sick parent, which God purposeth to
   take away. Nay, a man may fulfil this secret will and yet perish for
   ever, as Judas, and many which break his commandments and yet fulfil
   his decrees, that do that which God had deter mined before to be done
   in his secret purpose; as it is said, Acts iv. 28, To do that which his
   hand and counsel had determined before to be done.' Therefore his
   secret will is not here meant, but the will of God revealed. Therefore
   let me here distinguish again: The will of God is revealed two ways, in
   his word and in his works; the one to be done by us, the other to be
   done upon us: the one is Voluntas de nobis, God's will concerning us;
   the other, Voluntas in nobis, God's will in us, and to be done by us;
   the one maketh way for our active, the other for our passive obedience.
   Our active obedience hath respect to his laws and commands, but our
   passive to his providence. We show as much obedience in the one as in
   the other, in patience as in holiness: for as in holiness we own God as
   the supreme lawgiver, so in patience we own him as the supreme Lord,
   that hath a dominion over all events and all things which fall out in
   the world. In the one, we pray Ut nihil Dei displiceat nobis, that
   nothing which comes from God may provoke us to unseemly passion; in the
   other, we pray Ut nihil nostrum displiceat Deo, that nothing which
   comes from us may provoke God by unseemly and undutiful carriage. We
   principally pray for the latter here, that we may fulfil his will
   revealed in the word, and yet the other cannot be excluded. Take but
   this reason, because the saints in scripture express their subjection
   to God's providence in words very agreeable to this request, to the
   form of this petition; as those believers, when they saw God had
   determined Paul's journey to Jerusalem, when he went bound in the
   Spirit, notwithstanding the dangers of it, and their loss by his
   departure, they said, The will of the Lord be done.' Acts xxi. 14. And
   Christ himself, speaking of his passion, Mat. xxvi. 39, Not as I will,
   but as thou wilt: and not my will, but thine, be done.' Luke xxii. 42.
   So that we pray both for the one and the other, though with a plain
   difference. Why? For our active obedience must be even without a
   conditional desire that the commands of God should be repealed; we
   cannot so much as desire God should disannul his law, and repeal those
   statutes he hath enacted. Yet we may desire conditionally, if God see
   fit, the removal of our affliction, and that condition of life to which
   we are determined by his providence: The commandment is not grievous'
   in itself, 1 John v. 3, yet the affliction in its own nature is
   grievous, Heb. xii. 11. We may desire more knowledge of God's law, yet
   we may not desire more experience of affliction; the one is more
   absolutely necessary than the other. We are not only to obey actively,
   but to love the commandments of God, and to have our hearts carried out
   in a greater esteem, and to prefer them before liberty itself; but I
   doubt whether we are so concerning our afflictions, to prefer them
   before freedom and exemption, and the welfare of our nature.

   Well, then, you see what is meant by the will of God, which is the
   matter about which this is conversant.

   Then here is the note of appropriation, Thy will, in opposition to our
   own will, the will of Satan, the wills of men.

   [1.] To our own will, which is the proudest enemy Christ hath on this
   side hell, and the cause of all the mischief which doth befall us. The
   great contest between us and God is, whose will shall stand, God's
   will, or ours? In every sin we slight the will of God, and set up our
   own. We despise the commandment.' 2 Sam. xii. 9: not grossly and
   formally; David did not slight the commandment, and say, Tush! it is a
   foolish law;' but by necessary interpretation we slight the law of God,
   and set up our own will. Therefore, when we pray that God's will may be
   done, we do in effect renounce our own will, those wills of the flesh
   and mind,' Eph. ii. 3, which the apostle speaks of; so it is in the
   Greek. The soul is never renewed until the will be renewed, till the
   will be broken. And therefore self-denial is made one of the first
   principles of Christianity, the denying of our own will. The will is
   the leading part of the soul. Though the new creature begins with the
   mind, yet it comes not to any perfection, it is not formed until the
   will be subdued to God, until grace be seated in the heart. When a man
   treadeth on a dry hide, one part or other will be apt to rebound and
   leap up against him, till he stands in the middle and centre: so, until
   grace be seated in the heart, corruption will recoil. When a bird's
   wings are broken, it can fly no longer; so when the will is subdued,
   then the work of grace begins. The mind is the counsellor, but the will
   is the monarch and prince, which sways and rules all in the soul.
   Again, the will is more corrupted than the mind; the understanding is
   much blinded, but the will is more depraved. The mind hath a little
   light, and is apt to take God's part sometimes, by suggesting good
   motions; but the will doth more abhor and refuse good than the
   understanding is ignorant of it. "We are convinced often when not
   converted. Therefore this is the main thing, that our corrupt wills may
   be subdued to God: Let thy will be done, not our own.

   [2.] Thy will, in opposition to Satan's will. Our lusts are called his
   lusts: John viii. 44, The lusts of your father the devil ye will do.'
   They are of his inspiring, of his cherishing; the grand incubus of hell
   is the father of these brats and sinful productions. So, 2 Tim. ii. 26,
   the Holy Ghost speaks of carnal men, that they are taken captive by
   Satan at his will and pleasure.' Wicked men are at Satan's beck, and
   they do his will. The devil sets such a lust at work, the man obeys
   presently: the devil stirs such lusts by his arts and engines, and
   observes such a lust will be most prevalent at such a time; the man is
   taken by Satan's will. Now, Thy will, &c., we desire the Lord's grace,
   that we may not comply with the devil's motions.

   [3.] Thy will, in opposition to the wills of men: 1 Pet. iv. 2, That he
   no longer should live to the lusts of men, but to the will of God;' not
   according to the wills of men, but according to the will of God. In our
   natural state we are apt to be swayed by the lusts and humours of
   others, according as the posture of our interest is determined; and
   therefore it is a good piece of self-denial to cease from the lusts of
   men, from the humours and customs of those whom we fear and from whom
   we hope. And until we cease from men, in vain do we expect to serve
   God.

   Thus for the matter about which this request is conversant, Thy will.'

   Secondly, Here is the request itself, Be done; what doth this imply,
   when we say, Let thy will be done'?

   [1.] We beg a heart to do it: Deut. v. 29, Oh that there were such an
   heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments
   always!' It is not enough to set ourselves to do what God hath
   commanded; but we must get a renewed, sanctified heart.

   [2.] We beg skill to do it: Ps. cxliii. 10, Teach me to do thy will,
   for thou art my God.' We beg that God would teach us, and lead us forth
   in the obedience of his will.

   [3.] We beg strength to do it. It is said, Heb. xiii. 21, The God of
   peace, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect
   in every good work, to do his will.' We beg strength, that we may do
   what is pleasing in his sight. In our will there is a double mischief;
   it is opposite to and averse from God: Rom. viii. 7, The carnal mind is
   enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed
   can be.' And it is strongly inclined to other things; and this both by
   nature and by evil custom. There is an aversion from God, which is
   natural, and which is increased by custom; therefore it is God must
   give us a heart to do his will, and skill and strength. Thus God he
   must draw us off from other things, which is called the circumcising of
   the heart.' Deut. xxx. 6. He must draw us off, and he must draw us on
   too. As he pares away the foreskin, the fleshiness which cleaves to our
   hearts, and inclineth us to seek our own will, in hunting after
   pleasures, honours, profits: so doth the Lord draw us to himself: Cant.
   i. 4, Draw me, and we will run after thee.'

   II. Let us come to the circumstances of the petition, In earth, as it
   is in heaven.'

   First, The place, wherein also the persons are noted, in earth, that
   is, by the men which live upon earth. Why is this mentioned, on earth?

   [1.] The earth is a place of our exercise and trial, and now is the
   time to show our self-denial and our obedience to God, to deny our own
   will and do the will of God: John xvii. 4, I have glorified thee upon
   earth.' This is a work that must not be suspended until we come to
   heaven; it will not be thankworthy then, when there is no interruption,
   no trouble, no molestation there: but here, I have glorified thee on
   earth,' where so few mind the work, and where there are so many
   distractions and temptations to divert us.

   [2.] The earth is the only place where this work is begun, or else it
   shall never be done hereafter: instance in anything that is the will of
   God. Here we must believe, or there we shall never enjoy: Luke ii. 14,
   Peace upon earth.' Now God offereth grace, and now it is his will we
   should come out of our sins, and accept of Christ to the ends for which
   he hath appointed him. And here we must be sanctified, else we shall be
   filthy for evermore. Corn grows in the field, but it is laid up in the
   barn. Now is the time of minding this work, here upon earth.

   [3.] That while we are upon earth, we might long for that happy estate
   we shall have in heaven, wherein we might serve God. Therefore Christ
   in his prayer would have us think how God is glorified and obeyed
   there, that we might send up hearty wishes after that perfect estate,
   when we shall serve God without weariness, and without distraction.

   [4.] Upon earth, to show that we pray not for those in the other world,
   but for those upon earth. We do not pray for the saints departed, they
   are out of harm's way, past our prayers, being in their final estate.
   We pray not for the dead, but for the living. Thus for the first
   circumstance in this petition, the place where.

   Secondly, There remains nothing but the last, and that is the manner
   how this is to be done: As it is in heaven.' Chrysostom observes that
   this clause may be referred to all the former petitions: Hallowed be
   thy name upon earth, as it is in heaven;' Thy kingdom come upon earth,
   as it is in heaven.' But certainly most proper it is to the matter in
   hand. But what is the sense? How is God obeyed in heaven?

   There are in scripture three heavens, the airy heaven, the starry
   heaven, and the heaven of heavens. In all these heavens God's will is
   done. God is obeyed in the lower heaven, you shall see in Ps. cxlviii.
   8, fire, hail, snow, and vapours, stormy winds, fulfilling his word.'
   Winds and storms, and all those things which seem to be most
   tempestuous and unruly, to be the disorders of nature, they are at
   God's beck. Then in the starry heaven, ver. 6, He hath made a decree
   which shall not pass: they are under a law and statute, and are not
   exorbitant and eccentric, do not alter their path; the sun riseth,
   sets, and knows the just point of his compass. But it is chiefly meant
   of the heaven of heavens, where angels and blessed spirits are, and
   they obey God perfectly: Ps. ciii. 20, 21, Bless the Lord, ye his
   angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening
   unto the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye
   ministers of his that do his pleasure.' The angels do his commandments,
   and are hearkening to the voice of his word, are at God's beck, to be
   sent up and down, to ascend and descend as God will have them; so with
   respect to this doth Christ say, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
   heaven.'

   But here, again, why is this added, As it is in heaven?

   1. To sweeten our subjection to God's will. We upon earth are not held
   to a harder law and task than they in heaven. The angels, they are not
   sui juris, at their own dispose: they have many privileges above man,
   yet have no exemption from homage and duty to God. They have an
   exemption and freedom from trouble, and sickness, and disease, and the
   necessities of meat and drink, and all the molestations and infirmities
   of the flesh which we lie under, but are not freed from the will of
   God, but they obey his commandments, hearkening to the voice of his
   word. These courtiers of heaven are servants of God, and fellows with
   us in the same obedience; none is too great to obey God. The angels,
   which excel in strength, they obey his will, and so must we; nay, they
   obey his will with a holy awe and fear, that they may not displease him
   in the least; for it is said of Michael the archangel, Jude 9, that he
   durst not bring against the devil a railing accusation, but said, The
   Lord rebuke thee.' He had not boldness to speak one uncomely word, or
   one unseemly word, to do anything that was displeasing to God.

   2. As to sweeten our obedience, so to show us the reasonableness of
   this obedience. We would have the happiness of the angels, and,
   therefore, certainly we should come into a fellowship in their duty; it
   is but equal we should imitate their holiness. If we would have
   communion with them in glory, we should have communion also with them
   in grace. Mat. xxii. 30, it is said, we shall be isa'ngeloi, like the
   angels of God.' We seek after the same glory and happiness which they
   have: to stand before the Lord and to behold his face; that is their
   happiness. Surely if we would have the reward of angels, which we upon
   earth are aspiring and looking after, it is but equal we should do the
   work of angels, and write after their copy.

   3. Therefore doth Christ use this comparison, that we might not
   miscarry by a low example. How apt are we to follow the track, and to
   take up with an easy and low rate of obedience: Luke xviii. 11, that
   put great confidence in that, God, I thank thee I am not as other men.'
   Now because we have few good examples in the world, and those we have
   have their spots and defects, and are very susceptible of evils, and
   apt to miscarry by them, therefore Christ would carry us up to look
   after a heavenly and celestial pattern; he propoundeth the angelical
   perfection as a pattern and example. He that shoots at a star, will
   shoot higher than he that aims at a shrub: surely the higher the
   pattern that we aim at, the greater will our obedience be. Wicked men
   they think that everything is enough in religion, though it be never so
   little; but the godly cannot so easily satisfy themselves, they are
   pressing and hastening on more and more.

   4. To teach us that we are not only to look to the quid, but to the
   quomodo; not only to what we do, but also in what manner we yield
   obedience to God; therefore Christ would not teach us to pray only, Thy
   will be done,' but as it is in heaven,' in such a manner. God respects
   not only the doing of what he hath required, but also the manner of it,
   that we may not only do good, but well; it is the adverb which crowns
   the action. We are to consider with what heart we go about it: Prov.
   xvi. 2, The Lord weigheth the spirits.' That which he putteth into the
   balance of the sanctuary is, with what spirit, with what heart, we go
   about the work; that is it he weigheth and regardeth. Now that we may
   look not only to the matter of obedience, but also to the manner how we
   do it, therefore doth Christ give us this pattern.

   Object. But you will say, Our obedience is accompanied with many
   defects and infirmities; therefore, how can we serve God as the angels
   do in heaven? How shall we take comfort in our obedience if this be our
   pattern?

   I answer:--

   1. Though we cannot do it in the same measure, yet we should do it in
   the same manner; though there be not an exact equality, yet there
   should be some answerable resemblance. Our obedience should not be
   wholly different in the kind and manner of it from theirs which serve
   God in heaven, though for the degree and rate we cannot come up to
   their pattern.

   2. Though we do not attain to this perfection in this life, yet we must
   aim after it, long for it, and pray for it. Aim after it, not
   sluggishly content ourselves with any low degrees of obedience, but aim
   at the highest. And to long for it: there is a time coming when we
   shall be perfect; when we shall be not only as the angels are, but as
   Christ is: We shall be like him,' 1 John iii. 2. And we pray for that
   on earth which is expected in heaven; we pray for what we do expect
   from the final and consummate estate, when we shall be as the angels of
   God, and perfectly do his will.

   I come to the points; they are three:--

   1. It concerns them very much that would in prayer own God as a father,
   and pretend a respect to his glory and kingdom, to see that his will be
   done here upon earth.

   2. It is the Lord that giveth to will and to do those things which are
   pleasing in his sight.

   3. God doth not only look to this, that his will be done, but to the
   manner how it is done.

   I. It concerneth them very much that would in prayer own God as a
   father, and pretend a respect to his glory and kingdom, to see that his
   will be done here upon earth.

   I shall prove it:--

   First, By the arguments intimated in the point.

   1. As we pray to God, we should see his will be done, upon a double
   account--as real and successful.

   [1.] As we would express a reality and sincerity in prayer. They mock
   God that pray they might do his will, yet have no care to do it, that
   declaim against their lusts, yet hug them and keep them warm in their
   bosoms. We oftener pray from our memories than our consciences, and
   oftener from our consciences than our affections. From our memory, as
   we repeat words by rote, without sense, or feeling, or consideration of
   the importance of them. From our consciences, rather than affections.
   Austin observes of himself: while he was under the power of his lusts
   he would pray against concupiscence, but his heart would say, At noli
   modo, timebam enim ne me exaudiret Deus; But, Lord, not yet; for I am
   afraid lest God should hear me.' Conscience tells us that such things
   must be done and asked; thus we put a little of our conscience in
   prayer, but nothing of affection and serious desire. Many would be loth
   God should take them at their words, when they seem to resign up them
   selves to his will, and think of parting with their lusts; it is bitter
   and irksome to them: as Phaltiel, Michal's husband, went after her,
   going and weeping.' 2 Sam. iii. 16. Now if we would manifest our
   prayers to be real, we should labour to perform the same; otherwise we
   are but like those soldiers which spat upon Christ and buffeted him,
   yet cried, Hail, King of the Jews;' so it is but a mockage to say, Thy
   will be done,' yet have no care to do it: Mat. xv. 8, This people
   draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their
   lips, but their heart is far from me.' There is no reality in the
   prayer, whatever be in it, if the heart be not in it. Some men's
   prayers are but the fruit of wit and memory; others but the result of
   their judgments, what is fit to be done, rather than of their hearts,
   what they desire to be done: and they are only good so far as they do
   more solemnly express God's right, not their inward desires.

   [2.] If we would have our prayers successful. Ps. lxvi. 18, If I regard
   iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.' Clearly, if we will
   not do God's will, there is no reason he should regard our will. If I
   regard iniquity in my heart, there may be sin in the heart; but if I
   regard it there, God will not hear me, if I entertain an affection to
   it. When the wind blows, some cold air will get into the chamber,
   though the door be shut never so close; but to leave the door open for
   it doth not argue such a care of health as is requisite. There will be
   sin in the children of God, but it is not allowed. Love to any known
   sin makes our prayers to God to be without success. So Prov. xxviii. 9,
   He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer
   shall be abomination.' God useth often the law of retaliation, will pay
   home sinners in their own coin: we will not hear him, therefore he will
   not hear us. The same argument we have to urge to God in prayer, that
   God hath to urge to us for duty and obedience. What argument will you
   use to awaken your confidence and affection?' By the blood of Christ we
   have boldness to come to him,' Heb. x. 19, and Eph. iii. 12. This is
   not only an argument to be urged in expectation of mercy, but also in
   the enforcement of duty, when God beseecheth you by the bowels of
   Christ to do his will, and to mind his work. If the blood of Christ
   cannot prevail with us, to bring us up to the will of God, how can we
   expect it should prevail with God to bring us in returns of blessing?
   When God speaks we slight him, therefore when we speak God may cast off
   our prayers.

   God speaks more wisely to us than we can to him; we stammer, and lisp,
   and speak foolishly in our prayers to God. There is far more reason why
   we should hear God than God hear us; for there is more equity in his
   precepts than there is reason in our prayers, and we are bound to obey
   God's will more than he is to grant our request; and therefore if we
   would not have God turn away his ear from our prayers, we should not
   turn away our ears from hearing his law and counsel: John ix. 31, Now
   we know that God heareth not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of
   God, and doeth his will, him he heareth.' It is a general maxim, Those
   which were ready to deprave Christ's actions were possessed of the
   truth of this: If any man worship him, and do his will, him he
   heareth,' John ix. 31. It is not enough to keep up a form of
   worshipping, but we must be tender of his will; that is the way to get
   a gracious answer. Thus as we pray we are bound.

   2. As God's children, so we must do his will: Mal. i. 6, If I be a
   father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear?'
   Relations to God are not bare titles and grounds, whereby we may expect
   favour from God; but they carry in their bosom obligations to duty on
   our part. Many will give God good words and fair titles, but there is
   no care had of complying with his will. Nay, your owning that relation
   will aggravate your sin, and be a witness against you. You owned me
   your father, and have not done my will. So Mat. xii. 50, Whosoever
   shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
   brother, and sister, and mother.' These may be sure of a comfortable
   relation to God, and that God will own them in that claim, when they
   make it their business to do his will; otherwise you reproach God
   rather than worship him. When you do your own will, and call God
   Father, you lay the devil's brats at his door; you pretend to God, and
   take his name upon you; therefore those that say, Our Father,' must
   also say, Thy will be done.'

   3. Those that would have respect to God's glory must do his will. This
   is the honour of God, when you are at his command. God gloried in
   Abraham; rather Cyrus than Abraham is there meant, as the context
   shows: see Isa. xlvi. 11. Isa. xli. 2, The man from the east, whom I
   have called to my foot.' When you are at his beck, ready to go step by
   step with God, as God leads you, you are ready to follow. It was the
   honour of the centurion that had his soldiers at such a command, that
   when he said to one, Go, he went; and to another, Come, and he came,'
   Mat. viii. So it is God's honour, when he can bid you do nothing but
   you are ready to obey, though with the greatest hazard and loss of all.

   4. Our subjection to his kingdom. God stands upon his authority. What
   is a king without obedience? Christ is never received as king but where
   his will is obeyed, otherwise we mock him with an empty title. The high
   priest's servants said, Hail, King of the Jews,' in mockage; thus it is
   to own him as king, when we will not yield obedience. Then do we desire
   that his kingdom may come indeed and in power, when we resolve to do
   his will, to love as God will have us, and hate, fear, and hope as God
   will: Ps. cxliii. 10, Thou art my God; teach me to do thy will.' If you
   own God as sovereign, you must be in subjection to his will. Thus this
   prayer will yield us arguments, as we own him as a father, as we
   profess respect to his glory and kingdom.

   Secondly, I shall bring other arguments to persuade this, to make
   conscience of God's will.

   1. The example of Christ Jesus, who wholly yielded up himself to the
   will of God; and wilt thou stand upon thy terms? John v. 30, I seek not
   mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.' Christ did not seek
   to please his human, his own natural will, but the will of his Father.
   This is true religion, to be like him whom we worship. Now, we are
   never like Christ until we make doing of God's will to be the great
   business of our lives. Wherefore doth he come into the world? He tells
   you; to do his Father's will: Luke ii. 49, Wist ye not that I must be
   about my Father's business?' This was his sole employment; so it should
   be ours, if we have the same mind which Christ had.

   2. Consider God's right. We are not at our own dispose, but at the
   Lord's use. God hath a right in us, as he created us. The perfection of
   everything lieth in fulfilling the Creator's will, for that is the end
   wherefore they were made. The creatures are all thy servants, and
   continue this day according to thine ordinances,' Ps. cxix. 91. We owe
   our being, and all we have, from him. We see among men dependence
   begets observance; a man that lives upon another will be careful to
   please him. Thou boldest all by the indulgence and bounty of God,
   therefore it should be thy study to do his will. Jesus Christ hath
   bought thee: 1 Cor. vi. 20, Glorify the Lord in your souls and bodies,
   which are God's.' That is God's which he hath bought. A servant that
   was bought, when men were sold for slaves, he was his master's money;
   so his strength, time, service belonged to his master. We are God's,
   because he hath bought us, therefore we cannot live as we will; for
   this is the property of a servant, that he cannot live as he will.
   Again, as God hath begotten us anew, regenerated us, what is the aim of
   his grace?' That we should no longer live in the flesh, to the lust of
   men, but to the will of God,' 1 Pet. iv. 2. It is the aim of grace to
   cure the disorders of the will, and to bring us to a stricter bond of
   duty and service to God. And indeed if grace hath had its fruit and
   power upon you, you will give up yourselves to God. Cant, vii. 10, I am
   my beloved's.' You are your beloved's, to be used by him as he
   pleaseth. So that unless you will retract your vows, you will make
   conscience of doing the will of God, for he hath a manifest right in
   you.

   3. Consider our own incapacity. There is great reason why our wills
   should be given up to the will of God, because we are not able to
   manage them ourselves. By the law of nations, fools and madmen must
   have a guardian; they have lost the dominion and power over themselves,
   they are to be ruled by another, they are slaves by nature, that must
   be guided by another: Tit. iii. 3. We are all by nature fools, and it
   is the greatest mischief that can be to be left to our own wills; and
   therefore, when God requireth the resignation of our wills, it is but
   as the taking of a sword out of a madman's hand, which will be the
   cause of his own mischief and ruin. Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso,--No
   man is hurt by any but himself, though he maybe troubled by others.'
   Now, since we cannot manage our own will, it is fit we should have a
   guardian; and who is more wise than God to govern us? A merchant,
   though he owns the ship, and hath stored it with goods, yet because he
   hath no skill in the art of navigation, he suffereth the pilot to guide
   it. Certainly we shall but shipwreck ourselves unless we give up
   ourselves to be guided by the Spirit of God according to his will.

   4. The benefit that accrueth to us by doing his will--we shall have his
   favour here and his glory hereafter. His favour here, which is that
   which endeareth us to God: Acts xiii. 22, I have found a man after mine
   own heart, which shall fulfil all my will.' These are men after God's
   own heart, that do his will. And though we have great infirmities, yet
   because we are bent to do his will, they will be passed over; as David
   had his infirmities, yet because it was in his heart to do the will of
   God, therefore this is a man after mine own heart. And you shall have
   the glory of God hereafter: 1 John ii. 17, The world passeth away and
   the lusts thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.'
   Those things that our wills carry us to they perish. The inclination of
   our heart carrieth us to the world, riches, honours, pleasures; but the
   will of God carrieth us to an ever lasting estate. The world passeth
   away, and the lusts thereof.' There will a time come when those things
   we will, and are so strongly addicted to and lust for, will be gone--we
   shall have no relish, no savour in them, no appetite to them. When men
   are leaving the world, then they cry out how the world hath deceived
   them; but now he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.' Never
   any repented of doing the will of God; this will stick by us to all
   eternity, and bring us to everlasting happiness.

   Use 1. To show how far they are from any sincere respect to God, that
   upon the least occasion transgress his will, and break through bonds
   and restraints God hath set to them. The heart is never right but when
   it lieth under the awe of a command. Many will fear a punishment; but
   it is said, Prov. xiii. 13, He that feareth the commandment: if the
   commandment stands in his way he dares not break through, it is more
   than a hedge of thorns, or if lions stood in the way. But on the other
   side, when men make no bones of a commandment, when they will
   transgress for a pair of shoes' (as the prophet saith), when every
   small temptation is enough to draw them off from God, it showeth how
   little sincere respect they have to God.

   Use 2. It serves to press us to a more tender regard to the will of
   God. To this end consider these motives:--

   1. His absolute authority to command: 1 Tim. vi. 15, Who is the blessed
   and only potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;' his will is
   enough--I am the Lord, you shall do thus and thus.

   2. Consider the equity of what he hath commanded: Rom. vii. 12, The
   commandment is holy, and just, and good.' Nothing God commandeth but
   what is agreeable to his own nature, and what is suited to our benefit.
   It is no burden to live justly, soberly, and holily in communion with
   God; it is not a burden, but a great ad vantage. The yoke of Christ is
   a bountiful yoke. Our service and duty hath its own reward in the very
   mouth and bosom of it. It is no great wrong to us to govern our
   affections, to live soberly, chastely, and in the exercise of holy
   services; here is nothing but what raiseth and sublimates the nature of
   man. If the commandment of God had been to offer our children in
   sacrifice, or any of those barbarities which were practised among the
   Gentiles, yet this had been enough, I am the Lord;' but when he hath
   given such holy and good commands, which makes you live more like men,
   like reasonable creatures, you should be tender of the Lord's will.

   3. To be given up to our own will is a great judgment. When the Lord
   hath a mind to destroy a people, he gives them up to their own will:
   Ps. lxxxi. 12, Israel would none of me; so I gave them up unto their
   own hearts' lust; and they walked in their own counsels.' It is the
   greatest judgment which can be laid upon any creature, that he may have
   his own will. A man may be given up to Satan, yet recover: 1 Cor. v. 5,
   Deliver such an one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
   spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.' He may be given up
   to Satan for his exercise and trial; but when he is given up to
   himself, to the sway of his own heart, to be besotted with his own
   counsels, and to have his own lusts, what a heavy judgment is this!
   When Balaam would not be satisfied, God said to him, Go,' Num. xxii.
   35. He had his answer before, again and again, but he would be
   inquiring still; Go,' and that was his punishment.

   4. It is the truest liberty to be subject to the will of God. Then,
   when the Son of God shall make you free, you shall be free indeed,'
   John viii. 36. How doth the Son of God make us free? Not from duty, but
   for duty. He that lieth under the dominion and power of any sin is a
   very slave. But then are we free indeed, when we are loosed, not from a
   due subjection to God, but from the power of the devil. It is not
   liberty to be free to do what we please, good or evil; but the more
   determined we are to good, the more freedom--for that is a liberty
   which comes nearest to the liberty of God, who is a most free agent and
   yet cannot sin. Such a liberty is in God, Christ, and the angels in
   heaven: surely they do not live a slavish life that are ever praising
   and lauding of God. It will be the greatest pleasure in the issue to
   deny our own will and do the will of God. The more we are enlarged for
   this, the greater is our happiness. Then we have the happiness of the
   spirits of just men. None among men have greater happiness than
   glorified saints, yet none have less of their own will. Why should we
   account that a bondage which is part of our happiness? In heaven
   glorified spirits there are not complaining of any burden, yet they
   have no will of their own, but they will and nill as God doth.

   5. He that hath a heart bent to do the will of God, he hath the
   clearest knowledge of the mind of God: John vii. 17, He that will do
   the will of God, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God.'
   It is not the sharpness of parts that pierceth into a truth, especially
   into a controverted truth, when the dust of contention is raised; but
   he that is most close in walking with God, it is he that knoweth his
   mind. A blunt iron, when hot and in the fire, will pierce deeper into
   an inch board than a sharper tool that is cold; so a man that hath pure
   affections for God, a heart to do the will of God, pierceth deeper many
   times into controverted truth, and sees more of the mind of God in that
   truth than a man of parts doth. There arc many mistakes about the will
   of God. Now make conscience of obedience, do not consult with the
   interest of your own private passions, and then you shall know the mind
   of God. It is just with God to withhold the light from them that
   consult with their lusts and interests and carnal humours, for these
   blind the mind, and only like and dislike things as they shall relish
   with their lusts.

   6. God will surely punish the violation of his will. This implieth two
   things:--

   [1.] That God takes notice of it; he observes whether his will be done,
   yea or no. The Rechabites were tender of the commandment of their dead
   father, who could not take cognizance of their actions; but it was the
   will of their father, and they would keep to the will of the dead: Jer.
   xxxv. 14. But now the Lord seeth whether his will be kept, yea or no:
   Prov. xv. 3, The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the
   evil and the good.' Wherever you are, God is with you. As the prophet
   said to Gehazi, Went not mine heart with thee?' 2 Kings v. 26, meaning
   his prophetical spirit. The Lord's Spirit goeth along with "us wherever
   we go, he observes what we do. When Jesus Christ was in the throng, he
   saith, Who is it that toucheth me?' He was sensible virtue passed out
   from him when one touched him by faith. So in the throng of creatures
   we depend upon God--he knows what virtue goeth out to preserve thee and
   me in being. These are fit instances to ingenerate in our minds a sense
   of God's omniscience.

   [2.] He will severely punish: James iv. 12, There is one lawgiver, who
   is able to save and to destroy.' There are many lawgivers in the world,
   that have power of life and death, but that is only of life temporal;
   but there is one Lawgiver that can reward with eternal life, and punish
   with eternal death. So God truly and properly hath the power of life
   and death. Therefore, since he can punish so severely, we should not
   stand out against God's will. Many times the doing God's will is
   irksome to flesh and blood, but remember hell will be worse. When we
   press men to faith, repentance, and new obedience, and tell them this
   is the will of God concerning you, that you do believe in Christ, walk
   holily and humbly with God, what saith the man? Shall I mope myself,
   and sit mourning in a corner, and spend my life in a dark melancholy
   manner, in going from one duty to another? This is far better than to
   sit howling under the wrath of God for evermore.

   For directions. If you would do the will of God, then--

   1. There must be some solemn time of resigning and giving up thy will
   to him. Naturally we are averse. Now, whosoever is brought unto God, he
   comes and lays down the weapons of his defiance at God's feet. God hath
   a right to us, and he will have this right confirmed by our grant and
   consent: Rom. xii. 1, I beseech you by the mercies of God, that ye
   present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God.'
   There cannot be a more acceptable sacrifice to God than the resignation
   of our own will to him: See how Paul comes and layeth down the buckler,
   when God had him under: Acts ix. 6, And he, trembling and astonished,
   said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?' There will be a time when
   you will solemnly give up the keys of your own hearts to God, and bid
   him come and enter. Paul, that now did nothing but threaten and breathe
   out terror to the children of God, when God had humbled him, then he
   lies at God's feet. When you are truly humbled, you will desire God to
   come and take possession of your hearts, and resolve to come under his
   yoke: Mat. xi. 28, Take my yoke upon you, and you shall find rest for
   your souls.' Christ will force it upon none. In the matrimonial
   contract, consent is not to be forced: Take my yoke.'

   2. When you give up yourselves to God, it must be without bounds and
   reservations: That ye may stand perfect and complete in the will of
   God,' Col. iv. 42. That was his prayer for them: and, Acts xiii. 22, I
   have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after my own heart; he shall
   fulfil all my will.' We should so perfectly obey, as if we had no will
   of our own, not reserving a property in anything. Our thoughts are not
   our own to dispose, nor our desires nor delights, but as God will. The
   least sin reserved is a pledge of the devil's interest and right in us.
   And therefore give up all to God, resign up your selves wholly to him,
   as remembering that every motion, every thought, every affection, is
   under a rule, and in every action we should say, Will God have this to
   be done, yea or no?

   3. There are some special things concerning which God hath more
   expressly signified his will and given special charge, and these we
   should make greatest conscience of, how distasteful soever they be to
   flesh and blood, or prejudicial to our own interest. For instance,
   concerning repentance and turning from sin, Ezek. xxxiii. 11, you have
   God's oath that he delights in it: As I live, saith the Lord God, I
   have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
   from his way, and live.' And God would not have any to perish, but that
   all should come to repentance,' 2 Pet. iii. 9. This is the will of God;
   he hath told you what a great deal of pleasure he takes in repentance,
   that you should come and mourn over your sins, and bewail your
   stragglings. When a profane Esau knew what his father desired, he takes
   his bow to go and kill venison; when we know anything more pleasing to
   God, we should do it. And then he takes pleasure also in the work of
   faith, believing in Christ: John vi. 29, This is the work of God, that
   ye believe on him whom he hath sent: and 1 John iii. 23, This is his
   commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
   Christ.' Therefore we should be much in the work of faith, and in
   receiving Christ, that we may accomplish the good pleasure of God in
   us. It is very pleasing to God we should thus repent, believe, and
   return to him. The very first motion, how welcome is it to the Lord!
   Ps. xxxii. 5, I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord;
   and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.' So Luke xv. 20: the father
   ran to meet him when the prodigal thought of returning. So that you
   should live a sanctified life: 1 Thes. iv. 3, This is the will of God,
   even your sanctification.' That you should walk holily, God hath
   expressly declared his will. Then for duties of relations, God takes a
   great deal of pleasure in obedience to magistrates, parents, masters: 1
   Pet. ii. 15, For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put
   to silence the ignorance of foolish men.' Then, that we should observe
   providences, ever be in a thankful frame: 1 Thes. v. 18, In everything
   give thanks; for this is the will of God, in Christ Jesus, concerning
   you.' It is a great rebellion and disobedience not to obey God's solemn
   charge.

   4. We should be willing to obey God, whatever it cost us. The least sin
   is not to be committed to avoid the greatest trouble. You would think
   it were a small sin for Moses to tarry in Pharaoh's court, where he
   might be helpful to the people of God, yet he chose rather to suffer
   affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
   for a season,' Heb. xi. 25.

   5. For the greatest good that possibly can come of it, we should not
   cross God's revealed will. Many times this is a snare. Men think to be
   justified by their good intentions. We must not do evil that good may
   come thereof: Rom. iii. 8. If one lie could save the world, we were not
   to do it, for the least evil is not to be done contrary to God's will,
   though the greatest good come of it.

   Use 3. Examine how you stand affected to God's will. This is very
   needful, because--

   1. There be many mistakes about it.

   2. Hereby we may discern whether we are thus entirely affected with the
   Lord's will.

   Men flatter themselves with a pretence of obedience, and cry, Lord,
   Lord,' but do not do his will. They give God good words, but do not
   break out into an actual contest; as those wretches, Jer. xviii. 12, We
   will every one do the imagination of his evil heart:' and Jer. xliv.
   17, We will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own
   mouth.' There are many things wherein we are apt to mistake. As,

   [1.] We pretend to do God's will in general, but when it comes to
   particulars we stick at it. Usually, when we take up duty by the lump,
   it doth not exasperate opposite propensions and inclinations. This is
   our great fault, we please and flatter ourselves with notions and
   abstract conceits. What say you to this will of God concerning you in
   particular? How forward were the Israelites! Oh, they would do the
   whole will of God; they run away with the general notion. Yea, but
   saith Joshua, chap. xxiv. 19, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an
   holy God, he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions
   nor your sins.' We will do the will of God in general, but when it
   comes to cross our lusts and private inclinations, these make us grudge
   at it, and shrink back again.

   [2.] Some commend and approve the will of God, and talk of it, but do
   not practise it. It is here, Thy will be done;' it is not, Let it be
   talked of, spoken and conferred of by me, but done. And it is not
   giving good words. You know the parable of the two sons: One said, I
   will not, and did;' the other, I go, sir, and went not.' Mat. xxi. 29,
   30. Where Christ prefers the open sinner before the hypocrite, that is
   talking of God's will, and seems at a distance to be like the
   carbuncle, all of a fire, but touch him, he is key-cold. When we are
   approving much of the will of God in our judgments, and commending of
   it, and do it not, this is in effect to say, I know what my Father
   commands me, but I will do as I list.

   [3.] Another deceit about the will of God is this: For the present,
   while we are in a good humour, when our lusts lie low, when the heart
   is warm under the impulsions of a present conviction or persuasion, men
   have high thoughts of doing the will of God: Deut. v. 27, Speak thou
   unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; we will hear
   it, and do it.' There are several acts of our wills; there is consent,
   choice, intention, and prosecution. It is not enough to consent: these
   things may be extorted from us by moral persuasion; but there must be a
   serious choice, an invincible resolution, such an intention as is
   prosecuted with all manner of industry and serious endeavours, whatever
   disappointments we meet with from God and men. Then this intention or
   invincible resolution is such as will not be broken by difficulties,
   weakened by loss of interest, not discouraged by the many
   disappointments we meet with, even in our waiting upon God.

   [4.] We have many times a seeming awe upon the conscience, and so are
   urged to do God's will, yet the heart is averse from God all the while;
   therefore they strive to bring God's will and theirs together, to
   compromise the difference. A notable instance of this you have in
   Balaam. He had a message sent to him, and a great bribe. Now he had a
   carnal heart, which ran out upon the wages of unrighteousness, and,
   therefore, though he knew the people of Israel were blessed of the
   Lord, yet first he will go to God: Num. xxii. 8,; Lodge here this
   night, and I will bring you word again, as the Lord shall speak unto
   me.' He is very tender, he durst not go with them, unless the Lord say,
   Go. But God denies him: ver. 12, Thou shalt not go with them.' What
   then? The Lord refuseth to give him leave. Then Balak sends more
   honourable messengers, and propounds rewards again. Then his carnal
   will is for God: ver. 18, Balaam answered, If Balak would give me his
   house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord
   my God, to do less or more.' Was not this spoken with an honest mind,
   think you? This was the dictate of his conscience; not for a houseful
   of gold durst he go against God the Lord. Yet you shall find it was a
   sore temptation to him, for he goes again to God: ver. 19, Tarry here
   this night, that I may know what the Lord will say unto me more.' Then
   saith God, Go, when he saw his heart was set for the wages of
   unrighteousness. There was a reluctancy in his conscience, he durst not
   go, therefore he would fain bring the will of God to his will. In many
   cases we are thus divided between our own affections and God's will,
   between our interests and the will of God.

   It is a case often falls out, when there is a quarrel between
   conviction and corruption. When light is active and strong in
   conscience, men dare not go against the apparent will of God, yet their
   hearts hang another way. We have one carnal affection or other, and
   then all our business is to bring God's will and ours together; and how
   to disguise and palliate the matter, that with greatest leave to
   conscience we may seem to contradict the will of God.

   [5.] A fifth deceit about the will of God, and that is, a wish that we
   were brought under the power of it, as he that stretched himself upon
   his bed, and said, Oh, that this were to labour! Many men have a
   velleity, a languid and incomplete will; they have a wish, but not a
   volition, not a serious desire; and sometimes they may draw it out to a
   cold prayer that God would make them better. It is just like a man that
   should lie down and complain, Oh, that I were at such a place! and
   never travel. Would I had performed such a task! yet puts not his hand
   to the work. Men would, but they will not, set themselves in good
   earnest to get the grace they wish for, there is not striving to
   accomplish their will. A chapman no doubt would have the wares, it is
   like he hath a cold wish, but will not come to the price; I will buy it
   whatever it cost me. They have not those active and industrious
   resolutions, such a strong and serious bent of heart towards God, but
   only a few wishes.

   [6.] Halving the will of God; as in many cases many will do part of the
   will of God, but not all, they come not fully up to the mind of God.
   For instance, they will take notice of some great commandment, but not
   of the least. We cannot dispense with ourselves in the least: Mat. v.
   19, Whosoever shall break one of the least commandments, and shall
   teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.'
   We are apt to say It is but a little one, and my soul shall live.' No
   sin is little which is committed against a great God. It argueth more
   wickedness to break with God for a trifle and a very small matter, it
   argueth more corruption; as a little force will make a heavy body move
   downward. Again, in another case, the ceremonialist stands upon some
   lesser things; as the Jews, John xviii. 28, would not go into the
   judgment-hall lest they should be defiled,' yet they could seek the
   life of the Lord of glory. They are not brought under the dominion of
   the Lord's grace, faith, repentance, holiness, and the weightier things
   of the law; these are things they regard not. This is hypocrisy. Like
   one that comes into a shop to buy a pennyworth and steals a pound's
   worth; so they are punctual in lesser things, that they may make bold
   with God in greater. Again, some will do the will of God in public,
   where they may be observed; but not in private, and when alone. They
   make a fair show in the world, but in their families their converse is
   more loose and careless: Ps. ci. 2, I will walk within my house with a
   perfect heart.' A man that is truly holy will show it at home and
   abroad, in his closet and secret retirements, everywhere he makes
   conscience of the will of God. Many times we strain ourselves and put
   forth our gifts in public; God will be served with our utmost in secret
   also; and the will of God is expressed concerning the inward as well as
   the outward man, and we must make conscience of both: Isa. lv. 7, Let
   the wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,'
   &c. Not only make conscience of our way, our outward course, but of our
   thoughts as well as our actions, for the thoughts fall under a law. So
   some will make conscience of the first-table duties, and neglect the
   second; and some of the second, and neglect the first. Some are very
   punctual in dealing with men, but neglectful of God: Rom. i. 18, The
   wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and
   unrighteousness of men.' Both tables are owned from heaven. Some will
   not wrong their neighbour of a farthing, but stick not to rob God of
   all that faith, fear, love, trust, worship, that is due to him. Many
   that will not defile their bodies with promiscuous copulation, yet are
   adulterers and adulteresses to God, their hearts straggling from God,
   doting upon the creature to the wrong of God. Many condemn the
   rebellion of Absalom, and rise up against their heavenly Father, and
   are murderers, that strike at the being of God. They are tender of
   wronging the reputation of men, yet dishonour God, and are never
   troubled. So, on the other side, others fear and worship, but in their
   dealings are very unconscionable; they will not swear an oath, but are
   very uncharitable, censuring their brethren without pity and remorse.
   This is the fashion of the world, to be in with one duty and out with
   another.

   [7.] A loathness to know the will of God, to search and inquire into
   it, argueth deceit, and that we are loath to come under the power of
   it. Some men shrewdly suspect it is true, but are loath to inquire into
   it: John iii. 20, Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither
   cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.' They have a
   shrewd guess about the ways of God, but will not search to be
   satisfied: 2 Pet. iii. 5, They are willingly ignorant.' As Tertullian
   saith of the heathens, they would not search into the Christian
   religion, because they had a mind to hate it; so these are loath to
   inquire further into the will of God. There is a great deal of deceit
   in it; it shows we are afraid to come too near a suspected truth.
   Again, now and then when lusts are under some restraint, men seem to
   lie much under the will of God. A horse that is kept low is easily
   ruled by the rider, but when fed high he grows headstrong. Many times
   in a mean condition a man seems to make conscience of doing the will of
   God; but when prosperous, he waxeth wanton and disobedient: Jer. v. 5,
   I will get me to the great men, but these have altogether broken the
   yoke and burst the bonds.'

   So that there are a great many mistakes about doing the will of God,
   therefore you had need search.

   Secondly, How shall we know we are rightly affected with the will of
   God?

   [1.] When God's will is reason enough for what he hath required of us;
   when a man is so sensible of God's will that this is instead of all
   reasons. Obedience is never right but when it is done upon the mere
   sight of God's will. This is enough to a gracious heart, that this is
   the will of God, 1 Pet. ii. 15, 1 Thes. v. 18, though the duty be never
   so cross to our own desires and interests. This is to obey the
   commandment for the commandment's sake, without any other reason or
   inducement. There is, indeed, ratio formalis and ratio motiva, the
   formal reasons of obedience and the motives of obedience. The formal
   reason of obedience is the sight of God's will, the motives to
   obedience are rewards and a dread of punishment. The formal reason is
   God's will; and this is pure obedience, to do what God wills be cause
   God wills it.

   [2.] When a man is very inquisitive to know what is the will of his
   heavenly Father. When he doth not only practise what he knows, but
   searcheth that he may know more: Rom. xii. 2, That ye may prove what is
   that good and acceptable and perfect will of God;' and, Eph. v. 17, Be
   ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.' When a
   man is desirous to know the whole will of God, not for curiosity but
   for practice, that he might do it. When the understanding hath a
   confused notion of a thing they will not know it distinctly, but when
   men search, and are willing to find out the counsel of God in all
   things that they may come up to it, this is a sign the heart is rightly
   affected to the will of God.

   [3.] Hereby may you know your affection to God's will, by keeping
   yourselves from your sins: Ps. xviii. 23, I was upright before him, and
   kept myself from mine iniquity.' There is an iniquity that we may call
   ours, upon which the will is most passionately addicted; be it
   worldliness, sensuality, inordinate desire of reputation and respect
   with men. Now, when we are plucking out our right eye, and cutting off
   our right hand, Mat. v. 29--when we are mortifying and subduing our
   lusts--when we can deny ourselves in those things to which the heart is
   most wedded, that is a sign of compliance with the will of God.

   The second point.

   Doct. 2. That it is the Lord which giveth to will and to do those
   things which are pleasing in his sight.

   Therefore we ask it of him, Thy will be done,' --that is, as I
   explained it, we ask of him a heart, skill, and strength to do his holy
   will.

   Here I shall tell you:--

   1. What I mean by the point.

   2. Give you the proof of it.

   I. What I mean by the point:--

   1. I mean thus, that in the work of conversion God doth all: Ezek. xi.
   19, I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you;
   and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give
   them an heart of flesh.' The benefit of a tender sanctified heart is
   God's gift: Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27, A new heart also will I give you, and
   a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony
   heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I
   will cause you to walk in my statutes.' Mark, a new heart--that is,
   another heart, a heart to understand, a heart to love, a heart to do
   the will of God, he gives it. He doth not only offer it, or prepare it,
   make way for it, but I will give you a heart of flesh.'

   2. This is that I mean, that after conversion God still concurreth. He
   doth not only give the habit of grace, but actual help in the work of
   obedience. He worketh all our works in us.' Isa. xxvi. 12. His actual
   help is necessary to direct, quicken, strengthen, protect, and defend
   us. To direct us: Ps. lxxiii. 24, Thou shalt guide me by thy counsel,
   and bring me to thy glory.' In our way to heaven, we need not only a
   rule and path, but a guide. The rule is the law of God, but the guide
   is the Spirit of God. To quicken and excite us by effectual motions: a
   drowsiness and a deadness is apt to creep upon our hearts, and we see
   in the same duty it is a hard matter to keep up the same frame of
   spirit, the same vigour of affection, life, and warmth; and therefore
   we had need go to God often, as David: Ps. cxix. 37, Quicken thou me in
   thy way.' It is God which doth renew the vigour of the life of grace
   upon all occasions, when it begins to languish and droop. To
   corroborate and strengthen what we have received: Eph. iii. 16, the
   apostle prays there that he would strengthen with might by his Spirit
   in the inner man;' and, 1 Pet. v. 10, Make you perfect, stablish,
   strengthen, settle you.' There are many words heaped up there to show
   how God is interested in maintaining and keeping afoot that which he
   hath planted in the soul. In protecting and defending them against the
   incursions and assaults of the devil, who always lieth in wait to
   surprise the soul, to withdraw us from God. The regenerate are not only
   escaped out of his clutches, but are advanced and appointed to be
   Satan's judges, which an envious and proud spirit cannot endure;
   therefore he maligns, assaults, and besiegeth them with temptations
   daily. Now, it is God that defends: John xvii. 11, Keep through thine
   own name those whom thou hast given me;' by thy name--that is, by thy
   power.

   3. God must not only help us in the general, and upon weighty
   occasions, but in every act, from the "beginning of the spiritual life
   to the end. It is not enough to say that the first principles and
   motions are of God, but the flowing forth of all motions and actions,
   according to those principles: Phil. ii. 13, It is God that worketh in
   you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.' God not only gives
   the desire and purpose, but he gives grace to the good which we will
   and purpose to do. These two are distinct; and we may have assistance
   in one kind and not in another; willing and doing, I mean, are
   different. Paul saith, Rom. vii. 18: To will is present with me; but
   how to perform that which is good I find not.' To will is more than to
   think; and to exert, and put forth our will into action, it is more
   than both; and in all we need God's help. We cannot think a good
   thought, nor conceive a holy purpose, much less perform a good action,
   without God, so that every moment we need renewed strength. As long as
   the work of grace is powerful and renewed in us, so long we are kept in
   a warm and healthful frame; but we grow vain, loose, earthly, carnal
   again, and off from God, when this heat and warmth of grace is
   withdrawn; and therefore God still concurreth in the whole business of
   our obedience to him.

   II. Having showed what I mean, and how far God is interested in this
   work, what need we have to desire we may do his will; let us prove it.
   And because it is a weighty point, I shall prove it by parts.

   1. As to the first grace, that it is God alone which frames our hearts
   to the obedience of his will.

   2. That when we are thus framed by grace, after conversion, it is God
   still concurs, and must help us to do his will.

   First, As to the first grace, I shall prove that it is God alone, by
   the power of his own Spirit, which frames our hearts to the obedience
   of his will. This will appear by considering:--

   (1.) What man is by nature.

   (2.) The words by which our cure is expressed, and the way God takes to
   put us into a course of obedience.

   (3.) What the scripture speaks as to the utter impotency of man, to the
   framing of his heart to the obedience of God's will.

   (1.) First, This will appear by those notions or emphatical terms by
   which the scripture doth set forth man's condition before God works
   upon him. He is one that is born in sin:' Ps. li. 5, Behold, I was
   shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me;' and things
   natural are not easily altered. And as he is born in sin, so he is
   greedy of sin: Job xv. 16, He drinketh in iniquity like water;' it
   noteth a vehement propension, as greedy to sin as a thirsty man to
   drink. Thirst is the most implacable appetite, hunger is far better
   borne. It is the constant frame of his heart: Gen. vi. 5, Every
   imagination of the thoughts of his heart is only evil continually.' Oh,
   how many aggravating and increasing circumstances are there named.
   There is a mint that is always at work; the mind is coining evil
   thoughts, and the heart evil desires and carnal motions; and the memory
   is the closet and storehouse where they are lodged and kept. This is
   the case of man, born in sin, greedy and thirsty of sin, and one whose
   thoughts are evil continually.

   But may not a man be reclaimed? Oh no, for he hath a heart of stone:
   Ezek. xxxvi. 26, I will take away the heart of stone.' Every man that
   comes to be converted hath a heart of stone; and what is that?
   insensible, inflexible. Insensible, he hath no feeling of his
   condition; inflexible, he will not be moved and wrought upon by the
   word, and the Spirit, and providence. How many means are wasted upon
   him, and to no purpose! And Jer. xvii. 9, The heart is deceitful above
   all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?' It invents all
   kinds of shifts and excuses to elude God, or rather to cheat itself.
   When God comes to work upon man, it slides away from under his hand, as
   if salvation itself should not save them. Yea, but is not the New
   Testament more favourable to man than the Old? Or, is not man grown
   better now there is so much of God's grace discovered? I answer, there
   is a perfect harmony between the Testaments: there he is styled a child
   of wrath by nature,' Eph. ii. 3; the elect as well as others were so.
   There you will find him to be a servant of sin.' Rom. vi. 17. Never
   such an imperious master as sin is, never such a willing servant as man
   is. Sin never leaves commanding, and we love to work, and therefore are
   at its beck. There you will find him to be represented as a man that
   hath a blind understanding,' and a hard heart,' and one that is averse
   from the life of God.' Eph. iv. 18. There you will find him to be one
   that is an enemy to the law of God,' enmity' itself, Rom. viii. 7; one
   that neither will nor can please God.' One that is blind, and knows not
   what to do: 2 Pet. i. 9, He that lacketh these things is blind.' and
   with such a blindness as is far worse than bodily. A man that is blind
   in his bodily eyes, would think it to be a great happiness to have a
   fit guide: as in Acts xiii. 11, when Elymas was smitten blind, he
   sought about for somebody to lead him by the hand.' But he that is
   spiritually blind, cannot endure to have a guide; or if one would lead
   him, and direct him in the right way, he is angry. And as the scripture
   represents him as blind, so without strength: Rom. v. 9, Dead in
   trespasses and sins;' Eph. ii. 5, yea, worse than dead; a dead man doth
   no more hurt, his evil dieth with him; but there is a life of
   resistance and rebellion against God that goeth along. I have spoken
   but little, yet put all together, and then it shows what a miserable
   wretched creature man is.

   The scripture doth not speak this by chance, it is not an hyperbole
   used once or twice, but everywhere, where it speaks of this matter, it
   sets out man to be blind, hard, dead, obstinate, and averse from God.
   Certainly man contributes little to his own conversion, if the word of
   God sets him out everywhere to be such a one; he cannot hunger and
   thirst after Christ, that drinks in iniquity like water. Nothing in his
   nature to carry him to grace, who is altogether sinful.

   If the scripture had only said that man had accustomed himself to sin,
   and was not born in sin: if it had said that man is very prone, and not
   greedy and thirsty in iniquity: if it had only said that man .did often
   think evil, but not continually: if the scripture had said that man was
   somewhat obstinate, but not a stone, an adamant, and like the nether
   mill-stone: that he had been indifferent to God and the world, God and
   the flesh, and not a professed enemy: that he had been a captive of
   sin, and not a servant of sin: that man had been weak and not dead:
   only a neuter and not a rebel: then there might have been something in
   man; and the work of conversion and reducing to God had not been so
   great. But the scripture saith the quite contrary, that man is all this
   and much more, therefore this clears it up, that his conversion is not
   in himself, but it is God must work this good work upon him, or else he
   can never be renewed.

   (2.) Secondly, Let us consider the terms how the cure is wrought.
   Certainly to remedy so great an evil, requireth an omnipotent, an
   almighty power. Therefore see how conversion is described in scripture,
   sometimes by enlightening the mind: Eph. i. 18, The eyes of your
   understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of
   his calling,' &c. Man, the best creature on this side heaven, is stark
   blind in the things of God. If he should go to see with the light of
   nature, how would he grope at noon-day! If he should put on the
   spectacles of art he will but be little better. Nay, let him take
   further the glass of the word, yet how blind in a spiritual sense.
   Something there must be done upon the faculty; the object must not only
   be revealed, but the eye must be enlightened. There are thick scales
   upon his eye, as Paul had in his blindness, that must be taken off,
   before he can see into the things of God.

   But is this all, enlightening the eye? No; the scripture describeth
   this work of God by opening of the heart: Acts xvi. 14, God opened the
   heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of
   Paul.' God doth not only knock at the heart--that he doth by his word,
   and by the external means--but he openeth the heart; he must open the
   door before he can come in, enter, and take possession.

   As to the means, God trieth key after key, one providence after
   another. As when a man would open a door, he knows not what key will
   fit the lock, he trieth key after key; so God trieth one cross, one
   affliction after another, one sermon, one message after another; but
   until he puts his fingers upon the hole of the lock, we shall not open.

   But these words are not emphatical enough, therefore it is expressed by
   a regeneration: John iii. 3, Except a man be born again, he cannot see
   the kingdom of God.' Mark, they must not only be reformed, but must be
   regenerated and born again.

   Now, because this is an ordinary work which falleth out in the course
   of causes, therefore there is a more solemn notion used, it is
   expressed by a resurrection: Eph. ii. 5, He hath raised you up together
   with Christ.' Yea, but that which hath been may be again, therefore it
   is expressed not only by a resurrection, but by a creation: Eph. ii.
   10, We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works:' 2
   Cor. iv. 6, He that commandeth the light to shine out of darkness, hath
   shined in our hearts.' And we are called new creatures. And higher than
   this, it is expressed not only by a creation, but by a victory and
   overcoming. It is resembled by beating and binding of the strong man,
   and rescuing and taking away his prey from him: Luke xi. 21, 22; 1 John
   iv. 4. By bringing into captivity every proud thought to the obedience
   of Christ,' 2 Cor. x. 5.

   These expressions the scripture useth to set out the mystery of grace,
   the power of God that worketh in us. What is wanting in one is supplied
   in another.

   (3.) The third thing I shall produce; That the scripture doth expressly
   deny any power in man to convert himself to God: 1 Cor. ii. 14, The
   natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God, because they
   are spiritually discerned;' and as he cannot know, so he cannot obey:
   Rom. viii. 7, The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not
   subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; and they cannot
   please God:' ver. 8. And they cannot come to Christ: John vi. 44, No
   man can come to me except the Father draw him.' And they cannot do
   anything without Christ, John xv. 15; and they cannot think a good
   thought, 2 Cor. iii. 5: and they cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat.
   vii. 18; and they cannot speak a good word, Mat. xii. 34; and they
   cannot believe, John xii. 39; and they cannot do that which is good,
   Jer. xiii. 23, Ye that are accustomed to do evil, cannot do good.' From
   whence doth all this deficiency in them arise? Partly from nature,
   partly from custom. Besides the natural there is a customary and
   habitual depravation. By nature we are averse from God, and by custom
   we are more confirmed in this evil aversation from God. Man, by lying
   long in his unregeneracy, hath his averseness from God increased and
   strengthened upon him. Naturally we are in love with the world, and
   have declined God and the things of God. Consider him in his naturals,
   he cannot know the things of the Spirit:' 1 Cor. ii. 14. And the carnal
   mind cannot be subject to the law of God, being at enmity against him,
   Rom. viii. 7. There are other places express this cannot, which derive
   it from custom; they are become slaves to their lusts, and their sins
   have gotten such a hand over them that they know not how to break them
   off: Jer. xiii. 23, Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard
   his spots? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.'
   And so where it is said: John xii. 39, They could not believe.'
   Naturally man is unable; but that place speaks of another degree of
   impossibility through contracted obstinacy and judicial obduration.
   Thus you see man is wholly impotent as to this work, and it is the Lord
   alone must do it.

   Object. But here is an objection. If it be so that man hath such an
   utter impotency to convert himself to God, how can it stand with the
   mercy of God, as the creator of mankind, to require the debt of
   obedience from him that is not able to pay? How can it stand with the
   justice of God to punish him with eternal death, for the neglect of
   that which he is not able to do? and how can it stand with the wisdom
   of the supreme lawgiver, to exhort him by promises and threatenings,
   who hath no power to do what he is exhorted to do?

   I answer:--

   1. As to the first; how can it stand with the mercy of God to require
   the debt of obedience from him that is not able to pay? God hath not
   lost his right, though man hath lost his power; their impotency doth
   not dissolve their obligation. A drunken servant is a servant still. It
   is against all reason a master should lose his right by the servant's
   default. A prodigal debtor hath nothing to pay, yet he is liable to be
   sued for the debt without any injustice. God contracted with us in
   Adam, and gave us a power which we lost by his fall; and therefore
   though our power be gone, yet God may demand his due to obey and please
   him; especially since this obedience God required of Adam, was not only
   due by covenant and positive law, but by immutable right and natural
   justice of man. Men think it harsh to suffer for Adam's fault, to which
   they were not conscious and actually consenting.

   Yea, but consider, every man will find an Adam in his own heart. The
   old man is there, we are still sinning away those relics of natural
   light in conscience, and those few moral inclinations which are left.
   There is a little ability and strength he hath as a man, and shall not
   God challenge the debt of obedience from a proud prodigal debtor, that
   is weakening and wasting himself more and more? We are proud, therefore
   God may exact it of us. We think we are able to obey and do his will,
   when we are weak; we are poor, yet think ourselves rich; therefore God
   may admonish us of our duty, demand his right to show our impotency and
   beggary, and that we may not pretend we were not called upon for what
   we owe. But man is not only a proud debtor, but we are prodigal
   debtors; those relics of conscience and moral and human inclinations,
   which escaped out of the ruins of the fall, we lose those things every
   day, and embezzle them away by the service of sin. Therefore it
   standeth fully with the clemency of God, as creator of mankind, to
   require the debt of him that wastes that little stock he hath.

   2. As to the other part, how it can stand with the justice of God to
   punish him with eternal death, for the neglect of that he cannot do. I
   answer: Besides natural impotency, there is voluntary. We must not
   consider man merely as impotent to good, but as delighting in evil, as
   loving it with all his heart. This cannot indeed is a will not, it is a
   voluntary impotence. You will not come to me, that ye might have life:'
   John v. 40. Our impotency lies in our obstinacy. So man is left without
   excuse, because we freely refuse the grace offered, and by continuing
   in sin we increase our bondage, and draw an inveterate custom upon
   ourselves, and so grow every day more obstinate against God.

   3. As to the last, how can it stand with the wisdom of God to exhort
   him with promises and threatenings, that hath no power to do that which
   he is exhorted to?

   I answer: These exhortations, they carry their own blessing with them
   to those to whom God means them for good. As God's creating word
   carried with it its power: Be there light, and there was light;' and as
   Christ's word carried forth his power, it was not in vain to say,
   Lazarus, come forth,' though he was dead, and could not hear it; there
   was a mighty power went with the word; so there is power goes along
   with the exhortations of the gospel, to work grace in the hearts of
   those to whom God intends it as a blessing.

   Yea, but if this be for the elect's sake only, and to convey that power
   to them, to what use doth it stand to others? If the elect did dwell
   alone, and were a distinct community among themselves, the objection
   were plausible; but they are hidden among others: therefore reprobates
   are called obiter, by the by, as others are called according to
   purpose; and therefore they have the benefit of the common call and the
   common offer. The world stands for the elect's sake, yet others have
   the benefit of the world and worldly things. So the word is preached
   for the elect's sake, yet others have the benefit of an external call.
   The sun shines, though blind men see it not. The rain falls upon rocks
   and mountains, as well as fruitful valleys; so God may suffer these
   exhortations to light upon wicked men. And again, as to them, it is for
   their conviction; it is to bridle their corruptions; it is at least a
   means to civilise them, and keep them from growing worse: therefore
   such kind of doctrines and persuasions restrain their wickedness.
   Therefore it stands well enough with the wisdom of the lawgiver to call
   upon men, and invite them with promises and threatenings, to
   repentance.

   Therefore now let me show how doth God reduce and frame our hearts to
   the obedience of his will. The ways God useth are of two sorts, moral
   and real.

   [1.] God works morally, so as to preserve man's nature, and the
   principles thereof; therefore he works by sweet inclination, not with
   violence. So he comes with blandishments and comfortable words: Hosea
   ii. 14, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak
   comfortably unto her.' So, Gen. ix. 27, The Lord shall persuade Japhet,
   and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem.' By fair and kindly words, he
   draweth on men to the liking of the gospel. He offereth no violence to
   our natural principles, but to our corruptions. God doth not make the
   will to be no will, but to be a good will; he restoreth the faculties
   to their right use and exercise; he layeth forth the beauty and
   excellency of his grace, and a glorious estate he sets before our eyes,
   and so outbids temptation, and draweth our hearts to himself. And God
   not only doth work suitably to our general nature, as we are reasonable
   creatures, but suitably to the particular frame of the heart. Some are
   of a stout and stubborn temper, and will not be subdued by milder means
   and motives; therefore God breaks them with fears and terrors, and with
   a spirit of conviction; and others, he draws them on by love, and by a
   gentle application.

   That God hath respect to men's particular tempers was figured in those
   extraordinary ways of appearance and manifestation; they are fitted
   according to the state of men. To Moses, that was a shepherd, and was
   acquainted with bushes, God appears in a bush of fire; and to the wise
   men, that were skilled in the motions of the heavenly bodies, he
   appears in a star; and to Peter, that was a fisherman, he appears to
   him, and shows his power first in the draught of fishes, So still these
   are pledges of this kind of dispensation: that God will work suitably,
   not only to our general nature as men, but to our particular state and
   temper. Yea, yet further, to set on this moral way of working, there is
   a fit subordination of the circumstances of providence. God takes the
   wild asses in their month;' and he hath his reason wherein to surprise
   the hearts of sinners: Prov. xxv. 11, A word fitly spoken is like
   apples of gold in pictures of silver.' God comes in in a fit season; as
   when a soul is humbled by some sudden accident; as one was converted by
   seeing a man fall down dead suddenly by him. God ordereth some
   providences to work, and awaken the hearts of men; or else by some
   great affliction: Hos. ii. 14, I will bring her into the wilderness,
   and speak comfortably unto her.' God finds many a sinner in the briars,
   as Abraham found the lamb. Stub born humours are then most broken.
   Metal in the furnace is capable of any form. God may suit and dispose
   us so that he may come in in a fit season to the soul, or in terrors of
   conscience, when the heart is scourged with remorse for great sins. All
   this is God's moral work.

   [2.] There is a real work, which goes along with this persuasion: there
   is an almighty power; for bare persuasion cannot make the blind to see,
   the dead to live, or open the heart of man, that is so desperately and
   obstinately wicked, until he puts his fingers upon the holes of the
   lock, until he begins to open the heart.

   Concerning this real work, observe it is secret, yet thorough and
   prevailing, so as the effect doth follow, when God will convert. The
   exact manner of God's drawing is unknown. Austin calls it an inward,
   hidden, and unspeakable power, which God putteth forth together with
   the word. It is marvellous in our eyes; but he that knew how to create
   souls knows how to work upon them. This power, it is like the
   influences of the heavens, which so insinuate themselves with the
   operation of second causes, that they cannot be seen; so there is such
   a mighty power working in us, though we cannot tell how to express it.
   We cannot say there is no such power, because we do not know what it
   is.

   And as this power is secret, so when this power is put forth it is
   prevailing: he works prevailingly, so as the effect must necessarily
   follow. The grace God gives to men, to convert them, it is not a power
   to be converted, repent, and believe, if they will; no, but he gives
   repentance, he gives faith, and works so as the effect shall succeed:
   he works efficaciously and determinately, so as to oppose all the
   resistance of the will, and accomplish his work.

   That is the first branch.

   Secondly, When we are thus framed by grace, after conversion God still
   concurreth, and must help us to do his will. He doth not only give us
   the habit of grace, but actual help in the work of obedience: Isa.
   xxvi. 12, Thou hast wrought all our works in us.'

   But why is it that still the Lord worketh in us, both to will and to
   do, unto the last; and not only begins with us, but still keeps grace
   in his own hands, so as we shall have our supplies from heaven from day
   to day?

   There are several reasons:--

   [1.] Because it endeareth God to a gracious soul. The more visits we
   have from God, and the more he is mindful of us at every turn, the more
   is God endeared to us. In such a duty, there we met with comfort and
   enlargement, because God was there; that is noted and regarded, so that
   the Lord is rendered the more precious. The experiment we have of God
   in every duty doth the more make us prize his grace. As David, Ps.
   cxix. 93, I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou hast
   quickened me.' I shall never forget such a sermon, and such a prayer,
   because there I met with God. So in affliction, Rom. v. 3, Patience
   worketh experience;' or in such a conflict, we had such a support: this
   endeareth God to the soul. As mutual acts of kindness do maintain a
   friendship between man and man, so do these renewed acts of love, and
   of God's care and kindness over us, maintain a friendship between God
   and us.

   [2.] It engageth us to a constant dependence upon God, and communion
   with him. It is dependence which maintains the commerce between heaven
   and earth. Now, if we did keep the stock ourselves, God and we should
   soon grow strangers. When the prodigal had his portion in his own
   hands, he goes out of his father's house: Luke xv. The throne of grace
   would lie neglected and unfrequented. If we did not stand in need of
   daily receivings, when would the Lord hear from us? And therefore, to
   oblige us to a constant dependence, God will keep the grace in his own
   hands, that ever we may have some thing to drive us to himself, some
   necessities upon us; for the throne of grace is for a time of need:
   Heb. iv. 1 6.

   [3.] This is that which keeps us humble, and that upon several
   considerations. All we have, it is by gift; and then what can we be
   proud of? Not only the habits of grace themselves, but also those
   actual incitements which are necessary to draw them forth into act. So
   that of all our excellencies we may say, Alas! it is but borrowed; and
   if we be proud of them, we are but proud we are more in debt than
   others: when most enlarged and most assisted, it is from God. We would
   laugh if a groom should be proud of his master's horse and his master's
   cloak; shall we usurp that honour that is due to God? What hast thou
   that thou didst not receive?' 1 Cor. iv. 7. And then we have it from
   hand to mouth. That which we have received will not bear us out, unless
   God come in with new influences of grace. We should soon grow proud if
   God did not direct us, and give out the renewed evidences of his love
   day after day; and we should not acknowledge our benefactor if God
   should do all at once: therefore he lesseneth and weakeneth our
   corruptions by degrees, and by the renewed influences of his grace; and
   by this means we are made sensible of the mutability of our own nature.
   God left Hezekiah, to try him, that he might know all that was in his
   heart.' 2 Chron. xxxii. 31. God hath so dispensed grace that he will be
   going and coming as to actual influence; therefore sometimes he will
   leave us, that he may discover a man to himself. Though we have grace
   planted in our hearts, and are renewed, yet if God leave us, how weak
   and foolish are we! We are renewed, but not fully recovered of that
   maim and bruise we got by the fall of Adam, and we cannot do as we
   will. If God withdraw his quickening, his strength, secret corruption
   will break forth, and our indisposition to holy things will soon
   appear.

   [4.] Then it is for the honour of the Lord's grace. It doth abundantly
   provide for the glory of grace, that from first to last we are indebted
   to God; not only for those permanent and fixed habits which constitute
   the new creature, but for those daily supplies without which the
   motions of the spirit are at a stand. And this is that which makes the
   saints still to put the crown upon grace's head. When the servants gave
   an account of improving of their talents, saith one of them, Luke xix.
   16, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds:' he doth not say, My
   industry,' but, thy pound.' So Paul, Gal. ii. 20, I live;' yea, but he
   interposeth presently, Yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.' They are
   ever ascribing all to God, because they see they can do nothing without
   him. When we come to heaven, it is a question which we shall admire
   most, grace or glory, the glory of that estate into which we are
   brought, or else grace, which was the foundation of it. Oh, when we see
   all that was done and suffered for God, it was from God: Of thine own
   have we given thee.' How will the soul admire the riches of his
   glorious grace! We have not only traded with his money, but by his
   direction; and when our stock was embezzled he supplied us at every
   turn. For these ends the Lord still keeps grace in his own hands, that
   we can do nothing to any purpose unless he be pleased to concur, by the
   influences and quickenings of his own Spirit.

   Use. The use shall only be in these two branches:--

   1. In doing any good work, let us do all things in him as well as to
   him. Let us not only make this our scope, that we may do it to God, but
   let us make his grace our principle: otherwise, when we go to work for
   God without God, it will befall us as it did Sampson, that thought to
   go out and shake himself as in former times, but his locks were cut and
   his strength gone. Men that have had former experiences, think to find
   a like vigour of affection, a like raisedness of spirit, a like
   savouriness of expression; but if they take not God along with them,
   they find their strength is gone, their affections dead, that all their
   spirits are dry and sapless, and that they do not go forth with such
   life and power as formerly. Therefore, whenever you go about a good
   work, say, as David, I will go forth in the strength of God.'

   2. It directs us in ascribing the honour of what we have done. It is
   dangerous to assume divine honour to ourselves or accept it from
   others; but we must give the Lord the glory, whose concurrence doth all
   the work. Remember, we have received all from God, and God must have
   all the glory and honour; if others should ascribe it to us, we are not
   to take it. To conceal and receive stolen goods, brings us within the
   compass of theft, as well as to steal them ourselves. So, when others
   would ascribe anything to us, still let the Lord have the glory of
   every work and business.

   The third point.

   Doct. 3. We are not only to look to this, that his will be done, but to
   the manner how it is done.

   It is not for the honour of his majesty to be put off with anything; we
   must serve him with all our mind and strength: Mal. i. 14, When ye
   brought that which was torn, and lame, and sick, should I accept this
   of your hands? saith the Lord. I am a great king, saith the Lord of
   hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.' We are to aim at the
   highest manner of serving God. There is an ardent desire in the saints
   to be perfect: If by any means they would attain to the resurrection of
   the dead,' Phil. iii. 11; that is, that happy and sinless state they
   shall enjoy hereafter. The manner is more considerable than the work
   itself. A man may sin in doing good, but he cannot sin in doing well;
   therefore the manner is that which is mainly stood upon in scripture.
   God doth not only look that we pray, but it must be fervent effectual
   prayer, not a drowsy devotion; not only that we hear, but take heed how
   we hear; not only that we serve him, but serve him instantly; not only
   run, but so run. The great thing that is put into the balance of the
   sanctuary, when God comes to weigh the actions of men, what doth he
   consider? He weighs the spirits: Prov. xvi. 2, All the ways of man are
   right in his own eyes; but the Lord weigheth the spirits;' that is, he
   considers with what frame of heart, and in what manner, we go about
   anything we do for him. And therefore this is the main thing we should
   look after, in what manner we serve him, even as the angels do in
   heaven; not in an ordinary but perfect manner.

   But wherein doth the resemblance hold; how should we be as the angels?

   1. In conformity to the angels, we must serve God readily. The angels
   are represented as with wings,' Isa. vi. 2: and the angel Gabriel is
   said to fly swiftly' upon God's message; they are hearkening for God's
   word, and go on God's errand. So we should be ready and speedy in our
   obedience: Ps. cxix. 60, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
   commandments.' It is not enough to keep God's commandments, but we must
   make haste; that is, before the strength of the present impulsion be
   lost, and those fervours which are upon us be cooled.

   2. Willingly and cheerfully, and without murmuring. Angels are ready at
   God's beck; they are ministering spirits, even to the meanest saints;
   God hath sent them abroad for the heirs of salvation; they are as
   guardians to them, to look after them in all their ways. The devils,
   what Christ bids them do, do it murmuringly; the unclean spirit would
   not come out without rending and tearing, Mark ix.; Christ's presence
   was a burthen to them, Mat. viii. When we do things with reluctancy,
   murmuringly, we are more like the devils than the angels. When the
   devils obey his word, they are forced to it by the absolute power of
   Christ; yet they do it not with willingness and freeness, as the good
   angels do. But we are to do it freely: I delight to do thy will, O my
   God.' Ps. xl. 8. And, John iv. 34, It is my meat and drink to do the
   will of him that sent me.' That was the dish Christ loved.

   3. Constantly and unweariedly. Thus do the angels in heaven. The devils
   they abode not in the truth; but angels, they do it without weariness;
   they rest not day nor night, but are still lauding, praising, and
   serving God, and are never weary. God in communion is ever new and
   fresh to them; the face of their heavenly Father is as lovely as at the
   first moment; no weariness or satiety creeps upon those good spirits.
   Thus should we do it without weariness, and then we shall reap if we
   faint not.

   4. Faithfully, not picking and choosing: They hearken to the voice of
   his word,' whatever it be, be it to ascend or descend. So we, if it be
   to go backward for God, though it be against the bent of our hearts.
   David is said to be a man after God's heart,' because he did all God's
   will.' Acts xiii. 22: all which should be a pattern for us, and we
   should strive to come up to it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Give us this day our daily bread.

   WE are now come to the second sort of petitions, that concern
   ourselves, as the former did more immediately concern God. Now you may
   observe the style in the prayer is altered. It was before, Thy name,
   Thy kingdom, Thy will; now it is, Give us, and Forgive us, &c. Before,
   our Lord had taught us to speak in a third person, Thy will be done;'
   and now in a second person, Give us this day:' which is not so to be
   understood as if we were not at all concerned in the former part of the
   Lord's Prayer. In those petitions, the benefit is not God's, but ours.
   When his name is sanctified, his kingdom cometh, and his will is done;
   these things do not only concern the glory of God, but also our
   benefit. It is our advantage when God is honoured by the coming of
   Christ's kingdom and the subjection of our hearts unto himself. But
   these latter petitions do more immediately concern us. Now, among
   these, in the first place, we pray for the necessary provisions of the
   present life. Some make a scruple why such a prayer should be put in
   the first place. Surely not to show the value of these things above
   pardon and grace; but this is the last of the supplications. The Lord's
   Prayer may be divided into supplications and deprecations. Among the
   supplications, there we prayed, first, for the glory of God; next, for
   the kingdom of God; next, for our subjection to that kingdom; and, in
   the last place, we pray for daily bread, or sustentation of the present
   life. But the other two are deprecations; and that either of evil
   already committed, and so we pray for pardon of sin, Forgive us our
   trespasses;' or deprecation of evil that is likely to be admitted, and
   so we pray against temptation, Lead us not into temptation:' so that
   this request is put into a fit order. First, we seek God's glory as the
   end; his kingdom as the primary means; our subjection to that kingdom
   as the next means; and last of all, our comfortable subsistence in the
   world as a remote subservient help, that we may be in a capacity to
   serve and glorify God.

   In this petition there is:--

   I. The thing asked, and that is bread, by which is meant all things
   necessary for the maintenance of this life.

   Now this is set forth:--

   1. By a note of propriety, our bread.

   2. By an adjunct of time, daily bread.

   II. The manner of asking, give; we ask it as a gift of God.

   III. The persons for whom we ask, Give us; as many as are supposed to
   be in a family together. Those that can call God Father by the Spirit,
   they may come with most confidence to God about daily supplies.

   IV. The renewing of our request, se'meron, this day:' there is very
   much in that; we ask but from morning till night: Give us this day our
   daily bread.'

   Before I come to explain these circumstances, let me observe in
   general:--

   Doct. 1. That it is the Lord which doth bestow upon us freely and
   graciously the good things of this life.

   It is bread we ask, and we ask it of God, and to God we say, Give.' All
   which circumstances do fully make out the point.

   This point again must be made good by parts:--

   1. That God giveth it.

   2. That he freely and graciously giveth it.

   First, I shall show you how God is interested in the common mercies we
   do enjoy; and how every one, high or low, rich or poor, full or in a
   mean condition, of what rank soever they be, even those that have the
   greatest store and plenty of worldly accommodations, they must come
   from morning to morning and deal with God for daily bread.

   Those common mercies which we do enjoy:--

   [1.] God gives us the possession of them, for he is the absolute Lord
   of all things both in heaven and in earth, and whatsoever is possessed
   by any creature, it is by his indulgence; for the primitive and
   original right was in him: Ps. xxiv. 1, The earth is the Lord's, and
   the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.' It is all
   God's; we hold it in fee from him, for he is the great landlord who
   hath leased out all these blessings to the sons of men. The earth is
   first the Lord's, and then by a grant he hath given it to men to enjoy:
   Ps. cxv. 16, The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord's; but the
   earth hath he given to the children of men.' He hath given it to men
   partly by a general grant, and leave given to enjoy and occupy it as
   the place of our service. But that is not all; he doth not only give
   the earth in general to men, but he makes a particular allotment; the
   particular designation of every man's portion of what he shall enjoy in
   the world, it is of God. And so it is said, Acts xvii. 26, He hath
   determined the bounds of their habitation.' God hath not only appointed
   in general the earth to be the place of our service for a while, but he
   hath determined how much every one shall possess, what shall fall to
   his share. These things come not by chance, or by the gift of others,
   or by our own industry, but by the peculiar designation of God's
   providence. However they come to us, God must be owned in the
   possession; whether they come to us by donation, purchase, labour, or
   by inheritance, yet they are originally by God, who by these means
   bestoweth them upon us. If they come by donation, or the gift of
   others, the hearts of men are in God's hands, and he it was that
   disposed them to be bountiful to us, that appointed them to be
   instruments of his providence, to nourish us. He that sends a present,
   he is the giver, not the servant which brings it. So, though others be
   employed as instruments, it is the Lord which made them able and
   willing to do us good. If they come to us by inheritance, it is the
   providence of God that a man is born of rich friends and not of
   beggars: Prov. xxii. 2, The rich and poor meet together; the Lord is
   the maker of them all.' He that hath cast the world first into hills
   and valleys, it was he that disposed of men, some into a high, and some
   into a low condition. If they come to us by our own labour and
   purchase, still God gave it to us: Deut. viii. 14-18, Take heed that
   thine heart be not lilted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God; for it
   is he that giveth thee power to get wealth.' He doth not leave second
   causes to their own power and force, as if he were only an idle
   spectator in the world. No, he gives the skill and industry to manage
   affairs, and success upon lawful undertakings; the faculty and the use,
   it is all from God. Though a man hath never so many outward advantages,
   yet, unless the Lord concur with his blessing, all would be to no
   purpose.

   [2.] As God gives us the possession, so he gives us a right and title
   to them. There is a twofold right to these common blessings; a
   providential and a covenant right. Dominium politicum fundatur in
   providentia; Our civil right to things is founded upon God's
   providence:' but Dominium evangelicum fundatur in gratia; Our gospel
   right to things is founded upon God's grace.' (1.) He gives the
   providential right, and thus all wicked men possess outward things, and
   the plenty they enjoy is as the fruits and gifts of God's common
   bounty; it is their portion, he hath given it to them: Ps. xvii. 14,
   Which have their portion in this life,' whatever falleth to their share
   in a fair way, and in the course of God's providence; they are not
   usurpers merely for possessing, but for abusing, what they have. They
   have not only a civil right by the laws of men, to prevent the
   incroachment of others, but a providential right before God; and are
   not simply responsible for possession, but for their ill use and
   administration. (2.) There is a covenant right to these blessings: so
   only believers have a right to creature comforts by God's special love;
   and so, That little that a righteous man hath is better than the
   treasures of many wicked,' Ps. xxxvii. 16; as the mean fare of a poor
   subject is better than the large allowance of a condemned traitor.
   Every wicked man is a traitor to God, and hath only an allowance until
   he be destroyed. But that little which a man hath, seasoned with God's
   love, is better than all the mighty increase of wicked men. Now, this
   covenant right we have by Christ, who is heir of all things,' Heb. i.
   2; Christ hath the original right to them, and we by him come to have a
   covenant right. So it is said, 1 Cor. iii. 23, Things present, and
   things to come, all are yours.' As things to come, the day of judgment
   is theirs; so things present are theirs by a new title from him. So it
   is said, 1 Tim. iv. 5, marriage, meats, and drinks, and all creatures,
   are made for them that believe. They that believe have only a gospel
   right to them. To draw it to the present thing, we do not only beg a
   possession of these things, but a right; not only a providential, but a
   covenant right, that we may enjoy them as the gifts of God's fatherly
   love and compassion to us, that we may take our bread out of Christ's
   hands, that we may look upon it as swimming to us in his blood, and all
   our mercies as wrapt up in his bowels; and then they will be sweet, and
   relish much better with a gracious soul, because he can not only taste
   the creature, but the love of God in the creature.

   [3.] He gives the continuance of our blessings, that we may keep what
   we have; for unless the Lord do daily support us, we cannot keep our
   comforts for one day. How soon can God blast them! It is at his
   pleasure to do what he will with you. He gave Satan power over Job's
   estate: chap. i. 12, Behold, all that he hath is in thy power.' Our
   life, it is continued to us by the indulgence of God, and by his
   providential influence and supportation. For as the beams of the sun
   are no longer continued in the air than the sun shineth, or, as the
   water retains the impress and stamp no longer than the seal is kept on
   it, so when God takes off his providential influence, all vanisheth
   into nothing. Thus he is said, Heb. i. 3, to uphold all things by the
   word of his power.' As a weighty thing is upheld in the hand of a man,
   when he looseneth his hand all falls to the ground; so it is said, Job
   xii. 10, In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the
   breath of all mankind.' God by his almighty grasp holdeth all things in
   his own hands, and if he should but let loose his hand, all would fall
   to nothing and disappear: Job vi. 9. For it is from the intimate
   support and influence of his providence that we have our lives. So our
   comforts, they are continued to us by God. Alas! in themselves they are
   poor fugacious things! Haman was to day high in honour, and to-morrow
   high upon the gallows. Riches make themselves wings, and fly away as an
   eagle towards heaven:' Prov. xxiii. 5. The Holy Ghost seems there to
   compare riches to a flock of birds, which pitcheth in a man's field
   to-night, but to-morrow they are gone. Who is the richer for a flock of
   wild fowls because they pitch in his field now? So all these outward
   things are so flying that they are soon gone by many accidents, unless
   he preserves them and continues our possession of them. For God he can
   give a charge and commission to the fire, to the fury of men, one way
   or other, to deprive us of these things: Behold, all he hath is in thy
   hands,' Job i. 12. When a man hath gotten abundance of worldly comforts
   about him, and seemeth to be intrenched and provided against all
   hazards, the man is taken away, and cannot enjoy what he had heaped
   together with a great deal of care and solicitude.

   [4.] We beg leave to use them. It is good manners in religion to ask
   God's leave in all things. It is robbery to make use of a man's goods,
   and to waste and consume them without his leave. We must ask God's
   leave upon this account, because, though God gives these good things to
   men, yet he still reserves the property in himself; for by distributing
   blessings to the creature, he never intended to divest himself of the
   right. As a husbandman, by scattering his corn in the field, did not
   dispossess himself, but still keeps a right and means to have the
   increase; so when the Lord scattereth his blessings, we only receive
   them as stewards, not as owners and proprietors: God still is the
   supreme Lord, and only hath the property and dominion. In life it is
   clear man is not dominus vitae, but custos; not lord of his life, but
   only the steward and guardian of it; he cannot live or die at his own
   pleasure: if a man kills himself he runs the danger of God's law. What
   is said of life is true also of his estate: he is not an owner so much
   as a steward; that is the notion of our possession: we are stewards,
   and must render an account to God.: Hos. ii. 9, I will return and take
   away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof,
   and will recover my wool and my flax.' Though God hath communicated
   these things to the children of men, yet he hath reserved the dominion
   in his own hands: so Hag. ii. 8, The silver is mine, and the gold is
   mine, saith the Lord of hosts.' He never disposed anything so into the
   creature's hands, but still he hath reserved a right and interest in
   it; and therefore it is, Gen. xiv. 19. that the Lord is not only called
   the creator of heaven and earth, but possessor of heaven and earth.' He
   is not only the possessor, of heaven where he dwells, which he hath
   reserved to his own use, but he is possessor of earth, which he hath
   committed to the use of men. And God will have his right acknowledged
   from day to day.

   [5.] It is he that giveth us ability to use them: we beg that we may
   not only have the comforts, but life and strength to use them; for God
   can blast us in the very midst of our enjoyments. It is the case of
   many, when they have hunted after a worldly portion, and begin to
   think, now I will sit down and enjoy it; when the gain is come into his
   hands, and he thinks to waste [24] that which he hath got in hunting,
   death takes him away, and he hath not power to use them. Thus it was
   with the rich fool; when he began to sing lullabies to his soul, and
   enjoy what he had got, he is taken away by death: Luke xii. 29, Thou
   fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall
   those things be which thou hast provided?' And it is said, Num. xi. 33,
   when those people had gotten quails, that while the flesh was yet
   between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was
   kindled against the people; and the Lord smote them with a very great
   plague.' And that nobleman which saw plenty in Samaria, but could not
   taste of it: 2 Kings vii. 19. So Job xxi. 23, One dieth in his full
   strength, being wholly at ease and quiet:' when he has gotten abundance
   of worldly comforts about him, death seizes on him of a sudden.

   [6.] God yet is further interested in these mercies, so as to give us a
   sanctified use of them, that we may take our bread out of God's hands
   with prayer and thanksgiving, and due acknowledgments of God. In 1 Tim.
   iv. 4, 5, Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
   it be received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word of
   God and prayer.' Then are the creatures sanctified to us, when we enjoy
   God in them; when our hearts are raised to think of the donor, and can
   love him the more for every gift. Carnal men, like swine, raven upon
   the acorns, but look not up to the oak from whence they drop. In the
   Canticles, the spouse's eyes are compared to dove's eyes. They which
   make the allusion say this is the meaning: look, as a dove pecks, and
   looks upward; so upon every grain of mercy, we should look up to the
   God of mercies: it is not enough to taste the sweet of the creatures,
   but also to own God, his love and Bounty in them, so to have them
   sanctified to us. This is the privilege we have as men, that we can
   know the first cause, and who is the benefactor. All creatures subsist
   upon the first cause, but are not capable of knowing it. And this is
   our privilege as Christians, to have this capacity reduced into act. It
   is of the Lord's grace to give us a sanctified use of these things.

   [7.] We beg of God the natural blessing upon the holy use of out ward
   comforts, so as they may continue us in health and vigour for the
   service of God; for nothing will prosper with us but by his blessing:
   Ps. cvi. 15, He gave them their request, but sent leanness into their
   souls;' that is, they had no natural comfort by that which they had
   obtained. God may give a man meat, yet not an appetite; he may not give
   him the comfortable use of it, a blessing with it. And therefore the
   apostle makes it to be an argument of God's bounty to the heathen, that
   as he gave them food, so he gave them gladness of heart: Acts xiv. 17,
   He gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their
   hearts with food and gladness;' that is, gave them a comfortable use, a
   blessing upon the use of outward things. And Lev. xxvi., you will find
   a distinction between bread,' and the staff of bread.' We may have
   bread, yet not the staff of bread. Many have worldly comforts, but not
   with a natural blessing: Eccles. iii. 13, That every man should eat and
   drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour; it is the gift of God:'
   not only that he should have increase by his labour, but enjoy good; to
   have the comfortable use of that increase.

   [8.] Contentation is one of God's blessings that we ask in this prayer,
   Give us this day our daily bread;' that is, such provisions as are
   necessary for us, contentment and quiet of mind in the enjoyment: Joel
   ii. 19, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall
   be satisfied therewith.' It is not only a blessing we should look
   after, but contentment, that our minds may be suited to our condition,
   for then the creature is more sweet and comfortable to us. The
   happiness of man doth not lie in his abundance, but in the suitableness
   of his mind to his estate: Luke xii. 15, A man's life consisteth not in
   the abundance of things which he possesseth.' There is a twofold war
   within a man, both which must be taken up before a man can have
   comfort; there is a war between a man and his conscience, and this
   breeds trouble of mind; and there is a war between his affections and
   his condition, and this breeds murmuring and envious repining. Say,
   Yea, Lord, and let us be contented with thy gift. This for the first
   thing, how God is concerned in these outward comforts.

   Secondly, That the Lord doth freely and graciously give these good
   things to us, that is, merely out of his bounty and goodness. It is not
   from his strict remunerative justice, but out of his grace. The very
   air we breathe in, the bread we eat, our common blessings, be they
   never so mean, we have them all from grace, and all from the tender
   mercy of the Lord. Ps. cxxxvi. 25, you have there the story of the
   notable effects of God's mercy, and he concludes it thus: Who giveth
   food to all flesh; for his mercy endureth for ever.' Mark, the psalmist
   doth not only ascribe those mighty victories, those glorious instances
   of his love and power, to his unchangeable mercy, but our daily bread.
   In eminent deliverances of the church we will acknowledge mercy; yea,
   but we should do it in every bit of meat we eat, for the same reason is
   rendered all along. What is the reason his people smote Sihon king of
   the Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan, and rescued his people so
   often out of danger? Tor his mercy endureth for ever.' And what is the
   reason he giveth food to all flesh?' For his mercy endureth for ever.'
   It is not only mercy which gives us Christ, and salvation by Christ,
   and all those glorious deliverances and triumphs over the enemies of
   the church; but it is mercy which furnisheth our tables, it is mercy
   that we taste with our mouths and wear at our backs. It is notable, our
   Lord Jesus, when there were but five barley loaves and two fishes, John
   vi. 11, He lift up his eyes and gave thanks.' Though our provision be
   never so homely and slender, yet God's grace and mercy must be
   acknowledged.

   But to evidence this by some considerations that certainly it is of the
   mercy of the Lord that he giveth bread to the creature: God giveth
   these mercies--

   1. To those that cannot return any service to him.

   2. To those that will not return any service to him.

   3. When we are at our best we cannot deserve them.

   4. We deserve the quite contrary.

   [1.] He giveth these mercies to those that cannot return any service to
   him; the beasts, and fowls of the air, the young ravens: Ps. cxlv. 16,
   Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living
   thing.' What can the beasts, or fishes, or fowls of the air deserve at
   God's hand? What honour and service can they bring to him? Only they
   have a bountiful Creator, from whom they receive their allowance.

   So as to infants. Alas! what can they deserve at his hand? When God
   rocks their cradles, and nourisheth them from the dug, what service can
   they do to God? Isa. xlvi. 3, 4, By me,' saith the Lord, you are borne
   from the belly, and carried from the womb; and even to your old age, I
   am he; and even to hoar hairs will I carry you.' Mark, not only in old
   age, when we have done God service, doth he maintain us; but from the
   womb, the belly, before we could do any thing for him, we were tenderly
   handled by him. He alludeth to parents and nurses, which carry their
   younglings in their arms. In infancy we are not in a capacity to know
   the God of our mercies, and look after him; yet he looked after us
   then, when we could not perform one act of love and kindness to him.
   The psalmist takes notice of this: Ps. xxii. 9, 10, Thou art he that
   took me out of the womb; thou didst make me hope when I was upon my
   mother's breasts. I was cast upon thee from the womb; thou art my God
   from my mother's belly.' Christians, before ever you could do anything
   for him or yourselves, before you could improve his mercy, when you
   could not know who was your benefactor, who it was that nourished and
   cherished you, yet then God rocked your cradles, kept you from many
   dangers, nursed you, and brought you up, and carried you in the tender
   arms of his providence.

   [2.] God gives these mercies to those that will not serve him when they
   can: Isa. i. 2, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
   rebelled against me.' There are many in the world whom God protects,
   supplies, and provides them of all necessaries, yet they return nothing
   but disobedience, contempt, rebellion, and unthankfulness. The sun doth
   not shine by chance, but at God's disposal: Mat. v. 45, He makes his
   sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just
   and on the unjust.' Most of those which are fed at God's table, and
   maintained at his expense and care, they are his enemies; and many
   times the more men receive from him the worse they are. Look, as beasts
   towards man, when they are in good plight they grow fierce, and are
   ready to destroy those which nourish them, so, when we are plentifully
   supplied, we kick with the heel, wax wanton, and forgetful of God. Or
   as a froward child scratcheth the breast which suckles it, so we rebel
   against God that nourished us, and brought us up, and dishonour our
   heavenly Father that provides these blessings for us. Parisiensis hath
   a saying, They which hold the greatest farms many times pay the least
   rent.' So the great ones of the world, they which have most of God's
   bounty, give him the least acknowledgment.

   [3.] When we do our best we cannot deserve these mercies, or merit
   aught at God's hands; for all we do is already due to God, as we are
   his creatures, and the paying new debts will not quit old scores. The
   question is propounded: Job xxii. 2, Can a man be profitable unto God,
   as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?' See the answer:
   chap. xxxv. 7, If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what
   receiveth he of thine hand?' And wherein is God profited if a man's
   ways be perfect? And, therefore, whatever God doth for creatures, he
   doth it freely, because he cannot be obliged by any act of ours and
   pre-engaged. Thus Adam in innocency could not obtain the blessing but
   by virtue of the covenant, nor merit aught at God's hands, that is, put
   any obligation upon God; and, therefore, certainly now we cannot. And
   partly, too, because whatever we do, it will not carry a proportion
   with these common mercies. We are proud creatures, and think of a
   condignity of works, and to merit from heaven these mercies. But, alas!
   there is no comparison; and if God would deal with us upon merit and
   strict commutative justice, we cannot give him a valuable compensation
   for temporal mercies: Gen. xxxii. 10, I am not worthy of the least of
   all the mercies which thou hast showed unto thy servant.' Though none
   of God's mercies can simply be said to be little, for whatsoever comes
   from a great God should be great in our value and esteem, as a small
   remembrance from a great person is much prized; therefore no mercy is
   simply little, but comparatively. Now the least mercies some have, and
   others the greatest temporal things. When we are put into the balance,
   we and all our worth and deservings cannot counterpoise the least
   mercy, or merit the daily bread we have from God. And then the little
   good we do, it is merely by the grace that we have received. If one man
   differs from another, who made him differ? It is but a new gift, he is
   the more indebted to God.

   [4.] We deserve the contrary. We have forfeited our lives, and all our
   comforts; we have put ourselves out of God's protection by sin. Death
   waylaid us when we were in our mother's womb; and as soon as we were
   born there was a sentence in force against us: Rom. v. 12, Death came
   upon all, for that all have sinned.' And still we continue the
   forfeiture. We provoke God to cut us off. It is a kind of pardoning
   mercy by which we subsist every moment. This is sensible in case of
   sickness, when our lives and comforts slide from us, when there is but
   a step between us and death, when the old covenant comes to be put in
   suit, and God seems to be executing the sentence of the law. And that
   is the reason why the temporal deliverance of the wicked and impenitent
   is called a remission: as Ps. lxxviii. 38, But he, being full of
   compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not.' And Mat.
   xviii. 26, 27, 28, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. And
   the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and forgave him the
   debt.' Why is it called a remission? Improperly, because it was a
   reprieve from the temporal judgment for a time; it was not an executing
   the sentence which was in force against us; and it was not from
   anything in the sinner, but from God's pity over his creatures. And a
   godly man, every time his life and comforts are in danger, hath a
   pardon renewed at that time: Isa. xxxviii. 17, Thou hast in love to my
   soul delivered it from the pit of corruption; for thou hast cast all my
   sins behind thy back.' They are loved out of danger, and loved out of
   sickness; the pardoning mercy of God is indeed renewed to them.

  APPLICATION.

   Use 1. For information, in two branches:

   First, That God will give his people temporal things. Not only pardon,
   and grace, and glory; but no good thing will he withhold:' Ps. lxxxi.
   11. Many say they can trust God for eternal life, but can not trust him
   for daily bread. This is an utter mistake. Certainly it is far more
   easy to trust God for daily bread than for eternal life; because there
   are more difficulties, more natural prejudices, against these greater
   mercies of pardon and eternal life, than there can be against the daily
   effects of God's bounty. It is a harder matter to work through our
   natural prejudices, which lie against eternal life, than to work
   through that distrust which lies against God's care over us and
   provision for us. Why? For God's common bounty it reacheth to all his
   creatures, even to the smallest worm; his mercy is over all his works.
   And surely it is more easy to believe his common bounty than his
   special love, which runs in a distinct channel to such a sort of men.

   But because many have too weak a faith about temporal things, let us
   consider how willing God is to distribute and give out these supplies.
   Several things I might mention.

   1. God's respect to the bodies of his people is a mighty ground and
   encouragement. God is in covenant with the body as well as the soul.
   Jesus Christ proves the resurrection from thence, that God is the God
   of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:' Mat. xxii. 32. This argument can never
   be made good, but upon the supposition that God is in covenant with
   Abraham's body, with the whole believer; and therefore the mark of
   circumcision was in their flesh, as the water of baptism is sprinkled
   upon our bodies. Well, then, if the bodies of the saints be in covenant
   with God, certainly some of the promises of the covenant do concern the
   body and sustentation of the present life. But that is not all, but
   Jesus Christ hath purchased both body and soul: 1 Cor. vi. 20, Ye are
   bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
   spirit, which are God's.' Not only the soul is Christ's, but the body.

   You will say, That is ground of service; but what! can it be inferred
   that therefore God will provide for us? It is not only a ground of our
   service, but of Christ's care of us. If Christ had only purchased our
   service, yet it were a ground of hope. If you expect work and service
   from a body, you will give maintenance to that body. But Christ's
   purchase implieth his care over that he hath purchased; for the
   interest God hath in us in redemption is a gracious interest, God had
   an interest in us before we were redeemed; we could not make void his
   right by any rebellion of ours. But then God hath such an interest in
   us as engaged and solicited him to destroy us. Look, as a prince hath
   an interest in his subjects, if they rebel and revolt from their
   obedience, they cannot disannul his right, but it is such a right as
   binds him to pursue and chastise them until they return to their duty,
   so God hath a right to the fallen creature, but it was such a right as
   solicited vengeance. But the right Christ purchased was a gracious
   right, that God might protect and preserve us. Well, then, if Christ
   purchased body and soul, he hath obtained, not only that God should be
   gracious to our souls, but gracious to our bodies; then the argument
   runs clearly for confirming the faith of the saints in expectation of
   temporal benefits.

   2. God hath given us greater things, therefore he will not stand upon
   the less; when a man hath been at great cost, he will not lose it. The
   Lord hath given us his Christ: Rom. viii. 32, He that spared not his
   own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
   also freely give us all things?' Can any man be so illogical, so
   ill-skilled in consequences, as not to conclude from thence, if God
   give us Christ, with him he will give us all things? So Mat. vi. 33,
   Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other
   things shall be added to you.'

   3. These things are dispensed to inferior, yea, to the worst of his
   creatures: Ps. cxlvii. 9, He giveth to the beast his food, and to the
   young ravens which cry.' Will God maintain the beasts of the field, and
   will he not maintain his children? It is monstrous and unnatural to
   think thus, that God will not support you, and bear you out in your
   work. This is Christ's own argument: Mat. vi. 34, Take therefore no
   thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take thought for the
   things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.' Daily
   bread is in your Father's power, and he gives it graciously to all his
   creatures, and therefore certainly he will give it to you. Thus you may
   see with what confidence you may expect daily supplies.

   Secondly, It informs us that we may ask temporal things, if we ask them
   lawfully. It is true, prayers to God for spiritual things are more
   acceptable. As your child pleaseth you better when it comes to you to
   be taught its book, rather than when it comes for an apple, so it is
   more pleasing to God when you come for the Mediator's blessing and
   spiritual things: Acts iii. 26, God hath sent him to bless you, in
   turning away every one of you from his iniquities.' But yet we may ask
   other things. Why? For they are good and useful to us in the course of
   our service, and without them we are exposed to many temptations. And
   prayer easeth you of a deal of carking about them: Phil. iv. 6, Be
   careful for nothing; but in everything by prayer and supplication, with
   thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.' We may ask
   them, but it must be lawfully; and that, for order, not in the first
   place. That is howling, when we come to God merely for corn, wine, and
   oil; when we prefer these things before his favour and the graces of
   his Spirit. Then it must be lawful, too, as to the manner: a moderate
   proportion, not to set God a task to maintain you at such a rate, but
   to ask a moderate allowance. Christ teacheth us here to pray for bread,
   which is a necessary allowance: Prov. xxx. 8, Feed me with food
   convenient for me.' And, 1 Tim. vi. 8, If we have food and raiment, let
   us therewith be content.' And then ask them with humility and
   submission to the will of God. We ought to say, as in James iv. 15, If
   the Lord will, we will go to such a place, and get gain.' And then
   lawfully, too, as to the end; not for an unlawful end, for. ostentation
   and not, that we may live at large and at ease: James iv. 3, Ye ask,
   and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your
   lusts.' But we must ask it for a good end: Ps. cxv. 1, Not unto us,
   Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for
   thy truth's sake.' Lord, not for our ease, or our plenty, but that thy
   name may be glorified, that we may be supported in service. And then
   again, law fully as to the plea. We must not come and challenge it, as
   if it were our due; we must not use the plea of merit, but of mercy.
   Our Saviour doth not say, Let this bread come to us anyhow, as he
   saith, Let thy will be done;' our subjection to God is due; but, Give
   us this day our daily bread,' acknowledging the Lord's mercy.

   Use 2. Let us not place our confidence in second causes, but in God, by
   whose goodness and providence over us all temporal things do come unto
   us; for without him all our carking and labour is nothing; and if we
   have our wishes without labour, yet we shall not have our comfort and
   blessing without God: Mat. vi. 27. Which of you, by taking thought, can
   add one cubit to his stature?' By taking thought, he meaneth anxious
   care about success. We cannot change the colour of a hair by all our
   anxious thoughts. We cannot make ourselves stronger or taller. Many a
   man is pierced through with worldly cares, and still the world frowns
   upon him, so all his care comes to nothing. Prov. x. 4, it is said, The
   hand of the diligent maketh rich.' Compare it with ver. 22, and it is
   said, The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow
   with it.' Most commonly they that are diligent they thrive with their
   diligence; yea, but if that be all, if they have not the Lord's
   blessing, they have not that sweetness and peace when they have gotten
   abundance. Oh, therefore, let us place our confidence, not in second
   causes, but in God.

   Use 3. Let us be thankful to God for these worldly things that we
   enjoy. I urge this:--

   First, Because of the danger of ingratitude. Usually we never forget
   God more than when he remembereth us most. When men have what they
   would have, then God is neglected; they grow careless in prayer, or
   flat and cold in the performance of it. There is a great deal of
   difference between men poor and rich. When poor, they will seem to put
   a natural fervency into their prayers; but when rich, they grow cold
   and careless. Mark what the Lord saith, Hos. xiii. 6, They were filled,
   and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.' Oh, how
   frequent is this, that many having been kept under a great sense of God
   in a low condition, but when they have been well at ease, then they
   bear it up as if they could live without God. The bucket comes to the
   river with an empty mouth, gaping to receive its fulness, as it were;
   but when it is full, the bottom is turned towards it. So it is very
   usual with men to turn their backs upon the mercy-seat, and when the
   Lord hath given them great in crease in worldly things, and leased out
   a great estate to them, he hath very little rent from them. Now,
   because this is usual, therefore those whom God hath blessed with the
   supplies of the present life, how should they study thankfulness!

   Secondly, Because of the equity of it. Consider what an equity there
   is, that we should be thankful for outward blessings.

   1. They are good in themselves.

   2. They come from God.

   3. They come from the Lord's grace and mercy.

   [1.] They are good in themselves. Food and raiment is good, and every
   creature of God is good,' 1 Tim. iv. 4. They are good things, though
   not the best things. They are good for ourselves, that we may serve God
   more cheerfully. The Lord would have the Levites and priests have their
   portion, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord: 2 Chron.
   xxxi. 4. Now these things are good to encourage us, and support us in
   our work. Man consists of two parts, of a body and of a soul. Now
   whether we look to the one or the other, you will have many arguments
   to love and praise God, not only for what he hath done for our souls,
   but likewise for our bodies. And they are good, because they prevent
   many snares and temptations: Prov. xxx. 9, Lest I be poor and steal,
   and take the name of my God in vain.' Diseases which arise from fulness
   are more common; but diseases which arise from indigence and emptiness,
   they are more dangerous. So diseases of prosperity they are more
   common, it is a rank soil and yields more weeds; but diseases which
   arise from poverty breed atheism, irreligion, and rebellion against
   God. They are good, as they make us more useful for God and man. For
   God, as having more advantages for the honouring of God: Prov. iii. 9,
   Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all
   thine increase.' And of doing good to others: That we may have to
   distribute to them that need,' Eph. iv. 28. Oh, we should all covet and
   affect mightily, to have wherewith to relieve the necessities of
   others.

   [2.] As they are blessings, so they are blessings which do not come by
   chance, or by man's providence: 1 Tim. vi. 17, The living God, who
   giveth us richly all things to enjoy.' The people of God are
   plentifully provided for. Your tables are well furnished, backs well
   clothed; it is God which gives you richly to enjoy them, and he must be
   acknowledged. As David doth: 1 Chron. xxix. 14, For all things come of
   thee, and of thine own have we given thee.' Then, ver. 16, O Lord our
   God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house for
   thine holy name, cometh of thine hand, and is all thine own.' Though
   you yourselves have been purchasers of your own estate, and carvers of
   your own fortune (as man is most apt to forget God there), yea, but
   though you have prepared and brought together a great deal of store,
   yet, Lord, all comes from thee. It sweeteneth the mercy. When you are
   at the table, to be carved to by a great person, their remembrance is
   counted a greater favour than the meal itself. So it is not barely the
   comfort we have by the creature which sweeteneth it, but when we think
   of the donor, that the great God should think of us, that it is God who
   spreads our table for us, that doth put this meat and drink before us.
   It was he that gave seed to the sower, and bread for food.' 2 Cor. ix.
   10. When we take it immediately out of God's hands, it is much sweeter.
   And not only so, but also it is the more sanctified. When we look to
   second causes, we shall surely abuse the mercy: Hosea ii. 8, For she
   did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
   her silver and gold.' What then?' Therefore she prepared it for Baal.'
   When God's kindness is not taken notice of, when we do not see God in
   our mercies, we shall not use them for God. That man will surely
   improve his comforts ill that doth not see God in them. Now that which
   comes from God leads the heart to God again, then the creature is
   sanctified. Therefore acknowledge God in these outward things. We
   should say of every morsel of bread, This is God's gift to me; of every
   night's sleep, This is the Lord's goodness. When God is acknowledged in
   these outward things, he takes it the more kindly, and we are the
   better for it; the mercy is the sweeter and the more sanctified.

   [3.] They not only come from God, but from the Lord's free grace and
   mercy. These are two distinct notions, by which God's goodness is set
   out, and they are both significant and expressive in the present case:
   Grace, that doth all freely; mercy, that pitieth the miserable.

   (1.) Then we have them from grace. Grace is at liberty to give them to
   whom it will. Well, there is grace in these outward things; for God
   gives them to whom he will; to some, not to others. Oh, when we
   consider the distinction between us and others every one hath not such
   liberal supplies, nay, many of those of whom the world is not
   worthy--surely this is merely the Lord's goodness. Prov. xxii. 2, The
   rich and the poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them all.'
   They had the same maker that you had (others which are destitute),
   therefore why is it you have more than they? It is merely from grace.
   Why is one vessel framed for an honourable use, and another for a baser
   use? So it pleased the potter. God, as the great master of the scenes,
   appointeth to every man what part he shall act, merely out of his own
   grace; he is bound to none. It was a good speech of Tamerlane, the
   great conqueror of the East, to Bajazet: What did God see in thee, that
   are blind in one eye, and me, that am lame of one leg, that he should
   make us, passing by many others, the lords of so many opulent and
   mighty kingdoms? A savoury speech from an infidel! What did God see in
   any of us, to exalt, cherish, and supply us, and let pass many others,
   who, for moral excellencies and virtuous endowments, do far exceed us?
   When we consider this distinction, then, Even so, Father, because it
   pleased thee There is a kind of election and reprobation in these
   common mercies; that is God will dispense them to one and not to
   another; he will be glorified in their poverty and glorified in thy
   wealth; and therefore there is grace in it.

   (2.) There is a mercy in it, that pitieth the miserable. How doth it
   appear these good things come from mercy? Because of our want and
   because of our forfeiture.

   (1st.) Our want and our indigence. Oh, when we think what shiftless
   creatures we should have been if he had not provided for us Ps xl. 17,
   I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinketh upon me.' If we were but
   sensible of our own weakness, and emptiness, and manifold necessities
   we would admire that God should think of us, such forlorn and wretched
   creatures; or that our baseness and poverty doth not make us
   contemptible to God: Ps. xxxiv. 6, This poor man cried, and the Lord
   heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.' He doth not say,
   This wise man, this eminent saint, but this poor man. This was the
   doctrine of the Gentiles--That the divine power did only care for the
   great and weighty concernments of the world, but other things he left
   to their own event and to their own chance; as if God, in the great
   throng of business, were not at leisure to attend every private mans
   request. These were the fond surmises the Gentiles had of God; but we
   are taught better. This poor man cried unto the Lord and he heard him.'
   Poor men in the world, when they have anything to do with great
   persons, they must look long, wait, pray, and pay to seek their face
   and favour, and at length meet with a rough answer and sour look. But
   God will not shut the door; the throne of grace lies open for every
   comer. You will say, this would sweeten mercies to the poor. Nay, it
   concerns not only those that are actually poor but the great ones of
   the world (for they are poor and shiftless in themselves if God did not
   provide for them); others are but glasses where they might see their
   own misery. If they did well weigh the wants and necessities of others,
   they might see what would have been their own case if the Lord had not
   been merciful unto them. As Austin when he saw a beggar frisking and
   leaping after his belly was filled,' the spectacle wrought much upon
   him that he had not such rejoicing in God, who tasted so much of his
   abundance. Saith Chrysostom If you are not thankful for health, go to
   the spittals and lazar-houses and see what might have been your own
   case. Thus if you are not thankful for abundance, go to the families
   where there are children that want bread. It is the Lord's mercy to the
   richest, for they were miserable and indigent. It is a great mercy to
   relieve those from hand to mouth; but you that have abundance, it is a
   double mercy to you, for he prevents the necessity before it was felt.
   As Ps. xxi. 3, Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness.'
   David takes notice of the goodness of God to him. Before the need is
   felt and observed, you are stored; and this should be a great
   endearment of the Lord's mercy to you.

   (2d.) It is mercy, if we consider not only our want, but our
   forfeiture. It is not only mercy, but pardoning mercy; at least a
   reprieving from trouble, for we deserved the contrary. There is a kind
   of temporary pardon, which continueth all these blessings. It is as
   great a curse as possibly David could thunder out against obstinate
   sinners and God's implacable enemies: Ps. xxviii. 4, Give them
   according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their
   endeavours.' Do we think this would be matter of mischief only to
   David's enemies? No; every one of us, if we had our deserts, we should
   soon be shift less, harbourless, begging from door to door, yea,
   howling for one drop of mercy to cool our tongues. Oh, then, surely the
   Lord is to be praised and acknowledged in bestowing the good things of
   this present life. Well, then--

   As these blessings come from God, let them carry up your heart to God
   again. As all rivers they run from the sea, and they discharge
   themselves into the sea again, so let all be returned to God with
   thankfulness, with acknowledgments that you have received them from
   God. I shall urge it with one example: Jesus Christ, though he were
   heir, Lord of all things, Who thought it no robbery to be equal with
   God,' yet you find him ever giving thanks when he used the creatures:
   Mat. xv. 36. And it is the main thing John taketh notice of, and
   passeth by the miracle: John vi. 23, Where they did eat bread, after
   that the Lord had given thanks.' Nigh to Tiberias, there was the place
   where our Lord fed many with five loaves and two fishes; but he only
   saith this, Where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given
   thanks.' He saw this was a notable circum stance, so he doth but
   cursorily mention the miracle, only calls it eating bread, but
   expressly mentioneth Christ's blessing the creature. He would teach us
   that the blessing of all enjoyments is in God's hand.

   Use 4. If the Lord be the donor and giver of all these outward things,
   let us beware we do not abuse these gifts of God, as occasions of
   sinning against the giver, that we fight not against him with his own
   weapons. Jesus Christ, speaking to his own disciples, though they were
   trained up with him, a company chosen out, and select family, who were
   to be his heralds and ambassadors to the world, yet he gives them this
   caution: Luke xxi. 34, Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your
   hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of
   this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.' He saw it needful
   to warn his own disciples. We had two common parents, Adam and Noah,
   and one miscarried by eating, and the other by drinking; these sins are
   natural to us. The throat is a slippery place, and had need well be
   looked unto. Mark, Christ there doth not mean surfeiting and
   drunkenness merely in a gross notion. When we hear of surfeiting and
   drunkenness, we think of spuing, staggering, reeling, vomiting, and the
   like; but we are to consider it in a stricter notion: Take heed lest
   the heart be overcharged.' The heart may be overcharged when the
   stomach is not; that is, when we are less apt to praise God, grow more
   lumpish and heavy, or rather when we settle into a sensual frame of
   spirit, and by an inordinate delight in our present portion, are taken
   off from minding better things. Look, as the heart is overcharged with
   the cares of the world, so likewise with creature delights and comforts
   of this world, when it is set for ease and vanity. Many that would be
   leathers of the other drunkenness, yet are guilty of this kind of
   surfeiting and drunkenness; the heart is overcharged with an inordinate
   affection to present things. There cannot be a more heavy judgment than
   when our table is made our snare: Ps. lxix. 22. A snare, it is God's
   spiritual judgment; when the comforts of this life serve not so much to
   lengthen and strengthen life, but when their hearts are hardened in
   sin, and they grow neglectful of God and heavenly things. Raining
   snares is an argument of God's hatred. First, The Lord shall rain
   snares;' and then, Brim stone and an horrible tempest shall be their
   portion.' Ps. xi. 6. So it makes way for his eternal anger.

   Use 5. Let us be contented with that portion which God hath given us of
   worldly things, if the Lord be the donor. Why?

   1. Because God stands upon his sovereignty; you must stand to God's
   allowance, though he gives to others more and to you less; for God is
   supreme, and will not be controlled in the disposal of what is his own.
   The goodman of the house pleaded, Mat. xx. 13-15, Friend, I do thee no
   wrong; is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?' The
   fulness of the earth and all is his; and, therefore, though others have
   better trading, and finer apparel, and be more amply provided for than
   we are, God is sovereign, and will give according to his pleasure, and
   you must be content.

   2. Nothing is deserved, and therefore certainly everything should be
   kindly taken. If a man be kept at free cost, and maintained at your
   expense, you take it very ill if he murmur and dislike his diet.
   Certainly we are all maintained at free cost, and, therefore, we should
   with all humble contentation receive whatever God will put into our
   hands.

   3. God knows what proportion is best for us; he is a God of judgment,
   and knows what is most convenient for us, for he is a wise God. It is
   the shepherd must choose the pasture, not the sheep. Leave it to God to
   give you that which is convenient and suitable to your condition of
   life. A shoe may be too big for the foot, and a garment too great for
   the body, as Saul's armour was too large for little David: 1 Sam. xvii.
   God will give you that which is convenient, that which is agreeable to
   you. A garment, when too long, proves a dirty rag; we may have too
   much; and therefore God he carves out our allowance with a wise hand.

   4. God doth not only give suitable to your condition, but suitable to
   your strength, such a portion as you are able to bear. God layeth
   affliction upon his people, and he gives them mercies as they are able
   to bear; if they had more, they would have more snares, more
   temptations. You find it hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
   of heaven: Mat. xix. 24. A man may take a larger draught than he is
   able to bear; so God proportioneth every man's condition according to
   his spiritual strength; every man is not able to bear a very high
   prosperous estate: Heb. xiii. 5, Let your conversation be without
   covetousness; and be content with such things as ye have: for he hath
   said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee;' then you will live
   upon the promise. But when men set God a task, and he must maintain
   them at such a rate, that ends in mischief and distrust: Ps. lxxviii.
   19, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?' &c.

   5. Contentation is one of God's gifts that we ask in this prayer, Give
   us this day our daily bread;' that is, we ask to be contented with our
   portion. Contentment and quietness of mind with what we do enjoy, it is
   a great blessing: Joel ii. 19. See what the Lord saith. there by his
   prophet: I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be
   satisfied therewith.' The bare and simple blessing doth not speak so
   much of God's love as when we are satisfied, when we have contentment
   in it; that is the greater blessing. When our minds are suited to our
   condition, then the creature is more sweet, more comfort able. Your
   happiness lies not in abundance, but in contentment: Luke xii. 15. This
   doth not make a man happy, that he hath much; but this, that he is
   contented; he hath what God will give him. All spiritual miseries may
   be referred to these two things: a war between a man and his
   conscience, and a war between his affections and his condition.

   6. There may be as much love in a lesser portion as in a greater. There
   is the same affection to a small younger child, though he hath not so
   large an allowance as the elder brother; yet, saith he, My father loves
   me as well as him; not that I have a double portion, but I have as much
   of my father's love. So a child of God may say, God loves me, though he
   hath given another more and me less. Be content with what falls to your
   share, and with your allowance by the wise designation and allotment of
   God's providence. Thus much for the first point.

   A word of a second, viz.:--

   Doct. 2. In asking temporal things, Christ hath stinted us to a day,
   Give us, se'meron, this day, our daily bread.'

   God in an extraordinary manner fed his people in the wilderness; the
   manna stank if they had kept it another day; they had it from day to
   day. What is the reason Christ saith, Give us this day'?

   1. That every day we may pray to God. Therefore it is not, Give us this
   month, or year, but day; because every day God will hear from us: 1
   Thes. v. 17, Pray without ceasing.' God would not have us too long out
   of his company, but by a frequent commerce he would have us acquainted
   and familiar with him. This is required, that you should not let a day
   pass over your head but God must hear from you, for your patent lasts
   but for a day; you have a lease from God of your comforts and mercies,
   but it is expired unless you renew it again by prayer. How much do they
   differ from the heart of God's children, that could be contented, like
   the high priest of old, to come to the mercy-seat but once a year! Now
   the Lord would have us come every day to the throne of grace.

   2. Every day, because there should be family prayer; for all that take
   their meat together are to come, and say to God, Give us this day our
   daily bread.' It is not said, Give me,' but Give us.' Therefore you see
   how little of love and fear of God is there, where, week after week,
   they call not upon God's name.

   3. To make way for our gratitude and thankfulness. Our mercies, they
   flow not from God all at once, but some to-day, and some to morrow, for
   we take them day by day; all together, they are too heavy for us to
   wield and manage: Ps. lxviii. 19, Who daily loadeth us with benefits.'
   Our mercies, they come in greater number and a greater measure than we
   are able to acknowledge, make use of, or be thankful for. Therefore,
   this is the burden of gracious hearts, that mercies come so thick and
   fast they cannot be thankful enough for them; but to help us, God
   distributes them by parcels. Who loadeth us daily, some to-day, some
   to-morrow, and every day, that we may not forget God, but may have a
   new argument to praise him.

   4. To show us every day we should renew our dependence upon God for
   temporal things. There is no day but we stand in need of the Lord's
   blessing, of sanctification, of comfort, that they may not be a snare,
   that there is still need of new strength, new grace, and new supplies.

   5. Again, Give us this day,' that we may not burden ourselves with
   overmuch thoughtfulness, that we might not solicitously cark for
   to-morrow: Mat. vi. 34, Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.'
   Every day affords business, trouble, care, and burden enough; we need
   not anticipate and pre-occupy the cares of the next day; God would not
   have us overborne with solicitude, but look no further than this day.

   6. Christ would teach us that worldly things should be sought in a
   moderate proportion; if we have sufficient for a day, for the present
   want, we should not grasp at too much. Ships lightly laden will pass
   through the sea, but when we take too great a burden, the ship will
   easily sink with every storm. We have sore troubles to pass through in
   the world; now when we are overburdened with present things we have
   more snares and temptations.

   7. Christ would train us up with thoughts of our lives' uncertainty:
   James iv. 13, Say not, This and this I will do to-day or to-morrow:
   What is your life? it is but a vapour.' One being invited to dinner the
   next day, said, For these many years I have not had a to-morrow;
   meaning he was providing every day for his last day. We do not know
   whether we have another day, but are apt to sing lullabies to our
   souls, and say, Soul, take thine ease, thou hast goods laid up for many
   years,' Luke xii. 19. We are sottishly secure, and dream of many years,
   whereas God tells us only of to-day.

   8. To awaken us after heavenly things. When we seek bread for the
   present life, then give us this day;' but now come to me, saith Christ,
   and I will give you bread that shall nourish you to eternal life,'
   bread that endureth for ever: John vi. 27, Labour not for the meat
   which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto ever lasting
   life.' There is meat that will endure for ever, but for the present we
   beg only for this day: 1 Pet. i. 4, To an inheritance incorruptible,
   and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you.'
   That is an eternal state, this but of a short and of a small
   continuance. You see what need you have to go to God, that he will most
   plentifully provide for you.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [24] Qu. "taste?"--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________

   And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

   WE have now done with the supplications of this prayer, and are come to
   the deprecations. The supplications are those petitions which we make
   to God for obtaining of that which is good. The deprecations are those
   petitions we make to God for removing of that which is evil. Now of
   this latter sort there are two:--(1.) We pray for the remission of evil
   that is already committed; (2.) We pray for the prevention of the evil
   which may be inflicted. The first of these is the petition we have now
   in hand. Here,

   1. The petition is proposed, Forgive us our debts.'

   2. It is confirmed by an argument, As we forgive our debtors.' In the
   first, take notice:--

   I. Of the object, or matter of this petition, and that is, debts.

   II. The subject or persons praying, us.

   III. The person to whom we pray, our heavenly Father, who alone can
   forgive our sins.

   IV. The act of God about this object, forgive.

   Then the petition is confirmed by an argument, which is taken from our
   forgiving of others.

   In which there is an argument.

   1. A simili, from a like disposition in us. Thus, what is good in us
   was first in God, for he is the pattern of all perfection. If we have
   such a disposition planted in our hearts, and if it be a virtue in us,
   surely the same disposition is in God, for the first being wanteth no
   perfection.

   2. The argument may be taken  dispari, or  minori ad majus, from the
   less to the greater. If we, that have but a drop of mercy, can forgive
   the offences done to us, surely the infinite God, that is mercy itself,
   he hath more bowels and more pity: For his ways are above our ways, as
   high as the heaven is above the earth.' Isa. lv. 9. So it seems the
   argument is propounded: Luke xi. 4, Forgive us our sins, for we also
   forgive every one that is indebted to us.'

   3. The argument may be taken from the condition or the qualification of
   those that are to expect pardon. They are such that, out of a sense of
   God's mercy to them, and the love of God shed abroad in their hearts,
   are inclined and disposed to show mercy to others. So Christ explains
   it, ver. 14, making it a condition or qualification on our part: If ye
   forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
   you.' But this will be more abundantly clear when I come to examine
   that clause.

   Before we come to the petition itself, the connexion is to be
   considered, for the particle and links it to the former petition. After
   Hallowed be thy name,' he doth not say, And thy kingdom come;' they are
   propounded as distinct sentences: but, Give us this day our daily
   bread, and forgive us our debts,' for three reasons:--

   [1.] Without pardon all the good things of this life will do us no
   good. They are but as a full diet, or as a rich suit, to a condemned
   person; they will not comfort him and allay his present fears. Until we
   are pardoned, we are under a sentence, ready for execution and
   therefore we cannot have that comfort in outward things until we have
   some interest in God's fatherly mercy. A man that is condemned hath the
   king's allowance until execution. So it is the indulgence of God to a
   wicked man to give him many outward things, though he is condemned
   already. We should not satisfy ourselves with daily bread without a
   sense of some interest in pardoning mercy.

   [2.] To show us our unworthiness. Our sins are so many and grievous
   that we are not worthy of one morsel of bread to put in our mouths.
   When we say, Give us this day,' &c. , we need presently to say, Forgive
   us our sins.' There is a forfeiture even of these common blessings:
   Gen. xxxii. 10, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of
   all the truth, which thou hast showed unto thy servant.' All that we
   have we have from mercy, and it is mercy undeserved. As we are
   creatures, there can be no common right between God and us to engage
   him to give temporal blessings, for we owe ourselves wholly to him, as
   being created out of nothing. Children cannot oblige their parents. But
   much more, as we are guilty creatures, it is merely of the mercy of the
   Lord.

   [3.] These are joined together because sin is the great obstacle and
   hindrance of all the blessings which we expect from God: Jer. v. 25,
   Your sins have withheld good things from you.' When mercy comes to us,
   sin stands in the way and turns it back again, so that it cannot have
   so clear a passage to us. Therefore God must forgive before he can
   give, that is, bestow these outward things as a blessing on us.

   Having spoken of this connexion, let me observe something from the
   petition itself.

   The first thing I shall observe is the notion by which sin is set out,
   Forgive us our debts.' The point is:--

   Doct. 1. That sins come under the notion of debts.

   In Luke xi. 4, it is, Forgive us our sins.' There is a twofold debt
   which man oweth to God.

   1. A debt of duty.

   2. A debt of punishment.

   [1.] A debt of duty, worship, and obedience; this is a debt we owe to
   God. In this sense it is said, Rom. viii. 12, We are debtors, not to
   the flesh, to live after the flesh.' In which negative the affirmative
   is clearly implied, that we are debtors to God, to live to God; debtors
   to the Spirit, to live after the Spirit. By the law of creation, we
   were not appointed to serve and please the flesh, but to serve God:
   Luke xvii. 10, When you have done all those things which are commanded
   you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our
   debt or duty to do.' Obedience, worship, and service, is a debt we owe
   to God, by virtue of that interest which he hath in us, and command he
   hath over us. And so you have that speech, Gal. v. 3, that we are
   debtors to the whole law, as we come under the obedience of it.

   [2.] A debt of punishment, which we are fallen into through the neglect
   of our duty. Punishment is due to us as wages: Rom. vi. 23, The wages
   of sin is death.' God hath, as it were, made a contract with us, that
   if we will sin we must take our wages; we must take what it comes to.

   Now in this petition, when we say, Forgive us our debts,' we do not
   desire to be discharged of the duty we owe to God, but to be acquitted
   of the guilt and punishment. The faults or sins that we are guilty of
   oblige us and bind us to the punishment; and therefore sins are called
   debts. The original debt we owe is obedience; and in case of default,
   the next debt we owe is punishment. Look, as in a contract and bond, if
   the party observe not the condition, then he is liable to the
   forfeiture: so God dealt with man by way of covenant, and the tenor of
   it was exact obedience; and this covenant had a sanction or an
   obligation annexed: in case obedience was not exactly performed, we
   should be accursed, and suffer all manner of misery in this life and
   the next. Now, by the fall, we incurred this penalty; and therefore, as
   lost and undone creatures, we run to God's mercy, and beg him to
   forgive the debt, or the forfeiture of that bond of obedience wherein
   man standeth bound to God by the law.

   A little to make it good, before I come to the body of the petition,
   let me show how sin is a debt, wherein it agrees. That will appear if
   you can consider:--

   1. Our danger by sin.

   2. Our remedy from sin.

   In both the parts you will find sin is considered as a debt.

   First, If you consider our danger by sin.

   [1.] There is a creditor to whom the debt is due, and that is God: Luke
   vii. 41, when he would set out God's mercy he saith, There was a
   certain creditor which had two debtors,' &c. God is there set forth
   under the notion and similitude of a creditor. God is a creditor,
   partly as our creator, and partly as a lawgiver, and partly as a judge.
   As our creator and benefactor, from whom we have received all that we
   have: it was the Lord that gave to every man his talents to trade
   withal; to some more, to some less: Mat. xxv. Thus God hath trusted us
   with life, and all other blessings. But then, as a lawgiver: if God had
   given us life, strength, parts, wealth, that we should do with them
   what we would, though the gift would oblige us, in point of gratitude,
   to serve our benefactor, yet we had not been so responsible for our
   defaults. But we are under a law to serve him and honour him that made
   us and gave us what we have. God did not dispossess himself of an
   interest in them. He did not give them to us as owners and proprietors,
   to do with them what we would; but he gave them to us as stewards: our
   life and employment here is a stewardship. Nay, God is not only a
   lawgiver, but also a judge; he will call us to an account. He doth
   oblige us as a creator, but imposeth a necessity upon us of obeying and
   serving him as a lawgiver; and not only makes a law, but will take an
   account of men, how they observe the law of their creation. There will
   a time come when the lord of those servants will come and reckon with
   them, and require his own with usury: Luke xix. 23. He will require
   this debt and service at our hands, else we must endure the penalty.
   Well, this is the connexion: he that abuseth God's mercy as a creator
   offends him as a lawgiver, and is justly punished by him as a judge.
   There are many never think of this, therefore are not sensible of these
   great relations, nor that they shall answer for all their talents,
   strength, and time, and advantages they have in the world. Thus there
   is a creditor.

   [2.] As a debtor is bound to make satisfaction to the creditor, or else
   is liable to the process of the law, which may be commenced against
   him, so are we all to God, bodies and souls; we are become hupodikos to
   Theo, guilty before the Lord:' Rom. iii. 19. So we translate it. We are
   under the sentence of the law, liable to the process of his revenging
   justice, and one day God will pursue his righteous law against us. All
   the fallen creatures are quite become bankrupt; we can never pay the
   original debt of obedience, therefore must be left to lie under the
   debt of punishment.

   [3.] Look, as debts stand upon record, and are charged upon some book
   of account, that they may not be forgot, so God hath his book of
   account--a book of remembrance, as it is called: Mal. iii. 16. All our
   words, speeches, actions, they are all upon record; what means we have
   enjoyed, what mercies, what opportunities, what calls, and what
   messages of his love and grace: Job xiv. 17, My iniquity is sealed up
   in a bag.' As men's writings or bonds, which they have to show for
   their debts owing to them, are sealed up in a bag, so Job useth that
   similitude. Thus is sin represented as a thing that is upon record, and
   cannot be forgotten. Many times we lose the memory of what we have done
   in childhood and infancy, but all is upon record; and your iniquities
   will one day find you out, though you have for gotten, and think never
   to hear of them more.

   [4.] A day of reckoning will come, when God will put the bond in suit,
   and all shall be called to an account. Sometimes God reckoneth with
   sinners, in part, in this world, but surely in the next. Death is but
   the summons to come to an account with God: Luke xvi. 2, Give an
   account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer steward.' That
   passage of the parable is applicable to death: That when ye fail, they
   may receive you into everlasting habitations,' ver. 9. When the soul is
   turned out of doors, when it is cited to appear before the tribunal of
   God, then we give up our account. But especially at the great day: Rev.
   xx. 12, And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the
   books were opened;' that is, the book of conscience and the book of
   God's remembrance. There are two books, that are written within and
   without, upon which all our actions are stamped: they are now closed in
   a great measure; we know not what is in these great books. One of the
   books (that of conscience) is in our own keeping, yet we cannot deface
   and blot it out. These books at that day will be opened; conscience, by
   the power of God, shall be extended to the recognition of all our ways.
   Conscience writes when it speaks not: many times it doth not smite for
   sins we are guilty of; but there stands the debt charged, upon which we
   shall be responsible.

   [5.] After this reckoning there is execution. A bankrupt that cannot
   satisfy his creditor is cast into prison; so God hath his prison for
   impenitent, disobedient, and obstinate sinners: 1 Pet. iii. 19, He went
   and preached unto the spirits in prison.' It is a dismal prison, where
   poor captive prisoners are held in chains of darkness; that is, under
   the horrors of their own despairing fears, looking for the judgment of
   the Lord, when they shall be cast into this prison, and no getting out
   again, until they have paid the utmost farthing: Luke xii. 50. And that
   will never be as to the sinner: he is, as it were, always satisfying,
   and can never be said to have satisfied, the justice of God.

   Thus you see how sin is a debt, and what correspondence there is
   between them--the obligation of punishment that ariseth from sin. But
   now it differeth from all other debts.

   (1.) No debt to man can be so great as our debt to God, both for number
   and weight. Mat. xviii. 24, compared with ver. 28: you shall see there
   the parable of the lord forgiving ten thousand talents;' and the
   servant goes and takes his brother by the throat, and requireth from
   him a debt of an hundred pence.' Mark, offences done to God are greater
   than offences done to us; for there is as much difference and
   disproportion as between an hundred and ten thousand. And then the debt
   of the fellow-servant was but pence, an hundred pence; but the debt due
   to the lord, that was talents; and a talent is reckoned to be one
   hundred and eighty-seven pounds ten shillings. Our sins against God are
   more and more heavy than any which our brethren can commit against us.
   Pence, talents; one hundred and ten thousand: there is the difference
   and disproportion. Oh that we had a due sense of what it is to sin
   against God, against an infinite majesty! To strike a private person is
   not so much as to strike an officer of justice; and that is not so much
   as to strike the supreme magistrate. What is it to sin against God? and
   how often do we? All our imaginations are only evil, and that
   continually; and therefore all our sins against God will arise to a
   vast and heavy debt, because of the infiniteness of the object against
   whom sin is committed.

   (2.) In other debts there is a day of payment set them; in this debt
   there is none. God doth not tell us when he will put the bond in suit
   against us; he may surprise us ere we are aware. Luke xii. 20: when he
   dreamed of many years, Thou fool, this night.' The spirits now in
   prison did as little think of that doleful place as those sinners which
   are alive. It may be to-day, to-morrow, the next hour: Gen. iv. 7, Sin
   lieth at the door.' There is a sentence and curse that waylays him.
   Sin, for the punishment of sin; it is ready to seize upon him, and
   pluck him by the throat, and bring him into God's presence. Still the
   curse hovers over the head of obstinate and impenitent sinners.

   (3.) In other debts, if the goods are taken by way of execution, and
   suffice, the person is free; but here God aims at the person, and the
   whole person. Body and soul are cast into hell fire.' Mat. x. 28.

   (4.) Here there can be no shifting, no avoiding the danger. If you fly
   from God, you do but fly to God; from God, as willing to be a friend;
   to God, who is sure to be revenged. Whither shall I fly from thy
   Spirit? If I go into the depths, thou art there.' Ps. cxxxix. God is
   here, there, and everywhere.

   (5.) All other debts cease at death; when a man dieth, we say his debts
   are paid: but here execution begins, then the law takes the sinner by
   the throat, and drags him to everlasting punishment, and doth in effect
   say, Pay me what thou owest. Death is God's arrest. As soon as the soul
   steps out of the world, presently it is attached and seized, and
   forfeited into the hands of God's justice. How many are there that lie
   under this danger and never think of it! Spiritual debts they are not
   so sensible of as literal. A man that is deeply in debt, and in danger
   of an arrest, cannot sleep, eat, walk abroad, but his fears are upon
   him. Augustus bought his quilt or bed, that could sleep soundly when he
   owed so many thousand sesterces. But poor senseless sinners never think
   of danger until they are plunged into it, and then there is no escape.

   Secondly, The metaphor will also hold good as to our remedy and
   recovery, how we come out of this debt. A debtor that is insolvent is
   undone, unless there be some means found out to satisfy the creditor:
   so we must altogether lie under the wrath of God, unless satisfaction
   be made. Therefore, Jesus Christ, in the

   [1.] Place, comes under the notion of a surety. Because he took the
   debt of man upon himself, therefore, Heb. vii. 22, he is called, the
   surety of a better testament.' When Christ undertook the business of
   our salvation, he did in effect say, as Paul to Philemon, ver. 18, If
   he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee aught, put that on mine account:'
   so did Jesus Christ in effect say to God, Let me be made a sin, and
   made a curse for them. He that was a judge, was willing to become a
   party, and to pay what he owed. David, in the type of Christ, saith,
   Ps. lxix. 4, I restored that which I took not away.' He did not take
   away any honour from God: it was we that robbed God of the glory of his
   justice, authority, and truth; that trampled them under our feet: but
   Christ made restitution and amends to God.

   [2J Having condescended to become our surety, he made full
   satisfaction, by suffering the punishment which was due to us: Isa.
   liii. 4, Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows.'
   That which we should have borne upon our own backs, and would have
   crushed us for ever, that he hath borne, and he hath carried. Christ
   was to be the sinner in law, and was to suffer in our stead. Solomon
   hath a passage concerning suretyship: Prov. xi. 15, He that is surety
   for a stranger, shall smart for it;' or, as the Hebrew will bear it,
   sore bruised;' or, as it is in the margin, shall be bruised and sore
   broken.' And the same word is used concerning Christ, that was our
   surety: Isa. liii. 10, It pleased the Father to bruise him.' Christ is
   our surety, therefore he was bruised and broken, he suffered what we
   should have suffered. It is true, there are some circumstances of our
   punishment which Christ suffered not, as a great part of our punishment
   in hell; there is the worm of conscience and despair, and the eternity
   of torments; but this was not essential to the punishment, but did only
   arise from the guilt and from the weakness of the party that is
   punished, because we cannot work through it otherwise. Christ paid the
   full price which divine justice demanded, and so made satisfaction for
   us.

   [3.] Christ satisfying as our surety, all those which had an interest
   in his death, they are set free from the wrath of God, they have a
   release from this great debt owed. As when the ram was taken. Isaac was
   let go; so when Christ was taken, the sinner is released and
   discharged: Job xxxiii. 24, Deliver him from going down to the pit; 1
   have found a ransom.' Certainly God will not exact the debt twice, of
   the surety and of the principal person; our surety having paid the debt
   for us, therefore we go free. And, therefore, if our consciences should
   pursue us at law, we may answer, Christ was taken for us, He was
   bruised for our iniquities, and he bore the chastisement of our peace.'

   [4.] Christ hath not only satisfied for the punishment, but he hath
   procured favour for us; wherein he differeth from an ordinary and
   common surety. Christ does not only free us from bonds, but also hath
   brought us into grace and favour with the creator, lawgiver, and judge.
   There is a double notion of Christ's death; that of a ransom for the
   delivery of a captive, and as a merit and price which was given for
   eternal life. The death of Christ did not only dissolve the obligation
   which lay upon us to suffer the penalty for the breach of the law, and
   so deliver us from the wrath to come; but it was a price that was given
   to purchase grace, favour, and heaven for us, which is called, Eph. i.
   14, The purchased possession.' Now, why must our surety instate us thus
   into favour? Because Christ was such a surety as did not only pay the
   forfeiture, but also the principal; that is, he did not only make
   satisfaction for the trespass and offence (which is the payment of the
   forfeiture), but also he established a righteousness answerable to the
   law (which is the payment of the principal), and of that original debt
   which God first required of the creature; for there is a debt of duty
   and service which Christ performeth and establisheth as a righteousness
   for us.

   [5.] From hence in his name there is proclaimed redemption to the
   captives, freedom to poor prisoners that were in debt, and weak, and
   could not acquit themselves. And therefore the publication of the
   gospel is compared to the year of jubilee: Luke iv. 19, Christ came to
   preach the acceptable year of the Lord.' It relates to .the year of
   jubilee, wherein all debts were cancelled; it was a year of general
   releasement, proclaimed by sound of trumpet, that every man should
   return to his inheritance, and all debts dissolved and done away: Lev.
   xxv. 9, 10. So Jesus Christ saith, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
   to preach the acceptable year of the Lord;' that is, to proclaim to
   poor captives a release of all debts, and all bonds which are upon
   them.

   [6.] All those that come to God by Christ are interested in the comfort
   of this offer and proclamation of grace, and may plead with God about
   their discharge from this great and heavy debt. I put it mainly in that
   notion (those that come to God by Christ), because you will find that
   is the description of those whom Christ means to save: Heb. vii. 25, He
   is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him.' Who
   are those that come unto God by him? Those that in Christ's name do
   seriously, and with brokenness of heart, deal with him about a release
   and a discharge. To come to God by him, it is to come in his name, to
   plead his propitiation, or his satisfaction, as the only meritorious
   cause; and the promise of God in Christ to blot out our offences, as
   the only ground of hope; and as to ourselves, acknowledging the debt;
   that is, in confessing our sins, and our desert of punishment, with a
   purpose to forsake them.

   (1 ) There is required an acknowledgment of the debt. God stands upon
   it that his justice may be owned with a due sense, according to the
   tenor of the first covenant: for though the satisfaction be made by
   another, and that by a surety of God's providing; yet God will have the
   creature know they are under so heavy a debt, that he will have them
   feel it in brokenness of heart; not know it only in a general
   conviction, but confess their sins: 1 John i. 9, If we confess our sins
   he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.' When we come with true
   remorse, and confess we have offended so just, so holy, so merciful a
   Father, it must be grievous to us in the remembrance of it You must not
   only confess sin as a wrong, but as a debt: sin hath wronged God, and
   it is also a debt binding you over to a punishment we could never
   endure, nor make God any satisfaction for. Therefore David, when he
   would have God's bond crossed and can celled see how he pleads: Ps. li.
   2, 3, O Lord, blot out mine offences, for I acknowledge my
   transgressions; and my sin is ever before me.' Blot it out, for I
   acknowledge it; that is, I submit to thy instituted course; I submit to
   the justice of the first covenant.

   (2.) The satisfaction of Christ must be pleaded also by a sinner in the
   court of heaven, in a believing manner, that there may be an owning of
   the surety. All parties that are interested in this business must
   consent Now God and Christ they are agreed about the business of
   salvation: God hath agreed to take satisfaction from Christ, and Christ
   hath agreed to make this satisfaction to God: all the business now is
   about the sinner's consent, or about his ready acceptation of Jesus
   Christ and we never heartily indeed consent to this, that Christ shall
   be our surety, and he the person that must release and discharge this
   debt, until we look upon him by an eye of faith, as one that tore the
   bond and handwriting that was against us. The law is called the
   handwriting that was against us;' there is the bond which was to be put
   in suit: now, Col. ii. 14, He hath torn, or blotted out the handwriting
   of ordinances, that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took
   it out of the way, nailing it to his cross.' He hath disannulled the
   law, which binds to suffer the wrath of God. The law was the bond by
   which our death was ratified.

   (3 ) There is required an unfeigned purpose to forsake sin. that hath
   been released of his debt, must not still run into new arrears.

   Christ never blotted out our debts that we might renew them, and go on
   upon a new score of offending God again; this is to dally with God, to
   run into the snare when he hath broken it for us and given us an
   escape, to plunge ourselves into new debts again.

   In this prayer, Forgive us our debts,' then presently, Lead us not into
   temptation.' Therefore we must purpose to forsake sin other wise we do
   not draw nigh to God with a true heart: Heb. x. 22. We do but deal
   falsely with God in all the confessions we make, and m all the pleas of
   faith, unless there be an unfeigned purpose to renounce all sin and
   cast it off as a thing that will undo our souls. Thus, Christians, must
   you sue out your release and discharge in your surety's name.

   Use 1. The use is, first, to show us the misery of an impenitent,
   unpardoned sinner; he. hath a vast debt upon him, that will surely undo
   him unless he doth in time get a discharge. He is bound over to suffer
   the wrath of God for evermore, and no hand can loose him but God's.
   Many times they think of no such matter, and cry, Peace, peace.' to
   themselves; but it is not the debtor which must cancel the book, but
   the creditor. Have you a discharge from God? where is your legal
   qualification? poor creatures, what will you do? Many take care that
   they may owe nothing to any man; oh! but what do you owe to God? To
   live in doubt and in fear of an arrest, oh, what misery is that! But
   when sin lieth at the door, ready to attack you every moment and hale
   you to the prison of hell, that is most dreadful. Therefore think of it
   seriously; how do accounts stand between God and you? Sinners are loth
   to think of it. When the lord came to reckon with his servants, Mat.
   xviii. 24, it is said, One was brought to him which owed him ten
   thousand talents:' he was loth to come to an account, he would fain
   keep out of the way, but he was brought to him. So we are unwilling to
   be called to account, we shift and delay, and will not think of our
   misery: but the putting off sin will not put it away; our not thinking
   of our misery will not help us out, and will not be a release and
   discharge.

   2. If sins be debts, and an increasing debt, so that man is ever
   treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath; it presseth us to be more
   careful to get out of this condition. Saith Solomon, Prov. vi. 3-5: If
   thou beest in debt, flee as a swift roe from the hand of the hunter,
   and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.' Oh, it is a sad thing to
   lie in our sins! If you be under this debt, give not sleep to thine
   eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids; get away like the swift roe from
   the hand of the hunter,' &c. And what I say concerning a state of sin,
   I say concerning daily failings; make your peace with God betimes; if
   you have contracted a new debt, make all even between God and your
   souls, that you may not sleep in your sins.

   3. This should make us more cautious that we do not commit sin: why? it
   is a debt that will render you obnoxious to the wrath of God; in itself
   it merits eternal death: oh, therefore, sin no more, do not run again
   into the snare! When you give way to sin, you hazard the comfort of
   your acquittance by Christ: Ps. lxxxv. 8, The Lord will speak peace
   unto his people, and to his saints; but let them not turn again to
   folly.' If the Lord hath given you your peace, and some hope of your
   being discharged of this heavy debt, take heed of meddling with
   forbidden fruit, and running into debt again.

   II. From the subject or persons which make this prayer, Forgive us,'
   observe,

   Doct. Even those that call God Father, ought to beg, daily and humbly,
   pardon of their sins.

   Forgive us; who is that us that can say in faith, Our Father, daily?
   For this is a pattern for daily prayer, as the word se'meron in the
   former petition noteth. We need beg, for Christ hath taught us here to
   sue out our discharge: in which begging there is an exercise of faith
   eyeing Christ: Rom. iii. 25, God hath set forth him to be a
   propitiation through faith in his blood.' And there is an exercise also
   of repentance, as to mourning for sin: 1 John i. 9, and Prov. xxviii.
   13, He that confesseth and forsaketh his sin, shall have mercy:' and as
   to loathing of sin, Acts iii. 19, Repent ye therefore, and be
   converted, that your sins maybe blotted out.' And certainly it must be
   humbly begged; for if we seek pardon we must seek it in God's way. We
   do not beg God to rescind and, make void his laws, and those wise
   constitutions he hath appointed whereby the creature shall receive this
   grace; and the manner wherein he will deal and transact this business
   with the offending creature: but we seek it as exercising our renewed
   repentance; that is, mourning for sin, and loathing of sin. But of this
   more hereafter.

   Now, that the best of God's children should be dealing with God about a
   pardon of their sins, I shall argue it:--

   1. From the necessity.

   2. The utility and profit of such a course.

   First, The necessity of this will appear two ways:--

   [1.] From the condition of God's children here in the world.

   [2.] From the way wherein God will give out a pardon.

   [1.] From the condition of God's children here in this world. The best
   are not so fully sanctified in this life but there is some sin found in
   them; not only they who walk with no care, but even they that set the
   most narrow watch over their ways, they are not so sanctified but they
   need daily to go to God.

   (1.) They have original sin which remaineth with them to the last, they
   have the sinning sin which the apostle speaks of. Paul complains of the
   body of death: Rom. vii. 23, 24, Who shall deliver me from it?' The
   Hebrews were wont to propound their wishes by way of question; as, Oh
   that salvation were come out of Zion!' It is in the Hebrew, Who shall
   bring salvation out of Zion?' So, Who will lead me into Edom?' that is,
   Oh that I were led into Edom,' that I might display the banner there,
   because of God's truth. So, Who shall deliver me from the body of this
   death?' that is, Oh that I were delivered!' Where the reign of sin is
   broken, yet there it remains; though it be cast down in regard of
   regency, yet it is not cast out in regard of inherency. As the ivy that
   is gotten into the wall, cut away the boughs, branches, stubs, yet
   still there will be some sproutings out again until the wall be pulled
   down; so until these earthly tabernacles of ours be tumbled in the
   dust, though we are mortifying and subduing of sin, yet there will be a
   budding and sprouting out again.

   (2.) There are many actual sins: James iii. 2, In many things we offend
   all;' and Eccles. vii. 20, There is not a just man upon earth, that
   doeth good, and sinneth not:' that is, that sins not either in omitting
   of good or committing of evil: our offences are either total or
   partial. Partial offences; though a child of God loves God, fears God,
   trusts in God, yet not in that purity and perfection that he hath
   required of him; though he serves God and obeys him, yet not with that
   liberty, delight, reverence, which he hath required. There is an
   omission in part in every act: there is not that perfection which God
   deserveth, who is to be served with all our might, with all our
   strength. Our principles are divided; there is flesh and spirit; there
   is a mixture in all our actions. Sometimes there is a total omission,
   the spiritual life is at a stand, many times all acts of respect are
   intermitted. Then for commissions, sometimes, out of ignorance, they do
   not see what is to be done. Though they have a general resolution to do
   the whole will of God, yet many times they mistake. Our light is but in
   part: And who can understand his errors? Cleanse me from secret sins:'
   Ps. xix. 12. We sin out of ignorance, as a man in the dark may jostle
   against his friend. Sometimes by imprudence and inconsideration, as a
   man that is not heedful, though he knows it, he may mistake his way.
   Many are overtaken in a fault: Gal. vi. 1; that is, unawares, and
   besides their intention. Sometimes, out of incogitancy and sudden
   incursion, they may not only be overtaken but overborne, drawn away by
   their own lusts,' James i. 14: overcome by the prevalency of passion
   and corrupt affection; so sin gets the upper hand. Thus it is with the
   children of God. Look, as it was said of the Romans, that in battle
   they were overcome, but never in war; though a child of God hath the
   best of it at last, yet in many particular conflicts he is overborne by
   the violence of temptation and his own corrupt lusts. Thus there is a
   necessity of begging daily pardon, if we consider the condition of the
   saints while they are here in the world, who carry a sinning nature
   about them, a corrupt issue that will never be dried up while they are
   in the world; and also they are guilty of many actual sins, both of
   omission and commission.

   Secondly, The necessity of it will appear from the way wherein God
   gives a pardon, which is upon the creature's humble submission, and
   seeking of terms of grace; so that whatsoever right we have to
   remission in Christ, though we have a general right to remission and
   pardon of sin, yet we must seek to apply that right, and beg the use of
   it for our daily pardon and acceptance with God. This will appear by
   considering--(1.) The nature of this request; (2.) The right that a
   justified person hath to the pardon of his daily sins.

   1. What we beg for when we say, Forgive us our sins. Five things we ask
   of God:--

   [1.] The grant of a pardon.

   [2.] The continuance of this privilege.

   [3.] The sense and comfort of it.

   [4.] The increase of that sense.

   [5.] The effects of pardon, or a freedom from those penal evils that
   are fruits of sin.

   (1.) The grant of a pardon, that God would accept the satisfaction of
   Christ for our sins, and look upon us as righteous in him. Jesus Christ
   himself was to sue out the fruits of his purchase: Ps. ii. 8, Ask of
   me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
   uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.' Though he had a right
   to be received into heaven, to sit down at the right hand of God, and
   administer the kingdom for the comfort of his elect ones, yet ask of
   me.' And so we are to sue out our right: Ps. xxxii. 5, I said, I will
   confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the
   iniquity of my sin.' What then? For this cause shall every one that is
   godly pray unto thee.' Though God be so ready to forgive as soon as we
   conceive a purpose he gives out a pardon--yet we are to call upon God.
   God will have us to sue out the grant of a pardon. Why? Because he
   would deal with us as a sovereign, therefore doth he require the
   submission of our faith. It was of grace that he would appoint a
   satisfaction for us, which he did not for the fallen angels; and it was
   much more grace that he would give that satisfaction, give that price,
   out of his own treasury. Christ was not a mediator of our choosing, but
   God's; and therefore, though justice be fully satisfied, yet the debt
   is humbly to be acknowledged by the creature, and we are to sue out
   terms of grace. And again, the application to us is merely grace, when
   so many thousands perish in their sins; therefore we are to beg, to sue
   out this grace, that we may have the benefit of Christ's death. God
   doth it, that in begging we may acknowledge our own misery, and how
   unable we are to make satisfaction: Ps. cxliii. 2, In thy sight no
   flesh can be justified;' and Ps. cxxx. 3, 4, If thou shouldest mark
   iniquities, Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee,
   that thou mayest be feared.' Before God will give us an interest in
   this forgiveness, we are to come and confess ourselves utterly to be
   insolvent, and also to own Jesus Christ as the means, that we may
   solemnly and explicitly own our Redeemer, who was appointed by God, and
   procured this benefit for us: 1 John ii. 1, And if any man sin, we have
   an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.' God hath
   required we should sue it out, and own our advocate, as well as confess
   ourselves unable to satisfy, that we might know who is our advocate. In
   the type of the brazen serpent, Num. xxi. 8, And the Lord said unto
   Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall
   come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it,
   shall live.' Mark, though God set up a sign of salvation (as it is
   called elsewhere), yet when you shall look upon him you shall live. So
   God would have us sue out the grant by looking to Christ, that so our
   interest may be established: John iii. 14, 15, And as Moses lifted up
   the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted
   up; that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal
   life.' That whosoever believeth in him,' that was the intent of looking
   upon it, that we might fix our faith on Christ, and come tinder the
   shelter of his wing. We beg, upon a sense of our own unworthiness, the
   acceptance of Christ's satisfaction for us.

   (2.) We pray for the continuance of pardon; though we are already
   justified, yet Forgive us our sins.' As in daily bread, though we have
   it by us, and God hath stored us with blessings in our houses, yet we
   beg the continuance and use of it; so whatever right we have to
   pardoning mercy, yet we beg the continuance of it, for two
   reasons:--Partly because justification is not complete until the day of
   judgment, but mercy is still in fieri, that is, God is still a-doing:
   Acts iii. 19, That your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
   refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.' Then are our sins
   blotted out, then is this privilege complete. We read of forgiveness in
   this world, and forgiveness in the world to come, Mat. xii. 32.
   Forgiven in this world, when accepted to grace and favour with God; and
   forgiven in the world to come, when this privilege is complete, and
   fully made up to the elect. Some effects of sin remain till then; as
   death, which came into the world by sin, remains upon the body till
   then--then our sin is blotted out, when all the fruits of it are
   vanished and done away. So that whilst any penal evils that are
   introduced by sin remain, we ought to pray for pardon, that God would
   not repent of his mercy. Look, as when we are in a state of
   sanctification, we pray for the continuance of sanctification, as well
   as the increase of it, because of the relics of sin, though our
   perseverance in grace and sanctification be as much secured by God's
   promise as our perseverance in God's favour, and the gift of
   justification; so we pray for the continuance of pardon, because the
   evils of sin yet remain in part. And partly, because God, for our
   exercise, will make us feel the smart of old sins, which are already
   pardoned; as an old bruise, though it be healed, yet ever and anon we
   may feel it upon change of weather. Accusations of conscience may
   return for sins already pardoned; as Job xiii. 26, Thou makest me
   possess the iniquities of my youth.' Though a man be reconciled to God,
   and in favour with him, yet the sins of his youth will trouble him
   after he hath obtained the pardon of them. God may make these return
   with a horrible and frightful appearance upon the conscience; their
   visage may be terrible to look upon. Though these sins are blotted out,
   Satan may make the remembrance of them very frightful; and God, in his
   holy, wise dispensation, may permit it for our humiliation. Though this
   be no intrenching of the pardon already past, yet it may exceedingly
   terrify the soul, and overcloud our comfort, and therefore we must beg
   the continuance of this benefit. Go to God as David did: Ps. xxv. 6, 7,
   Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving-kindness, for they
   have been ever of old. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
   transgressions.' He begs God's ancient mercies would continue with him.
   He acknowledged he had received mercy of old; he could run up to
   eternity, that had been for ever of old; yet, Lord, remember not
   against me the sins of my youth. When the sense of old sins are
   renewed, we must renew petitions for the pardon of them. It is usual
   with God, when we are negligent, to permit the devil to make use of
   affliction to revive old sins, that they may stare afresh in the view
   of the eye of conscience; therefore we had need to beg the continuance
   of this privilege, for it is not complete. Though the pardon itself be
   not abrogated, yet the comfort of it may be much intrenched upon, and
   old sins may come and terrify the soul with a very hideous aspect.

   (3.) We beg here the sense and manifestation of pardon, though it be
   not the only thing we pray for. Forgive us our sins,' that is, let us
   know it. God may blot sins out of his book, when he doth not blot them
   out of our consciences. There is the book of conscience, and the book
   of God's remembrance. The book of God's remembrance may be cancelled
   (to speak after the manner of men); as soon as we believe and repent,
   then the handwriting which was against us is torn; but he blots it out
   of our consciences when the worm of conscience is killed by the
   application of the blood of Christ through the Spirit, when we are
   sprinkled from an evil conscience,' as the expression is, Heb. x. 22.
   And David is earnest with God for this benefit, the sense of his
   pardon: Ps. li. 8, 12, Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones
   which thou hast broken may rejoice; and restore unto me the joy of thy
   salvation.' Nathan had told him his sins were pardoned, yet he wanted
   the joy of God's salvation, that ancient free spirit, that comforting,
   enlarging spirit he was wont to have. God may forgive in heaven, when
   he does not forgive in our sense and feeling; therefore we beg the
   manifestation of it by the comforts of the gospel.

   (4.) We beg the increase of that sense, for this sense is given out in
   a different latitude. Spiritual sense is not in all alike quick and
   lively; many have only a probable certainty, but have many doubts--some
   have comfort, but never arrive to peace. Comfort, you know, is that
   thing which holds up itself against encounters when we are confronted;
   so there may be many doubts when the preponderating part of the soul
   inclineth to comfort. Some have peace for the present, rest from
   trouble of conscience; others have joy, which is a degree above peace
   and comfort.

   (5.) We beg the effects of pardon, or freedom from those penal evils
   which are continued upon God's children, and are the fruits ^of sin.
   Clearly this is intended, for we beg of God to pardon us as we pardon
   others; that is, fully, entirely to forgive, forget. We beg of God to
   for give us our sins; that is, to mitigate those troubles, evils, and
   afflictions, which are the fruits of sin. It is true, when a man is
   justified, the state of his person is altered; yet sin is the same in
   itself, it deserves all manner of evils; therefore we beg not only a
   release from wrath to come, but from those other temporal evils that
   dog us at the heels. Sin is the same still, though the person is not
   the same. It is still the violation of a holy law, an affront done to a
   holy God, an inconvenience upon the precious soul; it brings a blot
   upon us, an inclination to sin again; nay, it brings eternal death.
   Though it do not bring eternal death upon pardoned persons, yet it may
   occasion temporal trouble. God hath still reserved this liberty in the
   covenant: that he will visit their transgression with the rod, and
   their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not
   utterly take from, him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail,' Ps.
   lxxxix. 32, 33. And Prov. xi. 31, The righteous shall be recompensed in
   the earth;' that is, he shall smart for his evil-doings. A child of
   God, when he sinneth against him, though he be not executed, yet he may
   be branded, he may have a mark of shame put upon him, his pilgrimage
   may be made uncomfortable, and these may be fully consistent with God's
   grace and love. Therefore we beg a release from these penal evils, that
   as the guilt, so the punishment also may be abolished.

   2. The right that a justified person hath to the pardon of his daily
   sins.

   Pardon of sin is to be considered: (1.) in. the impetration of it; (2.)
   the offer; (3.) the judicial application, or legal absolution of the
   sinner.

   [1.] In the impetration and purchase of it. So when, Heb. x. 14, By one
   offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified,' there
   needed no more to expiate them to satisfy justice.

   [2.] In the offer of it. So God hath proclaimed pardon upon the
   condition of repentance: Ezek. xxxiii. 11, Say unto them, As I live,
   saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but
   that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your
   evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?'

   [3.] In the judicial application, or legal absolution of a sinner. God
   in his word hath pronounced the legal absolution of every one that
   believeth in Christ. As soon as we repent and believe, a threefold
   benefit we have:--

   (1.) The state of the person is altered; he is a child of God: John i.
   12, To as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
   sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.' He hath full leave
   to call God Father, a kind of fatherly dealing from him. Translated
   from a state of wrath to the state of grace, from a child of the devil
   he is made a child of God, never to be cast out of his family.

   (2.) The actual remission of all past sins: Rom. iii. 25, To declare
   his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
   forbearance of God.' It would be a license to sin if his sins were
   remitted before committed.

   (3.) A right to the remission of daily sins, or free leave to make use
   of the fountain of mercy, that is always running, and is opened in the
   house of God for the comfort of believers: Zech. xiii. 1, In that day
   there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.'

   Secondly, The utility and profit of such a course. See Sermon on Psalm
   XXXII. 1, Sermon xx. [25]

   Use. The use is to press us to be often dealing with God about the
   pardon of our sins, by a general and daily humiliation; none are
   exempted from bewailing the evil of sin. The death of Christ doth not
   put less evil into sin; it is still damning in its own nature; it is
   still the violation of a holy law, an affront to a holy God, an
   inconvenience to thy precious soul. When Christ paid the price for our
   sins, it was upon this condition: that we should renew our faith and
   repentance; that we should sue out our discharge in his name; that when
   we sin we may come and humble ourselves before the Lord. Under the law,
   if a man were unclean, he was to wash his clothes before evening; he
   was not to sleep in his uncleanness. So if you have defiled yourselves,
   you should go wash in the laver that God hath appointed. The Lord
   taught his people under the law the repeating a daily sacrifice,
   morning and evening. If one be fallen out with another, God hath
   advised us, before the sun be set, to go and be reconciled to our
   brother; and wilt thou lie under the wrath of God for one night? If we
   would oftener use this course, the work of repentance would not be so
   hard. Wounds are best cured at first, before they are suffered to
   fester and rankle into a sore; so are sins before they grow longer upon
   us. And if we did oftener thus reckon with ourselves, we should have
   less to do when we come to die. Therefore do as wise merchants; at the
   foot of every page draw up the account, so help it forward; so it will
   not be hard to sum up a long account, and reckon up our whole lives,
   and beg a release of all our debts; therefore daily come and humble
   yourselves before the Lord. The oftener you do this, the sooner you
   will have the comfort of pardon; but when you keep off from God, and
   delay, you suffer the loss of peace, and the loss of God's favour; and
   hardness of heart, and atheism, and carnal security increase upon you.

   As we forgive our debtors.

   I come to the last branch. Hence observe:--

   Doct. 3. Those that would rightly pray to be forgiven of God, they must
   forgive others.

   First, I shall give you the explication; Secondly, The reasons.

   For explication, I shall speak to three things:--

   1. Who are debtors.

   2. What respect our forgiving of others hath to God's forgiving of us.

   3. In what manner we must forgive others.

   First, Who are our debtors. It is not meant in a vulgar sense, of those
   only which stand engaged for a sum of money due to us; but of all such
   as have offended us in word or deed. There is a duty we owe to one
   another, which, when we omit, or act contrary unto it, we are not only
   debtors to God, but to one another; and the doers of the injury are
   bound to repair the wrong, and to make restitution. In this large sense
   is the word debtors here taken, with respect to the person that hath
   done the injury. He becomes a debtor, is to make satisfaction, and
   suffer the punishment which the wrong deserves.

   Secondly, What respect hath our forgiving of others to God's for giving
   us?

   I shall speak to it negatively and positively.

   1. Negatively.

   [1.] It is not a meritorious cause, or a merit and price given to God,
   why he should pardon us, for that is only the blood of Christ. Every
   act of ours is due, it is imperfect, and no way proportionate to the
   mercies we expect; and therefore it cannot be meritorious before God.
   It is due, it is a duty we are bound to do, and paying off new debts
   doth not quit old scores. God hath laid such a law upon us, that we are
   to forgive others. That cannot expiate former offences. And it is
   imperfect too. The remembrance of injuries sticks too close to us. When
   we do most heartily and entirely forgive others, even then we have too
   great a sense of the injury and wrong that is offered to us. Now that
   which needs pardon cannot deserve pardon. And it is disproportionate to
   the mercy which we expect. What a vast disparity and difference is
   there between God's pardoning of us and our pardoning of others,
   whether we respect the persons that are interested in this action, or
   the subject-matter, or manner and way of doing, or the fruit and issue
   of the action.

   First, In the persons pardoning. What proportion can there be between
   God and man, the Creator and the creature? God he is most free, and
   bound to none, of infinite dignity and perfection, which can neither be
   increased nor lessened by any act of ours, for him or against him; but
   we live in perfect dependence upon God's pleasure, are subject to his
   command, and bound to do his will; and therefore what is our forgiving
   our fellow-creatures, made out of the same dust, animated by the same
   soul, and every way equal with us by nature, when they wrong us in our
   petty interests? What proportion is there between this forgiving and
   God's forgiving? he that is of so infinite a majesty, his forgiving the
   violations of his holy law?

   And secondly, To the subject-matter, that which is forgiven, there is
   no proportion. When we compare the multitude or magnitude, the
   greatness, and the number of offences forgiven of the one side and the
   other, we see there is a mighty disproportion. We forgive pence, and
   God talents; we an hundred pence, he ten thousand talents: Mat. xviii.

   So, thirdly, The manner of forgiving: on God's part, by discharging us
   freely, and exacting a full satisfaction from Christ; therefore our
   forgiving can hold no comparison with it, which is an act of duty, and
   conformity t6 God's law.

   And fourthly, As to the fruit and issue of the action. Our good and
   evil doth not reach to God. Though our forgiving of others be an action
   of profit to ourselves, yet no fruit redounds to God. And therefore
   there being no proportion between finite and infinite, there can be no
   such proportion between our forgiving and God's forgiving, as that this
   act may be meritorious before God. Thus it is not brought here as
   merit, as that which doth oblige and bind God meritoriously to forgive
   us.

   [2.] It is not a pattern or rule. We do not mean our forgiving should
   be a pattern of forgiving to God. So as is taken, indeed, ver. 10, Thy
   will be done on earth, as it is in heaven;' there it implies a
   conformity to the pattern. But when we say, Forgive us, as we forgive,'
   it doth not mean here a pattern or rule. We imitate God, but God doth
   not imitate us, in forgiving offences; and it would be ill with us if
   God should forgive us no better than we forgive one another. God is
   matchless in all his perfections; there is no work like his: Ps.
   lxxxvi. 8. As God is matchless in other things, so in pardoning mercy.
   As the heavens are above the earth, so are his ways above our ways, and
   his thoughts above our thoughts:' Isa. lv. 9. And upon this very
   occasion the Lord will multiply to pardon: As far as the heavens,' &c.
   This is the greatest distance we can conceive. The heavens, they are at
   such a vast distance from the earth, that the stars, though they be
   great and glorious luminaries, yet they seem to be but like so many
   spangles and sparks. This is the distance and disproportion which is
   made between God's mercy and ours: Hosea xi. 9, I will not return to
   destroy Ephraim; for I am God, and not man.' If God should forgive but
   only as man doth, it would be ill for Ephraim if he had to do with
   revengeful man. God acteth according to the infiniteness of his own
   nature, far above the law and manner of all created beings. Therefore
   it is not put here as a pattern and rule.

   [3.] It doth not import priority of order, as if our acts had the
   precedency of God's; or as if we did or could heartily forgive others
   before God hath shown any mercy to us. No; in all acts of love, God is
   first; his mercy to us is the cause of our mercy to others. As the wall
   reflects and casts back the heat upon the stander-by when first warmed
   with the beams of the sun, so, when our hearts are melted with a sense
   of God's mercy, his love to us is the cause of our love and kindness to
   others: 1 John iv. 19, We love him, because he first loved us;' that
   is, we love him, and others for his sake; for love to God implies that.
   Why? Because he hath been first with us. And then it is the motive and
   pattern of it. In that parable, Mat. xviii. 32, 33, God's forgiving is
   the motive to our forgiving: I forgave thee all thy debt; and shouldest
   not thou have compassion on thy fellow-servant?' In those that have
   true pardon it causeth them to forgive others out of a sense of God's
   mercy; that is, they are disposed and inclined to show mercy to others.
   But in others that think themselves pardoned, and have only a temporary
   pardon and reprieve (such as is there spoken of), it is a motive which
   should prevail with them, though it doth not. Nay, it is the pattern of
   our love to others: Eph. iv. 32, Forgiving one another, even as God for
   Christ's sake hath forgiven you;' in that manner, and according to that
   example.

   [4.] It doth not import an exact equality, but some kind of
   resemblance. As, it is a note of similitude, not equality, either of
   measure or manner; it only implieth that there is some correspondent
   action, something like done on our part. So, Luke vi. 36, Be merciful,
   as your heavenly Father is merciful.' As, notes the certainty of the
   truth, though not the exact proportion; there will be something
   answerable to God.

   2. But positively to show what respect it hath.

   [1.] It is a condition or moral qualification which is found in persons
   pardoned: Mat. vi. 14, For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your
   heavenly Father will also forgive you:' but, ver. 15, If ye forgive not
   men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
   trespasses.' These two are inseparably conjoined, God's pardoning of
   us, and our pardoning of others. The grant of a pardon, that is given
   out at the same time when this disposition is wrought in us; but the
   sense of a pardon, that is a thing subsequent to this disposition. And
   when we find this disposition in us, we come to understand how we are
   pardoned of God.

   [2.] It is an evidence, a sign or note of a pardoned sinner. When a
   man's heart is entendered by the Lord's grace, and inclined to show
   mercy, here is his evidence: Mat. v. 7, Blessed are the merciful, for
   they shall obtain mercy.' The stamp or impression shows that the seal
   hath been there; so this is an evidence to us whereby we may make out
   our title to the Lord's mercy, that we have received mercy from the
   Lord.

   [3.] It is a necessary effect of God's pardoning mercy shed abroad in
   our hearts; for mercy begets mercy, as heat doth heat: Titus iii. 2, 3,
   Show meekness to all men; for we ourselves also were some times
   foolish, disobedient,' &c. There is none so tender to others as they
   which have received mercy themselves; that know how gently God hath
   dealt with them, and did not take the advantage of their iniquity.

   [4.] It is put here to show that it is a duty incumbent upon them that
   are pardoned. God hath laid this necessity upon men. And that may be
   one reason why this clause is inserted, that every time we come to pray
   and beg pardon, we may bind ourselves to this practice, and warn
   ourselves more solemnly of our duty, and undertake it in the sight of
   God. So that when we say, Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
   debtors,' it is a certain undertaking or solemn promise we make to God,
   if he will show mercy to us, this will incline us to show mercy to
   others. In earnest requests, we are wont to bind ourselves to necessary
   duties.

   [5.] It is an argument breeding confidence in God's pardoning mercy.
   When we, that have so much of the old leaven, that sour, revengeful
   nature, in us, yet when we have received but a spark of grace, it makes
   us ready to forgive others; then what may we imagine in God! What is
   our drop, to that infinite sea of fulness that is in him! Clearly thus
   it is urged in that clause, Luke xi. 4, And forgive us our sins; for we
   also forgive every one that is indebted to us.' There is a special
   emphasis upon that, for we also; that is, we that have so little grace,
   we that are so revengeful and passionate by nature, we also forgive
   those that are indebted to us. Therefore the gracious God, in all
   goodness, and in all moral perfections, doth far exceed the creature;
   and if this be in us, what is there in God? This kind of reasoning is
   often used in scripture; as Mat. vii. 11, If ye then, being evil, know
   how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
   Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?' If
   evil men hath such bowels and affections towards their children,
   certainly there is more of this goodness and kindness in God.

   Thirdly, Wherein this forgiving of others doth consist?

   1. In forbearing others.

   2. In acquitting others.

   3. In doing good to them.

   [1.] In forbearing one another and withholding ourselves from revenge.
   This is a thing that is distant from forgiving, and accordingly we
   shall find it so propounded by the apostle: Col. iii. 13, Forbearing
   one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
   against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.' Mark, there is
   first forbearing and then forgiving. What is forbearing? A ceasing from
   acts of revenge, which, though they be sweet to nature, yet they are
   contrary to grace. Some men will say, We will do to him as he hath done
   to us: Prov. xxiv. 29, Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to
   me; I will render to the man according to his work.' Corrupt nature
   thirsteth for revenge, and hath a strong inclination this way; but
   grace should give check to it: Say not,' &c. Men think it is a base
   thing, and argueth a low, pusillanimous spirit, to put up with wrongs
   and injuries: oh, it argueth a stupid baseness. But this is that which
   giveth a man a victory over himself; nay, it gives a man the truest
   victory over his enemy, when he forbears to revenge. It gives a man a
   victory over himself, which is better than the most noble actions
   amongst the sons of men: Prov. xvi. 32, He that overcometh his own
   spirit is more than he that taketh a city.' There is a spirit in us
   that is boisterous, turbulent, and revengeful, apt to retaliate and
   return injury for injury. Now, when we can bridle this, this is an
   overcoming of our own spirits. But that is the true weakness of spirit,
   when a man is easily overcome by his own passion. And then hath our
   enemy a true victory over us, when his injuries overcome us so far as
   we can break God's laws to be quit with him. Therefore the apostle
   saith: Rom. xii. 21, Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
   good.' Then is grace victorious, and then hath a man a noble and brave
   spirit, not when he . is overcome by evil (for that argueth weakness),
   but when he can overcome evil. And it is God's way to shame the party
   that did the wrong and to overcome him too: it is the best way to get
   the victory over him. When David had Saul at an advantage in the cave,
   and cut off the lap of his garment, and did forbear any act of revenge
   against him, Saul was melted, and said to David, Thou art more
   righteous than I,' 1 Sam. xxiv. 17. Though he had such a hostile mind
   against him, and chased and pursued him up and down, yet when David
   forebore revenge when it was in his power, it overcame him, and he
   falls a-weeping. So the captains of the Syrians, when the prophet had
   blinded them, and led them from Dothan to Samaria, what saith the king
   of Israel? is he ready to kill them presently? No: 2 Kings vi. 22, Set
   bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to
   their master.' He was kind to them; and what followeth? They did no
   more annoy Israel.' This wrought upon the hearts of the Syrians, so
   that they would not come and trouble them any more.

   [2.] In forgiving, it is not only required of Christians to forbear the
   avenging of themselves, but also actually to forgive and pardon those
   that have done them wrongs. They must not only forbear acts of revenge,
   but all desires of revenge must be rooted out of their hearts. Men may
   tolerate or forbear others for want of a handsome opportunity of
   executing their purposes; but the scripture saith, Forbearing one
   another, forgiving one another.' This forgiving implieth the laying
   down of all anger, and hatred, and all desire of revenge. Now this
   should be done, not only in word, but sincerely and universally.

   (1.) Sincerely, and with the heart. In the conclusion of that parable,
   Christ doth not say, If ye do not forgive, thus it shall be done to
   you; but, If ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother
   their trespasses, so also shall my heavenly Father do to you.' We must
   not only do this, but do it from the heart. Joseph, when his brethren
   came to him and submitted themselves, did not only remit the offence,
   but his bowels yearned towards them, and his heart was towards them:
   Gen. l. 17. Then,

   (2.) It must be done universally, whatever the wrong be, be it to our
   persons, names, or estates. To our persons: Acts vii. 60, Stephen, when
   they stoned him, he said, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.'
   Though they had done him so great an injury as to deprive him of his
   life and service, yet, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.' So to
   our names: When Shimei came barking against David the poor man was
   driven out of Jerusalem by a rebellious son, and this wicked wretch
   takes advantage against David and rails at him--yet David forgives him
   when restored to his crown: He shall not die,' 2 Sam. xix. 23. Nay, he
   sware to him. So his estate: When a debtor is not able to pay, and yet
   submits. So Paul bids Philemon to forgive the wrongs of Onesimus: Put
   it on my score,' Philem. 18, that is, for my sake forgive this wrong.

   [3.] We must be ready to perform all offices of love to them: Luke vi.
   27, Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you.' Mark, do not
   only forbear to execute your wrath and revenge upon them, but do good
   to them; yea, though they be enemies upon a religious ground; though
   religion be made a party in the quarrel, and so engage us to the
   greater fury, when that which should bridle our passions is the fuel to
   them: Pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you,' Mat.
   v. 44. Miriam, when she had wronged Moses, yet he falls a-praying for
   her, Num. xii. 13, that the Lord would forgive the sin and heal her.

   For the reasons why those that would rightly pray to be forgiven of God
   must forgive others--it should be so, it will be so--there is a
   congruency and a necessity.

   1. The congruency, it should be so. It is fit that he that beggeth
   mercy should show mercy; it is exceedingly congruous. For this is a
   general rule: that we should do as we would be done unto; and,
   therefore, if we need mercy from God, we should show mercy to others,
   and without it we can never pray in faith. He that doth not exercise
   love can never pray in faith. Why? His own revengeful disposition will
   still prejudice his mind, and make him conclude against the audience of
   his prayers; for certainly we muse on others as we use ourselves. And
   that is one reason of our unbelief, why we are so hardly brought to
   believe all that tender mercy which is in God; because it is so irksome
   to us to forgive seven times a day, we are apt to frame our conclusions
   according to the disposition of our own heart. Can we think God will
   forgive when we ourselves will not forgive? A man's own prayers will be
   confuted. What is more equal than to do as we would be done unto? And
   therefore it is but equal, if he entreat mercy for himself, he should
   show it unto others. Look, as the centurion reasoned of God's power,
   from the command that he had over his soldiers: Mat, viii. 9, I am a
   man under authority, and I say to one, Go, and he goeth; and to
   another, Come, and he cometh.' Those things we are accustomed to, they
   are apt to run in our minds when we come to think of God. Now he that
   kept his soldiers under discipline that if he said, Go, they go, he
   reasons thus of God: Surely God hath power to chase away diseases. So
   accordingly should we reason of God's mercy according to the mercy that
   we find in ourselves. Therefore it is very notable that when Christ had
   spoken of forgiving our brethren, not only seven times, but seventy
   times seven,' the disciples said unto the Lord, Increase our faith,'
   Luke xvii. 5. How doth this come in? In the 4th verse Christ had spoken
   that they should forgive not only seven times, but seventy times seven;
   and they do not say, Lord, increase our charity, but our faith;
   implying that we cannot have such large thoughts of God when our own
   hearts are so straitened by revenge and our private passions.

   2. In point of necessity; as it should be so, so it will be so; for
   God's mercy will have an influence upon us to make us merciful. All
   God's actions to us imprint their stamp in us. His election of us makes
   us to choose him and his ways; his love to us makes us love him again,
   who hath loved us first; so his forgiving of us makes us to forgive our
   brethren. There is an answerable impression left upon the soul to every
   act of God. Why? For a true believer is God's image: The new man is
   created after God.' Eph. iv. 24; and therefore he acts as God.
   Certainly, if there be such a disposition in our heavenly Father, it
   will be in us if we have an interest in him. Look, as a child hath part
   for part, and limb for limb, answerable to his father, though not so
   big in stature and bulk; so hath a child of God, which is created after
   God, he hath all the divine perfections in some measure in his soul.
   And this consideration is of more force, be cause the new creature
   cannot be maimed and defective in every [26] part, but is entire,
   lacking nothing. And therefore, if God forgive others, certainly the
   godly will be inclinable to forgive too.

   Use 1. Here is a ground of trial whether we are pardoned or no: Is our
   revengeful disposition, that is so natural and so pleasing to us,
   mortified? That is one trial or evidence whether we are forgiven of
   God; can we freely from the heart forgive others?

   Object. But it may be objected against this: Do you place so much in
   this property of forgiving others? It doth not agree only to pardoned
   sinners, because we see some carnal men are of a weak and stupid
   spirit, not sensible of injuries. And, on the other side, many of God's
   children find it hard to obtain [27] to the perfect oblivion of
   injuries that is required of them.

   Ans. As to the first part, I. answer: We do not speak of this
   disposition as proceeding from an easy temper, but as it proceedeth
   from grace; when, in conscience towards God, and out of a sense of his
   love to us in Christ, our hearts, being tendered and melted towards
   others, to show them such mercy as we ourselves have received from the
   Lord; that is the evidence. And again, we do not press to judge by this
   evidence single and alone, but in conjunction with others; when they
   are humbly penitent, and confessing their sins, and turn to the Lord,
   which is the great evangelical condition: Job xxxiii. 27, If any say, I
   have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me
   not,' then will he restore light to him. When a man is soundly touched
   with remorse, and seeth the folly of his former courses, and asketh
   pardon of God, then is God gracious to him. But this is that we say,
   that this disposition of pardon, in conjunction with the great
   evangelical condition of faith and repentance, it helpeth to make the
   evidence more clear.

   2. As to the other part of the objection, which was this: it will be a
   great weakening of the confidence of God's children who cannot get such
   a perfect oblivion of injuries they have received, but find their minds
   working too much this way:

   I answer: As long as we live in the world there will be flesh and
   spirit, corruption as well as grace; there will be an intermixture of
   the operations of each. Carnal nature is prone to revenge, but grace
   prevaileth and inclineth to a pardon. Well, then, if this be the
   prevalent inclination of the soul, and that which we strive by all good
   means to cherish in us, this meek disposition, passing by of wrongs we
   receive by others, then we may take comfort by this evidence, though
   there be some reluctances and regrudgings of the old nature.

   Use 2. To press us to this ready inclination to forgive wrongs and
   injuries. We are not so perfect but we all need it from one another.
   There will be mutual offences while we are in the world, especially in
   a time when religious differences are on foot; therefore it concerns us
   to look after this disposition of forgiving others, as we would be for
   given of God. Human society cannot well be upheld without this mutual
   forbearance and forgiving. Now imitate your heavenly Father. No man can
   wrong us so much as we daily trespass against him, and yet God
   pardoneth us. He doth not only pardon the lesser failings, some venial
   errors, and sins of incogitancy and sudden surreption, which creep upon
   us we know not how; but he pardons the greatest sins, though they be as
   scarlet: Isa. i. 18. Those that are of a crimson hue, God can wash them
   out in the blood of Christ. And mark, what is it then that you will
   stand upon? Is it the greatness of the offence? God pardons great sins.
   Or is it the baseness of those that injure you--(this is the
   circumstance)--when we, have received wrong from those which are our
   inferiors, that owe us more reverence and respect? What are we to God?
   Notwithstanding the baseness of those which affront him daily, all men
   to him are but as the drop of the bucket, and the small dust of the
   balance,' Isa. xl. 15; yet God pardons them. And then again, cast in
   the consideration of God's omnipotency. He is able to right himself of
   the wrongs done to him, and no man can call him to an account. Many
   times it is not in our power: He can cast body and soul into hell,'
   Mat. x. 28. God is thus offended, and by saucy dust that is ready to
   fly in his face, in considerable man; and yet the Lord pardons, and
   this he doth freely: Luke vii. 42, He frankly forgave them both.' And
   he pardons fully, as if it were never committed: Micah vii. 19, He
   casts all our sins into the depths of the sea.' Then he pardons
   frequently: His free gift is of many offences unto justification.' Rom.
   v. 16. And he multiplies to pardon,' Isa. lv. 7. And mark, he pardons
   too (in some sense) before they repent; there is a purpose; he provided
   Christ before we were born. And he gives us grace to repent, or else we
   could never humble ourselves at his feet, the offended God; he gives
   them the grace whereby they shall acknowledge the offence. Christ
   prayed for his persecutors when they had no sense of the injury they
   had done him; they were converted by that prayer afterwards: Luke
   xxiii. 34, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do;'
   therefore certainly much more when they repent and submit. Oh,
   therefore, let us not be drawn hardly to this duty; or, at least, we
   should not upon every petty offence cherish hatred and rancour against
   our brethren.

   But here are certain cases that would come into debate.

   First Case. Whether it be consistent with this temper, forgiving of
   others, to seek reparation of wrongs in a way of justice, and pursue
   men at law for offences they have committed against us?

   Ans. Yes. For,

   1. Certainly one law doth not cross another. By the law of charity the
   law of justice is not made void. A magistrate, though he be a
   Christian, and bound to forgive others, is not bound up from executing
   his office against public offenders. Nor yet are private men tied from
   having recourse to the magistrate for restoration to their right, or
   reparation of their wrong. For to demand one's right is not contrary to
   love, nor to seek to amend and humble the party nocent by the
   magistrate's authority, who is the minister of God for good.' Rom.
   xiii. 4; and that others may hear and fear.' Deut. xix. 20; and the
   party damnified may for the future live in peace. Forgiving is an act
   of private jurisdiction. The offence, as far as it is private to us, it
   may be forgiven; but there are many such offences as are not only an
   offence to us, but to the public order, and that must be left to the
   process of the law.

   2. Whosoever useth this remedy must look to his own heart, that he be
   not acted with private revenge, nor with a spirit of rigour or rancour
   against the party offending; but that he be carried out with zeal to
   justice, with pity to the person, that he and others may not be
   hardened in sin. For this is the general law of Christ, that all things
   should be done in love.' 1 Cor. xvi. 14. Therefore when we are acted by
   our private passion and secret desires of revenge, we abuse God's
   ordinance of magistracy, and make it to lacquey upon our lusts. And
   therefore there must be a taking heed to the frame of our own hearts,
   that they be upright in these things. Though it seem hard to flesh and
   blood, yet remember flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of
   God. Grace must frame your hearts to the obedience of God's will.

   3. These remedies from authority must be in weighty cases, and in
   matters of moment and importance. Their contending in law one with
   another about the smallest matters is that which the apostle taxeth: 1
   Cor. vi. 7. Not upon every trifling occasion. It must be after other
   means are tried and used; as the help of friends to compound the
   matter, for charity trieth all things: 1 Cor. xiii. 4. And the apostle
   saith, 1 Cor. vi. 5, Is there none to judge between you?' that is, none
   to decide and arbitrate the difference, for the refuge to authority
   should be our last remedy. And it must be too when the party wronging
   is able to make satisfaction, otherwise it is rigour and inhumanity: 2
   Kings iv. 1. As when the creditors came to take the sons of the widow
   for bondmen. When you are rigorous with those that come to poverty, not
   by their own default, but by the discharge of their duty brought
   poverty upon themselves, it is contrary to Christianity. Look, as
   physicians deal with quicksilver, after many distillations they make it
   useful in medicines; so, after many preparations is this course to be
   taken.

   Second Case. Whether, in forgiving injuries, we are bound to tarry for
   the repentance of the party? The ground of doubting is, because Christ
   saith, Luke xvii. 3, If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him;
   and, if he repent, forgive him;' and because of God's example, who doth
   not forgive an obstinate sinner, but him that repents. Certainly, even
   before repentance, we are bound to lay aside revenge, and in many cases
   to go and reconcile ourselves with others. Saith our Saviour, If thou
   hast aught against any one, [28] go reconcile thyself to him, and then
   come and offer thy gift.' It is not said, If any have aught against
   thee, but, If thou hast aught against any one*. 1 I confess, in some
   cases, it is enough to lay it aside before the Lord. But at other
   times, we are to seek reconciliation with the party which hath wronged
   us. But this case is mightily to be guided by spiritual prudence. As
   for God's example, God is superior, bound to none, he acts freely; it
   is his mercy that pardons any; and yet God gives us a heart to repent
   of his good pleasure,--he begins with a sinner. But this is nothing to
   our case who are under law, who are bound to forgive others.

   III. The person to whom we pray, Our heavenly Father.

   The note is, that God doth alone forgive sin.

   There is a double forgiveness of sin--in heaven and in a man's own
   conscience; and therefore sometimes compared to the blotting out of
   something out of a book, sometimes to the blotting out of a cloud. To
   the blotting out of a book: Isa. xliii. 25, I, even I, am he that
   blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not
   remember thy sins;' that it may be no more remembered or charged upon
   us. To the blotting out of a cloud: Isa. xliv. 22, I have blotted out
   as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins;' as the
   sun when it breaketh forth in its strength dispelleth the mists and
   clouds. Sin interposeth as a cloud, hindering the light of God's
   countenance from shining forth upon us. Both these are God's work; to
   blot the book and to blot out the cloud.

   1. Pardoning of sin in the court of heaven, it belongeth to God
   peculiarly: Dan. ix. 9, To the Lord our God belong mercies and
   forgivenesses,' &c. It is God alone can do it, for two reasons:--

   [1.] He is the wronged party.

   [2.] He is the supreme judge.

   (1.) He is the wronged party, against whom the offence is committed:
   Ps. li. 4, Against thee, against thee only, have I sinned.' He had
   sinned against Bathsheba, against Uriah, whose death he projected. How
   is it said against thee only'? There may be wrong and hurt done to a
   creature, but the sin is against God, as it is a breach of his law, and
   a despising of his sovereign authority; the injury done to the creature
   is nothing in comparison of the offence done to God, against so many
   obligations wherein we stand bound to him. Amongst men, we distinguish
   between the crime and the wrong. And a criminal action is one thing,
   and an action of wrong and trespass is another. If a man steal from
   another, it is not enough to make him restitution, but he must satisfy
   the law.

   (2.) He is the supreme judge. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as one God,
   are the judge of all the earth, to whom they must be accountable for
   the offence: Gen. xviii. 25, Shall not the judge of all the earth do
   right?' But in the mystery of redemption, the Father, as first in order
   of the persons, is represented as the judge, to whom the satisfaction
   is tendered, and who doth authoritatively pass a sentence of
   absolution. And therefore it is said, 1 John ii. 1, We have an advocate
   with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.' He is to deal with him as
   the supreme judge; and it is God that justifieth.' Rom. viii. 33. The
   whole business of our acquitment is carried on by the Father, who is to
   receive the satisfaction, and our humble addresses for pardon.

   But to answer some objections that may arise.

   Object. 1. It is said, Mat. ix. 6, The Son of man hath power on earth
   to forgive sins.'

   I answer: That is brought there as an argument of his Godhead. He that
   was the Son of man was also very God; and therefore upon earth, in the
   time of his humiliation, he had power to forgive sins, for he ceased
   not to be God when incarnate. And it became him to discover himself, as
   by his divine power in the work of miracles, so his divine authority in
   the forgiveness of sins.

   Object. 2. Is taken from the text, Forgive us our debts, as we for give
   those that trespass against us.'

   I answer: In sin, there is the obliquity or fault in it, and the hurt
   or detriment that redounds to man by it. As it is a breach of the law
   of God, or an offence to his infinite majesty, God can only pardon it,
   or dispense with it. As it is a hurt to us, so restitution is to be
   made to man, and man can pardon or forgive it.

   Object. 3. It is said, John xx. 23, Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are
   remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.'
   So that it seemeth man hath a power to remit sins.

   I answer: They do it declaratively, and by commission from God. The
   officers of the church have the keys of the kingdom of heaven committed
   to them; the key of knowledge or doctrine, and the key of order and
   discipline. Accordingly this power is called, The keys of the kingdom
   of heaven.' Mat. xvi. 19. And the use of them is to open or shut the
   doors of God's house, and to bind or loose,' as the expression is, Mat.
   xviii. 18. That is, to pronounce guilty and liable to judgment, or to
   absolve and set free declaratively and in God's name; or, as it is
   literally expressed in the place alleged, to remit or retain. The key
   of doctrine is exercised about all sin as sin, were it never so secret
   and inward; and the key of order and discipline about sin only as it is
   scandalous and infectious. Now what they act ministerially, according
   to their commission, it is ratified in heaven, for it is a declaration
   or intimation of the sentence already passed there. So that a
   declarative and ministerial power is given to the church; but the
   authoritative power of forgiving sins, that God hath reserved to
   himself. Man can remit doctrinally, and by way of judicial procedure,
   but that is only by way of commission and ministerial deputation. Such
   as are penitent, and feel the bonds of their sins, they do
   declaratively absolve and loose them, or take off the censure
   judicially inflicted for their scandalous carriage. This ministerial
   forgiving, however carnal hearts may slight it, both in doctrine and
   discipline, yet being according to the rules of the word, is owned by
   God, and the penitent shall feel it to their encouragement, and the
   obstinate to their terror.

   2. As he pardoneth sin in the conscience; and there God alone can
   forgive sin, or speak peace to the soul upon a double account:--

   [1.] Because of his authority.

   [2.] Because of his power.

   (1.) Because of his authority. Conscience is God's deputy, and till God
   be pacified, conscience is not pacified upon sound and solid terms.
   Therefore it is said, where conscience doth its office, 1 John iii. 20,
   21 , If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and
   knoweth all things; if our hearts condemn us not, then have we
   confidence towards God.' God is greater than our consciences. His
   authority is greater, for God is supreme, whose sentence is decisive.
   Now, though conscience should not do its office, 1 Cor. iv. 4, For I
   know nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that
   judgeth me is the Lord.' All depends upon God's testimony.

   (2.) Because of his power, who only can still the conscience: Isa.
   lvii. 19, I create the fruit of the lips to be, peace, peace;' that is,
   the lips of his ministers or messengers, who bring the glad tidings of
   peace, or the reconcilement of God to his people: and therefore it is
   called the peace of God,' Phil. iv. 7, as wrought by him. The gospel is
   a sovereign plaster, but it is God's hand that must make it stick upon
   the soul, otherwise we hear words and return words: it is by the lively
   operation of his Spirit that our hearts are settled. God cometh in with
   a sovereign powerful act upon the soul, otherwise one grief or sad
   thought doth but awaken another. Till he command loving-kindness,' Ps.
   xlii. 8, we are still followed with temptation; as the rain swells the
   rivers, and rivers the sea, and in the sea one wave impelleth another,
   so doth one temptation raise another.

   Use 1. It reproveth those that do not deal with God about the pardon of
   their sins. If God alone pardon sins, then God must be sought to about
   it. For though there be none in earth to call us to an account, yet God
   may call us to an account; and then what shall we do? Many, if they
   escape the judgment of man, think they are safe; but alas! your
   iniquities will find you out. You think they are past, and never more
   to be remembered; but they will find you out in this world or the next;
   our business lieth not with man so much as with God. Therefore this
   should be the question of your souls: Job xxxi. 14, What then shall I
   do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?'
   Which way shall I turn myself when God calleth me to an account? He
   will come and inquire into our ways; are you provided of an answer?
   David's sin was secret; his plot for the destruction of Uriah closely
   carried. Nathan tells him, 2 Sam. xii. 12, Thou didst it secretly.'
   But, against thee have I sinned.' Many escape blame with men, but God's
   wrath maketh inquisition for sinners. You cannot escape his search and
   vengeance if you do not treat with him about a pardon.

   Use 2. It shows the folly of those that have nothing to show for the
   pardon of their sins, but their own secure presumptions; it is God's
   act to pardon sin. Man may forget his sin, but if God remember it he is
   miserable. Man may hide his sin, but if God bring it to light; man may
   put off the thoughts, but if God doth not put away; man may excuse his
   sin, but if God aggravate it; the debtor may deny the debt, but if the
   book be not crossed, he is responsible: Ps. xxxii. 1, 2, Blessed is he
   whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered; blessed is the
   man to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity,' &c. We must have God's act
   to show for our discharge, then we may triumph: It is God that
   justifieth, who is he that condemneth?' &c., Rom. viii. 33, 34. God is
   the offended party, and the supreme judge. Then conscience hath nothing
   to do with us, nor Satan, neither as accuser or executioner. Not as an
   accuser, for then he is but a slanderer; not as an executioner, for he
   is turned out of office: Heb. ii. 14, That he might destroy him that
   had the power of death, even the devil.' Have you your pardon from God?
   Is your discharge from him? When have it we from God?

   1. Have it you from his mouth, in the word, or prayer, upon suing to
   him in Christ's name, and earnest waiting upon him? If men would
   consider how they come by their peace, they would sooner be undeceived.
   You were praying and wrestling with God, and so your comfort came. God
   speaketh peace. But when it groweth upon you, you know not how; it was
   a thing you never laboured for; like Jonah's gourd, it grew up in a
   night; it is but a fond dream.

   2. Have it you under his hand? Is it a peace upon scripture terms?--of
   faith: Rom. v. 1, Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
   with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:'--repentance: Luke xxiv. 47,
   That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name
   among all nations,' &c.;--and the exercise of holiness,--then have you
   God's word to show for it. But if it be not a peace consistent with
   scripture rules, nay, you are afraid of the word, John iii. 20, you are
   loth to be tried,--it is a naughty heart.

   3. Have it you under his seal? 2 Cor. i. 22, Who hath also sealed us,
   and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.' Have you the
   impress of God upon you, God's seal, his image? Doth the Spirit of
   promise assure your hearts before God, that you can live in the
   strength of this comfort and go about duties cheerfully? Then it is
   God's pardon; otherwise it is but your own absolution, which is worth
   nothing.

   Use 3. It showeth that we need not fear the censures of men, nor the
   hatred of the ungodly; for it is God pardoneth, and who can condemn?
   God will not ask their vote and suffrage who shall be accepted to life
   and who not: 1 Cor. iv. 3, But with me it is a very small thing that I
   should be judged of you, or of man's judgment,' &c. A man must expect
   censure that will be faithful to God; but if he acquit us, it is no
   matter what our guilty fellow-creatures say.

   Use 4. Is comfort to broken-hearted sinners; to those that need and
   desire pardon. It is well for them that God doth not put them off to
   others, but reserveth this power of pardoning sins to himself.

   1. It is his glory to forgive sins: Exod. xxxiii. 18, And he said, I
   beseech thee show me thy glory;' compared with Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7, And
   the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God,
   merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
   truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression,
   and sin,' &c. It is not only the glory of a man, who is so offensive
   himself and so passionate, that this passion will draw him to what is
   unseemly, but of God.

   2. It is his glory, not only above the creatures, but above all that is
   called god in the world: Micah vii. 18, Who is a God like unto thee,
   that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the
   remnant of his heritage? He retaineth not his anger for ever, because
   he delighteth in mercy.' The heathen gods were known by their terrors
   rather than their benefits, and feared rather for their revenges than
   their mercies. We may boast of him above all idol gods upon this
   account. He is known among his people, not so much by acts of power, as
   acts of grace, and the greatness of his mercy, in pardoning sins for
   Christ's sake.

   3. He is willing to dispense a pardon: Micah vii. 18, He delighteth in
   mercy.' God delighteth in himself, and all his attributes, and the
   manifestation of them in the world; but above all in his mercy. Justice
   is his strange act,' Isa. xxviii. 21. There is not anything more
   pleasing to him. It is the mercy of God that he hath drawn up a
   petition for us; he would never have taught us to have asked mercy by
   prayer, if he had not been willing to show us mercy.

   4. God will do it for his own sake, and not for any foreign reasons:
   Isa. xliii. 25, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
   for mine own sake,' and out of a respect to his own honour. See how God
   casts up his accounts. It is mercy: Jer. iii. 12, I am merciful, saith
   the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever.' So his truth: Ps. cvi.
   45, He remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the
   multitude of his mercies.' Not from any desert of theirs, who do so
   neglect him and wrong him; God will do it upon his own reasons.

   5. He will do it in such a way as man doth not, in a way of infinite
   mercy: Hosea xi. 9, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger;
   for I am God, and not. man.' It is the great advantage of us sinners
   that we have to do with God and not man in our miscarriages; for man's
   pity and mercy may be exhausted, be it never so great. What! seven
   times a day? But God is infinite. Man may think it dishonourable to
   agree with an inferior when he stoops not to him; but God is so far
   above the creature that we are below his indignation. Man is soon
   wearied, but not God: Isa. lv. 8, 9, For my thoughts are not your
   thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the
   heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your
   ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.'

   I now come to the fourth and last consideration.

   IV. That forgiveness of sins is one great benefit that we must ask of
   God in prayer. Here it will be needful to show:--

   First, The necessity of treating with God about forgiveness.

   Secondly, The nature of this benefit

   Thirdly, The terms how God dispenseth it.

   First, The necessity will appear in these propositions:--

   1. Man hath a conscience: Rom. ii. 15, Thoughts accusing or excusing,'
   &c. A beast cannot reflect.

   2. A conscience inferreth a law.

   3. A law inferreth a sanction.

   4. A sanction inferreth a judgment.

   5. A judgment inferreth a condemnation to the fallen creature.

   6. There is no avoiding this condemnation, unless God set up a
   chancery, or another court of grace.

   7. If God set up another court, our plea must be grace. Of this see
   more at large, Twenty Sermons,' Sermon 1 on Ps. xxxii. 1, 2.

   Secondly, The nature of this benefit, or manner how God forgiveth.

   1. Freely.

   2. Fully.

   [1.] Freely, and merely upon the impulsions of his own grace: Isa.
   xliii. 25, I, even I, am he that forgiveth your iniquities for my
   name's sake.' Nothing else could move him to it but his own mercy; and
   he could have chosen whether he would have done so, yea or no--for he
   spared not the angels, but offereth pardon to man, and all men are not
   actually pardoned. And, therefore, the only reason why he showeth us
   mercy and not others, is merely his own grace. The intervention of
   Christ's merit doth not hinder the freedom of it, though dearly
   purchased by Christ, yet freely bestowed on us. For it is said, Rom.
   iii. 24, Justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is
   in Christ.' Why? Partly because it was mercy that he would not
   prosecute his right against us. Partly because he found out the way how
   to recompense the wrong done by sin unto his majesty, and out of his
   love sent his Son to make this recompense for us: John iii. 16. It was
   love set all a-work. And lastly, not excited hereunto by any worth on
   our parts, but the external moving cause was only our misery, and the
   internal moving cause his own grace. Nor is the freedom of this act
   infringed by requiring faith and repentance on our part, because that
   only showeth the way and order wherein this grace is dispensed, not the
   cause why. It is not for the worth of our repentance, or as if there
   were any merit in it. A malefactor, that beggeth his pardon on his
   knees, doth not deserve a pardon; only the majesty of the prince
   requireth that it should be submissively asked. These are not
   conditions of merit, but order; not the cause, but the way of grace's
   working. And these conditions are wrought in us by grace: Acts v. 31;
   not required only, but given. In all other covenants, the party
   contracting is bound to perform what he promiseth by his own strength.
   But in the covenant of grace, God doth not only require that we should
   believe and repent, but causeth it in us. Conditions of the covenant
   are conditions in the covenant. God requireth faith and repentance, and
   giveth faith and repentance. Compare Isa. lix. 20, with Rom. xi. 26. It
   is Christ's gift as well as his precept; so that when we come about
   pardon of sin, we have only to do with grace. We beg pardon, and a
   heart to receive it. It is a free pardon.

   [2.] It is a full pardon. It is full in several respects. (1.) Because
   where the party is forgiven, he is accepted with God as if he had never
   sinned: Ps. ciii. 12, As far as the east is from the west, so far hath
   he removed our transgressions from us.' And Micah vii. 19, Thou wilt
   cast all their sins into the depth of the sea;' Isa. xxxviii. 17, Thou
   hast cast all my sins behind thy back.' It shall not be remembered nor
   laid to their charge any more. It is true, for a while after they may
   trouble the conscience, as when the storm ceaseth, the waves roll for a
   while afterwards; so may sin in the consciences of God's children work
   trouble, after the fiducial application of the blood of Christ. But the
   storm ceaseth by degrees; and it is possible that the commitment of new
   sins may revive old guilt, as a new strain may make us sensible of an
   old bruise. Yet we must distinguish between the full grant of a pardon,
   from the full sense of it. When we are not thankful, humble, fruitful,
   former sins may come into remembrance, and God may permit it, as matter
   of humiliation to us, and to quicken us to seek after new confirmation
   of our right and interest. Yet God's pardon is never reversed, nor will
   the sin be charged again, or put in suit against him, to the final
   condemnation of the person so pardoned. Once more: though the sins of
   the justified should be remembered at the day of judgment, it will not
   be to the confusion of their faces, but the exaltation and praise of
   the Lord's grace. Then is this acquittance in all respects full. (2.)
   It is full, because where God forgiveth one sin, he will forgive all:
   Ps. ciii. 3, Who pardoneth all thy sins;' and Micah vii. 19, Thou wilt
   cast all their sins into the depth of the sea.' Sins original, actual;
   of omission, commission; small, great; secret, open; lust that boileth
   in the heart, and breaketh out in the life; sins of worship, of
   ordinary conversation. Look in the bill--what owest thou? A Christian
   is amazed when he cometh to a serious account with God; but the
   self-judging sinner needeth not be discouraged when he cometh to God.
   For where God pardoneth all that is past, the fountain stands daily
   open for him to flee unto, with all his faults as they are committed;
   and upon the renewing of his faith and repentance, he shall obtain his
   pardon. All sins are mortal, all of them damnable. Therefore if all
   sins be not pardoned, he remaineth in danger of the curse, and one sin
   let alone is sufficient to exclude us out of heaven. Therefore all is
   pardoned, first or last. Justice hath no more to seek of Christ. And we
   have all leave to sue out our pardon in Christ's name. He is under that
   covenant that will pardon all.

   [3.] It is full; because where God forgiveth the sin, he also forgiveth
   the punishment. It will not stand with God's mercy to forgive the debt,
   and yet to require the payment. It is a mocking to say, I for give you
   the debt, and yet cast the man into prison; and to pardon the
   malefactor, and yet leave him liable to execution. Here in the text,
   God forgiveth us, as we are bound to forgive our brother, not in part,
   but in whole. Guilt is nothing but an obligation to punishment (1.) As
   to eternal punishment, it is clear: Rom. v. 9. The eternal promises and
   threatenings, being of things absolutely good and evil, are therefore
   absolute and peremptory, that is certain. (2.) But now as to temporal
   afflictions, there is some difficulty, for where the whole punishment
   is done away, such grace and payment of any part of the debt cannot
   stand together. That pardon which is given upon valuable and sufficient
   price is full and perfect. Jesus Christ satisfied the justice of God
   for all our sins. How is it, then, that the saints are subject to so
   many afflictions? (1.) So far as sin remains, so far some penal evil
   remains: when the dominion of it is broken, there remains no
   condemnation, but yet some affliction, and when it is wholly gone,
   there is no evil at all. We are not yet purged from all sin; and,
   therefore, (2.) these afflictions are not satisfactory punishments, and
   need not, as to the completing of our justification, but are helps to
   us, as the furtherance of our sanctification; and so are of great
   use--[1.] To make us hate sin more. If we only knew the sweetness of
   it, and not the bitterness, we would not be so shy of it. Now the
   bitterness of it is seen by the effects: Jer. ii. 19, Thine own
   wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee;
   know therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou
   hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, saith
   the Lord God of hosts.' [2.] It will cause us to prize our deliverance
   by Christ. If affliction be so grievous, what would hell be? 1 Cor. xi.
   32, But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
   should not be condemned with the world.' It is a gentle remembrance of
   hell-pains, or a fair warning to avoid them, when scorched or singed a
   little. [3.J To make us walk more humbly. We forget ourselves, and are
   apt to be puffed up. Paul saith, 2 Cor. xii. 7, Lest I should be
   exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there
   was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
   me, lest I should be exalted above measure.'

   [4.] It is full, because where God forgiveth sin, there are many
   consequent benefits.

   (1.) God is reconciled: Rom. v. 1, Therefore being justified by faith,
   we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.' This is the
   great blessing, and our great work is to make and keep peace with God;
   to have no cloud between us and his face. Light is pleasant: what then
   is the light of his countenance, that filleth us with a peace that
   passes understanding? We would have a powerful friend, especially if we
   need him: Acts xii. 20; they sought peace with Herod, because their
   country was nourished by the king's country;' so should we do: we
   cannot live without God. If sin be pardoned, then we are at peace with
   God, and may have free access to him, with a free use of all that is
   his.

   (2.) A heart sanctified is a connexed benefit: 1 Cor. vi. 11, And such
   were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
   justified in the name of the Lord Jesus;' and 1 John i. 9. Sin is
   considerable in the guilt and filth of it, as it rendereth us obnoxious
   to God's justice, or as it tainteth our faculties and actions.
   According to this double respect, Christ destroyeth sin, and no man
   hath benefit by him that is not freed from the guilt and filth thereof.
   Christ was sent into the world to restore God's image in us. But the
   image of God consisteth in the participation of holiness, as well as
   the participation of blessedness; for God, that is happy and blessed,
   is also holy and good. The filthiness of sin is opposite to holiness,
   and the guilt of it to blessedness; so that either Christ must restore
   but half the image of God, or he must give us this double benefit. If
   he should give us one without the other, many inconveniences would
   follow; therefore both are given: he justifieth that he may sanctify,
   and he sanctifieth that he may glorify.

   (3.) Providence is blessed: the curse is taken out of our blessings,
   and the sting out of our afflictions. As long as sin remains unpardoned
   our blessings are cursed: Mal. ii. 2, If ye will not hear, and if ye
   will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my name, saith the Lord of
   hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your
   blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to
   heart.' There will be a worm in our manna, our table will become a
   snare,' Ps. lxix. 22. But when once sin is pardoned, the sting of
   misery is taken away: 1 Cor. xv. 56, The sting of death is sin, and the
   strength of sin is the law: but thanks be to God, which giveth us the
   victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.' Crosses are not curses.

   (4.) We have a right to heaven, which is the great ground of hope: Rom.
   v. 10, For it, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
   death of his Son. much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
   life.'

   Thirdly, The terms upon which it is dispensed are faith and repentance.

   1. Faith: Acts x. 43, To him give all the prophets witness, that,
   through his name, whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of
   sins.' Faith is necessary to honour the mercy of God, to own the
   surety, to consent to his undertaking, to encourage the creature to
   look after this benefit.

   2. Repentance, which implieth a sorrow for sin, with a serious purpose
   of forsaking it. Sorrow for sin: no man can seriously desire a pardon
   but he that is touched with a sense of his sin, moved and troubled at
   it. And then, for purpose of forsaking: Ezek. xxxiii. 12, As for the
   wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he
   turneth from his wickedness.' Sin pardoned must be left; otherwise, a
   pardon given to a wicked man would be a confirmation of his sin, or a
   concession of leave to sin. Well, then, let us seek pardon of God in
   this way.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [25] In a subsequent volume.--ED.

   [26] That is, any.'--ED.

   [27] Qu. attain'?--ED.

   [28] This seems to be inaccurate.--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________

   And lead us not into temptation.

   WE are now come to the sixth petition, which is doubly expressed:--

   1. Negatively, Lead us not into temptation.

   2. Affirmatively, But deliver us from evil.

   The first part doth more concern preventing grace, that we may not fall
   into evil; and the second, recovering grace, that if we fall into evil
   we may not be overcome of it, nor overwhelmed by it, but may find
   deliverance from the Lord. Here we pray: (1.) that we may not be
   tempted; or, (2.) if the Lord see it fit we should be tempted, that we
   may not yield; or, (3.) if we yield, that we may not totally be
   overcome. As the former petition concerned the guilt of sin, so this
   concerns the reign and power of it.

   In this first part, take notice:--

   First, Of the evil deprecated, or that which we pray against, and that
   is, temptation.

   Secondly, The manner of deprecation, Lead us not.

   In which there is something implied, and something formally asked.

   1. Something implied; and that is:--

   [1.] God's providence. When we say to God, Lead us not,' we do
   acknowledge he hath the disposal of temptation.

   [2.] God's justice, and our desert; that for former sins, God may
   surfer this evil to befall us. We have so often provoked the Lord, that
   in a judicial manner he may suffer us to be tempted.

   [3.] Our weakness; that we are unable to stand under such a condition
   by our own strength, therefore we go to God.

   2. Something formally asked; that is, either that God would prevent the
   temptation, or, if he should use such a dispensation towards us, give
   us grace to overcome it.

   Of these things I shall speak in their order.

   First, Of the evil deprecated; and from thence observe:--

   Doct. 1. That temptations are a usual evil, wherewith we encounter in
   the present world.

   Here I shall:--

   I. Open the nature of temptations.

   II. I shall give you some observations concerning them.

   III. The reasons of it.

   I. For the nature of temptations.

   Temptation is a proving or making trial of a thing or person; what he
   is, and what he will do. And thus sometimes we are said to tempt God,
   and at other times God is said to tempt us.

   1. We are said to tempt God when we put it to the proof whether he will
   be as good as his word, either in the comminatory or promissory part
   thereof: Ps. xcv. 9, When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw
   my works;' they tempted God, as they put him often upon the trial. To
   note that, by the way, there is a twofold tempting or proving of God,
   either in a way of duty or sin. (1.) In a way of duty, when we wait to
   see his promise fulfilled; and so, Mal. iii. 10, Prove me now herewith,
   saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven,
   and pour you out a blessing.' Come pay your tithes and offerings: he
   would have the portion which belonged to himself: and prove me now
   herewith,' &c. God submits to a trial from experience, when we wait for
   the good promised. Thus we try God, and try his word: Ps. xviii. 30,
   The word of the Lord is a tried word; he is a buckler to all those that
   trust in him.' All those which build upon it, that wait to see what God
   will do, they will find it, upon experience, to be accomplished to a
   tittle; never did any build upon it, or wait for the accomplishment of
   it, in vain. (2.) In a way of sin. Many ways we are said to tempt God.
   When we set God a task, in satisfying our conceits and carnal
   affections: Ps. lxxviii. 18, They tempted God in their hearts, by
   asking meat for their lusts;' and when we will not believe in him, but
   upon conditions of our own making; or when we confine him to our means,
   or time, or manner of working; or would have some extraordinary proof
   of his being, and power, and goodness; or see whether God will punish
   us though we sin against him. All these ways we are said to tempt God
   in a way of sin. But that is not my business now. Therefore,

   2. As man tempts God, so is man himself tempted. Now man is either
   tempted:--

   First, By God.

   Secondly, By Satan.

   Thirdly, By his own heart.

   First, Man is tempted by God: Gen. xxii. 1, And it came to pass, after
   these things, that God did tempt Abraham.' How is God said to tempt
   man? When he trieth what is in us: Deut. viii. 2, To humble thee, and
   to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart;' either what of grace,
   or what of sin, is in our heart.

   [1.] What of grace. Thus the Lord tries us by afflictions, by delays of
   promises, and other means becoming his holy nature. By afflictions, for
   they are called a trial: 1 Pet. i. 6, Now for a season, if need be, ye
   are in heaviness through manifold temptations.' The afflictions of the
   gospel are called temptations. And so by delay of promises: God trieth
   us sometimes by delaying the accomplishment of his promise; as in Ps.
   cv. 19, Until the time that his word came, the word of the Lord tried
   him;' that is, until the promise was fulfilled and accomplished. A man
   is put to trial of all the grace that is in his heart.

   [2]. God tries what corruption there is in us. He trieth this either by
   offering occasions, or withdrawing his grace, or by permitting Satan to
   tempt us.

   (1.) By offering occasions in the course of his providence: God puts us
   upon trial there; sometimes by want, sometimes by fulness. By want:
   John vi. 5, 6, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?' saith
   Christ to Philip. And this he said to prove him, for he himself knew
   what he would do.' Christ will have the weakness of his followers
   tried, as well as their strength. And he trieth his people often by
   this kind of trial, when there are many mouths and no meat, and a man
   cannot see which way his visible supplies shall come in: this he doth
   to prove them, to see whether they will look only to out ward
   likelihood and probabilities, or rest themselves upon God's promise and
   all-sufficiency; or else, by fulness and outward prosperity, to see if
   they will forget him. I confess I do not remember where this is called
   a trial in scripture, unless there be somewhat in that place, Deut.
   viii. 16, He fed thee with manna in the wilderness, that he might
   humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
   latter end.' Possibly the trial there might lie in this: because they
   had but from hand to mouth, or because it was not that meat which their
   lusts craved, but that which God saw fit for them. But, however, though
   prosperity be not called so, yet certainly it is in itself a trial:
   Prov. xxx. 9, Give me not riches, lest I be full, and deny thee, and
   say, Who is the Lord?' Lust in us makes it to be a temptation, and the
   godly have been often foiled by it; and they need learn how to abound,
   as well as how to be abased,' Phil. iv. 12. They need learn how to
   avoid the snares of a prosperous condition. David, it was a trial to
   him; while he was wandering in the wilderness, he had such tenderness,
   that his heart smote him when he cut off the lap of Saul's garment,
   while he was chased like a partridge upon the mountains, wandering up
   and down, from forest to forest. But when he was walking at ease upon
   the terrace of his palace in Jerusalem, then he falls into blood and
   uncleanness; and therefore his estate was a trial, and he lieth in it,
   notwithstanding all his former tenderness of heart, until he was roused
   up by Nathan the prophet. And certainly, as to the wicked, it is a very
   great temptation, judicially inflicted, disposed of to them by God's
   judgment: they are plagued by worldly felicity; and it is part of their
   curse that they shall be written in the earth,' Jer. xvii. 13; and
   suitable to this purpose, God saith, Jer. vi. 21 , Behold, I will lay
   stumbling-blocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons
   together shall fall upon them.' How doth God lay stumbling-blocks? If
   men will find the sin, God may with justice enough find the occasion;
   he will give them some outward condition that is a snare to them. As we
   may try a servant whom we have just cause to suspect, by laying
   something in the way, that his filching humour may be discovered,
   without any breach of justice; so the wicked, that harden their hearts
   against God, God may give them their hearts' desire, and worldly
   happiness, and so it may cause them to stumble.

   (2.) God trieth us also by withdrawing his grace, as in 2 Chron. xxxii.
   31, God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his
   heart.' It is needful sometimes that we should see our weakness as well
   as our strength, and how unable we are to stand without grace, that we
   may be sensible whence we stand, and which without temptation could not
   so well be.

   (3.) God tries us, by permitting the temptations of Satan and his
   instruments; for surely these things do not befall us without a
   providence. Job xii. 16, The deceived and the deceiver are his,' his
   creatures; and nothing can be done or suffered in this kind without
   God's providence. See it in Christ's instance, Mat. iv. 1, it is said,
   He was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the
   devil;' that is, led by the good and Holy Spirit to be tempted by the
   evil spirit. So, 2 Sam. xxiv. 1, compared with 1 Chron. xxi. 1: God
   moved David, and Satan provoked David, to number the people; that is,
   God did let loose Satan upon David, to accomplish the righteous ends of
   his providence. And many of those arrows which are shot at us, though
   they come immediately from Satan's bow, yet they are taken out of God's
   quiver. God, as a just judge, may give us up to Satan as his minister
   and executioner. Well, then, this is one way of God's tempting,
   permitting of Satan to tempt. And as Satan, so his instruments, God
   tries us by them. Deut. xiii. 1-3, If there arise among you a prophet,
   or a dreamer of dreams, thou shalt not hearken unto him.' Why?' For the
   Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God
   with all your heart, and with all your soul.' God proveth. When there
   are delusions abroad and errors broached, it is that the approved may
   be made manifest.' 1 Cor. xi. 19. God letteth loose these winds of
   error and delusion that the solid grain may be distinguished from the
   light chaff, and that he may discover his own people, and whether we
   have received truths upon evidence, or taken them up only upon hearsay.
   All these ways may God be said to tempt.

   Now concerning this, take these rules:--

   (1.) God's tempting is not to inform himself, but to discover his
   creatures to themselves and others. Not to inform himself, for he knows
   our thoughts afar off.' Ps. cxxxix. 2; that is, he knows not only the
   conclusion and event, and management of things near, but he knows the
   very remote preparation aforehand; he knows what kind of thoughts we
   will have, and workings of spirit. As a man that is up in the air may
   see a river in its rise, and fountain, and course, and fall of
   it--seeth it all at once; whereas another which stands by the banks can
   only see the water as it passeth by. God seeth all things in their
   fountain and cause, as well as in their issue and event--he seeth all
   things together; therefore it is not for his own information. But the
   meaning is, therefore doth God try us, that what is known to him, and
   yet unknown to ourselves, that that which lodgeth and lieth hid in our
   heart may be discovered to us. That we may not be conceited of more
   than we have, and that the evil which before lay hid and was unseen may
   be cured when it is discovered. And, on the other hand, that grace may
   not lie sleeping in a dead and inactive habit, but be drawn out into
   act and view, for his glory and praise.

   (2.) God's tempting is always good, and for good; his tempting is
   either in mercy or in judgment. In mercy: and so when he trieth the
   graces of his people; or when he means more especially to discover the
   failings of his people, it is all good. When he tries the graces of his
   people, there is no doubt of that. When God hath furnished a man with
   grace, that he may, without any impeachment of his goodness, put him
   upon trial, and use creatures for that end for which he hath fitted
   them; as a man which hath made and bought a thing may prove it and try
   the strength of it. Or when the intent of the dispensation is to try
   their weakness, that is good also, and for good; as when a man tries a
   leaky vessel, with an intent to make it stanch. So when God tempts us
   by sharp afflictions, or any other course, it is for good: Heb. xii.
   10, He, verily, for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
   holiness.' A man that hath a disease upon him, it may be by walking or
   stirring the humours the disease may appear, it is for good; it is
   better it should be discovered, that he may in time look after a
   remedy, than lurk and lie hid in the body to his utter undoing; so it
   is for good our corruptions and weaknesses should be discovered, that
   they may be made sound. Ay, .but when God brings it in judgment, yet
   that is for good; that is, for his own glory and his church's good,
   though not for the good of the party. For the church's good, that
   naughtiness where it is might in time be discovered: Prov. xxvi. 26,
   Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed
   before the whole congregation,' lest men get a name that they might do
   religion a mischief. And it is for the glory of God that men may appear
   what they are. Here is no stain upon God's justice for all this. He
   that pierceth a vessel, if it run dreggy with musty or poisonous
   liquor, the fault is not in him that pierceth it, but in the liquor
   itself: he that pierceth or broacheth it doth only discover what is
   within, that if it be unsavoury he may cast it into the kennel. So, it
   is not the fault of God which pierceth, discovereth, and letteth out
   our corruption; the fault is in ourselves: we have those things within
   which are discovered as soon as God puts us upon a trial.

   (3.) God tempts no man, as temptation is taken properly for a
   solicitation to sin: James i. 13, Let no man say, when he is tempted, I
   am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
   tempteth he any man.' Mark, the apostle proves it, that in this sense
   God cannot tempt, because of the unchangeable holiness of his nature.
   In temptation we must distinguish between the mere trial, and the
   solicitation to sin; the mere trial, that is from God; but the
   solicitation to sin, that is from Satan and ourselves. God solicits no
   man to sin. It is true, God may try us, trouble us, toss us, exercise
   our faith, hope, and patience. God is the author of our trouble; but
   the devil is the author of our sin, who sinneth himself, and soliciteth
   others to sin.

   (4.) When we say, Lead us not into temptation,' we do not beg a total
   exemption from God's trials, but only a removal of the judgment of
   them. Not a total exemption, for then we must go out of the world, for
   while we are here every condition is a trial to us, and every
   enjoyment. Afflictions and trouble more or less put to trial, and
   therefore temptation in this sense is a necessary part of that warfare
   we must encounter and grapple withal while we are in the world.
   Prosperity tries us, to see if we be then mindful of God when all
   things succeed well; and adversity tries us, to see if we can patiently
   depend upon God. But it is the judgment of trials that we deprecate,
   that they may not come upon us as a judgment, or that our trial may be
   so moderate that we may stand our ground. When doth a trial come as a
   judgment? When it is immoderate and beyond our strength, either in a
   way of prosperity or adversity, but chiefly in a way of adversity; for
   that is most commonly set out in a way of trial in scripture. When it
   is immoderate and beyond our strength, 1 Cor. x. 13, God hath promised
   to his people that they shall not be tempted above that they are able
   to bear; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that
   they may be able to bear it.' God's conduct is very gentle. As Jacob
   drove on as the little ones were able to bear, so doth God proportion
   his dispensations to his people's strength, not to their deservings,
   but he considers what they are able to bear. Either God keeps off
   greater trials, or gives in greater strength; a sweeter sense of his
   love, or a greater measure of gracious support. A child would sink
   under that load that a strong back bears without any grudging. Now,
   this is that we ask of God, according to his promise, that our
   temptation may be not immoderate and too hard for us. Or else it is a
   judgment when it proves a provocation to sin; and so God's temptation,
   which was meant for our good, we may abuse it, and take occasion thence
   to sin; as when we murmur under the cross, or turn our worldly comforts
   into an occasion to the flesh. Now, to prevent the judgment which may
   be in these temptations; in all the trials which befall us, we should
   fear more the offence against God than our own smart, or the power of
   the devil, or any inconvenience that may accrue to us in natural evils
   which we feel. When we are under afflictions, we should be more
   solicitous that we do not offend God, that he would keep us from
   murmuring and dishonouring his name, then we should be about our ease
   and safety; for this is to prevent the judgment of the temptation. This
   was Paul's comfort when he was drawing to the conclusion of his life: 2
   Tim. iv. 18, The Lord hath delivered me out of the mouth of the lion,
   and he shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto
   his heavenly kingdom.' And so, in good things that we enjoy, we should
   fear more offending God with them than the losing of them; for the loss
   of his favour is more than the loss of our comforts. A man that loseth
   his worldly portion, this loss may be recompensed; but he that loseth
   the favour of God, that breach cannot be made up by any worldly
   comforts whatsoever.

   (5.) In passive evils, which are the usual trials of God's people, we
   are not to seek them, but to submit to them when they come upon us. We
   are not to seek them: Mat. xvi. 24, If any man will be my disciple, let
   him take up his cross.' When clearly it is our cross, that is, when it
   lies in our way, and we cannot decline it, then take it up and fit his
   back to it. So James i. 2, My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall
   into divers temptations.' He doth not say when ye run into them, but
   fall into them. We are not to draw them upon ourselves. Afflictions are
   not to be sought and desired, but improved. Christians, we never know
   when it is well with us: sometimes we question God's love, because we
   have no afflictions and trials; anon we are questioning his love,
   because we have nothing but afflictions. In all these things we should
   refer ourselves to God; not desire troubles, but bear them patiently
   and quietly when he lays them upon our backs.

   (6.) Again, for those trials which come from God. When God tempts us,
   or trieth his people in mercy, he hath a great deal of care of them
   under their trials. As a goldsmith, when he casts his metal into the
   furnace, he doth not lose it there, and look after it no more; but
   sits, and pries, and looks to see if it be not too hot, that nothing be
   spilt, nothing lost. So it is said, Mal. iii. 3, And he shall sit as a
   refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi,
   and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
   offering in righteousness.' The Lord will observe his people when they
   are under trial, how to moderate affliction, how to refresh them with
   seasonable comfort, that all this might better them, and bring them to
   good.

   (7.) Though in our trials we manifest weakness as well as grace, yet
   that weakness is to be done away. You must remember weakness is
   manifested that it may be removed, and grace manifested that it may be
   strengthened. When gold and silver is tried in the furnace, there is
   not only pure metal discovered, but also the drossy part mingled with
   it; but it is so discovered that it may be severed from the gold. Such
   is our trial; it may discover a great deal of dross and sin in us. But
   this is our comfort, that as it doth discover sin, so it conduceth to
   mortify sin. Therefore saith Job, chap. xxiii. 10, When he hath tried
   me, I shall come forth as gold;' that is, purified and refined, and
   having the drossy part eaten out.

   (8.) God permits us to be tempted of Satan and his instruments for his
   glory and our good. For his glory; that his power may be discovered in
   our preservation, in upholding that grace he hath put into us: 2 Cor.
   xii. 10, Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
   necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake: for
   when I am weak, then am I strong.' We should be glad that God be
   glorified, though with our great inconvenience. And it is for our good;
   to correct our pride and vainglory. When Peter presumed of his
   strength, then God left him to be tempted of the damsel, Mat. xxvi. 33,
   70.

   (9.) When God permitteth Satan to exercise us, though he suspends the
   victory, yet if he give us grace to fight and to maintain the combat,
   it is a great mercy. For so he dealt with Paul when he had to do with
   the messenger of Satan--(Satan was in that trouble, be it what it
   will)--he had only this answer, 2 Cor. xii. 9, My grace is sufficient
   for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness.' Three times he
   had been with God, and then he gets his answer, and it was only this,
   My grace,' &c. Jesus Christ in his conflict and combat was answered as
   to support, and so was heard in the things he feared. So if God give
   strength to the soul, it is an answer, though he do not take off the
   trial.

   Secondly, There are temptations from Satan, as well as from God, who is
   called the tempter: Mat. iv. 3. Now the devil's temptations they are
   evil, and for evil. How doth the devil tempt?

   [1.] By propounding objects; as Luke iv. 5, He showed unto him all the
   kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.' He had nothing to work upon
   within, therefore he propounds outward objects. So still the devil
   tempts us with a curious eye to take in the object, that it may be a
   bait and snare to the soul. Achan takes notice of it himself: Josh.
   vii. 21, When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and a
   wedge of gold, then I coveted them, and took them.' I saw, I coveted,
   and I took: the eye awakens desire, and desire that inclines to
   practise. So Prov. xxiii. 31, Look not thou upon the wine when it is
   red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself
   aright.' Unless we shut the windows of the soul, this pestilent plague
   gets in by the senses. The heart is corrupted by objects that we take
   in by the senses, as it corrupted Eve, dealt with her first by the
   sense; the forbidden fruit was full in her way, then the devil sets
   upon her.

   [2.] He tempts by the persuasion of instruments, who are the devil's
   spokesmen: thus was Joseph tempted by the enticements and blandishments
   of his mistress, Gen. xxxix. 7. And many times the devil sets nearest
   friends and relations to weaken their zeal, and withdraw their hearts
   from God: Mat. xvi. 23. Saith Christ to Peter, Get thee be hind me,
   Satan.' It was Peter said it, yet Christ rebuked Satan, for the devil
   had a hand in it; he makes one of Christ's disciples his instrument.

   [3.] He doth it by internal suggestion: 1 Chron. xxi. 1, And Satan
   stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel;' that is,
   by internal suggestion. John xiii. 2, The devil put it into the heart
   of Judas to betray him.' He haunts and pesters the hearts of men by
   vain thoughts and carnal imaginations. So the god of this world' is
   said to blind their minds,' 2 Cor. iv. 4.

   [4.] By stirring up the humours of our body. When he seeth men inclined
   to wrath, and angry motions, or lust, the devil, joins, and makes the
   tempest the more violent. He knows what use to make of an angry look, a
   wanton glance; he knows how to tempt, by awakening the humours of our
   own body against us.

   Take some observations here.

   (1.) In all sins Satan joineth; he is not idle, but makes use of every
   inclination of ours; as he sees the tree leaning, he joins issue. But
   some sins are purely of his suggestion; horrid sins, and such as are so
   very evil, that they could come from no other but from the devil: such
   sins as could not be acted by man in an ordinary course of sinning. As
   Judas his treason: though he were devil enough to plot such a thing,
   yet it is said, Satan put it into his heart. And such singular
   diabolical suggestions may be darted into the bosom of believers some
   times; thoughts of atheism, blasphemy, unnatural sins, self-murder,
   suspicion of the gospel; these things the devil throws in. Therefore,
   Eph. vi. 16, believers are warned to quench these fiery darts, that the
   devil hurls into the souls of men.

   (2.) Every man is haunted with special temptations, from temper, sex,
   age, custom, calling, company, course of affairs; these things are
   often spoken of in scripture. From temper: God makes use of temper; for
   though he plants all grace in the hearts of the regenerate, yet there
   are certain graces wherein they are eminent; as Timothy for temperance,
   Moses for meekness, &c. Thus Paul speaks of the law in his members:
   Rom. vii. 23. The devil may find forces from the temper of the body to
   destroy the soul. So also from sex; as he beguiled Eve,' 2 Cor. xi. 3.
   And from age: we read of youthful lusts,' 2 Tim. ii. 22. And how strong
   the devil is about young ones: 1 John ii. 13, I have written unto you,
   young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one.' They are most
   assaulted with pride, with youthful lusts suitable to their age. So
   from custom and education: Ps. xviii. 23, I kept myself from mine
   iniquity.' Every man hath his iniquity; that is, such as his education
   and custom hath wrought upon him, which makes the sin prevail over
   other sins. A child of God hath a predominant sin, not over grace, for
   that is inconsistent with sincerity; but some master-sin which prevails
   over the rest; according as the channel is cut, so corrupt nature runs,
   but some in this channel, and some in that: every man hath his special
   sin, and accordingly the devil plies him. Then our calling is a special
   temptation: 1 Tim. iii. 6, the apostle speaks that a bishop should not
   be a novice, lest, being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
   condemnation of the devil;' --pride, and ostentation of gifts, and
   vainglory in such public service. Many other sins follow every calling:
   therefore if you would be skilled in Satan's enterprises, you must mind
   temper, age, calling. So company: as a man's company is, his soul is
   insensibly tainted. As a man that walks in the sun is tanned before he
   is aware, so are the souls of men sullied and defiled by carnal company
   before they be aware. A man would think, of all sins, passion is so
   uncomely that it should not tempt another man: yet it is said, Prov.
   xxii. 24, 25, Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious
   man thou shalt not go; lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy
   soul:' for the more accustomed to them, the less odious they seem; so
   by little and little, our spirits are shaped and fitted for such a sin.
   There are certain sins that are more special temptations. Look, as
   every disease hath a diet which suits with it, so all sins in the soul.
   Satan knows what baits we will catch at. It may be, a man that is
   addicted to the pleasures of the flesh may despise profit, and
   therefore the devil will not ply him that way. So a man that is
   addicted to gain despiseth pleasure. The devil suits him with a bait
   that suits the disease of his soul. It is an opinion the devils have
   their several wards and quarters; some for such a sort of sinners,
   others for another sort. Look, as the heathens had several gods (which
   were indeed devils), as Bacchus, the god of riot, or patron of
   good-fellowship; and Venus, of wantonness and love; and Mars, the devil
   of revengeful and angry spirits: and we read of Mammon for wealth: Mat.
   vi. 24. I know it is fictio personae, to make the matter more sensible;
   there is a person feigned. But there may be something of this truth in
   it, that the devils have several quarters, some to humour the covetous,
   others enticing the wanton, others lie leigers in taverns and
   drinking-houses, to draw men to beastly excess; and others about the
   revengeful, to awaken their rage. But all this, however it be (it is
   the opinion of some), should make us watchful over our own desires and
   inclinations, for that is it the devil makes use of to Bet upon us.

   (3.) The sin of the devil tempting must be distinguished from our sin
   in consenting. If the devil tempt, and we consent not, it is his sin.
   The envious man may throw weeds over the garden wall; but if we do not
   suffer them to root there, it is not the gardener's fault, but the
   fault of the envious man: so the devil may fling in temptations, fiery
   darts, atheistical or blasphemous thoughts; yet if we throw them out
   with indignation, and give no harbour and entertainment to them there,
   it is our misery, but the devil's sin; and therefore, if our hearts
   abhor them at the very first rising, though they be man's cross, they
   will be put upon Satan's account.

   (4.) Satan, if he cannot prevail by the first temptation to draw us to
   sin, he will seek to prevail by a second or subsequent temptation, to
   draw us to trouble and discomfort. If he cannot weaken grace, he may
   molest and disturb our comfort by flinging in a blasphemous thought,
   which is abhorred by a Christian. If he cannot draw you to deny God,
   then he will seek to cloud things, that you may suspect your own
   estate; and thus our way is made wearisome to us. Look, as a candle
   which sticks to a stone wall, though it cannot burn the wall, yet it
   smutcheth and defileth it; so the children of God, when the devil seeks
   to make their temptations stick, though he doth not burn their hearts
   with these fiery darts of blasphemy and atheism--they catch not
   there--yet they weaken our comfort; and then his second temptation is
   to bring us to doubt of God's love, to doubt of our own faith, and to
   draw us to impatiency and murmuring at God's hand. Therefore it should
   be our care, not only to withstand the devil's first temptation, but
   his second also.

   (5.) Certainly they cannot stand long that seem to give up themselves
   to Satan's snares. How may this be done? Any carnal affection
   unmortified layeth us open to the devil: 1 Tim. vi. 9, They that will
   be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
   hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.' If a man
   cherish his worldliness, and do not mortify it, he lieth ready to be
   seized upon as a ready prey for Satan. Judas, he had the bag, and he
   lay open to the devil; his worldliness increased upon him, so the devil
   entereth into him. Again, when we ride into the devil's quarters and
   will parley with temptation, when we freely open the windows of the
   senses unto alluring objects, and can dally with the snare and play
   about the temptation, then we do but tempt God to leave us, and tempt
   the devil to surprise us. And therefore be sober, be watchful, for your
   adversary, the devil, walketh about like a roaring lion, seeking whom
   he may devour.' 1 Pet. v. 8. Be sober;' what is sobriety? A holy
   moderation in the use of worldly things. Be sure not to leave any
   carnal affection unmortified. And then be watchful; take heed not to
   play about the temptation, nor put yourselves upon occasions of sin,
   for then we lie open to the devil, and give him an advantage against
   us. Thus much for the second sort of temptations, such as come from
   Satan.

   The third sort of temptations are those which .arise from our own
   hearts; so we call these urgings and solicitations to sin which we feel
   in our bosoms. Concerning this also I shall give some observations.

   [1.] If there were no devil to tempt us, yet the heart of man is
   fruitful enough of all that is evil: Mat. xv. 19, Out of the heart
   proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
   witnesses, blasphemies.' There is a black catalogue, and all comes out
   of the heart of man. And among the rest, observe, there is murder,
   which strikes at the life of man; and blasphemy, which strikes at the
   honour and being of God. Though the devil should stand by and say
   nothing to us, we have enough within us to put us upon all kind of
   evil: Jer. xvii. 9, The heart is deceitful above all things, and
   desperately wicked; who can know it?' As to actual sins, there is a
   difference; but as to original sin, it is the same in all. All the sins
   that ever have been or shall be committed in the world, they are
   virtually in our natures, they are but original sin acted and drawn out
   this way and that way, as all numbers are but one multiplied: Cain's
   murder, Judas's treason, Julian's apostasy and enmity to Christ, the
   seed and root of all is in our nature; and if we were but left to
   ourselves, and had the same temptations and occasions, we should be as
   bad as others; such as we would not imagine that ever we should commit
   is in our heart: 2 Kings viii. 13, Is thy servant a dog, that he should
   do this great thing?' when he had been told of those horrid cruelties
   he should act upon the women and children of Israel. No man knows the
   depth of his own wickedness, if loosened of his chain and the
   restraints are taken off. At first nature abhors them in the conceit of
   them; but when God permits us to lie under the temptation, and fair
   occasion, man is not to be trusted. We see, in this respect, what need
   there is to pray that God would not leave us under the power of
   temptation, because the heart of man is prone, naturally inclinable, to
   all evil. There are new actual sins, but there is no new original sin,
   that is but one and the same in all persons and at all times; the root
   of all the mischief which hath been in the world is within us.

   [2.] That without the flesh, the world and the devil can have no .
   power over us. A man cannot be compelled to sin against his own
   consent; he may be compelled to suffer temptation, but he is a sinner
   by his own choice. The world would not hurt us were it not for lust in
   the heart: 2 Pet. i. 4, Escaping the corruption of the world through
   lust.' I say, it is not the beauty or sweetness of the creature, but
   lust, which is our ruin and undoing, and that makes the world so
   dangerous unto us. A spider sucketh poison from the same flower from
   which a bee would suck honey; the fault is not in the flower, but in
   the spider: the devil can do nothing unless we give him leave. The fire
   is kindled in our own bosoms, Satan only doth blow it up into a flame.
   Saith Nazianzen, we have the coals in our own hearts, the devil doth
   but come and blow them up: suggestion doth nothing without consent. In
   vain doth one knock at the door, and none with in to look out and make
   answer; so, all other temptations would be in vain, if there were not
   somewhat within that would close with what is suggested from Satan:
   James i. 14, Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own
   lust, and enticed,' by his own concupiscence. If your hearts did not
   yield, if you did resist, the devil and the world could not force you.
   When Satan came to Christ, he might molest him, but he found nothing in
   him,' John xiv. 30; as a glass of pure water may be shaken, but there
   is no filth, no mud there discovered. But now, the best of men, they
   have somewhat within them, naughtiness and corruption enough in their
   own hearts, upon which Satan may work and inflame them with his fiery
   darts. In short, we may commit sin without Satan, but Satan cannot
   betray us to sin without ourselves; cannot have his desire upon us
   without us.

   [3.] The flesh doth not only make us flexible and yielding to
   temptations, but is active and stirring in our hearts, to force and
   impel us thereunto. There is a law in our members,' Rom. vii. 23, a
   powerful active principle within us, that is always urging us to sin.
   We think and speak too gently of our own corrupt hearts when we think
   the corruption is sleepy, and works not until it be irritated by
   outward objects and Satan's suggestions. No, there is an active,
   stirring principle within us, that poureth out sin as a fountain doth
   waters, though nobody comes to drink of them; as Gen. vi. 5, Every
   imagination of the thoughts of his heart is only evil continually.'
   There is a mint in man's heart that is always at work coining evil
   thoughts, evil desires, evil motions; and the flesh lusteth against the
   spirit.' Gal. v. 17: And Sin wrought in me all manner of
   concupiscence.' Rom. vii. 8. Though there were no other occasion to
   irritate, but God's law and the motions of his Spirit, yet there is a
   continual fermentation wrought by these corrupt humours in our hearts.
   Natural concupiscence doth not lie idle in them, but is active and
   warring; and the objects that are in the world, and the solicitations
   of the devil make it more violent.

   [4.] The temptations of the flesh and the world go in conjunction, and
   do mutually help one another. And therefore it is said, 1 John ii. 16,
   For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
   eyes,' &c. Mark, whatever is in the world, he doth not mention the
   object, but the lusts, because these are complicated and folded up
   together in the temptation. The bait is the world, but the appetite and
   desire we have from the flesh. And this is intimated in that passage,
   James i. 14, Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
   lust, and enticed.' There are two words there, drawn away, and enticed:
   the drawing away notes the vehemency of desire or inclination of our
   own hearts; and the enticement, that is from the object. Both ways doth
   corruption work, by force and flattery. The great bait is pleasure, the
   contentment that we take in outward enjoyments. And we are carried out
   to it by the vehement propension of corrupt nature.

   [5.] This vehement propension of corrupt nature to outward things is
   set at work by a hope of gaining them, or a fear to lose them; and so
   we are assaulted on every hand, by right-hand and left-hand
   temptations. By right-hand temptations, from the flatteries and
   comforts of the world, which are the more dangerous because of their
   easy insinuation into, and strong operation upon our hearts, and so our
   comforts prove a snare to us, and an occasion to the flesh,' as the
   apostle saith, Gal. v. 13. And then there are left-hand temptations,
   which arise from shame or fear of worldly evils, as the other did arise
   from a desire or hope of good. So the apostle: Gal. vi. 12, As many as
   desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to be
   circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of
   Christ.' That was their temporising then to comply with the Jews, who
   had some national privileges under the Roman government, and had better
   security to their worldly interests than possibly thorough Christians
   could have. Now, to avoid both these, the apostle, when he presseth
   Christians to all those graces which are necessary, he presseth them to
   temperance and patience: 2 Pet. i. 5, 6, Add to knowledge temperance,
   and to temperance patience.' Both these are armour of proof against
   worldly temptations; temperance against the delights, and patience
   against the evils and troubles of the world. It was never yet so well
   with the world but that Christians (those that are so in good earnest,
   that mean to go to heaven and keep a good conscience) will be assaulted
   on both sides.

   [6.] That there is no avoiding either of these snares and temptations
   as long as any carnal affection remaineth unmortified. For until a man
   be dead to worldly comforts, and hardened against worldly sorrows, he
   doth but lie naked and open to Satan: 1 Tim. vi. 9, He that will be
   rich, falls into temptation and a snare.' And what is said of riches,
   the same is true of pleasure: he that is vehemently addicted that way
   will soon come to put God out of the throne, and make his belly and his
   pleasure his God: 2 Tim. iii. 4, Lovers of pleasures more than lovers
   of God.' Any lust that is cherished and indulged will betray us. As for
   honour: John v. 44, How can ye believe, which receive honour one of
   another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?' True faith
   cannot be planted in that heart that is not purified, until there be a
   prevailing interest established for Christ over all carnal affections.
   Grace bears no sway in us, and hath no power over us. The ambition and
   love of respect from men will necessarily make us unsound in the
   profession of godliness. Well, then, it stands us upon to allow and
   cherish no secret sin, but to observe what are the tender parts of our
   hearts, or which way our corruptions lie, where subjection to God is
   most apt to stick with us: Ps. cxix. 133, Order my steps in thy word;
   and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.' Though we seem to have
   a zeal in other things, yet if one lust be indulged, we shall soon
   swerve from our duty. True obedience to God is inconsistent with the
   dominion of any one lust or corrupt affection. I say, though a man, out
   of some slender and insufficient touch of religion upon his heart, may
   go right for a while, and do many things gladly, yet that corruption
   which is indulged, and under the power of which a man lieth, will at
   length draw him off from God; and therefore no one sin should have
   dominion over us. When doth sin reign or have dominion over us? When we
   do not endeavour to mortify it, and to cut off the provisions that may
   feed that lust. Chrysostom's observation is: The apostle doth not say,
   Let it not tyrannise over you. but, Let it not reign over you; that is,
   when you suffer it to have a quiet reign in your hearts.

   [7.] The more we sin upon the mere impulsion of the flesh, and without
   an external temptation, the more heinous is our offence, for then the
   heart is carried of its own accord to sin: Ezek. xvi. 33, 34, They give
   gifts to all whores; but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and
   hirest them, that they may come unto thee for thy whoredoms. And the
   contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms, whereas none
   followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in. that thou givest a reward,
   and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary.' These
   are expressions to set forth their idolatry. But that which is intended
   there is this: that they were not desired or solicited, but merely
   carried to sin by their own proper motion, which exceedingly
   aggravateth sin. Why? For then it is a sign the heart is carried of its
   own accord by its own weight, as a heavy body is moved downward, not by
   the impression of outward force, but by its own natural propension.

   Now, when do men thus merely sin upon the impulsions of the flesh? I
   will instance in three cases:--

   (1.) When the temptation is so small and inconsiderable that it should
   not sway with any reasonable man. It is said in Amos ii. 6, They sold
   the poor for a pair of shoes.' And for a piece of bread will that man
   transgress,' Prov. xxviii. 21. When pleasure and profit is so
   inconsiderable as that it could not rationally make up a temptation,
   then men sin merely upon the corruptions of their own flesh. When the
   devil hath to do with great souls, such as Christ was, he propounds the
   glory of all the world: Mat. iv. Oh! but a lesser price will serve the
   turn with those that are deeply engaged already, that are biased with
   their own propension. For instance, a little ease and carnal
   satisfaction, a slothful humour, is enough to take them off from the
   sweetness of communion with God, and the pleasure and contentment that
   they might enjoy with him in holy exercises. Look, as in general, it is
   a great aggravation of all sin that for such paltry trifles we turn the
   back upon God and his grace. All sinners do so; they part with all
   their hopes by Christ for a mess of pottage, for a little present
   pleasure; that is profaneness indeed: Heb. xii. 1-6. So in particular
   things, when the smallest temptation seems to be strong enough to draw
   off our hearts from our duty, to bring us to a sin of omission, when it
   is needful to go and converse with God in secret; a little ease and
   sloth hangs upon us, and we cannot shake it off: or when we are drawn
   to a sin of commission by an inconsiderable matter, by the smallest
   worldly interest as can be mentioned, for a piece of bread, and a pair
   of shoes.

   (2.) When men tempt themselves, or provoke Satan to tempt them. As
   those which make provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof,'
   Rom. xiii. 14; that cater for their lusts, and contrive how to feed
   them, and how to cherish those inordinate affections in their hearts;
   that run into the devil's quarters, that bespeak a temptation; or, as
   it is, James v. 5, that nourish their hearts, as in a day of
   slaughter.' To nourish our hearts, is to feed our lusts, to put
   strength into the enemy's hand. When a commander sent to his prince to
   know how he should keep such a rebellious town in order, he sent him
   this answer: That he should starve the dog, and strengthen the clog;
   that he should weaken the city, and strengthen the garrison, that was
   his meaning. Truly, what was his advice in that outward case,, that is
   the duty of a Christian; to weaken his lusts, and still to be
   strengthening grace. He should be increasing the better part, and
   putting the spirit in heart by godly exercises; by treasuring up
   promises, getting arguments and fresh encouragements against sin; and
   by weakening the flesh, starving and cutting off provisions for the
   flesh. But, on the contrary, when men cater for the flesh, provide for
   it, indulge carnal distempers, and feed them with that diet which they
   affect, these tempt themselves, and seem willing to lie under their
   bondage, and to be glad of it.

   (3.) When a man is a sinner to his loss, and hath reasons of nature to
   dissuade him, as well as reasons of grace, not only religion, but his
   civil interests, would counsel him to do otherwise; as he that brings a
   blot upon his name or ruin upon his estate by evil courses; when men
   draw on iniquity with a cart rope,' as the expression is, Isa. v. 18;
   that is, when it is not pleasure, but a very toil and burden and
   temporal inconvenience to them to be sinful; that industriously make it
   their business; those that are holden with the cords of their own
   sins,' Prov. v. 22. He speaks of such as did bring temporal
   inconveniences upon themselves, as did consume their flesh and their
   own bodies; these certainly are those that have cause to complain of
   their own hearts, not to put it on Satan, but themselves.

   II. Having opened the nature of temptations, I come now to give the
   reasons why this is so usual an evil we encounter with in the
   world--temptation.

   1. God permits it for his own glory, to discover the power, the
   freeness and riches of his grace, that men may be driven the more
   earnestly to sue out their peace in the name of Jesus Christ. Luther
   propounds this reason: Though man be prone to sin of himself of his own
   accord, yet God suffers the tempter to be in the world, because man is
   backward to seek mercy and grace by Christ; and therefore God urgeth
   him with sore temptations. Certainly this reason was given by him not
   amiss. You know, when Paul felt those paroxysms and sad counter-buffs
   in his own spirit, this makes him bless God for Jesus Christ: Rom. vii.
   25. But thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.' It makes him
   reflect upon the grace of God in Christ. We keep off from the throne of
   grace till temptations drive us thither. As when the sheep wander, the
   shepherd lets loose his dog upon them; not to worry them, but to bring
   them back to the fold again: so God lets loose Satan to drive us to
   himself.

   2. For the trial of that grace which he hath wrought in us. Grace doth
   better appear in temptation than out of it. The greatness of the woman
   of Canaan's faith would never have been discovered, had it not been for
   Christ's answer and denial: Mat. xv. 25-28; then, woman, great is thy
   faith.' The glory of that grace which God hath wrought in his people
   would not be discovered so much, were it not for the great trials he
   puts them upon: Heb . xi. 17, By faith Abraham, when he was tried,
   offered up Isaac.' Before we go to heaven we shall have our trials, and
   shall be tried in our dearest comforts, and choicest worldly
   contentments; and all to see what faith we have, and what loyalty to
   God in the midst of these trials. A great tempest discovereth the
   goodness of a ship and skill of the pilot; and so these great trials
   they discover the soundness of our hearts, and the fruit of that grace
   which God hath wrought in us. Gold is most tried in the fire, and
   discovered to be pure and perfect. Stars that lie hid in the day shine
   in the night. We have but dry notions of the comforts of Christianity,
   and make them matter of talk, until we are put upon great trials, then
   is our belief and sense of them proved. A gilded potsherd may shine
   until it comes to scouring, but then the varnish and paint is worn off.
   The valour and worth of a soldier is not known in times of peace and
   when he is out of action. When we are put to some difficulty and
   straits, then is faith seen. Now this is a very pleasing spectacle to
   God, to see them approve their faith and loyalty to his majesty.

   3. Temptations, as they serve to prove, so also to humble us, that we
   may never be proud of what we have, or conceited of what we have not.
   As Paul, that he might not be exalted above measure, he was buffeted
   with a messenger of Satan: 2 Cor. xii. 7. Poor bladders we are, soon
   blown up and swollen into vanity and vain conceits of ourselves,
   therefore had need be pricked, that we may let out those swelling
   winds. A ship that is laden with precious ware, needs to be ballasted
   with wood, stones, or contemptible stuff. But why will God humble us by
   temptations, and such kind of temptations as are solicitations to evil?
   Answer, Spiritual evils need a spiritual cure. Out ward afflictions
   they humble, but not so much as temptations do; they are not so
   conducible to humble a gracious heart as temptations to sin. Why? For
   then the breach is made upon our souls, and the assault is given to
   that which a gracious man counts to be dear, and therefore these are
   suffered to come upon us. If anything will humble a child of God, this
   will do it. It may be he may bear up under losses tolerably, but when
   his peace comes to be assaulted, and his grace, this will humble him to
   purpose. Worldly men, they value their estate by their outward
   interest, but a child of God by his peace of conscience, and his
   thriving in grace. Oh, this wounds him to the heart, when in either of
   these he suffers loss; this sets him a-praying and groaning to God, as
   Paul groans bitterly when he felt those gripes of sin, and those
   reluctances in his heart: O wretched man!' &c. Afflictions, they
   conduce to humble and prove' us, Deut. viii. 16. And besides, too, the
   Lord loves to make the cause of our mischief to be the means of our
   cure. This giveth us the sight of some corruption we saw not before.

   4. God permits this exercise to his people to conform us to Christ. We
   must pledge him in his own cup, it must go round; he himself was
   tempted: Heb. ii. 7. Christ hath felt the weight, burden, and trouble
   of temptations, and knows the danger of them. Now the disciple is not
   above his lord, nor the scholar above his master. The devil, that did
   set upon Christ, will not be afraid of us.

   5. By temptations to sin God mortifieth sin; not only that sin to which
   we are tempted, but others, that we may not be so heedless. When we
   have smarted under temptation, we are not so indulgent to corruption as
   before; we do not let our senses nor affections run loose. As David
   speaks, that he got this by his fall: Ps. li. 6, In the hidden part
   thou shalt make me to know wisdom.' Oh, I shall be wiser and more
   circumspect for this all my life. When men have smarted they grow more
   cautious; and so, by the overruling and good hand of God, our sins do
   us service in our passage to heaven, as well as our graces; and God's
   children may say, they had sinned more if they had sinned less: they
   are more acquainted with the wiles and depths of Satan and naughtiness
   of their own hearts, and so are more solicitous.

   6. To make us more meek to others: Gal. vi. 1, If any man be fallen, ye
   which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
   considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.' We are very apt to be
   severe and fierce upon the failings of others; but now, when we are
   tempted ourselves, we learn more pity and compassion towards them.
   Severe censurers are left to some great temptation, that they may be
   acquainted with their own frailties; they are tempted to some sins, to
   which their hearts were not so inclinable before. Well, then, that we
   may pity others, mourn over them, and have a fellow-feeling of their
   condition, God will make us know the heart of a tempted man, that we
   may have more compassion over poor tempted souls. Possibly that may be
   a part of the apostle's sense: 2 Cor. i. 6, Whether we be afflicted, it
   is for your consolation and salvation; or whether we be comforted, it
   is for your consolation and salvation.' Persons in office in the
   church, they are afflicted and tempted; and, it may be, have a greater
   measure of afflictions and temptations, that they may show more pity to
   other souls. Therefore Luther was wont to say, three things made a
   minister, viz., prayer, meditation, and temptation. When he is much in
   communion with God, much in the study of the word, and hath been
   exercised in temptation, then he will be of a tender and compassionate
   heart over others; and that he may help them out of the snares of the
   devil, he is more fitted to his work by temptation.

   7. It occasions much experience of the care and providence of God, and
   the comforts of his promises. A man doth not know what the comforts of
   faith mean till he be exercised by temptation. And spiritual
   experiences will countervail all other troubles. This is an hour of
   temptation: Rev. iii. 10. What should we do in this hour of temptation?
   Be not over-confident, nor over-diffident, in an hour when God casts us
   upon trying times. Not over-confident, in casting your selves upon
   needless troubles without cause: Mat. xiv. 28. Peter said, Lord, if it
   be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water.' Peter thought he could do
   anything in the strength of Christ's word; Peter seeks a call before it
   be given him. Nor yet be over-backward and diffident to own God, and
   the truths of God. As Paul taxed Peter for dissembling: Gal. ii. 12.
   When those false brethren were likely to bring great trouble, Peter
   dissembled, and runs with them, and separates himself from the purer
   sort of Christians, he is taxed there for it. We should not run into
   them without cause, nor yet be ashamed to own the ways of God, those
   which are most agreeable to his holy word. Not be solicitous so much
   about events as duties; for God is far more concerned than we, and hath
   a greater interest than we can have. What is our interest, and the
   interest of our families and our children, to the great interest of
   God, the safety of his children, the safety of his glory, and cause of
   his church? Be not troubled about events, for all our business is to
   understand our duty, that we may not sin, but keep blameless in the
   hour of temptation.

   Use. If temptations be a usual evil, wherewith we encounter in the
   present world, then--

   First, We should not be dismayed at them.

   Secondly, We should be prepared for them.

   First, We should not be dismayed at them, as if some strange thing did
   befall us. When we enter into the lists with Satan, resist the devil.
   Why? 1 Pet. v. 9, For all those things are accomplished in your
   brethren that are in the flesh.' They are all troubled with a busy
   devil, a naughty world, and a corrupt heart! And why should we look for
   a total exemption, and to go to heaven in an unusual way?

   That we may not be dismayed by temptation, I shall give you several
   considerations.

   [1.] We took an oath to fight under Christ's banner. Baptism it is
   sacramentum militare, our military oath, which we took to fight in
   Christ's cause, against all the oppositions and difficulties we meet
   with in the world: 1 Pet. iii. 21. The apostle calls baptism The answer
   of a good conscience towards God.' An answer supposeth a question. It
   is an allusion to the questions propounded by the catechist to the
   catechumen. When they came to desire baptism, they asked them,
   Abrenuncias? Dost thou renounce the world, the flesh, and the devil?
   And they answered, Abrenuncio, I do renounce them. So Credis? Dost thou
   believe in Jesus Christ with all thy heart? as Philip propounds the
   question to the eunuch; and they answered, Credo, I do believe. Wilt
   thou undertake to walk in all holy obedience? and the answer is, I do
   undertake before God. Conscience, which is God's deputy, puts the
   question, in God's name, to those which take the seals of his covenant,
   Are you willing to renounce the flesh and worldly vanities? Will you
   cleave to God, and his ways, whatever they cost you? Whosoever makes
   this answer,, is supposed that he makes it knowingly, that he doth
   understand the difficulties of salvation, and what he must meet with in
   his way to heaven. So the apostle saith, You are not debtors to the
   flesh,' Rom. viii. 12. A man is a debtor to another, either by the
   obligation of some received benefit, or by his solemn promise and
   engagement; both are of use in that place. They that would seek the
   well-being of their souls, need not gratify the flesh. They that are
   engaged to walk after the Spirit, and come under the bond of a holy
   oath, and that are thus solemnly engaged, cannot expect to carry on the
   profession of godliness without conflicts and multiplied difficulties.

   [2.] That is not the happiest condition which is most quiet and free
   from the temptations of Satan; for Luke xi. 21, When the strong man
   armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace.' When the devil hath
   quiet possession, he doth not trouble men. The sea must needs be smooth
   and calm when wind and tide go one way. There are some which suspect
   their condition, because of continual temptation; and others, because
   they have no temptation. Neither is a safe rule, for the time of our
   conflict may not yet be come. But if any have cause to suspect
   themselves, it is the last sort; for they that are least troubled may
   be most hurt; they are quiet and secure, because Satan hath got them
   into his snare, and hath a quiet dominion in their souls.

   [3.] Jesus Christ himself was tempted, and therefore we should not be
   dismayed with temptations. Upon several accounts is this a comfort to
   us; partly, as it shows that we cannot look for an exemption, for the
   captain of our salvation was thus exercised, Heb. ii. 10. Be not
   disconsolate, it becomes good soldiers to follow their captain. We are
   to pledge him in this cup. He was tempted, therefore we shall be
   tempted. Partly and chiefly, because now he is more likely 10 pity us.
   It is said, Heb. ii. 18, Wherefore he is able to succour those that are
   tempted.' Jesus Christ hath felt the weight and trouble of temptations,
   therefore sure he will pity us if we lie under griefs and dangers; as a
   man that hath been shipwrecked himself is the more likely to pity
   others in their distress when they have lost all. One that knows evils
   by guess and imagination, knows them only at a distance, and doth not
   know how evil they are; but he that knows them by experience, he knows
   them at hand, and by such a smart sense as must needs leave a deep
   stroke and impression upon the soul. So Jesus Christ, that hath had an
   experimental knowledge, that knows the heart of a tempted man, can more
   feelingly succour those that are tempted; his heart becomes tender by
   experience; he knows the danger and troubles we are subject unto;
   therefore be not dismayed. And partly too, because by suffering this
   evil in his own person, he hath pulled out the sting of temptation.
   Christ sanctified every condition that he passed through; his being
   poor hath pulled out the sting of poverty. It is the more comportable
   now to a godly [poor man, one that hath an interest in Christ. His
   dying hath pulled out the sting of death; so that what is to him a
   prison (Isa. liii. 8, He shall be taken from prison and from judgment')
   is to us a bed of ease: Isa. lvii. 2, They shall rest in their beds;'
   so his being tempted hath unstung temptations, and hath made them not
   so grievous. And partly too, as he hath directed us how to stand out,
   and with what kind of weapons to foil Satan. Christ, that is a pattern
   of doing and suffering, is also a pattern of resisting. He that left us
   an example of doing the will of God, and of suffering with meekness,
   and when he was reviled, reviled not again; so in resisting temptations
   hath he left us an example, hath taught us how to grapple with the
   devil, and in what manner to repress his temptation; therefore we
   should not be altogether dismayed.

   [4.] Consider the comforts of the tempted. Abundantly hath God provided
   for his servants in their conflicts.

   (1.) Jesus Christ, our general, the captain of our salvation, in whose
   quarrel we are engaged, hath overcome all our enemies, we are
   interested in his victory: John xvi. 33, In the world ye shall have
   tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.' We may
   have many pressing and searching troubles, but the sting of them is
   gone. Non pugna sublata est, scd victoria: Christ hath not taken away
   the combat, we must fight; but the victory is sure, he hath overcome
   the world. This is our comfort when we are full of faintings and fears,
   that all things are vanquished and overcome by Christ; that though they
   terrify us, yet they shall not hurt us. Though Christ will not exempt
   us from battle, yet we have to do with the devil, the world, and death,
   which are all vanquished enemies.

   (2.) He hath a tender sense and knowledge of our estate. Christ saith
   to Peter, Satan hath a desire to have you, that he may sift you as
   wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,' Luke xxii.
   32. Christ's love and mercy is never more at work for his people than
   when they are most assaulted by Satan; then is he interceding for them:
   John xiii. 1, Jesus having loved his own which were in the world, he
   loved them unto the end.' When Christ was about to go to heaven, he
   thought, My own are to be left in the world, they are exposed to great
   temptation; and that set his heart a-work, as if he had said, Poor
   creatures! they are undone if I help them not. So, Zech. iii. 1, 2, And
   he showed me Joshua, the high priest, standing before the angel of the
   Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord
   said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath
   chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the
   fire?' And he showed me!' Our whole case and danger it is clearly known
   to Christ. He knows how Satan molests and troubles you in your
   approaches to God; how he seeks to divert your thoughts, to weaken your
   confidence. We have a friend and advocate that puts forth the strength
   of his mediation and intercession, and is zealous and affectionate for
   the welfare of his people. The Lord, that hath chosen Jerusalem, rebuke
   thee.'

   (3.) He is engaged in the battle, and fights with us, by renewing the
   strength of his own grace: Phil. iv. 13, I can do all things through
   Christ which strengtheneth me.' He gives relief and help, according to
   the nature of the conflict. If there be duty to be done, burden to be
   borne, or battle to be fought, Christ is giving in supply. As the
   olive-trees (Zech. iv. 11, 12) were always dropping into the lamps, so
   is he dropping in strength and grace into the heart: Ps. xvi. 8, I have
   set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall
   not be moved.' When a man hath an able second, he doth with the more
   courage go to the conflict. God is on our right hand, he is our second;
   his grace comes into the combat, and then the field cannot be lost. If
   we would exercise faith in God we might be the more confident.

   (4.) He will reward us when we have done. Hold fast to the end, and I
   will give thee a crown of life, a garland of immortality, that shall
   never wither. If you will but hold out, continue to fight the good
   fight of faith, there will a time of triumph come. He that is now a
   soldier shall be a conqueror, when the crown of righteousness shall be
   put upon his head, 2 Tim. iv. 8. And mark that: Rom. xvi. 20, And the
   God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.'

   It is troublesome to be in the world, but shortly God shall bruise
   Satan. Mark, he doth not only say, God shall tread Satan, but tread him
   under your feet, triumph over him. As Joshua called upon his
   companions, Come set your feet upon the necks of these kings, when they
   were hid in the cave; so the God of peace shall tread Satan under your
   feet shortly. Then your comfort will be greater, the more dangers you
   have gone through. As travellers, when they are come to their inn, and
   to their home, they sweetly remember the trouble and danger of the
   road; so, when we are come to heaven, these temptations will increase
   our rejoicing, and our triumph in God.

   (5.) Even before the battle a believer may be sure of victory. In other
   fights the event is uncertain. Non aeque glorietur accinctus, ac
   discinctus, Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he
   that putteth it off,' 1 Kings xx. 11. When a field is won then they
   will rejoice. But a believer, when he goes to fight, is sure to have
   the best of it beforehand, in bello, the war, though not in proelio,
   the particular conflict. Why? Because the Father and Jesus Christ are
   stronger than all his enemies; they cannot pluck the believer out of
   his hands: John x. 28, 29, I give to them eternal life, and they shall
   never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father,
   which gave them me, is greater than all; and none is able to pluck them
   out of my Father's hand.' This is the privilege which Christ conferreth
   upon his sheep, upon those which have an interest in him; though they
   have many shakings and tossings in their condition, yet their final
   perseverance is certain. Christ is so unchangeable in the purposes of
   his love, I will give to them eternal life;' and so invincible in the
   power of his grace, None shall pluck them out of my Father's hand;'
   nothing shall be able to hinder their perseverance. Now, though the
   fight be long and troublesome, yet this is one of God's encouragements,
   you are sure of victory at last. Therefore how muck .doth it concern us
   to get an interest in Christ, that we may keep on in this way and in
   this hope.

   Secondly, Let us be provided and prepared against temptations. And to
   this end I shall--

   First, Give some directions how to resist temptations in general.

   Secondly, What to do in a special hour of temptation which comes upon
   the world:--

   When there are terrors without, and we know not what evil may be
   a-coming, and our hearts are full of doubt, how we may support and bear
   up ourselves.

   First, To direct you as to temptations in general.

   [1.] You must be completely armed: Eph. vi. 11, Put on the whole armour
   of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.'
   Not a piece only, but the whole armour of God, otherwise you will never
   come off with honour and safety from the spiritual conflict. The poets
   feign of their Achilles that he was vulnerable only in the heel, and
   there he got his death-wound. A Christian, though he be never so well
   furnished in other parts, yet if any part be left naked, you are in
   danger. Our first parents were wounded in their heel. Who would have
   thought, that they which had such vast knowledge of God and his
   creatures, that they should be enticed by appetite? And Solomon, who
   had the upper part of his soul so well guarded, that he should be
   enticed by women? To see men of great know ledge to be unmortified and
   miscarry by their sensual appetite, is sad. A Christian must have no
   saving grace wanting: 2 Pet i. 5, Add to your faith, virtue; and to
   virtue, knowledge,' &c. There is all the graces, and they must come out
   in their turn. We need faith and virtue, zeal and holiness; and
   knowledge to guide it, and patience to arm it against the troubles of
   the present life; and we need temperance to moderate our affections to
   our worldly enjoyments; and godliness, that we may be frequent in
   communion with God; and brotherly-kindness, that we may preserve peace
   among our brethren, and may not make fractions and ruptures in the
   church; and we need charity, that we may be useful to all that are
   about us. There is use and work for all graces, one time or other:
   sometimes we shall be tempted to a neglect of God, at other times we
   shall be tempted to make a breach upon brotherly-kindness, at other
   times there will be a breach of charity. Sometimes the devil seeks to
   tempt us to fleshly wickedness, therefore we need temperance; sometimes
   to spiritual wickedness, to error, therefore we need knowledge;
   sometimes to raging with despair, then we need faith. We need the whole
   armour of God, for Satan hath his various ways of battery and assault:
   sometimes through ignorance we miscarry and run into error; sometimes
   for want of faith we run into despair and discomfort; sometimes for
   want of temperance violent corrupt lusts overset the soul.

   [2.] We must often pray to God for renewed influences; we must not only
   get habits of grace, but pray for a renewed influence. It is notable,
   next to the spiritual armour, the apostle mentioneth prayer: Eph. vi.
   18, Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
   watching thereunto with all perseverance.' We never receive so much
   from God upon earth as to stand in need of no more. And therefore
   though you put on the whole armour of God, yet praying always with all
   supplication in the Spirit.' Why? Because without the Lord's special
   assistance, whereby he actuates those graces, we can never defend
   ourselves nor offend the adversaries, or do any thing to purpose in the
   spiritual life. Strength of grace inherent will not bear us out against
   new assaults. Habitual grace it needs actual influence; partly, that
   these graces may be applied and excited to work: Phil. ii. 13, He
   giveth to will and to do.' God giveth to do; that is, excites that
   strength you have, and carrieth it out to work; and then that it may be
   directed in work: 2 Thes. iii. 5, And the Lord direct your hearts into
   the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.' Every time
   we would make use of the helmet of salvation, when we would lift up the
   head and wait for the mercy of God. The Lord direct you; we must be
   directed: and not only so, but that it may be supplied with new
   strength, for it is said, Isa. xl. 29, He giveth power to the faint,
   and to them that have no power he increaseth strength.' And he doth
   continue it: Luke xxii. 32, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
   not.' Thus will God keep us in dependence for those liberal aids and
   constant supplies of his grace, without which we cannot use the grace
   that we have.

   [3.] You must resist: 1 Pet. v. 9, Whom resist, steadfast in the
   faith;' James iv. 7, Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.'
   Stand your ground, and then Satan falls.

   In all those assaults, Satan hath only weapons offensive, as fiery
   darts; none defensive. We have not only the sword of the Spirit, which
   is an offensive weapon, but the shield of faith, that is a defensive
   piece of armour; therefore your safety lieth in resisting.

   Now, this resistance must be:--

   (1.) Not faint and cold, but strong and vehement.

   (2.) Thorough and total.

   (3.) Constant and perpetual.

   (1.) Not faint and cold. Some kind of resistance may be made by general
   and common grace. The light of nature will rise up in defiance of many
   sins, especially at first; but this must be earnest and vehement; it is
   against the enemies of your soul: Paul's resistance was with serious
   dislikes and deep groans: Rom. vii. 15, 24, The evil that I hate;' and
   O wretched man! how shall I be delivered?' In most cases, a detestation
   or peremptory denial is enough. "When the devil tempts Christ to
   worship him: Mat. iv. 10, Get thee behind me, Satan.' In other cases,
   there must be serious disputes and repulses. When Eve speaks faintly
   and coldly, the devil renews his assaults with more violence: Gen. iii.
   1-3, Hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And
   the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees
   of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of
   the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye
   touch it, lest ye die.' She speaks there warmly, and with too impatient
   a resentment of the restraint, and too cold in the commination and
   threatening. Therefore the devil works upon her, when he saw she
   amplifieth the restraint; for she saith more indeed: We must neither
   eat nor touch it.' A faint denial is a kind of grant, and therefore
   your repulse to Satan must be vehement and strong. In many cases,
   slight Satan--answer with indignation; as though a dog barks, yet the
   traveller goes by: Satan cannot endure contempt. At other times, argue
   for God strongly. Now, the great argument that quickens you to this
   lively and vehement resistance is, to consider thy soul is in danger,
   and all thy eternal concernments. So some expound that, Eph. vi. 12, We
   fight not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickedness in
   high places;' in heavenly places' it is in the original. No worldly
   concernments must go so near as that which concerns the eternal good
   and salvation of your souls. What would the devil have from thee but
   thy soul and thy precious enjoyments, thy peace of conscience,
   communion with God, thy hopes of eternal life? And when Satan comes,
   and bids nothing but worldly vanities, we should repel them with
   indignation. A merchant that hath a precious commodity, and a chapman
   bids him a base price, he puts up his wares with indignation, and will
   not so much as regard him or hear him; so when the devil comes, and
   would cheat you of your precious enjoyments, you should repel him with
   indignation, when there is such base and unworthy trifles to come in
   competition with your great hopes: as Christ, Mat. xvi. 26, What is a
   man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his soul? or
   what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?' What! shall I lose my
   soul, my hopes, and happiness and all for such paltry things, for a
   little temporal advantage?

   (2.) It must be a thorough and total resistance: when you yield, the
   devil encroacheth upon you. We are bid, in the Canticles, to take the
   little foxes,' to dash Babylon's brats in pieces: we should not yield
   to Satan a little. The devil at first cannot hope to prevail for
   greater things, therefore he seems more modest in his temptations; ay,
   but lesser sticks set the greater on fire: when ye entertain lesser
   temptations, this kindles in your souls, and it is easily blown up into
   a great flame in your conscience. At first, when the devil came to our
   first parents, Hath God said?' and then, You shall not surely die.'
   Hath God said you shall not eat of the fruit of the garden?' The first
   temptation was more modest. The approaches of Satan to the soul are
   gradual--he, asks but a little; ay, but it is a great matter if we
   grant it. Consider, the evil of temptation is better kept out than got
   out. The stone on the top of the hill, when it begins to roll downward,
   it is a hard thing to stay it; we cannot say how far it will go. Saith
   the deceived heart, I will yield but little, and never yield again. The
   devil will carry thee further and further, until he hath left no
   tenderness in thy conscience. As many that thought to venture but a
   shilling or two, yet, by the secret witchery of gaming, they play away
   their estate, clothes and all; so many that think they will sin but
   little at first, at last sin away all principles of conscience and
   profession of godliness.

   (3.) It must not be temporary, for a while, but perpetual. It concerns
   us not only to stand out against the first assault of Satan, but a long
   siege. Satan, what he cannot gain by argument, seeks to procure by
   importunity. But resist him.' saith the apostle, steadfastly in the
   faith,' 1 Pet. v. 9. As his instrument spake to Joseph, from day to
   day,' she ceased not, Gen. xxxix. 10. Deformed objects, when accustomed
   to them, seem not so odious; so the devil hopes to prevail at last, at
   least temptation will not seem so odious. But you must keep your zeal
   to the last, as we rate away an importunate beggar that will not be
   answered: to yield at last is to lose the glory of the conflict. Grace
   must not only have its work, but its perfect work,' James i. 4; so let
   all our graces, temperance, godliness, and brotherly kindness, have
   their perfect work.

   [4.] There is required watchfulness: 1 Pet. v. 8, Be sober, be
   vigilant.' You that are not ignorant of Satan's devices should watch
   that you give not him an advantage, 2 Cor. ii. 11; nor an occasion, 2
   Cor. xi. 12, lest Satan tempt you; nor a pretence, Gal. v. 13, to the
   flesh. Certainly, he that would not be foiled needs a great deal of
   holy moderation, and constant jealousy over his heart; he had need to
   guard his senses: Ps. cxix. 37, Turn away mine eyes from beholding
   vanity;' and to look to his company: Ps. cxix. 115, Depart from me, ye
   evil-doers, for I will keep the commandments of my God;' and to avoid
   all occasions of sin, not rush into them, but keep out of the way:
   Prov. iv. 14, Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the
   way of evil men;' for this is to ride into the devil's quarters, to run
   into the mouth of danger. Heretofore these were wholesome instructions,
   and why should they not be so now? The devil is not less subtle, or sin
   less odious and dangerous; only we are more foolhardy, therefore stand
   not at such a distance as we should from occasions. It is easier to
   avoid the occasion than the sin when occasion is offered; as it is
   easier for a bird to fly from the snare than, when entangled, to avoid
   danger. Therefore, when you run into harm's way, you tempt Satan to
   tempt; and when you look not to yourselves, it is just with God to let
   you fall into the snare.

   Secondly, There are special times of temptation, when Christians should
   look to themselves. There is an evil day: Eph. vi. 13, That ye may be
   able to stand in the evil day.' And there is an hour of temptation upon
   the world: Rev. iii. 10, I will keep thee from the hour of temptation
   which shall come upon all the world.' There are certain times when God
   is proving what men will do, and when the devil is likely to make a
   great advantage of our discontents and afflictions, when things fall
   cross to our desires, and we know not what evil waits for us; how
   should we do to behave ourselves?

   [1.] Be not over-confident or over-diffident. Not over-confident, in
   running beyond the bounds of our calling, to cast ourselves into
   dangers and hazards of temptation. Nor over-diffident, by base flying
   from, or giving way when God calls for valiant resistance. Both ways is
   the devil likely to assault us; either by making us. foolhardy. So
   Satan seeks to drive us beyond the bounds of our calling, to put us out
   of our place, that we may be a prey to him. As men use to trouble the
   water, that they may rouse the fish, and draw them into the snare, and
   drive them out of places of safety where they rest; so the devil seeks
   to put us out of our safety. Peter would needs come to Christ: Mat.
   xiv. 28, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water;' and
   we see he sinks before he could accomplish his purpose. So when we are
   over-confident, and run out of our calling upon hazards, then we are
   ever and anon ready to sink. But we should not turn back when God calls
   us to a valiant resistance: Should such a man as I flee?' Neh. vi. 11.
   Observe Peter's dastardliness when he ventures without a call into the
   priest's hall; a question of the damsel's overturns him. He that was so
   cowardly when he was out of his way, look upon his boldness when he was
   in his work: Acts iv. 7 unto ver. 13, When they saw the boldness of
   Peter and John, they marvelled.' John was the disciple of love, and
   Peter was the fearful disciple; yet how full of boldness, courage, and
   zeal when they were called and singled out to give proof of the reality
   of God's grace! And therefore we should never be over-forward, nor
   over-backward, but own God in his truth when we are in our calling. Let
   not Satan bring you out of your place to cast yourselves as a prey to
   him.

   [2.] In an hour of temptation, we should be more solicitous about
   duties than events, and about sins than dangers. As to events, God is
   concerned as well as you, and he will order them for his own glory. It
   should be your great care that you may be kept blameless to his
   heavenly kingdom: 2 Tim. iv. 17, 18, The Lord, that hath delivered me
   out of the mouth of the lion, shall deliver me from every evil work,
   and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom.' However God deal with
   you as to events, and whatever dangers attend you, this should be your
   care mainly, that you may not sin, but be kept blame less. David often
   begged direction, that he might be guided in his trouble, and not
   falter, and do anything unseemly.

   [3.] Be more jealous of Satan's wiles than of his open assaults.
   Natural courage, and the bravery of a common and ordinary resolution,
   together with deep engagement of credit and interest, may do much to
   make us stand out against assaults, against open force and violence of
   evil men; but there needs a great deal of judgment to stand out against
   the wiles and crafts of the devil. Flesh and blood will not so easily
   bear us out against the secret ensnarings of the heart. The young
   prophet doth thunder out his message against the king, 1 Kings xiii. 3,
   yet was enticed by the wiles of the old prophet. So we may stand out
   against an open assault and apparent violence, but take heed of the
   secret wiles of Satan.

   [4.] The wiles of Satan are to enforce and draw us into those
   corruptions which are incident to the season. Here is the great point
   of spiritual wisdom, to be seasoned in our mortification, and to
   withstand the spiritual evil that is apt to grow upon us in the time of
   our fears: Ps. lvi. 3, What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.'
   Then our great business is, to cherish our dependence upon God, to
   prevent distrust and unbelieving thoughts of God's providence. As, on
   the other side, in a time when we are likely to be corrupted with ease
   and prosperity, then our business is to watch against security and
   deadness of heart, which is apt to grow upon us. As Nazianzen said,
   When things go prosperous with me, I read the Lamentations of Jeremiah,
   I remember the mournful passages which befall the people of God, and
   that is my cure. So to prevent despondency in a time of fears, to
   encourage our souls to dependence.

   Now, when our wills are crossed, dangers attend us on every side, and
   we know not how far evil will break out to the overturning of all. What
   are the sins incident to such a time of trouble? and how do the wiles
   of Satan come upon us?

   (1.) Impatience: Gen. xxx. 1, when the will of Rachel was crossed, she
   said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.' When we impatiently
   fret against the Lord: Ps. xxxvii. 1, Fret not thyself because of
   evil-doers; neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity.'

   (2.) Murmuring and repining against the Lord, that is another snare:
   Jonah iv. 9, I do well to be angry, even unto death;' when he was
   crossed. Discontent at God's providence gratifieth Satan exceedingly;
   when we will justify ourselves, and think it a kind of zeal to be
   angry, and pet against providence.

   (3.) A spirit of revenge against instruments, when we do not sweetly
   calm the heart with the remembrance of God's hand: 2 Sam. xvi. 9, Why
   should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over, I pray
   thee, and take off his head.' Thus when wicked men disturb order, the
   heart is apt to rise in revenge, therefore we are to cairn our hearts.

   (4.) There is fainting in duty; when we begin to give over prayer, and
   are discouraged, and are loth to wrestle with God in an ordinance: Heb.
   xii. 12, Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.' When
   a man's hands begin to wax feeble, and he is discouraged in the ways of
   the Lord: My foot had well-nigh slipped,' saith David, Ps. lxxiii. 2.

   (5.) There is closing with sinful means, and running to them for an
   escape; as Saul, when he was crossed: 1 Sam. xxviii. 7, Seek me a woman
   that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and inquire of her.'
   When we go to carnal shifts, and unworthy means, these are very natural
   to us.

   (6.) Despair and distrustful thoughts of God, though we have had much
   experience of his goodness. David, 1 Sam. xxvii. 1, I shall now perish
   one day by the hand of Saul,' after all his experience.

   (7.) Questioning our interest in God, by reason of crosses, or the
   doubtful posture of our affairs: Judges vi. 13, If the Lord be with us,
   why then is all this befallen us?'

   These are the wiles of Satan. Ride out the storm upon gospel
   encouragements. This will bear us up, it is but a moment to eternity.
   It is but a light affliction, and will work for us a far more exceeding
   and eternal weight of glory.' 2 Cor. iv. 17.

   The second point is this:--

   Doct. 2. That if we would not be overcome by the evil of temptations,
   we should earnestly deal with God about them.

   For so doth our Lord direct us here (Lead us not into temptation') to
   come to God himself.

   There are two reasons I shall consider of in this discourse:--

   First, We cannot be tempted without the will of God.

   Secondly, Nor resist without the power of God.

   Therefore we should deal with God earnestly in all our temptations.

   First, We cannot be tempted without the will of God. That God hath a
   providence in and about temptations, is clear from the scripture: Mat.
   iv. 1, Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
   tempted of the devil.' The Holy Spirit had a hand in it, as well as the
   evil spirit. So, 2 Sam. xxiv. 1, God moved David to number Israel and
   Judah;' but in 1 Chron. xxi. 1, it is said, And Satan stood up against
   Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.' Satan, he cannot tempt
   without leave from God. As a lion cannot stir out of his cage, until
   the keeper brings him out, so the devil, this roaring lion, is held by
   the irresistible chains of God's providence, and cannot stir until God
   brings him out.

   Consider two things:--

   [1.] To be led into temptation is more than simply to be tempted. God's
   permitting us to be tempted is not so much as God's leading us into
   temptation, for these are two distinct phrases. God may permit or
   suffer us to be tempted, as a lord or sovereign, which hath power over
   his own creature, for the trial and exercise of grace, and can
   absolutely dispose of it according to his own will; but he leads us
   into temptation as a judge. And therefore this is one of the comforts
   which Job propounds to himself, when Satan had a liberty to molest him:
   Job ix. 12, He taketh away, who can hinder him? who shall say unto him,
   What doest thou?' The general of an army may, according to. his
   discretion, lead which band he pleaseth, and set them in the forlorn
   hope, in a place of the greatest danger, and appoint for reserves which
   part of the army he pleaseth. So God may single out his champions to
   combat for his glory, and may leave others in a more quiet posture,
   according as he pleaseth. Thus, as a sovereign agent, God may suffer to
   be tempted. But now, to lead into temptation, that is another thing,
   and implieth something of punishment, or as it is expressed, Mat. xxvi.
   41, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.' We enter into it by our
   own voluntary motion, as having forfeited his protection. But then God
   leads us in as a judge, puts the male factor into the executioner's or
   officer's hands: so doth God lead us into temptation; it is a judicial
   act, especially when left to perish under the weight of a temptation.

   [2.] Consider God as a judge; he may lead us into temptation two ways:
   either he may act in way of correction, to manifest his fatherly
   indignation; or by way of strict punishment. And so, in respect of his
   fatherly correction, God may give us up to a vexing, or to an ensnaring
   temptation. He may lead the godly into temptation, that they may be
   molested and troubled; and may lead the wicked into temptation, that
   they may be seduced and led away for their eternal ruin. There is a
   vexing temptation God useth for the correction of his own children; and
   thus Paul was buffeted by Satan, lest he should be exalted above
   measure: 2 Cor. xii. 7. The shepherd sets his dog upon the strayed
   sheep, not to worry him, but to lodge him, and bring him back again
   into the fold: so doth God suffer his children to be buffeted and
   exercised by Satan, to their great trouble, but for their good in the
   issue; for he knoweth how to turn all these things for good. Then there
   is an ensnaring temptation, by which the wicked are entangled in a way
   of sin; and so Satan, as God's executioner, is said sometimes to blind
   the eyes of wicked men, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ
   should shine unto them, 2 Cor. iv. 4; and sometimes to harden their
   hearts, John xii. 40, lest they should be converted and healed.' For
   the punishment of former sins, God may give up the wicked to be blinded
   and hardened by Satan to their own destruction, which is one of the
   most dreadful acts of God, as a Judge, on this side hell.

   Certainly then, when we are tempted, we have great cause to deal with
   God about the temptation, for he hath a hand: either he may suffer us
   to be tempted, as lord and sovereign; or may lead us into temptation,
   either in a way of fatherly correction, or as a mere punishment, that
   we may more ruin and destroy ourselves.

   I come now to the second reason.

   Secondly, God alone can give strength to resist and overcome the
   temptation; and therefore we should deal with him very earnestly about
   it: Rom. xvi. 20, The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
   shortly.' It is God that treads down Satan, but under your feet. We
   fight it out, but the author of the victory is the God of peace. We are
   interested in it (for we trample upon Satan with our own feet), but
   God's is the grace. Our faculties are not only exercised, but our
   graces.

   Briefly, two ways doth God concur with the saints in resisting
   temptations.

   First, God plants all those graces in their hearts that are necessary
   to the conflict To speak of those three essential graces, faith, fear,
   and love; these are all necessary for the resistance of a temptation.
   That faith is necessary, 1 Pet. v. 9, Whom resist, steadfast in the
   faith.' And fear and love, that they also are necessary, I shall prove
   thus: Satan's weapons against us, and his way of assaulting, are either
   subtile wiles or fiery darts: That ye may be able to stand against the
   wiles of the devil, and quench all the fiery darts of the wicked,' Eph.
   vi. 11, 16. As he assaults us by fiery darts, by raging and boisterous
   temptations, take the shield of faith, cover all with the righteousness
   of Christ, and with a sense of your privileges by Christ, and that is
   it which maintains the heart, and keeps it against the fiery darts of
   the devil. But as he assaults us by his wiles, there fear and the love
   of God comes in, and is necessary for us. For there are two sorts of
   wiles that Satan useth for the destroying of our souls: one is, to
   convey the temptation by such means as are most taking with the person
   tempted; and the other is, disguising and turning himself into an angel
   of light, colouring the temptation.

   For the first, namely, as he suiteth every distemper of our souls with
   a proper diet or food, or tempts us by such means as are likely to
   prevail, as if a man were tempted by sensual delight; there the love of
   God is necessary. Why? For nothing but the love of God will make us
   deny that which is so near and pleasing to us, or that affection which
   grows upon the apprehension of his grace in Christ; therefore the grace
   of God is said to teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts:'
   Titus ii. 12.

   [2.] For the other wile. As Satan doth transform himself into an angel
   of light, and cover his base designs with plausible pretences; for
   instance, revenge shall be accounted zeal; he will disguise it so as
   that the very apostles shall count it zeal for the glory of God when
   they called for fire from heaven to consume them, even as Elias did:'
   Luke ix. 54. And carnal counsel shall be counted pity and natural
   affection: Mat. xvi. 22, Peter took him and began to rebuke him,
   saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee.' He
   shall be the devil's agent to tempt Christ, and his carnal counsel
   shall be looked upon as pity to his Master. And licentiousness shall be
   Christian liberty, and our liberty by Christ shall be used as an
   occasion to the flesh: Gal. v. 13. And an immoderate use of carnal
   pleasure shall be Christian rejoicing or Christian cheerfulness.
   Therefore, as there needs love to withstand the potency of temptation,
   by the suitableness of the bait to our own affections, so there needs
   the fear of God: Prov. xiv. 27, The fear of the Lord is a fountain of
   life, to depart from the snares of death.' When the devil, by his
   wiles, is laying snares for us, snares of death, the fear of the Lord
   is a fountain of life. A man that is afraid to offend God, and to abuse
   his liberty, or run into any excess, under colour of grace, is very
   cautious and watchful, and thereby is not so soon surprised. Thus, when
   the soul is inflamed by the vehement heat of boiling lusts, or raging
   despair, faith is necessary: Luke xxii. 31, 32, Satan hath desired to
   have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee,
   that thy faith fail not.' Faith laying hold upon Christ's
   righteousness, and waiting for his grace, teaches us to over come in
   such conflicts.

   But why should I instance in these three graces only, when we are
   bidden to put on the whole armour of God'? Eph. vi. 11, 13. If we would
   come off with honour in this conflict, we must be completely armed; no
   power of the soul or sense of the body must be left naked and without a
   guard, therefore not one saving grace can be wanting.

   A Christian is set forth as armed from head to foot. There is for the
   head a helmet of salvation, which is hope; a breastplate of
   righteousness; the girdle of truth; for shoes, the gospel of peace; the
   shield of faith; the sword of the Spirit. These are the graces
   necessary to resist temptation, and these we have from God. A Christian
   hath not only weapons offensive, but defensive; not only a sword, but
   also a shield. Satan hath only weapons offensive, as darts; he hath
   darts to wound the soul. Again, observe, there is no piece of armour
   for the back. Why? Because there is no flight in this spiritual
   warfare; we must stand to it: James iv. 7, Resist the devil, and he
   will flee from you.'

   But let us see what are the pieces of the spiritual armour. The apostle
   begins with the girdle of truth,' by which is meant, not truth of
   doctrine (for that is the sword of the Spirit), but sincerity, or an
   honest intention; when a man endeavoureth to be both to God and man
   what he seems to be. Now, it is the Lord that must renew the right
   spirit within us. Satan he assaults us with wiles, but our armour of
   proof against him is the girdle of truth. We stand against the wiles of
   Satan, but we must not fight against him with his own weapons, and put
   off wiles with wiles; sincerity and honest intention, that is our
   strength; this is the girdle to the loins, it gives strength and
   courage to the soul. And then there is the breastplate of
   righteousness,' or that grace which puts us upon a holy conversation,
   suitable to God's will revealed in his word, whereby we endeavour to
   give God and man their due; it secures the breast and vital parts, the
   seed of inherent grace in the heart; an honest fixed purpose to obey
   God in all things. The next thing, the feet must be shod; we shall meet
   with rough ways in our passage to heaven, and what is that which is
   armour of proof for our feet?' The preparation of the gospel of peace/
   a sense of our peace and friendship made up between God and us through
   Christ. Without this we shall never follow God in the way of duty when
   we meet with difficulties and hardships, But above all, take the shield
   of faith.' A shield covers the body, but that which gives defence to
   all is faith: without this a man is naked. Destitute of Christ's
   imputed righteousness, he wants his covenant-strength; it applieth
   Christ's righteousness, and engageth the power of God on our behalf.
   Then there is the helmet of salvation,' which is hope: I Thes. v. 8. A
   well-grounded hope of salvation, it makes us hold up the head in the
   midst of all waves and sore assaults; that is, it is our great motive
   and encouragement in the work of sanctification. Then there is the
   sword of the Spirit,' which is both offensive and defensive; it wardeth
   off Satan's blows, and makes him fly back from us as one wounded and
   ashamed. These are the graces. Now God gives them to us, and therefore
   he is called The God of all grace.' 1 Pet. v. 10. Why? because he
   requires it only? No, but because he giveth it also. And it is called
   The armour of God,' ver. 11. God is the author, God is the maker, God
   is the inventor of this armour, and he doth freely bestow it upon us.
   The apostle bids us take the whole armour of God,' ver. 13, that is,
   take it out of God's hand. This armour is not of our making and
   procuring, but made to our hands by God himself.

   Secondly, He actuates these graces by putting good motions into our
   hearts, or sweet and gracious thoughts, whereby all the forementioned
   graces are drawn out. When we are conflicting with sin in an hour of
   temptation, faith is set a-work: That God may fulfil all the good
   pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power,' 2 Thes. i.
   11; that is, by a divine power and influence quickening it into acts.
   Joseph, when he was assaulted by a grievous temptation, he had a
   gracious motion and thought put into his mind: How can I do this
   wickedness, and sin against God?' Gen. xxxix. 9. Still there is a
   seasonable remembrance of things by the Spirit, whose office it is to
   bring all things to remembrance: John xiv. 26. The Spirit doth not only
   teach us all things, but brings things to our remembrance, when we have
   need of any truth to be set home upon the heart; either such a truth as
   forbids the evil to which we are tempted, or that speaketh comfort and
   encouragement to us under such a cross; or pressing such a duty as we
   hang off from. The seasonable remembrance of truths is the great actual
   help which we have from God. Jesus Christ himself, by seasonable urging
   the scriptures, defeated the temptation wherewith he was assaulted:
   Mat. iv. 10, 11. The word quickeneth in affliction: Ps. cxix. 50. Some
   proper comfort is borne in upon the soul by the power of God. It is not
   the bare remembrance of truth, but the secret power of God which
   enliveneth it, and makes it effectual in its season to defeat the
   temptation.

   Use. It directs you what to do in temptations, to go to God for help
   and strength against them. Briefly, when you treat with God, it should
   be under a threefold notion:--

   1. As the author and giver of grace.

   2. As the sovereign giver and disposer of it, according to his own
   will.

   3. As a judge, by temptation correcting some foregoing sin by the
   present temptation.

   1. Treat with God as the author and giver of grace: James i. 17, He is
   the father of lights, from whom every good and perfect gift cometh
   down.' And so--

   [1.] We ought to come to him as renouncing our strength, and waiting
   for his grace as able to help us. That address Jehoshaphat made in a
   temporal case is good also in a spiritual: 2 Chron. xx. 12, Lord, we
   have no might; our eyes are unto thee.' There is a renouncing of their
   own strength, and a dependence upon God. There must be a renouncing of
   all self-dependence, for God gives grace to the humble.' James iv. 6.
   The word humble is to be understood not morally, to those that are of a
   lowly carriage towards men, of a meek spirit; but it is understood
   spiritually, of those that, in the brokenness of their hearts,
   acknowledge their own nothingness and weakness: to these he gives
   grace. God withholdeth and withdraweth his influences when we do not
   acknowledge the daily and hourly necessity of grace--when we do not
   desire it with such vehemency as we were wont, nor receive it with such
   thankfulness and rejoicing. In these three last petitions of the Lord's
   Prayer: Give us this day our daily bread;' then, Forgive us our
   trespasses;' then, Lead us not into temptation:' we beg daily bread,
   daily pardon, daily strength. We can neither live without the one nor
   the other: we cannot live without daily bread, nor live comfortably
   without daily pardon, nor live holily without daily grace. And
   therefore you are to wait upon God all the day,' Ps. xxv. 5; and Ps.
   xvi. 8, I have set the Lord always before me.' Now, we may be said to
   set the Lord before us, either in point of reverence, when we are
   sensible of his eye and presence, or in point of dependence, when we
   are still waiting for his strength; and that is the meaning there, He
   is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.' Look, as a glass without a
   foot falls to the ground, and is broken as soon as it is set out of
   hand, such a sensible Christian apprehends himself to be if he be out
   of the hands of God; he is broken, and falls to pieces. Therefore, in
   this sense, he goes to God, and desires him to keep him from
   temptation. Dependence begets observance. If the creature could once
   but live of himself, though it were but for a while, God would seldom
   hear from him. This is that which is the bridle upon the new creature,
   to keep up his constant commerce with God.

   [2.] We must go to him with confidence, in an actual dependence upon
   the all-sufficiency of his grace. It is not enough to apprehend our
   weakness, but we must also go forth in the strength of God; that is,
   hold up our hearts with a sense of this, that God is able to bear us
   up, and defeat all our spiritual enemies. God would not take off the
   temptation from Paul, 2 Cor. xii. 9, but saith, My grace is sufficient
   for thee.' He can either weaken temptation, or give in further supply
   of strength; therefore encourage yourselves in the power of the Lord.
   The devil cannot tempt us one jot further than the Lord will permit
   him; his malice is limited and restrained: if you be in Satan's hands,
   Satan is in God's hands, and can do nothing without his leave and
   permission; he begs leave to enter into the herd of swine, much less
   can he enter into the sheep of his pasture.

   2. Look upon God, not only as the giver of grace, but as the sovereign
   giver and disposer of it according to his own will: Phil. ii. 13, It is
   God that worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.'
   His giving of grace is altogether free, as what measure of assistance
   we shall have, and by what means it shall be supplied. God may enlarge
   or abate the degree of his influence, according to his own will. Now,
   thus we must come to him, with submission to his good pleasure, either
   for taking off the temptation, or continuing it for your exercise, or
   the measure of your supply. When you murmur and fret, it is a sign you
   have too good thoughts of your selves; when we prescribe to God, it
   argues some ascribing to ourselves. You are to endeavour, indeed, to
   pray, and use all good means to come out of temptation; but submit, if
   the Lord be pleased to continue his exercise upon you. Nay, though God
   should continue the temptation, and for the present not give out those
   measures of grace necessary for you, yet you must not murmur, but lie
   at his feet; for God is Lord of his own grace.

   3. You are to look upon God as a judge, correcting some foregoing sin
   by your present temptation. And therefore--

   [1.] You must humble yourselves under his mighty hand, when you are
   exercised with great and sore temptations, and accept the punishment of
   your iniquity without murmuring; that is the only way to get it off,
   when you own it as the fruit of sin: Lev. xxvi. 41, If then their
   uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment
   of their iniquity;' and Micah vii. 9, I will bear the indignation of
   the Lord, because I have sinned against him.' Acknowledge the justice
   of his providence in this trouble that is brought upon you. A Christian
   must not only look to the malice of Satan in his temptations, but to
   the justice of God. Look, as in outward afflictions, we are not to
   reflect upon instruments:--Job did not say, The Chaldean and Sabean
   hath taken,' but The Lord hath taken,' chap. i. 23--so in these
   spiritual afflictions, take the temptation out of God's hand, as a
   judge. Though Satan pursue you with fiery darts, with temptations
   horrible and terrible, yet look upon it as the fruit of some foregoing
   sin. If he should tempt you by injection of despairing fears or
   blasphemous thoughts, these are not your sins, but they may be a
   punishment for your sins; so you ought to humble yourselves under the
   mighty hand of God. When you are vexed with such temptations as pierce
   and prick you in your veins, as David speaks; when the devil bears in
   blasphemous thoughts upon the heart, they are his sins, but your
   corrections, justly ordered by God. It may be it is for the correction
   of your sin that you have provoked God to afflict you thus; and this
   rod, if it smart, it was dipped in your own guilt, and it is a fruit of
   God's fatherly indignation for your folly and vanity; for God may thus
   manifest it, by giving thee up to this severe discipline, to be tempted
   and vexed by Satan. Now, it is your duty to be sensible of your sin,
   and say, as Sion in her troubles, Lam. i. 18, The Lord is righteous,
   for I have rebelled against his commandment.'

   [2.] Find out and remove the cause of sin, when God lets loose Satan
   upon us. Paul discerned it presently--as usually God's rod brings light
   along with it--when he was buffeted with a messenger of Satan; it was
   that he might not be exalted above measure,' 2 Cor. xii. 7. Now that
   which hath provoked God to exercise us with this discipline, that may
   be known sometimes by the time when this temptation surpriseth us: if
   it tread upon the heels of some immediate and foregoing provocation
   that is the sin you should humble your selves for; or by that ill frame
   and posture of spirit wherein the temptation found you, as Paul's heart
   was likely puffed up and exalted with his spiritual enjoyments;
   therefore God lets loose Satan. Sometimes by the nature of the
   temptation itself, for God suits punishments to sins, and apt and
   proper remedies to every disease; or else the sin will be cast up by
   workings of conscience in a way of remorse, as in a tempest that which
   is at bottom comes on top; or God will discover it by his Spirit, when
   you go and seek to him. When temptation is grievous and sore, go to God
   and say, Lord, why is it thus with me? Job xxxiv. 31, 32, Surely it is
   meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend
   any more. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity,
   I will do no more.' Pray for a discovery of your secret sin, and what
   is the mind of God in the dispensation. Now, when you have found out
   the cause of the sin, this is the direction, to remove the cause; for
   until we let the sin go, God will continue the punishment; though we
   strive, pray, and ask counsel, our burden will still be continued upon
   us, until sin be mortified in us, though in some measure it be removed
   out of our hearts.
     __________________________________________________________________

   But deliver us from evil.

   WE come to the close. The words apo` tou ponerou may be rendered,
   either from the evil one,' or from the evil thing.'

   First, From the evil one: Mat. xiii. 19, Then cometh, o ponero`s, the
   evil one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart;' and 1
   John ii. 13, I will write unto you, young men, because ye have
   overcome, ton ponero`n, the wicked one;' and 1 John v. 18, He that is
   begotten of God keepeth himself, and, o ponero`s, that wicked one,
   toucheth him not;' Eph. vi. 16, Take the shield of faith, wherewith ye
   shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked,' tou
   ponerou, of that wicked one. In all these places the devil is so
   called, because his great business is to draw, and drive others to sin;
   and therefore, as God is the holy one,' so Satan is called the wicked
   one.'

   Secondly, It may be rendered that evil thing: Mat. v. 37, Whatsoever is
   more than, these cometh, ek tou ponerou, of evil;' Mat. v. 39, But I
   say unto you, me antistenai to ponero, resist not evil.' We are
   commanded to resist the devil, and therefore in that place clearly it
   is put for the evil thing; and so in many other places. Now which of
   these senses shall we prefer?

   First, If it be meant of the evil one, or Satan, the words will bear a
   good sense, thus: If God, for our trial and further humiliation, shall
   suffer us to be tempted by the devil, yet we desire that he may not
   have his will upon us, that we be not kept under his power.

   To make good this interpretation, know the devil may fitly be called
   the evil one,' for he is the oldest sinner; he sins from the beginning:
   1 John iii. 8. And he is the greatest sinner, therefore he is called,
   Eph. vi. 12, spiritual wickedness;' his sins are in the high est degree
   sinful, every sin of his is a sin against the Holy Ghost, against full
   light, and with malice and spite against God and the saints. And he is
   the father of sin, John viii. 44. As Jubal was the father of all such
   as handle the harp and organ,' Gen. iv. 21; that is, he was the first
   that taught the use of that instrument: so all the sins in the world
   are by his furtherance, both actual and original; therefore he may be
   fitly called the evil one.

   Again, he hath a great stroke in temptation, that he is the artificer,
   the designer, the improver of them; therefore he is called, ho
   peirazon, the tempter.' Mat. iv. 3. Well, then, Lead us not into
   temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.'

   Secondly, we may render it indefinitely, as we do, Deliver us from
   evil,' that is, from sin. And fitly is this so called, because it is
   the greatest evil, above poverty, sickness, and worldly loss.
   Everything which doth harm us, that may be called evil. Now sin doth
   most hurt; nothing so much as sin. Why? Because it doth endamage our in
   ward man, and endanger our everlasting hopes.

   [1.] It doth endamage our inward man, and hindereth and diminisheth our
   comfortable communion with God. Other things may harm the man, but they
   do not touch the Christian; and therefore saith the apostle, 2 Cor. iv.
   16, For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish,
   yet the inward man is renewed day by day.' Breaches made upon the
   outward man come not so near as a breach made upon the inward man;
   therefore we faint not, so long as the inward man is safe.

   [2.] It doth endanger our everlasting hopes and concernments, and
   therefore it is the greatest evil. All afflictions do but reach our
   temporal, but sin reacheth our eternal concernments; and therefore the
   apostle promiseth himself this kind of deliverance, as that which was
   most worthy: 2 Tim. iv. 17, 18, I was delivered out of the mouth of the
   lion. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
   preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom.' Well, then, you see it may be
   rendered the evil one, or the evil thing. The word carrieth it for sin;
   kako`n denoteth the evil of afflictions, and malum poenae, as well as
   malum culpae; but ponero`n never but evil of fault. And we need not
   anxiously dispute whether the one or the other, for one can not be
   understood without respect to the other. Therefore I shall take it in a
   general sense--that evil which results from temptations, whether they
   arise from Satan, the world, or our own hearts.

   From the words thus opened, the points will be two:--

   First, That while we are in this valley of tears and snares, we should
   with earnestness and confidence pray to be delivered from evil.

   Secondly, To be kept from the evil of sin is a greater mercy than to be
   kept from the trouble of temptation.

   I observe the first point, because Christ thus directed us to pray to
   God. The second, because the evil of sin is intended. For the first, we
   should pray with earnestness, because of our danger, and with
   confidence, because of God's undertaking. The Lord Jesus knows what
   requests are most acceptable to his Father. Now when he would give a
   perfect pattern and platform of prayer, he bids you pray thus: Deliver
   us from evil.' Nay, we have not only Christ's direction, but Christ's
   example: John xvii. 15, I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of
   the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.' He did not
   absolutely pray for an exemption from temptation, though he knew the
   world would be a tempestuous place, that his people must expect strong
   assaults--Lord, take them not out of the world, but keep them from the
   evil; so here, Deliver us from evil.'

   First, We should pray with earnestness, because of our danger from the
   enemies of our salvation, which are the devil, the world, and the
   flesh; in respect of all which, we pray to be delivered from evil.

   [1.] From the evil which the devil designs against us. Both bad and
   good men have need to make this prayer: bad men have need; good men
   will have a heart certainly to pray thus to God, if they consider their
   danger.

   (1.) Natural and unconverted men, they are under the power of the
   devil, if they were sensible of it; for the devils are said to be
   rulers of the darkness of this world,' Eph. vi. 12. By which is meant
   the wicked, ignorant, and carnal part of the world, whether they live
   in Gentilism, or within the pale and line of Christ's communion; over
   all those that live in their unrenewed state of sin and ignorance, over
   all these, Satan hath an empire and dominion. And mark, when God
   carried on his kingdom in a way of sensible manifestation, by visions,
   oracles, and miracles, so did Satan visibly govern the pagan world by
   apparitions, oracles, lying wonders, and sensible manifestations of
   himself. But now, when God's kingdom is spiritual,--the kingdom of God
   is within yon,' Luke xvii. 21,--so by proportion, Satan's kingdom is
   spiritual too; he rules in the hearts of men, though they little think
   of it. All natural men, whether they be pagans or Christians, though
   outwardly and apparently they may renounce the devil's kingdom, and do
   not seem to have such open communion with him, as the Gentiles that
   consulted with his oracles, and were instructed by his apparitions,
   acted by his power, and offered sacrifice to him: but spiritually, all
   natural men are under the devil; for, 1 John iii. 8, He that committeth
   sin is of the devil;' that is, he belongeth to him. How is he of the
   devil? They are his children: Acts xiii. 10, O thou child of the
   devil.' And they are his subjects, he ruleth in them , he hath a
   kingdom among men, which by all means he goeth about to maintain: Mat.
   xii. 26, If Satan be divided against himself, how then can his kingdom
   stand?' And they are his workhouses, he worketh in them: Eph. ii. 2,
   The spirit that worketh in the children of disobedience.' The devil is
   hard at work in a wicked man's heart, framing evil thoughts, carnal
   motions; urging them to break God's laws; drawing them on to more sin
   and villainy; fills their hearts with lying, and all manner of sins:
   Acts v. 3, Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost?'
   He binds them with prejudices, and will not suffer them to hearken to
   the glorious gospel: 2 Cor. iv. 4, In whom the god of this world hath
   blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
   glorious gospel of Christ should shine unto them.' He blinds and holds
   them captive at his will and pleasure, their souls are fettered: 2 Tim.
   ii. 26. And sometimes he oppresses their bodies (for Satan carrieth on
   his kingdom by force, tyranny, fears, and bondage); and therefore it is
   said, Acts x. 38, that Christ went about doing good, and healing all
   that were oppressed of the devil.' Yet further, as God's executioner,
   he hath the power over death for their torment: Heb. ii. 14, That
   through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
   is, the devil.' And unless the Lord be merciful, he never ceaseth
   carrying on wicked men, until both they and he are for ever in hell:
   Mat. xxv. 41, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
   prepared for the devil and his angels.' All this is spoken, to show
   carnal men their condition. Oh that they would seriously think of it!
   When they do evil, when they slight the motions of God's grace, they
   are under Satan; and not only by force, as a child of God may be
   sometimes, but they are willingly ignorant: 2 Pet. iii. 5. The more
   willingly we commit sin, still the more we are under the power of the
   devil. Well, then, if any have need to say, Deliver us from evil,'
   certainly unrenewed carnal men have need to go to God, and say, Lord,
   pluck us out of evil;' as the same expression is used, Col. i. 13, Who
   hath delivered us from the power of darkness,' Hos errusato, who hath
   delivered us with a strong hand. Oh, go to God, in the name of Christ;
   there is no way of escape until God pluck you out by main forte. And
   mark, this power by which we are delivered, God conveyeth by the
   preaching of the word, which was appointed to turn us from darkness
   unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts xxvi. 18; and
   therefore hearken to God's counsel before your condition grow
   incurable, and wait upon the ordinances; for the more you neglect and
   contemn the means of your recovery, your misery increaseth upon you;
   for every day you are still more given up to Satan by the just judgment
   of God, and to be captivated and taken by him at his will and pleasure
   by the snares he sets for you.

   (2.) Good men, or God's own children, though they are delivered from
   the power of Satan, and brought into the kingdom of Christ, yet they
   are not wholly free in this world, but are sometimes caught by Satan's
   wiles, Eph. vi. 11, sometimes wounded by his fiery darts, ver. 16.
   Their lusts and their consciences are sometimes set a-raging; though he
   hath no allowed authority over their hearts, yet he exerciseth a
   tyrannical power; though he cannot rule them, yet he ceaseth not to
   assault them, if it were but to vex and trouble them. Briefly, the
   children of God have cause to pray, Deliver us from evil, in regard of
   Satan, because Satan hath a hand in their persecutions, and like wise a
   hand in their temptations to sin. It is he that instigateth their
   enemies to persecute them, and it is he that inflameth their lusts.

   (1st.) In stirring up their enemies to persecute them. All the troubles
   of the children of God, they come originally from the devil: Luke xxii.
   53, This is your hour, and the power of darkness.' We do not read that
   Satan did immediately vex Christ; and how was that hour then said to be
   the power of darkness? Why, by setting his instruments a-work to
   crucify him. And as he dealt with the head, so with the members: Rev.
   xii. 12, The devil hath great wrath, for he knoweth he hath but a short
   time.' When his kingdom begins to totter and shake, then he stirs up
   all his wrath, and inflames his instruments, as dying beasts bite
   hardest. So, Rev. xvi. 14, we read of the spirits of devils that go
   forth unto the kings of the earth, to stir them up against the saints.
   If you could behold, with your bodily eyes, this evil spirit hanging
   upon the ears of great men, and buzzing into them, and stirring them
   up, and the common people, and animating them against the children of
   God, you would more admire at the wonders of God's providence that you
   do subsist. Oh, how they are acted by this wrathful spirit!

   (2d.) By inflaming our lusts and corruptions. So, 1 Cor. vii. 5, lest
   Satan tempt you by your incontinency, sets lusts a-boiling, either to
   vex the saints or to ensnare them. It is possible he may sometimes
   prevail with God's own children to draw them to some particular act of
   gross sin, as 2 Sam. xi. 4, as when David defiled himself with lust,
   that thereby he may dishonour God; for by this means the name of God
   was blasphemed, 2 Sam. xii. 14. Or that thereby he may disturb their
   peace, for this made David lie roaring, Ps. xxxii. 3, 4; his radical
   moisture was even wasted and exhausted. Or else to spiritual sins, as
   murmuring, repining against God, distrust of providence when under
   crosses. Or when they are in their comforts, to drive them to carnal
   complacency and neglect of holy things, disuse of communion with God.
   Or to inordinate passions or spiritual wickedness, such as is not
   conversant about carnal passions or fleshly lusts, but spiritual pride,
   error, and unbelief. Certainly those that have anything of experience
   of the spiritual life cannot be ignorant of Satan's enterprises.

   Well, then, we had need go to God to deliver us from evil: for outward
   evils, for the protection of his providence; for these God hath
   undertaken: Ps. l. 15, Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will
   deliver thee.' Satan is in God's chains; he could not enter into the
   herd of swine without leave; therefore certainly he cannot get among
   the sheep of Christ's fold. It is the saying of Tertullian, If the
   bristles of swine be numbered, the hairs of our head are numbered;
   therefore you had need go to God (Deliver us from evil'), that
   persecution may not rage over you, that he may hedge you in by his
   providence, Job i. 10, and that he would be as a wall of fire round
   about you.

   As to inward evils, so we go to God for wisdom and strength; for Satan
   assaults us both ways, by wiles and darts: when he comes in a way of
   violence, he comes with fiery darts; but when he doth lie in ambush,
   there he hath his wiles to entice us with a seeming good. We--

   (1.) Beg wisdom, that you may espy the wiles of Satan, and may not be
   caught unawares, for he is transformed into an angel of light,' 2 Cor.
   xi. 14. Mark, the devil doth not care so much to ride his own horses,
   to act and draw wicked men to evil; he hath them sure enough; but he
   laboureth to employ the saints in his work, if he can, to get one which
   belongs to God to do his business; therefore he changeth himself into
   an angel of light. The temptation is disguised with very plausible
   pretences; then a child of God may be a factor for Satan, and an
   instrument of the devil. For instance, would Peter have ever made a
   motion for Satan if he had seen his hand? Oh, no; the temptation was
   disguised to him when he persuaded his Master from suffering. He
   covereth his foul designs with plausible pretences. Carnal counsel
   shall be pity and natural affection; Mat. xvi. 22, 23, Let not these
   things be; be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee. He
   said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan; thou art an offence unto
   me.' At another time, the disciples, when their Master was slighted and
   contemned, they thought certainly they should do as Elias did, call for
   fire from heaven to consume them, Luke ix. 54. Revenge will often go
   for zeal for God. Revenge, or storming at personal affronts or injuries
   done to ourselves, is looked upon as zeal; then the disciples may not
   know what spirit they are of. Many times we are acted by the devil when
   we think we are acted by the Spirit of God, and that which seems to be
   zeal is nothing but revenge. Therefore we had need go to God: Lord,
   deliver us from evil; we are poor unwary creatures; that we may not be
   ensnared by fair pretences and surprised by his enterprises. And thus
   we beg wisdom.

   (2.) We pray for strength to withstand his darts, that we may take the
   armour of God and withstand the evil one, Eph. vi. 13. Alas! of
   ourselves we cannot deliver ourselves from the least evil, or stand out
   against the least assault; therefore it is God alone that must keep the
   feet of his saints, 1 Sam. ii. 9. Therefore we go to him, that we may
   get his covenant strength, that we may be strong in the power of his
   might,' to conflict with Satan. Well, then, in regard of the first
   enemy of our salvation, the devil, we had need pray earnestly, that we
   may not be prevailed over by his arts; it is God alone that can keep
   us.

   [2.] The world, that is another evil which is, as it were, the devil's
   chessboard; we can hardly move backward or forward but he is ready to
   attack us and surprise us by one creature or another, and draw us into
   the snare. Therefore it is said, Gal. i. 4, that Christ gave himself
   for us, that he might deliver us from this present evil world.' That is
   one way of being delivered from evil, when we are delivered from an
   evil world. It concerns us, and it is a great point of religion, to be
   kept unspotted from the world,' James i. 27. The whole world is full of
   evils and temptations, and we cannot walk anywhere but we are likely to
   be defiled. The things of the world, the men of the world.

   (1.) The things of the world. All conditions of life become a snare to
   us, prosperity, adversity: Prov. xxx. 8, 9, Give me neither poverty nor
   riches; feed me with food convenient for me,' &c., lest I be full, and
   deny thee,' &c. Either condition hath its snares. A garment too short
   will not cover our nakedness, and too long proves lacinia praependens,
   ready to trip up our heels; and therefore both the one and the other
   condition are very dangerous. Many carry themselves well in one
   condition, but quite miscarry in another. As Ephraim was as a cake not
   turned, baked on the one side, Hosea vii. 8, quite dough on the other.
   Or as it is said of Joab, 1 Kings ii. 28, He turned after Adonijah,
   though he turned not after Absalom.' Some miscarry in adversity, others
   in prosperity. Indeed more under prosperity. Diseases which grow out of
   fulness are more rife than those which grow out of want; and fat and
   fertile soils are more rank of weeds. God's children most miscarry when
   all things are prosperous and flow in upon them, when they have lived
   in plenty. David was not soiled while he wandered up and down in the
   wilderness; but when he walked upon the terrace of his palace in
   Jerusalem, then he fell to lust and blood. The unsoundness of a vessel
   is not seen when it is empty; but when filled with water, then we see
   whether it be stanch, or leaky or no.

   But the other condition is not without its snares neither. In adversity
   we are apt to be impatient, as well as in prosperity to be forgetful of
   God; and therefore we had need learn how to go up hill and down hill,
   to know how to abound, and how to be abased,' Phil, iv. 12. Look, as
   the wind doth rise from all corners, so do temptations. When we are
   kept low and bare, or in danger, then we are full of worldly fears,
   distrusts, cares, grow base, pusillanimous, and have not the spirit and
   generosity of a Christian. In a high condition we are proud, secure,
   forgetful of changes, vain, wanton; and press towards heaven less, and
   grow dead to good things.

   (2.) As from the things of the world, so from the men of the world. We
   are apt to be poisoned by their bad example, and easily catch a
   sickness one from another. Good men may receive a taint: Isa. vi. 5, I
   am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
   unclean lips.' Open excesses do soon, manifest their own odiousness. I
   confess, a man that runs into open excess, we are not so much in danger
   of being enticed by him to the like practice; but we learn of one
   another secretly to be cold, careless, and less mortified. I say,
   though we are not carried into inordinate practices and gross
   wickednesses by the example of others, yet we learn to be cold in the
   profession of godliness, formal, less stirring in the way of holiness,
   and sometimes ensnared by their counsels. The flood and torrent of evil
   examples and counsels is so great, that it carrieth away men: Gal. ii.
   13, Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.' And the
   wills of men is one of our snares, 1 Pet. iv. 2. And besides, we are in
   danger to be terrified by their frowns, and act unseemly: Isa. viii.
   13, Fear not their fear, nor be afraid.' Out of the fear of men we are
   apt to miscarry in our duty to God. Well, then, we need to go to God to
   be delivered from the evil of the world, that we may not be infected
   nor terrified by the men of the world; or, which is the more usual
   temptation, corrupted by the things of the world. The world doth
   secretly and slightly insinuate with us; and therefore keep us from
   evil.

   Now how comes the world to be evil?

   In two things, when both our care and our delight is lessened towards
   heavenly things.

   (1.) When our care is lessened, when we are not so serious, so frequent
   in communion with God as we were wont to be; as Martha, that was
   cumbered about many things,' but Mary had chosen the better part,' Luke
   x. 42. When you begin to lessen your cares of duty, and Hagar thrusts
   Sarah out of doors, when the son of the bond-woman begins to mock at
   the son of the free-woman, when religion begins to be looked upon but
   as mopishness; to be so nice, precise, and so careful to maintain
   constant commerce with God; and begin to have lessening thoughts of
   God, and religion goes to the walls. So,

   (2.) When our delight is less in heavenly things, when we have lost our
   savour of the word, and ordinances, and Sabbaths, and they are not so
   sweet as before: 1 John ii. 16, If any man love the world, the love of
   the Father is not in him.' When the love of the world hath made you
   weary of the love of God, when your heart goes a-whoring from God, the
   chief good. As when the affections are scattered, a man is tempted to
   look upon other objects, the wife of the bosom is defrauded of her
   right; so God is defrauded by an over-delight in the creature, the
   world intercepts your delight: Ps. lxxiii. 27, 28, Thou hast destroyed
   all them that go a-whoring from thee; but it is good for me to draw
   nigh to God.' When our delight in communion with God is lessened by
   delight in the creature, it is spiritual adultery. Now when worldly
   objects are so continually with us, soliciting our affections, and
   drawing us away from God, oh what need have the best of us to pray,
   Lord, keep us from evil!' The soul doth easily receive a taint from the
   objects to which we are accustomed; therefore they which live in the
   world had need to take heed of a worldly spirit. The continual presence
   of the object doth secretly entice the heart; as long suits prevail at
   length, and green wood kindles by long lying in the fire. Insensibly is
   the heart drawn away from God, and you shall find less savour in holy
   things.

   [3.] We had need to pray earnestly, Lord, keep us from evil, because we
   are in danger of that other enemy, the flesh. There is not only an evil
   without us, as the devil and the world, but an evil within us: An evil
   heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God,' Heb. iii. 12. An
   evil heart, that is full of urgings and solicitations to sin. There are
   not only snares and temptations in the world, but there is a
   flexibleness in the party tempted: James i. 14, Every man is tempted,
   when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed,' hupo tes idias
   epithumias, of his own lust. The fire burns in our own hearts, Satan
   doth but blow up the flame. There is bad liquor in the vessel, Satan
   doth but only give it vent, and set it abroach with violence. We carry
   sinning natures about with us, therefore, Lord, Deliver us from evil.'
   The evil of the world would do no more hurt than the fire doth to a
   stone, if we were not combustible matter: The corruption that is in the
   world through lust,' 2 Pet. i. 4. The danger of living in the world
   doth not stand in this, because here are so many enticements and baits
   for every sense; but it is the corruption through lust; as the venom is
   not in the flower, but in the spider. The Philistines could not prevail
   against Samson if Delilah, on whom he doted, had not lulled him asleep;
   or as Balaam first corrupted Israel before he could curse them or bring
   them any harm: so corruption in the heart makes us liable to Satan's
   malice. There is a treacherous party within to open the door to Satan,
   without which all outward force could not annoy us.

   Well, then, we had need go to God: Lord, Deliver us from evil.'

   Where we beg:--

   (1.) That God would weaken the strength of inbred corruption, that we
   may not be foiled by it. Paul groans sadly, Rom. vii. 24, O wretched
   man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?' It is
   a question, but it implieth a wish, for the Hebrews propose their
   wishes by way of question; that is, Oh that I were delivered! It is a
   great mercy to be kept from falling into sin: kept from every evil
   work,' 2 Tim. iv. 18.

   (2.) If we be foiled by our corruption, we beg that we may not lie in
   it, nor grow weary of our resistance, nor cast away our weapons, and
   suffer sin to have a quiet reign: Ps. cxix. 133, Let not any iniquity
   have dominion over me.' We cannot hope for a total exemption from sin,
   but, O Lord, let it not reign over us. How shall we know when sin
   reigns? When there is no course of mortification set up against it, to
   break the power, force, and tyranny of it. Take this distinction: There
   are remaining and reserved corruptions; sin remains where it doth not
   reign; but reserved corruption, that is reigning. I will explain it
   thus: sin remains when, notwithstanding all our endeavours, yet it
   still haunts and pesters us, though praying, watching, striving,
   waiting, and depending upon God for strength; but it is reserved when
   you let it alone and are loth to touch it, but rather cherish, dandle,
   and foster it in the heart, and make provision for it. Therefore then
   are we delivered from evil when we recover by repentance; and though we
   suffer by the tyranny of sin, we will not let it alone to have a quiet
   reign in our hearts, do not live under the power of corruptions. Sin
   let alone will do us further mischief.

   Secondly, As we have reason to pray to God with earnestness, be cause
   of our danger; so with confidence, because of God's undertaking: 2
   Thes. iii. 3, The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep
   you from evil.' God hath undertaken to keep those who, with humble and
   broken hearts, do come to him to be kept from evil; that are watchful,
   serious, and careful to get evils redressed as soon as discerned;
   therefore we may come with an assured confidence to be delivered from
   all evil.

   How far hath God undertaken to keep his people from evils and dangers
   in this life? I answer:--

   [1.] So far as may be hurtful to their souls: 1 Cor. x. 13, God is
   faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able;
   but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
   able to bear it.' It is part of God's faithfulness to keep you from
   evil, to proportion and temper temptation to your strength. God suits
   the burden to every back, he drives on as the little ones are able to
   bear; therefore certainly he will mitigate temptation, or give in
   supply of strength.

   [2.] God will keep you from the evil of sin so far as it is deadly;
   that is, that it be not a sin unto death, 1 John v. 16; and that it may
   not reign in our mortal bodies, for you are dead to it: Rom. vi. 14,
   For sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the law,
   but under grace.'

   [3.] God undertakes for our final deliverance from all evil upon our
   translation to heaven. This is included in this prayer, that we may at
   length come to that state where is no sorrow, no sin, no assault and
   temptation from Satan, that we may be kept from all wickedness: Ps.
   xxxiv. 19, Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord
   delivereth him out of them all.' There is a time when God delivereth us
   from all at once, and that is by death and our translation into heaven.

   Well, then, let us fly to God for deliverance, waiting for his help.

   Doct. That to be kept from the evil of temptation is a greater mercy
   than to be kept from the trouble of temptation.

   Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil;' that is, if we
   be led into temptation, let us be kept from the evil of it.

   First, It is a more wonderful providence to be kept from evil than from
   temptation; esse bonum facile est, ubi quod vetat esse remotum est. It
   is no great matter to be chaste or honest, when there is no temptation
   to the contrary. Ay, but to keep our integrity in the midst of assaults
   and temptations, there is the wonder. If a garrison be never assaulted,
   it is no wonder that it standeth exempt from the calamity of war. This
   is like the bush that was burned, yet not consumed; exercised with
   temptation from day to day, and yet kept from evil. And in this sense
   God's power is more glorified than in keeping the angels; for the
   angels are out of gun-shot and harm's way, and not liable to
   temptations. But to preserve a poor weak creature in the midst of
   temptation, oh, how is the power of God made perfect in weakness!' 2
   Cor. xii. 9: perfected, that is, gloriously discovered.

   Secondly, The evil of sin is greater than the evil of affliction or
   trouble.

   [1.] The evil of sin is the greater evil, because it separateth from
   God: Isa. lix. 2. It is an aversion from the chiefest good. Affliction
   doth not separate from God, it is a means to make us draw nigh to him.
   Poverty, sickness, blindness, loss of goods, let a man be never so low
   and loathsome, yet if in a state of grace, the Lord taketh plea sure in
   him, and he is near and dear to God; God kisseth him with the kisses of
   his mouth; nothing is loathsome to God but sin.

   [2.] Sin is evil in itself, whether we feel it or no; affliction is not
   evil in itself, but in our sense and feeling: Heb. xii. 11. Sin is
   evil, whether we feel it or no; it is worse when we do not feel it:
   Past feeling,' Eph. iv. 19, when our conscience is benumbed.

   [3.] Affliction, or malum poenae, is an act of divine justice; but
   malum culpae is an act of man's corruptness. For the first, affliction,
   Amos vi. 3, Is there any evil, and the Lord hath not done it?' But sin
   is the devil's work in us: 1 John iii. 8, He that committeth sin, is of
   the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose
   the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
   devil.' And John viii. 34, Whosoever committeth sin, is the servant of
   sin.' The one cometh from a just God, the other from our corrupt
   hearts. The one is the act of a holy God, the other the act of a sinful
   creature.

   [4.] The death of Christ falls more directly upon this
   benefit--exemption from sin: Mat. i. 21, He shall save his people from
   their sins;' Acts iii. 26, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him
   to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities;'
   not troubles or sorrows, but sins.

   [5.] Affliction is a more particular temporal evil, but sin is an
   infinite universal evil. Sickness depriveth us of health, poverty of
   wealth, &c., and every adverse providence doth but oppose some
   particular temporal good; but sin depriveth us of God, who is the
   fountain of our comfort; the other but of some limited comfort.

   [6.] Afflictions are sent to remove sin: Heb. xii. 11, Now no
   chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous;
   nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness
   unto them which are exercised thereby;' Isa. xxvi. 9, When thy
   judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
   righteousness:' but sin is not sent to remove affliction. Now the end
   must be greater than the means, both as to prosecution and aversation.
   As to prosecution; to dig for iron with mattocks of gold and silver. So
   in aversation; if death were not worse than the pain of physic, no man
   would take physic to avoid death.

   [7.] Affliction is the effect of God's love: Heb. xii. 6, Whom the Lord
   loveth he chasteneth.' But to be left to sin is an effect of God's
   anger. God doth not always exempt from troubles; yet if he keep from
   spiritual hurt thereby, if he sanctify the trouble, support us with
   sufficient grace, 2 Cor. xii. 9; if preserved from evil, howsoever
   tempted and exercised, it is enough.

   Use 1. To reprove our folly. We complain of other things, but we do not
   complain of sin, which is the greatest evil. This is contrary to the
   spirit of God's children, who rejoice in troubles, but not in sins: 2
   Cor. xii. 9, Most gladly therefore will I rejoice in infirmities, that
   the power of Christ may rest upon me.' They groan bitterly under sins:
   Rom. vii. 23, O wretched man!' &c. If any man had cause to complain of
   afflictions, Paul had: in perils often, whipped, persecuted, stoned.
   But the body of sin and death was the greatest burden: lusts troubled
   him more than scourges; his captivity to the law of sin more than
   prisons. When affliction sitteth too close, sin sits loose. In
   affliction there is some offence done us, but in sin the wrong is done
   to God. And what are we to God? Afflictions may be good, but sin is
   never good. The body suffereth by affliction, but the soul suffereth by
   sin loss of grace and comfort, which are not to be valued by all the
   world's enjoyments. The evil of affliction is but for a moment--like
   rain, it drieth up of its own accord; but the evil of sin is for ever,
   unless it be pardoned and taken away. Sin is the cause of all the evils
   of affliction; therefore when we complain, we should complain, not so
   much of the smart, as of the cause of it.

   2. It directeth us:--

   [1.] How to pray to God against sin rather than trouble. This is indeed
   to be delivered from evil: 2 Tim. iv. 18, Paul reckoned upon that, He
   will deliver me from every evil work.' When afflicted, you should
   rather desire to have the affliction sanctified than removed; you will
   be most careful for that; saints do not pray for the interests of the
   old man rather than the new man. To be freed from trouble is a common
   mercy, but to have it sanctified is a special mercy. Carnal men may be
   without affliction, but carnal men cannot have experience of grace.
   Bare deliverance is no sign of special love.

   [2.] In our choice. It was a heavy charge they put upon Job: Job xxxvi.
   21, Thou hast chosen iniquity rather than affliction.' Sometimes we are
   put upon the trial, to lose the favour of God or the favour of men,
   duty and danger: here content myself, gratify my lusts and interests;
   there offend God. Out of the temptation, we could easily judge that all
   the misery in the world is to be endured rather than commit the least
   sin. But how is it upon a trial, when a worldly convenience and a
   spiritual inconvenience is proposed? By choosing sin, a man cannot
   altogether escape affliction here or here after. Wickedness, though it
   prosper a while, yet at length it proveth a snare.

   3. It directeth us to submit to God's providence, and to own mercy in
   it. Though God doth not exempt us from troubles, yet if he keep us from
   hurt thereby, if he sanctify the trouble, and support us with grace
   sufficient, it is his mercy to us. For Daniel to be put into the lions'
   den was not so great a judgment as for Nebuchadnezzar to have the heart
   of a beast. To be given up to our own hearts' lusts, to commit any sin,
   it is a greater cross than any misery that can light upon us; therefore
   let us be patient under affliction. Our great care should be, not to
   dishonour God in any condition. God hath promised to be with his people
   in their afflictions to comfort them; but hath never promised to be
   with his people in their sins: I will be with you in the fire, and in
   the water.' as the Son of God was with the three children in the fiery
   furnace. But God is departed when they sin; I will go to my own place.
   Sin hindereth prayer, but afflictions quicken it: Isa. xxvi. 16, Lord,
   in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer when thy
   chastening was upon them.' In affliction it is a time to put the
   promises in suit; it doth not hinder our access to God and the throne
   of grace, but driveth us to it. But sin increaseth our bondage, maketh
   us stand at a distance, and grow shy of God. The fruit of sin is shame,
   Rom. vi. 21.

   4. It teaches us how to wait and hope for the issue of our prayers.
   Pray that ye enter not into temptation; yet be not absolute in that,
   but to be kept from evil, that what way soever we are tried we may be
   kept from the evil of sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever.
   Amen.

   IN these words we have the conclusion of all, and that which giveth us
   confidence in the requests we make to God.

   First, The confirmation is taken from the excellency of God, to whom we
   pray; where there is a declaration of what belongeth to God:--

   Secondly, The duration and perpetuity, for ever.

   Three things are mentioned as belonging to God--kingdom, power, and
   glory.

   1. By kingdom is meant God's right and authority over all things, by
   which he can dispose of them according to his own pleasure.

   2. By power is meant his sufficiency to execute this right, and to do
   what he pleaseth, both in heaven and earth.

   3. The final cause of all is his glory. Thine is the glory,' or the
   honour of all things in the world belongs to thee. Glory is excellency
   discovered with praise. We desire that he may be more honoured and
   brought into request and esteem.

   Secondly, We have the obsignation and sealing of our requests in the
   word Amen; which is, signaculum fidei, an expression of our faith and
   hope. And actus desiderii, the strength of our desire. There is the
   Amen of faith, and the Amen of hearty desire; as by and by.

   Now let us look upon this conclusion, first, as a doxology or
   expression of praise to God: and the note is:--

   Doct. That hi every address to God, lauding or praising of God is
   necessary.

   For in this perfect form of prayer Christ teacheth us, not only to ask
   things needful for ourselves, but to ascribe to God things proper to
   him.

   There are two words used in this case in scripture, praise and
   blessing. Praise relateth to God's excellency, and blessing to his
   benefits: Ps. cxlv. 10, All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord; and
   thy saints shall bless thee.' All the works of God declare his
   excellency; but the saints will ever be ascribing to God the benefits
   they have received from him. So they are spoken of as things, though
   somewhat alike, yet as distinct: Neh. ix. 5, Blessed be thy glorious
   name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.' Our praise
   cannot reach the excellency of his nature; nor our blessing express the
   worth of his benefits. Both may be here intended. For thine is kingdom
   and power, relateth to his excellency, and thine is the glory, to his
   benefits; for God's glory is the reflex of all his works, and so
   expresseth the benefits showed to the sons of men, especially to his
   people. Well, then, whenever you would pray to God to bless you, you
   must bless God again, and praise his name: Eph. i. 3, Blessed be the
   God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all
   spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.' It is the echo and
   reflex of his grace and mercy to the creatures. God blesseth us, and we
   bless God; as the echo returneth the word, or the wall beateth back the
   beams of the sun. Only consider, we bless God far otherwise than he
   blesseth us: God's blessing is operative, ours declarative; his words
   are accompanied with power: benedicere is benefacere. He doth good; we
   speak good when we remember the blessed effects of his grace, and tell
   what he hath done for our souls.

   The reasons why we are to mingle praises and thanksgivings with our
   requests are these:--

   [1.] Because this complieth more with the great end of worship; which
   is not so much the relief of man as the honour of God; therefore we
   should not only intend the supply of our necessities, for that is but a
   brutish cry, howling for corn, wine, and oil, Hosea vii. 14; but we
   should intend also the honour of God: Ps. 1. 23, Whoso offereth praise
   glorifieth me.' A man may offer requests to God, yet not honour him,
   but seek himself; but he that offereth praise glorifieth me. He that
   doth affectionately, and from his heart, give God the honour of his
   attributes and titles in scripture, he glorifieth him; and therefore
   worship being for the glory of God, that should not be left out.

   [2.] This is the most effectual spiritual oratory, or way of praying:
   Ps. lxvii. 5, Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
   praise thee.' What then? Then shall the earth yield her increase; and
   God, even our own God, shall bless us.' We have comforts increased the
   more we praise God for what we have already received. The more vapours
   go up, the more showers come down; as the rivers receive so they pour
   out, and all run into the sea again. There is a constant circular
   course and recourse from the sea unto the sea. So there is between God
   and us; the more we praise him the more our blessings come down; and
   the more his blessings come down the more we praise him again; so that
   we do not so much bless God as bless ourselves. When the springs lie
   low we pour a little water into the pump, not to enrich the fountain,
   but to bring up more for ourselves.

   [3.] It is the noblest part of worship, and most excellent and
   acceptable service. It is a great honour to creatures to bestow
   blessing upon God. In other duties God is bestowing something on us;
   but in praise (according to our manner, and as creatures can) we bestow
   something upon God. In prayer, we come as beggars, expecting an alms;
   in hearing, we come as scholars and disciples, expecting instruction
   from God. Here (according to our measure and ability) we give something
   to him; not because he needs it, being infinitely perfect, but because
   he deserves it, being infinitely gracious. This is the work of angels
   and glorified saints. Other duties more agree with our imperfect state,
   as hearing and prayer, that our wants may be supplied; but this duty
   agrees with our state when we are most perfect. Love is the grace of
   heaven, and praise the duty of heaven; we are for vials, they harps:
   prayer is our main work, and praise theirs.

   Use. To reprove us, that we are altogether for the supply of our
   necessities, but little think of giving God the honour due to his name.
   Either we meddle not with it at all, or do it in a very flighty
   fashion. In this perfect form the glory of God is the Alpha and Omega,
   the beginning and the ending of this short prayer. The first petition
   it is for God's glory, and the final conclusion also. And therefore it
   is verily a fault that God is no more praised. In our addresses to him
   (Ps. xxii. 3) it is said, O thou that inhabitest the praises of
   Israel;' the meaning is, dwellest in Israel, where he is praised of
   them, because it is the great work they are about.

   Surely our assemblies should more resound with the praises of God. In
   church worship there should be a mixture of harps, which are
   instruments of praise, as well as vials full of odours, which are the
   prayers of the saints,' Rev. v. 8. But usually we thrust gratulation,
   thanksgiving, and praise, into a narrow room, and are scanty therein,
   but can be large and copious in expressing our wants and begging a
   supply. This duty is made too great a stranger in your dealings with
   God. What are the reasons of this defect?

   [1.] Self-love. We are eager to have blessings, but we forget to return
   to give God the glory. Prayer is a work of necessity, but praise a work
   of duty and homage. Self-love puts us upon prayer, but the love of God
   upon praise. Now, because we are so full of self-love, therefore are we
   so backward to this duty.

   [2.] A second cause is our stupid negligence; we do not gather up
   matter of thanksgiving, and observe God's gracious dealing with us,
   that we may have wherewith to enlarge ourselves in giving glory to his
   name: Col. iv. 2, Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with
   thanksgiving.' We should continually observe God's answers and visits
   of love, and what attributes he makes good to us in the course of his
   providence. But out of spiritual laziness we do not take notice of
   these things, therefore no wonder if we are backward to speak good of
   his name, but are always whining, murmuring, and complaining.

   Secondly, It is not only a doxology, but a full one, and very
   expressive of the excellency of God. From whence note:--

   Doct. The saints are not niggardly and sparing in praising of God;
   kingdom, power, and glory, and all that is excellent, they ascribe to
   him.

   A gracious heart hath such a sense of God's worth and excellency that
   he thinks he can never speak honourably enough of it. See how David
   enlargeth himself very suitably to what is spoken here: 1 Chron. xxix.
   10-13, And David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God, for ever and ever:
   thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
   victory, and the majesty: thine is the kingdom, Lord, and thou art
   exalted as head above all. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and
   praise thy glorious name.' Oh, when once a child of God falls upon
   speaking of God, he cannot tell how to come out of the meditation: he
   seeth so much is due to God that he heaps words upon words. So 1 Tim.
   i. 17, Now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
   God, be honour and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.' And in many other
   places of scripture. Now, this copiousness in praising of God is,
   partly, because of the excellency of the object: Neh. ix. 5, Blessed be
   thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.'
   When they have done what they can to bless God, remember his benefits,
   or praise God, and recount his excellencies, still they come too far
   short; therefore when we cannot do all, we should do much. And partly,
   it is from the greatness and largeness of their affection; they think
   never to have done enough for God, whom they love so much. David saith,
   I will praise him yet more and more.' They cannot satisfy themselves by
   taking up the excellency of God in one notion only; therefore majesty,
   greatness, glory, wisdom, and power, they mention all things which are
   honourable and glorious.

   Use. The use is again to reprove us for being so cold and sparing this
   way. It argueth a want of a due sense of God's excellency and
   straitness of spiritual affection; therefore we should study God more,
   and observe his manifold excellencies. Get a greater esteem of him in
   your hearts, for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth will
   speak.' We should be calling upon ourselves, as David, Ps. ciii. 1:
   Bless the Lord, my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy
   name.'

   Thirdly, I observe again, it is brought in with a for, as relating to
   the foregoing petitions: Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
   from evil: for thine is the kingdom,' &c.

   What respect hath this doxology to the foregoing requests?

   First, It serves to increase our confidence in prayer.

   Secondly, Our reverence and affection.

   Thirdly, To regulate and direct our prayers:--

   [1.] As to the person to whom we .pray.

   [2.] As to the manner of asking.

   [3.] As to the persons praying.

   Let us see all these requests. [29]

   First, The great end is to increase our confidence. Observe,

   Doct. It is a great relief to a soul, in praying to God, to consider
   that his is the kingdom, power, and glory; and all these for ever.

   His is the kingdom.

   God hath the sovereign government of all things. And then his right to
   govern is backed with all-sufficient power and strength; and so he can
   dispose of his sovereignty for the bringing to pass what we expect from
   him.

   Authority is one thing, and power another, but they both meet in God;
   he hath all power and authority.

   And then, his is the glory: he is concerned as well as we; yea more,
   his interest is greater than ours, for the glory of all belongs to him:
   and all this, not for a time, but for ever. These are the
   encouragements to raise our confidence that our prayers shall be heard
   and granted when we ask anything according to his will.

   There are two things that give us confidence in any that we sue to--if
   he be able and willing. Now God is able to grant our requests, and very
   prone and willing also. We are taught it sufficiently in this prayer;
   for we begin with him as Father, and we end with him as a glorious and
   powerful king; his fatherly affection, on the one hand, shows that he
   is willing; and his royal power, on the other, that he is able: so that
   if we ask anything according to his will, we need not doubt. We may
   gather his power and will out of this very clause: His power; for his
   is the kingdom, and power, or a right and authority, backed with
   absolute all-sufficiency. Then his will, Thine is the glory;' it is his
   glory to grant our petitions, not only matter of happiness to us, but
   of glory to God, therefore we need not doubt.

   But more particularly:--

   [1.] There is confidence established by that, that his is the kingdom.
   God's kingdom is either universal, over all men or things; or
   particular and special, which notes his relation to the saints, to
   those which have given up themselves to his government, to be guided by
   him to everlasting glory: and both these are grounds of confidence.

   (1.) His universal kingdom over all persons and things in the world.
   This kingdom is an absolute monarchy, with a plenary dominion and
   propriety grounded upon his creation of them. There is a twofold
   dominion--dominium jurisdictionis, and dominium proprietatis. The one
   is such as a king hath over his subjects; the other, such as a king
   hath in his goods and lands: the latter is greater than the former. A
   king hath a dominion of jurisdiction over his subjects to command and
   govern them; but he hath not such an absolute propriety in their
   persons as he hath in his own goods and lands; he may dispose of them
   absolutely at his own pleasure, but his jurisdiction is limited. In
   short, we must distinguish of his dominion as a ruler, and as an owner.
   But both these, they concur in God, and that in the highest degree, for
   God is owner as well as ruler; he made all things out of nothing,
   therefore hath a more absolute dominion over us than any potentate or
   king can have, not only over his subjects, but his goods; and can
   govern all things, men, angels, and devils, according to his pleasure.
   It is more absolute than any superiority in the world, and more
   universal, as comprising all persons and things. God hath right to be
   king, because he gave being to all things, which no earthly potentate
   can: therefore the author must be owner. All other kings are liable to
   be called to account and reckoning by this great king, for their
   administration; but God is absolute and supreme.

   Now this is a great encouragement to us, that we go to a God that hath
   an absolute right, for which he is responsible to none. We go not to a
   servant or a subordinate agent, who may be controlled by a higher
   power, and whose act may be disannulled; but to an absolute lord, to
   whom none can say, What doest thou?' Job ix. 12. Here is the comfort of
   a believer, that he goes immediately to the fountain and owner of all
   things; the absolute lord of all the world is his father; the sovereign
   and free disposing of all things is in his hand. If we expect anything
   from subordinate instruments, God's leave must first be asked, or they
   can do nothing for us; but he can do what he pleaseth, it is his own:
   Mat. xx. 15, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?'
   None can call him to an account.

   (2.) His relation to the saints. It is the duty of a king to defend his
   subjects, and provide for their welfare; so God, being king, will see
   that it be well with those that are under his government. It concerns
   you much to get an interest to be under this king, then to mention it
   in prayer: Ps. xliv. 4, Thou art my king, O God; command deliverances
   for Jacob.' If you want anything for yourselves or the church, put God
   in mind of his relation to you: Thou art my king.' Let not this
   interest lie neglected or unpleaded. All the benefit which subjects can
   expect from a potent king you may expect from God.

   Again, the word command is notable, and expresseth the case to the
   full: command deliverances.' All things are at God's command and beck;
   if he do but speak the word, or give out order to second causes, if; is
   all done in a trice. So Ps. v. 2, Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my
   king and my God: for unto thee will I pray.' To thee, and to none
   other. Why should we go to servants, when we may go to the king
   himself? So Ps. lxxiv. 12, For God is my king of old, working salvation
   in the midst of the earth.' God will defend his kingdom, and right his
   injured subjects. Therefore, if we would have any blessing to be
   accomplished for ourselves, or for the public, let us go to God: Thine
   is the kingdom.' And more especially, if we would have any good thing
   to be done by those in authority and subordinate power over us, do not
   so much treat with them as with God. Let us beseech God to persuade and
   incline their hearts, for his is the kingdom; he can move them to do
   what shall be for the glory of his name, and the comfort and benefit of
   his afflicted people. Let us go to God, who is the sovereign king; he
   can give you to live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
   honesty,' 1 Tim. ii. 2. Or, he can give you favour; dispose of their
   hearts to do good to his people: Neh. i. 11, Prosper, I pray thee, thy
   servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man; for I
   was the king's cup bearer.' The sovereign disposal of all things is in
   the hand of God.

   [2.] Thine is the power. This also is an argument of confidence, that
   God hath not only a kingdom, but power to back it. Titles without power
   make authority ridiculous, and beget scorn, not reverence and respect.
   But now God's kingdom is accompanied with power and all-sufficiency. He
   hath right to command all, and no creature can be too hard for him.
   Earthly kings, when they have authority and power, yet it is limited: 2
   Kings vi. 27, When the woman came to the king of Israel, Help, my lord,
   king. And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help
   thee?' But God's is an unlimited power: an absolute right and an
   unlimited power, they meet fitly in God; therefore this is an
   encouragement to go to him. Christians, that power of God which educed
   all things out of nothing, which established the heavens, which fixed
   the earth; that power of God, it is the ground of our confidence: Ps.
   cxxi. 2, My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.'
   This power should we depend upon.

   We can ask nothing but what God is able to give, yea, above our asking:
   Eph. iii. 20, Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly
   above all that we ask or think.' Our thoughts are vast, and our desires
   very craving, and yet beyond all that we can ask or think, According to
   the mighty power that worketh in us.' We cannot empty the ocean with a
   nutshell, nor comprehend the infinite God, and raise our thoughts to
   the vast extent of his power, only we must go to some instances of
   God's power; that power which made the world out of nothing, and that
   power which wrought in you, where there is such infinite resistance. We
   may go to God and say, Mat. viii. 2, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst
   make me clean.' You need not trouble yourselves about his will; he is
   so good and gracious, prone and ready to do good; so inclinable: he is
   your heavenly Father. But that which is most questioned is the
   sufficiency of God; can you believe his power? Now determine but that,
   Lord, thou canst, and that is a great relief to the soul. Our wants are
   not so many but God is able to supply them; our enemies and corruptions
   not so strong but God is able to subdue them: surely your heavenly
   Father will do what is in the power of his hand. A beggar, when he
   seeth an ordinary man coming, lets him pass without much importunity;
   but when he seeth a man well habited, well attended, and with rich
   accoutrements, he runs close to him, and will not let him alone, but
   follows him with his clamour, knows it is in his power to help him. So
   this should encourage us to go to the mighty God, which made heaven and
   earth, and all things out of nothing.

   The third argument which Christ propounds, Thine is the glory.' The
   honour and glory of all will redound to God, as the comfort accrueth to
   us; it is for God's honour to show forth his power in our relief, and
   to be as good as his word. Now this is a ground of confidence, that he
   hath joined his glory and our good together; and that God's praise
   waiteth, while our deliverance waiteth: Ps. lxv. 1, Praise waiteth for
   thee, O God, in Zion.' You think your comfort stays, and all this while
   God's honour waits. So Ps. cxii. 1, Praise ye the Lord; blessed is the
   man that feareth the Lord.' It is the Lord's praise that his servants
   are the only and blessed people in the world; and this is a wonderful
   ground of confidence. Think, surely God's glory he will be chary and
   tender of; he will provide for the glory of his great name. There is
   nothing God stands upon more than upon the glory of his name; nothing
   prevaileth with God more than that. If God were a loser by your
   comforts, if he could not save or bless thee without wrong done to
   himself, we might be discouraged. But when you come and plead with him,
   as Abigail, It will be no grief of heart unto my lord to forgive thy
   servant;' so it will be no loss to God if he show mercy and pity to
   such poor creatures as we are; you then may pray more freely and
   boldly. If thy comforts were inconsistent with his glory, or were not
   so greatly exalted by it, then it were another matter; but all makes
   for the glory of his name. If our good and happiness were only
   concerned in it, there might be some suspicion; but the glory of God is
   concerned, which is more worth than all the world. We are unworthy to
   be heard and accepted, but God is worthy to be honoured. It is for the
   honour of God to choose base, mean, and contemptible things, and to
   show forth the riches, goodness, power, and treasure of his glory. Much
   of our trouble and distrust comes only from reflecting upon our own
   good in the mercies that we ask, as if God were not concerned in them,
   whereas the Lord is concerned as well as you. As the ivy wrapped about
   the tree cannot be hurt, except you do hurt to the tree, so the Lord
   hath twisted our concernment about his own honour and glory. Thus the
   saints plead God's glory as an argument: Jer. xiv. 7, O Lord, though
   our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy name's sake.'
   They do not tell him what he shall do, but do thou that which shall be
   for thy glory. So Ezek. xxxvi. 22, Thus saith the Lord God, I do not
   this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's sake;'
   so Isa. xlviii. 9, For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for
   my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.'

   [4.] The duration, for ever. All excellencies which are in God, they
   are eternally in God. God is an infinite, simple, independent being,
   the cause of all things, but caused by none; therefore he was from
   everlasting, and will be to everlasting: Ps. xc. 2, Before the
   mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and
   the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.' If
   there were a time when God was not, then there was a time when nothing
   was; and then there would never have been anything, unless nothing
   could make all things. Therefore God is eternally glorious; for what
   ever is in God is originally in himself, and absolutely without
   dependence on any other, to everlasting. How loosely do honours sit
   upon men! Every disease shakes them out of their kingdom, power, and
   glory; and within a little while the state, show, and all the command
   of earthly kings will fade away, and come to nothing. Governors and
   government may die, principalities grow old and infirm, and sicken and
   die, as well as princes; kingdoms expire, like kings, and they like us:
   Ps. lxxxii. 6, 7, I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children
   of the Most High: but ye shall die like men.' But thy throne, O God, is
   for ever and ever,' Ps. xlv. 6. His kingdom, and power, and glory, they
   are without beginning and without end. Now this is also a ground of
   confidence and dependence upon God. Earthly kings, when they perish,
   their favourites are counted offenders: 1 Kings i. 21, When my lord the
   king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be
   counted offenders.' When other governors are set up, they and their
   children will be found offenders. But our king lives for ever;
   therefore this should encourage us to be oftener in attendance upon
   God, performing it with all diligence and seriousness, rather than
   court the humours and lusts of earthly potentates, who die like one of
   the people, and leave us exposed to the rage and wrath of others that
   do succeed them. But God is the same that ever he was, to all those
   that ever called upon his name. God is where he was at first: I AM is
   his name; there is no wrinkle upon the brow of eternity. His arm is not
   short, that it cannot save; or his ear heavy, that it cannot hear,'
   Isa. lix. 1. Whatever he hath been to his people that have called upon
   him in former ages, he is the same still. So Isa. li. 9, Awake, awake,
   put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake, as in the ancient days, in
   the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and
   wounded the dragon?' God hath done great things for his people: he
   smote Rahab, and killed the dragon (meaning Pharaoh); and God is the
   same God still his kingdom, power, and glory are for ever; and God will
   be your God too for ever more. Look, as this doth increase the terror
   of the damned in hell, that they fall into the hands of the living
   God.' Heb. x. 31--God lives for ever to see vengeance executed upon his
   enemies--so it is a comfort to have an interest in the living God, that
   can and will keep you, and bring you to heaven, where you shall be with
   him for ever more, that will ever live to see his friends rewarded.

   Secondly, It directeth and regulateth our prayers.

   [1.] It directs us to the object of prayer; to whom should we pray, but
   to him that is absolute and above control? To God, and God alone; not
   to angels and saints. To whom should we go in our necessities, but to
   him that hath dominion over all things, and power to dispose of them
   for his own glory? Will you think it a boldness to go immediately to
   God? It were so indeed if we had not a Mediator, for a fallen creature
   can never have the impudence; and wicked men that have not got an
   interest in Christ cannot expect relief from God; but it is no
   impudence to come with a Mediator: Heb. iv. 16, Let us therefore come
   boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace
   to help in time of need.'

   [2.] It directs us how to conceive of God in prayer. Right thoughts of
   God in prayer are very necessary and very difficult. No one thing
   troubleth the saints so much as this, how to fix their thoughts in the
   apprehensions of God when they pray to him. Now here is a direction how
   we should look upon God: look upon him as the eternal being, and first
   cause, to whom belongs kingdom, power, and glory. We cannot see God's
   essence, and therefore we must conceive of him according to his praises
   in the word. Now take but the preface and the conclusion, and then you
   have a full description of God. Look upon him as an eternal being,
   whose is the kingdom, absolute right to dispose of all things in the
   world, backed with all-sufficiency and strength. And look upon him as
   your Father that is in heaven; for Our Father which art in heaven
   relates to Christ, that is, in the heavenly sanctuary, appearing before
   God for us. This will help you in your conceptions of God, that you may
   not be puzzled nor entangled in prayer.

   [3.] It directs us as to the manner of praying: with reverence, with
   self-abhorrency, and with submission.

   (1.) With reverence, for he is a great, powerful, and glorious king:
   Thine is the kingdom, power, and glory.' Oh, shall we serve God then in
   a slight and careless fashion? Mal. i. 8, If ye offer the blind, the
   lame, and sick for sacrifice, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy
   governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the
   Lord of hosts.' Go to an earthly king, would you come to him with rude
   addresses, not thinking what to say, tumbling out words without sense
   and understanding? And compare this with ver. 14: saith God, when they
   brought him a sickly offering, I am a great king,' implying it is a
   lessening of his majesty. You do as it were dethrone God, you put him
   besides his kingdom, you do not treat him as he doth deserve, if you do
   not come into his presence with a holy trembling.

   (2.) With self-abhorrency, and a sense of your own nothingness. I
   observe this, because all the arguments in prayer are not taken from
   us, but from what is in God, from his attributes: Thine is the kingdom,
   power, and glory.' It is a blessed thing to have God's attributes on
   our side; to take an argument from God when we can take none from
   ourselves. Christ teacheth us to come with self-denial. The two first
   words, kingdom and power, show that all things come from God, as the
   first cause. And the last word, Thine is the glory,' shows all must be
   referred to God, as the last end; so that self must be cast out. So
   that all the reasons of audience and acceptance are without us, not
   from within us: Dan. ix. 8, 9, To us belongeth confusion of face; to
   the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses.' Therefore thus it
   directs us to place all our confidence in God's fatherly affection, in
   his power, goodness, and glory, and in his absolute authority; nothing
   to move God from ourselves.

   (3.) To come with submission. Thine is the kingdom; that is, he hath an
   absolute power to dispose of all blessings, therefore it is lawful for
   him to do with his own as he pleaseth. We must come, not murmuring or
   prescribing to God, but expecting the fulfilling of our desires, as it
   shall seem good to the Lord, according to his wisdom and power, by
   which he exercises his kingdom over all things, as may be for the glory
   of his name: Ps. cxv. 1, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
   name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.' Not to
   satisfy our revenge, not to gratify our private interest and passions;
   but, Lord, for thy name's sake, as may be for manifesting thy mercy and
   truth, so do it: not too passionate for our own ends, but confident
   that God, who hath the kingdom and government of the world in his own
   hands, will administer and carry on all things for his own glory.

   [4.] It directs us, again, what are the duties of the persons praying.

   (1.) Freely to resign up ourselves to God's service. Otherwise we mock
   God, when we acknowledge his dominion over all the world, and we
   ourselves will not be made subject to God. Therefore certainly a man
   that useth this prayer, Thine is the kingdom, power, and glory,' will
   also say, I am thine, save me,' Ps. cxix. 94. Let us freely resign up
   ourselves for him to reign over us. Can you say, with any face, to God,
   Thine is the kingdom,' yet cherish rebellious lusts in your own hearts?
   It is the most unsuitable thing that can be. Thine is the power:' He is
   able to bear you out in his work, however the world rage. And therefore
   we should not think scorn of his ser vice, for his is the glory: the
   service of such a king will put honour upon you.

   (2.) Another duty of him that is to pray is to depend upon God's
   all-sufficiency. Shall we speak thus of God, and say, Lord, thine is
   the power.' and yet not rely upon him? He that cannot rely upon him for
   this life and the other, doth but reproach God when he saith, Thine is
   the power'--thine is the power, yet I will not trust thee, but fly to
   base shifts, as if the creature had power, and man had power--as if
   they could better provide for us than God. Therefore we are to live
   upon him, and cast ourselves into the arms of his all-sufficiency.

   (3.) Another duty of them that would pray this prayer is, sincerely to
   aim at and seek the Lord's glory in all things. Why? For the glory is
   thine. Wilt thou say, Thine is the glory.' and yet give and take the
   glory which is due to God to thyself? All is due to him, from whom we
   have received all things. But he that prides himself in gifts and
   graces, cannot be in good earnest. Wilt thou rob God of the honour, and
   wear it thyself? Did men believe all glory belongs to God, they would
   not take vainglory to themselves. Herod was eloquent, and the people
   cried out, The voice of a god, and not of a man.' He did but receive
   this applause, and usurped the glory due to God, and God blasted him.
   Therefore, when we pride ourselves in our sufficiencies, and abuse our
   comforts to our own lusts, we cannot with a good conscience say, Thine
   is the glory.'
     __________________________________________________________________

   [29] Qu. respects?'--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________

   For ever. Amen.

   ALL this is sealed up to us in the last word, Amen; which may signify,
   either so be it, so let it be, or so it shall be.

   The word Amen sometimes is taken nominally: Rev. iii. 14, Thus saith
   the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the creation
   of God.' Sometimes it is taken adverbially, and so it signifieth
   verily, and truly; and so either it may express a great asseveration,
   or an affectionate desire. Sometimes it expresseth a great and vehement
   asseveration: John vi. 47, Amen, amen, verily, verily, I say unto you.'
   In other places it is put for an affectionate desire: Jer. xxviii. 6.
   When the false prophets prophesied peace, and Jeremiah pronounced war,
   Amen! the Lord do so; the Lord perform thy words which thou hast
   prophesied.' Amen, it is not an asseveration, as confirming the truth
   of their prophecy, but expressing his own hearty wish and desire, if
   God saw it good.

   Two things are required in prayer--a fervent desire and faith. A
   fervent desire; therefore it is said, James v. 16, The effectual
   fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.' And then faith: James
   i. 6, But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.' What is that faith
   required in prayer? A persuasion that those things we ask regularly
   according to God's will, that God will grant them for Christ's sake.
   Now both these Amen signifies: our hearty desire that it may be so; and
   our faith, that is, our acquiescency in the mercy and power and wisdom
   of God concerning the event.

   Christ would have us bind up this prayer, and conclude it thus: Amen,
   so let it be, so it shall be. Observe hence,

   That it is good to conclude holy exercises with some vigour and warmth.

   Natural motion is swifter in the end and close: so should our spiritual
   affections, as we draw to a conclusion, put forth the efficacy of faith
   and holy desires, and recollect, as it were, all the foregoing
   affections; that we may go out of the presence of God with a sweet
   savour and relish, and a renewed confidence in his mercy and power.

   Again, this Amen relateth to all the foregoing petitions, not to one
   only. Many, when they hear, Lord, give us this day our daily bread,'
   will say, Amen;' but when they come to the petition, Thy will be done
   on earth, as it is in heaven.' they are cold there, and have not hearty
   desires and earnest affections. Many beg pardon of sin; but to be kept
   from evil, to bridle and restrain their souls from sin, they do not say
   Amen to that. Many would have defence, maintenance, and victory over
   their enemies; but not with respect to God's glory. They forget that
   petition, Hallowed be thy name;' but this should be subordinated to his
   glory. Nay, we must say Amen to all the clauses of this prayer. Many
   say, Lord, forgive us our debts.' but do not like that, as we forgive
   our debtors:' they are loth to for give their enemies, but carry a
   rancorous mind to them which have done them wrong. But now we must say
   Amen to all that is specified in this prayer. Then,

   Mark, this Amen it is put in the close of the doxology. Observe hence,

   There must be a hearty Amen to our praises as well as our prayers, that
   we may show zeal for God's glory, as well as affection to our profit.

   Your Allelujahs should sound as loud as your supplications; and not
   only say Amen when you come with prayers and requests, things you stand
   in need of, but Amen when you are praising of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [20] That is, disapproved.'--ED.

   [21] Disapproves.'--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

CHRIST'S

TEMPTATION AND TRANSFIGURATION

PRACTICALLY EXPLAINED AND IMPROVED

IN SEVERAL SERMONS.
     __________________________________________________________________

TO THE READER

   THE following discourses on those important subjects of the temptation
   and transfiguration of our blessed Saviour, together with the sermons
   on the first chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, from the
   fourteenth to the twenty-first verse, having been carefully perused,
   and transcribed from the reverend author's own manuscripts, are now, at
   the earnest request of divers persons that were the happy auditors
   thereof, offered to public view. Had the author lived to publish these
   himself, they had come forth into the world more exact; but yet as they
   are now left, I doubt not but they will be very acceptable to all that
   have discerning minds, for the peculiar excellency contained in them.

   Thus much was thought necessary to be said by way of preface, the work
   sufficiently commending itself, especially coming from , such an author
   as Dr Manton.
     __________________________________________________________________

                           THE TEMPTATION OF CHRIST.

SERMON I.

   Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted
   of the devil.--Mat. IV. 1.

   THIS scripture giveth us the history of Christ's temptation, which I
   shall go over by degrees.

   In the words observe:--

   1. The parties tempted and tempting. The person tempted was the Lord
   Jesus Christ. The person tempting was the devil.

   2. The occasion inducing this combat, Jesus was led up of the Spirit.

   3. The time, then.

   4. The place, the wilderness.

   From the whole observe:--

   Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ was pleased to submit himself to an
   extraordinary combat with the tempter, for our good.

   1. I shall explain the nature and circumstances of this extraordinary
   combat.

   2. The reasons why Christ submitted to it.

   3. The good of this to us.

   I. The circumstances of this extraordinary combat. And here--

   1. The persons combating--Jesus and the devil, the seed of the woman
   and the seed of the serpent. It was designed long before: Gen. iii. 15,
   I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
   her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel;'
   and now it is accomplished. Here is the Prince of Peace against the
   prince of darkness, Michael and the dragon, the Captain of our
   salvation and our grand enemy. The devil is the great architect of
   wickedness, as Christ is the Prince of life and righteousness. These
   are the combatants: the one ruined the creation of God, and the other
   restored and repaired it.

   2. The manner of the combat. It was not merely a phantasm, that Christ
   was thus assaulted and used: no, he was tempted in reality, not in
   conceit and imagination only. It seemeth to be in the spirit, though it
   was real; as Paul was taken up into the third heaven, whether in the
   body or out of the body we cannot easily judge, but real it was. I
   shall more accurately discuss this question afterwards in its more
   proper place.

   3. What moved him, or how was he brought to enter into the lists with
   Satan? He was led by the Spirit,' meaning thereby the impulsion and
   excitation of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God. For it is said, Luke
   iv. 1, Jesus, being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and
   was led by the Spirit into the wilderness.' He did not voluntarily put
   himself upon temptation, but, by God's appointment, went up from Jordan
   farther into the desert.

   We learn hence:--

   [1.] That temptations come not by chance, not out of the earth, nor
   merely from the devil; but God ordereth them for his own glory and our
   good. Satan was fain to beg leave to tempt Job: Job i. 12, And the Lord
   said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy power, only upon
   himself put not forth thine hand;' there is a concession with a
   limitation. Till God exposeth us to trials, the devil can not trouble
   us, nor touch us. So Luke xxii. 31, Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to
   have you, that he may sift you as wheat.' Nay, he could not enter into
   the herd of swine without a patent and new pass from Christ: Mat. viii.
   31, So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us
   to go away into the herd of swine.' This cruel spirit is held in the
   chains of an irresistible providence, that he cannot molest any
   creature of God without his permission; which is a great satisfaction
   to the faithful: all things which concern our trial are determined and
   ordered by God. If we be free, let us bless God for it, and pray that
   he would not lead us into temptation: if tempted, when we are in
   Satan's hands, remember Satan is in God's hand.

   [2.] Having given up ourselves to God, we are no longer to be at our
   own dispose and direction, but must submit ourselves to be led, guided,
   and ordered by God in all things. So it was with Christ, he was led by
   the Spirit continually: if he retire into the desert, he is led by the
   Spirit.' Luke iv. 1; if he come back again into Galilee, ver. 4, Jesus
   returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee.' The Holy Ghost
   leadeth him into the conflict, and when it was ended leadeth him back
   again. Now there is a perfect likeness between a Christian and Christ:
   he is led by the Spirit off and on, so we must be guided by the same
   Spirit in all our actions: Rom. viii. 14, For as many as are led by the
   Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.'

   [3.] That we must observe our warrant and calling in all we resolve
   upon. To put ourselves upon hazards we are not called unto, is to go
   out of our bounds to meet a temptation, or to ride into the devil's
   quarters. Christ did not go of his own accord into the desert, but by
   divine impulsion, and so he came from thence. We may, in our place and
   calling, venture ourselves, on the protection of God's providence, upon
   obvious temptations; God will maintain and support us in them; that is
   to trust God; but to go out of our calling is to tempt God.

   [4.] Compare the words used in Matthew and Mark, chap. i. 12, And
   immediately the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness.' That shows
   that it was a forcible motion, or a strong impulse, such as he could
   not easily resist or refuse, so here is freedom--he was led; there is
   force and efficacious impression--he was driven, with a voluntary
   condescension thereunto. There may be liberty of man's will, yet the
   victorious efficacy of grace united together: a man may be taught and
   drawn, as Christ here was led, and driven by the Spirit into the
   wilderness.

   3. The time.

   [1.] Presently after his baptism. Now the baptism of Christ agreeth
   with ours as to the general nature of it. Baptism is our initiation
   into the service of God, or our solemn consecration of ourselves to
   him; and it doth not only imply work, but fight: Rom. vi. 13, Neither
   yield ye your members as instruments, opla, of un righteousness unto
   sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the
   dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God;' and,
   Rom. xiii. 12, Let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on
   the armour of light.' Christ's baptism had the same general nature with
   ours, not the same special nature: the general nature is an engagement
   to God, the special use of baptism is to be a seal of the new covenant,
   or to be to us the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.'
   Now this Christ was not capable of, he had no sin to be repented of or
   remitted; but his baptism was an engagement to the same military work
   to which we are engaged. He came into the world for that end and
   purpose, to war against sin and Satan; he engageth as the general, we
   as the common soldiers. He as the general: 1 John iii. 8, For this
   purpose the Son of God was manifested, hina luse, that he might destroy
   the works of the devil.' His baptism was the taking of the field as
   general; we undertake to fight under him in our rank and place.

   [2.] At this baptismal engagement the Father had given him a testimony
   by a voice from heaven: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased;' and the Holy Ghost had descended upon him in the form of a
   dove, Mark iii. 16, 17. Now presently after this he is set upon by the
   tempter. Thus many times the children of God, after solemn assurances
   of his love, are exposed to great temptations. Of this you may see an
   instance in Abraham: Gen. xxii. 1, And it came to pass after these
   things, that God did tempt Abraham;' that is, after he had assured
   Abraham that he was his shield, and his exceeding great reward,' and
   given him so many renewed testimonies of his favour. So Paul, after his
   rapture, lest he should be exalted above measure through the abundance
   of revelations, there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the
   messenger of Satan to buffet him,' 2 Cor. xii. 7. So Heb. x. 32, But
   call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were
   illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions;' i.e., after ye
   were fully convinced of the Christian faith, and furnished with those
   virtues and graces that belong to it. God's conduct is gentle, and
   proportioned to our strength, as Jacob drove as the little ones were
   able to bear it. He never suffers his castles to be besieged till they
   are victualled.

   [3.] Immediately before he entered upon his prophetical office.
   Experience of temptations fits for the ministry, as Christ's
   temptations prepared him to set a-foot the kingdom of God, for the
   recovery of poor souls out of their bondage into the liberty of the
   children of God: ver. 17, From that time Jesus began to preach, and to
   say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.' Our state of
   innocency was our health, the grace of the Redeemer our medicine,
   Christ our physician; for the devil had poisoned our human nature.
   Therefore, when he sets a-foot his healing cure, it was fit and
   congruous that he should experimentally feel the power of the tempter,
   and in what manner he doth assault and endanger souls: Christ also
   would show us that ministers should not only be men of science, but of
   experience.

   [4.] The place or field where this combat was fought, the wilderness,
   where were none but wild beasts: Mark i. 13, And he was there in the
   wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild beasts;
   and the angels ministered unto him.' Great question there is in what
   wilderness Christ was; their opinion is most probable who think it was
   the great wilderness, called the desert of Arabia, in which the
   Israelites wandered forty years, and in which Elijah fasted forty days
   and forty nights. In this solitary place Satan tried his utmost power
   against our Saviour.

   This teacheth us:--

   (1.) That Christ alone grappled with Satan, having no fellow-worker
   with him, that we may know the strength of our Redeemer, who is able
   himself to overcome the tempter without any assistance' and to save to
   the uttermost all that come unto God by him,' Heb. vii. 25.

   (2.) That the devil often abuseth our solitude. It is good sometimes to
   be alone; but then we need to be stocked with holy thoughts or employed
   in holy exercises, that we may be able to say, as Christ, John xvi. 32,
   I am not alone, because the Father is with me.' Howsoever a state of
   retirement from human converse, if it be not necessary, exposeth us to
   temptations; but if we are cast upon it, we must expect God's presence
   and help.

   (3.) That no place is privileged from temptations, unless we leave our
   hearts behind us. David, walking on the terrace or house-top, was
   ensnared by Bathsheba's beauty: 2 Sam. xi. 2-4. Lot, that was chaste in
   Sodom, yet committed incest in the mountain, where there were none but
   his own family: Gen. xix. 30, 31, &c. When we are locked in our
   closets, we cannot shut out Satan.

   II. The reasons why Christ submitted to it.

   1. With respect to Adam, that the parallel between the first and second
   Adam might be more, exact. They are often compared in scripture, as
   Rom. v., latter end, and 1 Cor. xv.; and we read, Rom. v. 14, that the
   first Adam was tupos tou mellontos, the figure of him that was to
   come.' And as in other respects, so in this; in the same way we were
   destroyed by the first Adam, in the same way we were restored by the
   second. Christ recovereth and winneth that which Adam lost. Our
   happiness was lost by the first Adam being over come by the tempter; so
   it must be recovered by the second Adam, the tempter being overcome by
   him. He that did conquer must first be conquered, that sinners might be
   rescued from the captivity wherein he held them captive. The first
   Adam, being assaulted quickly after his entrance into paradise, was
   overcome; and therefore must the second Adam overcome him as soon as he
   entered upon his office, and that in a conflict hand-to-hand, in that
   nature that was foiled. The devil must lose his prisoners in the same
   way that he caught them. Christ must do what Adam could not do. The
   victory is gotten by a public person in our nature, before it can be
   gotten by each individual in his own person, for so it was lost. Adam
   lost the day before he had . any offspring, so Christ winneth it in his
   own person before he doth solemnly begin to preach the gospel and call
   disciples; and therefore here was the great overthrow of the adversary.

   2. In regard of Satan, who by his conquest got a twofold power over man
   by tempting, he got an interest in his heart to lead him captive at his
   will' and pleasure, 2 Tim. ii. 26; and he was made God's executioner,
   he got a power to punish him: Heb. ii. 14, That through death he might
   destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.' Therefore
   the Son of God, who interposed on our behalf, and undertook the rescue
   of sinners, did assume the nature of man that he might conquer Satan in
   the nature that was conquered, and also offer himself as a sacrifice in
   the same nature for the demonstration of the justice of God. First,
   Christ must overcome by obedience, tried to the uttermost by
   temptations; and then he must also overcome by suffering. By overcoming
   temptations, he doth overcome Satan as a tempter; and by death he
   overcame him as a tormentor, or as the prince of death, who had the
   power of executing God's sentence. So that you see before he overcame
   him by merit, he overcame him by example, and was an instance of a
   tempted man before he was an instance of a persecuted man, or one that
   came to make satisfaction to God's justice.

   3. With respect to the saints, who are in their passage to heaven to be
   exposed to great difficulties and trials. Now that they might have
   comfort and hope in their Redeemer, and come to him boldly as one
   touched with a feeling of their infirmities, he himself submitted to be
   tempted. This reason is recorded by the apostle in two places: Heb. ii.
   18, For in that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to
   succour them that are tempted.' Able to succour; that is, fit,
   powerful, inclined, effectually moved to succour them. None so merciful
   as those who have been once miserable; and they who have not only known
   misery, but felt it, do more readily relieve and succour others. God
   biddeth Israel to pity strangers: Exod. xxii. 21, Thou shalt neither
   vex a stranger, nor oppress him; for ye were strangers m the land of
   Egypt.' They knew what it was to be exposed to the envy and hatred of
   the neighbours in the land where they sojourned: Exod xxiii. 9, For ye
   know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of
   Egypt.' We read that when King Richard the First had been, on the sea
   near Sicily, like to be drowned, he recalled that ancient and barbarous
   custom, whereby the goods of shipwrecked men were escheated to the
   crown, making provision that those goods should be preserved for the
   right owners. Christ being tossed in the tempest of temptations, knows
   what belongs to the trouble thereof. The other place is, Heb. iv. 15,
   We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
   our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
   without sin.' Christ hath experienced how strong the assailant is, how
   feeble our nature is, how hard a matter it is to withstand when we are
   so sorely assaulted. His own experience of sufferings and temptations
   in himself doth entender his heart, and make him fit for sympathy with
   us and begets a tender compassion towards the miseries and frailties of
   his members.

   4. With respect to Christ himself, that he might be an exact pat tern
   of obedience to God. The obedience is little worth, which is carried on
   in an even tenor, when we have no temptation to the contrary but is
   cast off as soon as we are tempted to disobey: James i. 12 Blessed is
   the man that endureth temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive
   the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.'
   And Heb. xi. 17, By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac:
   and he that had received the promises offered up his only-begotten
   son.' Now Christ was to be more eminent than all the holy ones of God,
   and therefore, that he might give an evidence of his piety, constancy,
   and trust in God, it was thought fit some trial should be made of him,
   that he might by example teach us what reason we have to hold to God
   against the strongest temptations.

   III. The good of this to us. It teacheth us divers things, four I shall
   instance in.

   1. To show us who is our grand enemy, the devil, who sought the misery
   and destruction of mankind, as Christ did our salvation And therefore
   he is called o e'chthros, the enemy; Mat. xiii. 39, The enemy that
   sowed them is the devil.' And he is called also o ponero`s, the wicked
   one, Mat. xiii. 19, as the first and deepest in evil. And' be cause
   this malicious cruel spirit ruined mankind at first, he is called a
   liar and murderer from the beginning.' John viii. 44. A liar because of
   his deceit; a murderer, to show us what he hath done and would do. It
   was he that set upon Christ, and doth upon us as at first to destroy
   our health, so still to keep us from our medicine and recovery out of
   the lapsed estate by the gospel of Christ.

   2. That all men, none excepted, are subject to temptations. If any
   might plead for exemption, our Lord Jesus, the eternal Son of God
   might; but he was assaulted and tempted; and if the devil tempted our
   Saviour, he will be much more bold with us. The godly are yet in the
   way not at the end of the journey; in the field, not with the crown on
   their heads; and it is God's will that the enemy should have leave to
   assault them. None go to heaven without a trial: All these things are
   accomplished in your brethren that are in the flesh.' 1 Pet. v. 9. To
   look for an exempt privilege, or immunity from temptation, is to list
   ourselves as Christ's soldiers, and never expect battle or conflict.

   3. It showeth us the manner of conflict, both of Satan's fight and our
   Saviour's defence.

   [1,] Of Satan's fight. It is some advantage not to be ignorant of his
   enterprises: 2 Cor. ii. 11, Lest Satan should get an advantage of us,
   for we are not ignorant of his devices.' Then we may the better stand
   upon our guard. He assaulted Christ by the same kind of temptations by
   which usually he assaults us. The kinds of temptations are reckoned up:
   1 John ii. 16, The lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the
   pride of life.' And James iii. 15, This wisdom descendeth not from
   above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.' With these temptations he
   assaulted our first parents: Gen. iii. 8, When the woman saw that the
   tree was good for fruit, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a
   tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and
   did eat.' And with the same temptations he assaulted Christ, tempting
   him to turn stones into bread, to satisfy the longings of the flesh; to
   fall down and worship him, as to the sight of a bewitching object to
   his eyes; to fly in the air in pride, and to get glory among men. Here
   are our snares, which we must carefully avoid.

   [2.] The manner of Christ's defence, and so it instructeth us how to
   overcome and carry ourselves in temptations. And here are two things
   whereby we evercome:--

   (1.) By scripture. The word of God is the sword of the Spirit,' Eph.
   vi. 17, and 1 John ii. 14, The word of God abideth in you, and ye have
   overcome the wicked one.' It is good to have the word of God abide in
   our memories, but chiefly in our hearts, by a sound belief and fervent
   love to the truth.

   (2.) Partly by resolution: 1 Pet. iv. 1, Arm yourselves with the same
   mind,' viz., that was in Christ. When Satan grew bold and troublesome,
   Christ rejects him with indignation. Now the conscience of our duty
   should thus prevail with us to be resolute therein; the double-minded
   are as it were torn in pieces between God and the devil: James i. 8, A
   double-minded man is unstable in all his ways.' Therefore, being in
   God's way, we should resolve to be deaf to all temptations.

   4. The hopes of success. God would set Christ before us as a pattern of
   trust and confidence, that when we address ourselves to serve God, we
   might not fear the temptations of Satan. We have an example of
   overcoming the devil in our glorious head and chief. If he pleaded,
   John xvi. 33, In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good
   cheer, I have overcome the world;' the same holdeth good here, for the
   enemies of our salvation are combined. He overcame the devil in our
   natures, that we might not be discouraged: we fight against the same
   adversaries in the same cause, and he will give power to us, his weak
   members, being full of compassion, which certainly is a great comfort
   to us.

   Use. Of instruction to us:--

   1. To reckon upon temptations. As soon as we mind our baptismal
   covenant, we must expect that Satan will be our professed foe, seeking
   to terrify or allure us from the banner of our captain, Jesus Christ.
   Many, after baptism, fly to Satan's camp. There are a sort of men in
   the visible church, who, though they do not deny their baptism, as
   those did, 2 Pet. ii. 9, Who have forgotten that they were purged from
   their old sins,' yet they carry themselves as if they were in league
   with the devil, the world, and the flesh, rather than with the Father,
   Son, and Holy Ghost; with might and main they oppose Christ's kingdom,
   both abroad and at home, in their own hearts, and are wholly governed
   by worldly things, the lusts of the flesh, and the lusts of the eye,
   and the pride of life. Now these are the devil's agents, and the more
   dangerous because they use Christ's name against his offices, and the
   form of his religion to destroy the power thereof; as the dragon in the
   Revelation, pushed with the horns of the Lamb. Others are not
   venomously and malignantly set against Christ, and his interest in the
   world, or in their own hearts, but tamely yield to the lusts of the
   flesh, and go like an ox to the slaughter, and a fool to the correction
   of the stocks.' Prov. vii. 22. We cannot say that Satan's work lieth
   about these. Satan needeth not besiege the soul by temptations; that is
   his already by peaceable possession; when a strong man armed keepeth
   his palace, his goods are in peace.' Luke xi. 21. There is no storm
   when wind and tide goeth together. But then there is a third sort of
   men, that begin to be serious, and to mind their recovery by Christ:
   they have many good motions and convictions of the danger of sin,
   excellency of Christ, necessity of holiness; they have many purposes to
   leave sin and enter upon a holy course of life, but the wicked one
   cometh, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart.' Mat. xiii.
   19. He beginneth betimes to oppose the work, before we are confirmed
   and settled in a course of godliness, as he did set upon Christ
   presently upon his baptism. Baptism in us implieth avowed dying unto
   sin and living unto God; now God permitteth temptation to try our
   resolution. There is a fourth sort, of such as have made some progress
   in religion, even to a degree of eminency: these are not altogether
   free; for if the devil had confidence to assault the declared Son of
   God, will he be afraid of a mere mortal man? No; these he assaulteth
   many times very sorely: pirates venture on the greatest booty. These he
   seeketh to draw off from Christ, as Pharaoh sought to bring back the
   Israelites after their escape; or to foil them by some scandalous fall,
   to do religion a mischief: 2 Sam. xii. 14, By this deed thou hast given
   great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme;' or at least to
   vex them and torment them, to make the service of God tedious and
   uncomfortable to them: Luke xxii. 31, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath
   desired to have you, that he might sift you as wheat'--to toss and vex
   you, as wheat in a sieve. So that no sort of Christians can promise
   them selves exemption; and God permitteth it, because to whom much is
   given, of them the more is required.

   2. The manner and way of his fight is by the world, per blanda et
   aspera, by the good or evil things of the world. There is armour of
   righteousness on the right hand and on the left.' 2 Cor. vi. 7, as
   there are right-hand and left-hand temptations. Both ways he lieth in
   ambush in the creature. Sometimes he tempts us by the good things of
   the world: 1 Chron. xxi. 1, And Satan stood up against Israel, and
   provoked David to number Israel.' so glorying in his might, and
   puissance, and victory over neighbour kings. So meaner people he
   tempteth to abuse their wealth to pride and luxury; therefore we are
   pressed to be sober: 1 Pet. v. 8, Be sober, be vigilant; because your
   adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he
   may devour.' The devil maketh an advantage of our prosperity, to divert
   us from God and heaven, and to render us unapt for the strictness of
   our holy calling. Sometimes he tempts us by the evil things of this
   world: Job i. 11, Put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath,
   and he will curse thee to thy face.' Satan's aim in bringing the saints
   into trouble is to draw them to fretting, murmuring, despondency, and
   distrust of providence, yea, to open defection from God, or blasphemy
   against him; and therefore it is said, 1 Pet. v. 9, Knowing that the
   same afflictions,' &c., because temptations are conveyed to us by our
   afflictions or troubles in the flesh.

   3. His end is to dissuade us from good, and persuade us to evil. To
   dissuade us from good by representing the impossibility, trouble, and
   small necessity of it. If men begin to apply themselves to a strict
   course, such as they have sworn to in baptism, either it is so hard as
   not to be borne, as John vi. 60, This is a hard saying, who can bear
   it?' Whereas, Mat. xix. 29, Every one that hath forsaken houses, or
   brethren, &c., for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and
   shall inherit everlasting life.' Or the troubles which accompany a
   strict profession are many. The world will note us: John xii. 42,
   Nevertheless, among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but
   because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be
   put out of the synagogue.' Whereas we must not be ashamed of Christ: 2
   Tim. ii. 12, If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny
   him, he also will deny us.' Or that we need not be so strict and nice,
   whereas all we can do is little enough: Mark xxv. 9, Not so, lest there
   be not enough for us and you.' In general, the greatest mischiefs done
   us by sin are not regarded, but the least inconvenience that attendeth
   our duty is urged and aggravated. He persuadeth us to evil by profit,
   pleasure, necessity; we cannot live without it in the world. He hideth
   the hook, and showeth the bait only; he concealeth the hell, the
   horror, the eternal pains that follow sin, and only telleth you how
   beneficial, profitable, and delightful the sin will be to you: Prov.
   ix. 17, 18, Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is
   pleasant. But he knoweth not that the dead are there, and that her
   guests are in the depths of hell.'

   4. While we are striving against temptations, let us remember our
   general. We do but follow the Captain of our salvation, who hath
   vanquished the enemy, and will give us the victory if we keep striving:
   The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly,' Rom. xvi.
   2. Not his feet, but ours: we shall be conquerors. Our enemy is
   vigilant and strong: it is enough for us that our Redeemer is merciful
   and faithful in succouring the tempted, and able to master the tempter,
   and defeat all his methods. Christ hath conquered him, both as a lamb
   and as a lion: Rev. v. 5, 8. The notion of a lamb intimateth his
   sacrifice, the notion of a lion his victory: in the lamb is merit, in
   the lion strength; by the one he maketh satisfaction to God, by the
   other he rescueth sinners out of the paw of the roaring lion, and
   maintaineth his interest in their hearts. Therefore let us not be
   discouraged, but closely adhere to him.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON II.

   And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterwards
   an hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the
   Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. And he answered
   and said, It is written, Man liveth not by bread alone, but by every
   word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.--Mat. IV. 2-4.

   IN these words there are three branches:--

   First, The occasion.

   Secondly, The temptation itself.

   Thirdly, Christ's answer.

   First, The occasion of the first temptation, in the second verse, When
   he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterwards an
   hungered.' Where take notice:--

   I. Of his fasting.

   II. Of his hunger.

   And something I shall speak of them conjunctly, something distinctly
   and apart.

   1. Conjunctly. In every part of our Lord's humiliation, there is an
   emission of some beams of his Godhead, that whenever he is seen to be
   true man, he might be known to be true God also. Is Christ hungry?
   There was a fast of forty days' continuance preceding, to show how, as
   God, he could sustain his human nature. The verity of his human nature
   is seen, because he submitted to all our sinless infirmities. The power
   of his divine nature was manifested, because it enabled him to continue
   forty days and nights without eating or drinking anything, the utmost
   that an ordinary man can fast being but nine days usually. Thus his
   divinity and humanity are expressed in most or all of his actions: John
   i. 14, The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
   glory, as the glory of the only-begotten Son of God.' There was a veil
   of flesh, yet the glory of his divine nature was seen, and might be
   seen, by all that had an eye and heart to see it. He lay in the manger
   at Bethlehem, but a star appeared to conduct the wise men to him; and
   angels proclaimed his birth to the shepherds: Luke ii. 13, 14. He grew
   up from a child, at the ordinary rate of other children; but when he
   was but twelve years old, he disputed with the doctors: Luke ii. 42. He
   submitted to baptism, but then owned by a voice from heaven to be God's
   beloved Son. He was deceived in the fig-tree when an hungered, which
   shows the infirmity of human ignorance; but suddenly blasted, this
   manifested the glory of a divine power: Mat. xxi. 19. Here tempted by
   Satan, but ministered unto and attended upon by a multitude of glorious
   angels: Mat. iv. 11; finally crucified through weakness, but living by
   the power of God: 2 Cor. xiii. 4. He hung dying on the cross; but then
   the rocks were rent, the graves opened, and the sun darkened. All along
   you may have these intermixtures. He needed to humble himself to
   purchase our mercies; but withal to give a discovery of a divine glory
   to assure our faith. Therefore, when there were any evidences of human
   frailty, lest the world should be offended, and stumble thereat, he was
   pleased at the same time to give some notable demonstration of the
   divine power; as, on the other side, when holy men are honoured by God,
   something falleth out to humble them: 2 Cor. xii. 7.

   2. Distinctly and apart. Where observe:--

   [1.] That he fasted forty days and forty nights; so did Moses when he
   received the law: Exod. xxxiv. 28; and at the restoring of the law
   Elias did the like: 1 Kings xix. 8. Now what these two great prophets
   had done, Christ, the great prophet and doctor of the Christian church,
   did also. For the number of forty days, curiosity may make itself work
   enough; but it is dangerous to make conclusions where no certainty
   appeareth. However this is not amiss, that forty days were the usual
   time allotted for repentance: as to the Ninevites, Jonah iii. 4; so the
   prophet Ezekiel was to bear the sins of the people for forty days; and
   the flood was forty days in coming on the old world: Gen. vii. 17. This
   was the time given for their repentance, and therefore for their
   humiliation; yet the forty days' fast in Lent is ill-grounded on this
   example, for this fast of Christ cannot be imitated by us, more than
   other his miracles.

   [2.] At the end of the forty days he was an hungered, sorely assaulted
   with faintness and hunger, as any other man at any time is for want of
   meat. God's providence permitted it, that he might be more capable of
   Satan's temptations; for Satan fits his temptations to men's present
   case and condition. When Christ was hungry, he tempteth him to provide
   bread, in such a way as the tempter doth prescribe. He worketh upon
   what he findeth: when men are full, he tempteth them to be proud, and
   forget God; when they are destitute, to distrust God: if he sees men
   covetous, he fits them with a wedge of gold, as he did Achan; if
   discontented, and plotting the destruction of another, he findeth out
   occasions. When Judas had a mind to sell his Master, he presently
   sendeth him a chapman. Thus he doth work upon our dispositions, or our
   condition; most upon our dispositions, but here only upon Christ's
   condition. He observeth which way the tree leaneth, and then thrusteth
   it forward.

   Secondly, The temptation itself, verse the third. Where two things are
   observable:--

   I. The intimation of his address, And when the tempter came to him.'

   II. The proposal of the temptation, If thou be the Son of God,' &c.

   I. For the address to the temptation, And when the tempter came to
   him.' there two things must be explained:--

   1. In what manner the tempter came to Christ.

   2. How he is said to come then to him.

   [1.] How he came to him. Whether the temptations of Christ are to be
   understood by way of vision, or historically, as things visibly acted
   and done? This latter I incline unto; and I handle here, because it is
   said, proselthon auto ho peirazon,--The tempter came to him.' This
   importeth some local motion and accession of the tempter to Christ,
   under a visible and external form and shape. As afterwards, when the
   Lord biddeth him be gone, then the devil leaveth him,' ver. 11; a
   retiring of Satan out of his presence, not the ceasing of a vision
   only. Yea, all along, he taketh him,' and sets him on a pinnacle of the
   temple,' and taketh him to an high mountain.' All which show some
   external appearance of Satan, and not a word that intimateth a vision.
   Neither can it be conceived how any act of adoration could be demanded
   by Satan of Christ fall down and worship me unless the object to be
   worshipped were set before him in some visible shape. The coming of the
   angels to Christ when the devil left him, ver. 11, all understand
   historically, and of some external coming. Why is not the coming and
   going of the devil thus to be understood also? And if all had been done
   in vision, and not by converse, how could Christ be an hungered, or the
   devil take that occasion to tempt him? How could answers and replies be
   tossed to and fro, and scriptures alleged? So that from the whole view
   of the frame of the text, here was some external congress between
   Christ and the devil. If you think it below Christ, you forget the
   wonderful condescension of the Son of God; it is no more unworthy of
   him than crucifixion, passion, and burial was. It is true, in the
   writing of the prophets, many things historically related were only
   done in vision; but not in the Gospels, which are an history of the
   life and death of Christ; where things are plainly set down as they
   were done. To men the grievousness of Christ's temptations would be
   much lessened, if we should think it only a piece of fantasy, and
   imaginary rather than real. And if his temptations be lessened, so will
   his victory, so will our comfort. In short, such as was Christ's
   journey into the wilderness, such was his fast, such his temptation;
   all real. For all are delivered to us in the same style and thread of
   discourse. Yea, further, if these things had been only in vision and
   ecstacy, there would have been no danger to Christ in the second
   temptation, when he was tempted to throw himself down from the pinnacle
   of the temple. Surely then he was truly tempted, and not in vision
   only; yea, it seemeth not so credible and agreeable to the dignity and
   holiness of Christ, that Satan should tempt by internal false
   suggestions, and the immission of species into his fancy or
   understanding; that Christ should seem to be here and there, when all
   the while he was in the desert. For either Christ took notice of these
   false images in his fancy, or not. If not, there is no temptation; if
   so, there will be an error in the mind of Christ, that he should think
   himself to be on the pinnacle of the temple, or top of an high
   mountain, when he was in the desert. It is hard to think these
   suggestions could be made without some error or sin; but an external
   suggestion maketh the sin to be in the tempter only, not in the person
   tempted. Our first parents lost not their innocency by the external
   suggestion, but internal admission of it, dwelling upon it in their
   minds. To a man void of sin, the tempter hath no way of tempting but
   externally.

   [2.] How is this access to Christ said to be after his fasting, when,
   in Luke iv. 2, it is said, Being forty days tempted of the devil, and
   in those days he did eat nothing; and when they were ended, he
   afterward hungered'?

   I answer--(1.) Some conceive that the devil tempted Christ all the
   forty days, but then he tempted him invisibly, as he doth other men,
   striving to inject sinful suggestions; but he could find nothing in him
   to work upon: John xiv. 30. But at forty days' end he taketh another
   course, and appeareth visibly in the shape of an angel of light. He
   saith he came to him, most solemnly and industriously to tempt him.
   This opinion is probable.

   (2.) It may be answered, Luke's speech must be understood.: Being forty
   days in the wilderness, and in those days he did eat nothing, and was
   tempted;' that is, those days being ended. There is, by a prolepsis,
   some little inversion of the order. But because of Mark i. 13, where it
   is said, He was in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan, and was
   with the wild beasts.' take the former answer.

   II. The proposal of the temptation, If thou be the Son of God, command
   that these stones be made bread.' Certainly every temptation of the
   devil tendeth to sin. Now where is the sin of this? If Christ had
   turned stones into bread, and declared himself by this miracle to be
   the Son of God, there seemeth to be no such evil in this. Like miracles
   he did upon other occasions; as turning water into wine at a marriage
   feast, multiplying the loaves in the distribution for feeding the
   multitude. Here was no curiosity; the fact seemed to be necessary to
   supply his hunger. Here is no superfluity urged--into bread, not
   dainties or occasions of wantonness, but bread for his necessary
   sustenance. I answer, Notwithstanding all this fair appearance, yet
   this first assault which is propounded by Satan was very sore and
   grievous.

   1. Because manifold sins are implied in. it, and there are many
   temptations combined in this one assault.

   [1.] In that Christ, who was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to
   fast, and so to be tempted, must now break his fast and work a miracle
   at Satan's direction. The contest between God and the devil is, who
   shall be sovereign? therefore it was not meet that Christ should follow
   the devil's advice, and do anything at his command and suggestion.

   [2.] That Christ should doubt of that voice that he heard from heaven
   at his baptism, Thou art my beloved Son;' and the devil cometh, If thou
   be the Son of God.' That it should anew be put to trial by some
   extraordinary work, whether it were true or no, or he should believe
   it, yea or no. No temptation so sore, no dart so poisonable, as that
   which tendeth to the questioning of the grounds of faith; as this did
   the love of God, so lately spoken of him. Therefore this is one of the
   sharpest arrows that could come out of Satan's bow.

   [3.] It tendeth to weaken his confidence in the care and love of God's
   fatherly providence: being now afflicted with hunger in a desert place,
   where no supply of food could be had, Satan would draw him to suspect
   and doubt of his Father's providence, as if it were in compatible to be
   the Son of God and to be left destitute of means to supply his hunger,
   and therefore must take some extraordinary course of his own to furnish
   himself.

   [4.] It tended to put him upon an action of vainglory, by working a
   miracle before the devil, to show his power; as all needless actions
   are but a vain ostentation.

   2. Because it was in itself a puzzling and perplexing proposal, not
   without inconveniences on both sides, whichsoever of the extremes our
   Lord should choose; whether he did, or did not, what the tempter
   suggested. If he did, he might seem to doubt of the truth of the
   oracle, by which he was declared to be the Son of God, or to distrust
   God's providence, or to give way to a vain ostentation of his own
   power. If he did not, he seemed to be wanting, in not providing
   necessary food for his sustentation when it was in his power to do so;
   and it seemed to be unreasonable to hide that which it concerned all to
   know, to wit, that he was the Son of God. And it seemeth grievous to
   hear others suspicious concerning ourselves, when it is in our power
   easily to refute them; such provocations can hardly be borne by the
   most modest spirits. This temptation was again put upon Christ on the
   cross: Mat. xxvii. 40, If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
   cross.' But all is to be done at God's direction, and as it becometh
   our obedience to him, and respect to his glory. Satan and his
   instruments will be satisfied with no proofs of principles of faith,
   but such as he and they will prescribe, and which cannot be given
   without entrenching upon our obedience to God, and those counsels which
   he hath wisely laid for his own glory. And if God's children be
   surprised with such a disposition, it argueth so far the influence of
   Satan upon them, namely, when they will not believe but upon their own
   terms: as Thomas, John xx. 25, Except I see in his hands the print of
   the nails, and put my ringer into the print of the nails, and thrust my
   hand into his side, I will not believe.' If we will not accept of the
   graces of faith as offered by God, but will interpose conditions of our
   own prescribing, we make a snare to ourselves. God may in condescension
   to a weak believer grant what was his fault to seek, as he doth
   afterwards to Thomas, ver. 27; but there is no reason he should grant
   it to the devil, he being a malicious and incorrigible spirit, coming
   temptingly to ask it.

   3. This temptation was cunning and plausible; it seemed only to tend to
   Christ's good, his refection when hungry, and his honour and glory,
   that this might be a full demonstration of his being the Son of God.
   There is an open solicitation to evil, and a covert; explicit and
   implicit; direct and indirect. This last here. It was not an open,
   direct, explicit solicitation to sin, but covert, implicit, and
   indirect, which sort of temptations are more dangerous. There was no
   need of declaring Christ's power by turning stones into bread before
   the devil, and at his instance and suit. It was neither necessary nor
   profitable. Not necessary for Christ's honour and glory, it being
   sufficiently evidenced before by that voice from heaven, or might be
   evident to him without new proof. Nor was it necessary for Christ's
   refection, because he might be sustained by the same divine power by
   which hitherto he had been supported for forty days. Nor was it
   profitable, none being present but the devil, who asked not this proof
   for satisfaction, but cavil; and that he might boast and gain
   advantage, if Christ had done anything at his instance and direction.
   And in this peculiar dispensation all was to be done by the direction
   of the Holy, and not the impure spirit. I come now to the third branch.

   Thirdly, Christ's answer, ver. 4, And he answered and said, It is
   written, Man liveth not by bread alone, but by every word that
   proceedeth out of the mouth of God.' Christ's answer is not made to
   that part of the proposal, If thou be the Son of God.' but to the
   urgent necessity of his refection. The former was clear and evident,
   the force of the temptation lay not there; but the latter, which Satan
   sought to make most advantage of, is clearly refuted. Christ's answer
   is taken out of Deut. viii. 3; and this answer is not given for the
   tempter's sake, but ours, that we may know how to answer in like cases,
   and repel such kind of temptations. In the place quoted, Moses speaketh
   of manna, and showeth how God gave his people manna from heaven, to
   teach them that though bread be the ordinary means of sustaining man,
   yet God can feed him by other means, which he is pleased to make use of
   for that purpose. His bare word, or nothing; all cometh from his divine
   power and virtue, whatever he is pleased to give for the sustentation
   of man, ordinary or extraordinary. The tempter had said that either he
   must die for hunger, or turn stones into bread. Christ showeth that
   there is a middle between both these extremes. There are other ways
   which the wisdom of God hath found out, or hath appointed by his word,
   or decreed to such an end, and maketh use of in the course of his
   providence. And the instance is fitly chosen; for he that provided
   forty years for a huge multitude in the desert, he will not be wanting
   to his own Son, who had now fasted but forty days. In the words there
   is:--

   I. A concession or grant, that ordinarily man liveth by bread; and
   therefore must labour for it, and use it when it may be had.

   II. There is a restriction of the grant, that it is not by bread only:
   But by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.' The
   business is to explain how a man can live by the word of God, or what
   is meant by it.

   1. Some take word for the word of precept, and expound it thus: if you
   be faithful to your duty, God will provide for you. For in every
   command of God, general or particular, there is a promise expressed or
   implied of all things necessary: Deut. xxviii. 5, Blessed shall be thy
   basket and thy store;' and Mat. vi. 33, Seek ye first the kingdom of
   God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
   you.' Now we may lean upon this word of God, keep ourselves from
   indirect means, and in a fair way of providence refer the issue to God.

   2. Some take the word for the word of promise, which indeed is the
   livelihood of the saints: Ps. cxix. 111, Thy testimonies have I taken
   as an heritage for ever; they are the rejoicing of my heart.' God's
   people in a time of want can make a feast to themselves out of the
   promises; and when seemingly starved in the creature, fetch not only
   peace and grace and righteousness, but food and raiment out of the
   covenant.

   3. Rather, I think, it is taken for his providential word or commanded
   blessing; for as God made all things by his word, so he upholdeth all
   things by the word of his power': Heb. i. 3. His powerful word doth all
   in the world: Ps. cxlvii. 15, He sendeth forth his commandment on the
   earth; his word runneth very swiftly; he giveth snow like wool.' And
   then, in the 18th verse, He sendeth out his word, and melteth them.' As
   the word of creation made all things, so the word of providence
   sustaineth all things. This word is spoken of Ps. cvii. 20, He sent his
   word, and his word healed them; and delivered them from all their
   destructions.' It is dictum factum with God; if he speak but the word,
   it is all done: Mat. viii. 8, Speak but the word, and thy servant shall
   be whole.' So Luke iv. 36, What a word is this 1 for with authority and
   power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out.' So of
   Joseph it is said, Ps. cv. 19, Until the time that his word came; the
   word of the Lord tried him;' that is, his power and influence on the
   hearts of the parties concerned for his deliverance. Well, then, the
   power of sustaining life is not in bread, but in the word of God; not
   in the means, but in God's commanded blessing, which may be conveyed to
   us by means, or without means, as God pleaseth. There is a powerful
   commanding word which God useth far health, strength, sustentation, or
   any effect wherein the good of his people is concerned. He is the great
   commander of the world. If he say to anything Go, and it goeth; Come,
   and it cometh.

   Thus you have the history of the first temptation. Now for the
   observations.

   Observe, first, That God may leave his children and servants to great
   straits; for Christ himself was sorely an hungered: so God suffereth
   his people to hunger in the wilderness before he gave them manna,
   Therefore it is said, Ps. cii. 23, He weakeneth the strength of the
   people in the way.' He hath sundry trials wherewith to exercise our
   faith, and sometimes by sharp necessities. Paul and his companions had
   continued fourteen days, and had taken nothing: Acts xxvii. 33. Many
   times God's children are thus tried: trading is dead, and there are
   many mouths to be fed, and little supply cometh in; yet this is to be
   borne: none of us more poor than Christ, or more destitute than was
   Christ.

   Secondly, That the devil maketh an advantage of our necessities. When
   Christ was an hungered, then the tempter came to him; so unto us. Three
   sorts of temptations he then useth to us, the same he did to Christ:--

   [1.] Either he tempteth us to unlawful means to satisfy our hunger; so
   he did to Christ, who was to be governed by the Spirit, to work a
   miracle to provide for his bodily wants at Satan's direction; so us.
   Poverty hath a train of sinful temptations: Prov. xxx. 9, Lest I be
   poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.' Necessities are
   urging, but we must not go to the devil for a direction how to supply
   ourselves, lest he draw us to put our hand to our neighbour's goods, or
   to defraud our brother, or betray the peace of our conscience, or to do
   some unworthy thing, that we may live the more comfortably. You cannot
   plead necessity; it is to relieve your charge, to maintain life; God is
   able to maintain it in his own way. No necessity can make any sin
   warrantable. It is necessary thou shouldst not sin; it is not necessary
   thou shouldst borrow more than thou canst pay. or use any fraudulent
   means to get thy sustenance. If others be un merciful, thou must not be
   unrighteous.

   [2.] To question our adoption, as he did the filiation of Christ: If
   thou be the Son of God.' It is no wonder to find Satan calling in
   question the adoption and regeneration of God's children, for he
   calleth in question the filiation and sonship of the Son of God, though
   so plainly attested but a little before: Heb. xii. 5, Ye have forgotten
   the exhortation which speaketh unto you as children, My son,' &c.
   Certainly whatever moveth us to question our interest in God's fatherly
   love, bare afflictions should not; for to be without afflictions is a
   sign of bastards. God hath no illegitimate children, but God hath
   degenerate children, who are left to a larger discipline.

   [3.] To draw us to a diffidence and distrust of God's providence: this
   he sought to breed in Christ, or at least to do something that might
   seem to countenance it, if he should upon his motion work a miracle.
   Certainly it is Satan's usual temptation to work in us a disesteem of
   God's goodness and care, and to make us pore altogether upon our wants.
   A sense of our wants may be a means to humble us, to quicken us to
   prayer; but it should not be a temptation to beget in us
   unthankfulness, or murmuring against God's providence, or any
   disquietness or unsettledness in our minds. And though they may be very
   pinching, yet we should still remember that God is good to them that
   are of a clean heart: Ps. lxxiii. 1. God hath in himself
   all-sufficiency, who knoweth both what we want, and what is fittest for
   us, and is engaged by his general providence as a faithful Creator: 1
   Pet. iv. 19, Let them that surfer according to the will of God, commit
   the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
   Creator;' but more especially as related to us as a Father: Mat. vi.
   32, Your heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of all these
   things.' And by his faithful promise, Heb. xiii. 5, He hath said, I
   will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.' And he will give us every
   good thing while we fear him: Ps. xxxiv. 9, 10, O fear the Lord, ye his
   saints: for there is no want to them that fear him. The young lions do
   lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not want any
   good thing.' And walk uprightly: Ps. lxxxiv. 11, For the Lord God is a
   sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing
   will he withhold from them that walk up rightly.' And seek it of him by
   prayer: Mat. vii. 11, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
   shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.'

   But you will say, You preach only to the poor and destitute. I answer,
   I speak as my subject leadeth me: it will put the point generally;
   Satan maketh an advantage of our condition. Christ had power to do what
   was suggested; every condition hath its snares, a full condition most
   of all: Ps. lxix. 22, Let their table be a snare, their welfare for a
   trap.' He hideth his snares and gins to catch our souls. In all the
   comforts men enjoy they are apt to grow proud, to forget God, to become
   merciless to others who want what they enjoy; to live in vain
   pleasures, and to forget eternity; to live in sinful security, in the
   neglect of Christian duties; to be enslaved to sensual satisfactions,
   to be flat and cold in prayer. This glut and fulness of worldly
   comforts is much more dangerous than our hunger.

   Thirdly, observe, In tempting, Satan pretendeth to help the tempted
   party to a better condition; as here he seemeth careful to have bread
   provided for Christ at his need, yea, pretendeth respect to his glory,
   and to have him manifest himself to be the Son of God, by such a
   miracle as he prescribeth. This seeming tenderness, counselling Christ
   to support his life and health, was the snare laid for him. Thus he
   dealt with our first parents: he seeketh to weaken the reputation of
   God's love and kindness to man, and to breed in the woman's mind a good
   opinion of himself. That his suggestions might make the greater
   impression upon her, he manageth all his discourse with her, that all
   the advice which he seemeth to give her proceeded of his love and good
   affection towards her and her husband, pretending a more than ordinary
   desire and care of man's good, Gen. iii. 5, as if he could direct him
   how to become a match for God himself. So still he dealeth with us; for
   alas! otherwise in vain is the snare laid in the sight of any bird,'
   Prov. i. 17. He covereth the snare laid for man's destruction with a
   fair pretence of love to advance man to a greater happiness, and so
   pretendeth the good of those whom he meaneth wholly to destroy. He
   enticeth the covetous with dishonest gain, which at length proveth a
   real loss: the sensual with vain pleasures, which at length prove the
   greatest pain to body and soul: the ambitious with honours, which
   really tend to their disgrace. Always trust God, but disbelieve the
   devil, who promoteth man's destruction under a pretence of his good and
   happiness. How can Satan and his instruments put us upon anything that
   is really good for us?

   Fourthly, That Satan's first temptations are more plausible. He doth
   not at first dash come with fall down and worship me;' but only
   pretendeth a respect to Christ's refection, and a demonstration of his
   sonship. Few or none are so desperate at first as to leap into hell at
   the first dash, therefore the devil beginneth with the least
   temptations. First men begin with less evils, play about the brink of
   hell: a man at first taketh a liking to company, afterwards he doth a
   little enlarge himself into some haunts and merry meetings with his
   companions, then entereth into a confederacy in evil, till he hath
   brought utter ruin upon himself, and what was honest friendship at
   first proveth wicked company and sure destruction at last. At first a
   man playeth for recreation, then ventureth a shilling or two,
   afterwards, by the witchery of gaming, off goeth all sense of thrift,
   honesty, and credit. At first a man dispenseth with himself in some
   duty, then his dispensation groweth into a settled toleration, and God
   is cast out of his closet, and his heart groweth dead, dry, and
   sapless. There is no stop in sin, it is of a multiplying nature, and we
   go on from one degree to another; and a little lust sets open the door
   for a greater, as the lesser sticks set the greater on fire.

   Fifthly, There is no way to defeat Satan's temptations but by a sound
   belief of God's all-sufficiency, and the nothingness of the creature.

   [1.] A sound belief of, and a dependence on, God's all-sufficiency:
   Gen. xvii. 1, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou
   perfect.' We need not warp, nor run to our shifts, he is enough to help
   to defend or reward us; he can help us without means, though there be
   no supply in the view of sense, or full heaps in our own keeping. God
   knoweth when we know not: 2 Pet. ii. 9, The Lord knoweth how to deliver
   the godly out of temptations,' &c., or by contrary means, curing the
   eyes with spittle and clay. He can make a little means go far. As he
   blessed the pulse to the captive children, Dan. i. 15, and made the
   widow's barrel of meal and cruse of oil to hold out, 1 Kings xvii. 14,
   and his filling and feeding five thousand with a few barley loaves and
   a few fishes, Mat. xiv. 21; on the other side he can make abundance
   unprofitable: Luke xii. 15, A man's life consisteth not in the
   abundance of the things which he possesseth.' No means can avail unless
   God giveth his blessing; therefore we should not distrust his
   providence, nor attempt anything without God's warrant, lest we offend
   him, and provoke him to withdraw his blessing.

   [2.] The nothingness of the creature: Not by bread alone.' It is
   nothing by way of comparison with God, nothing by way of exclusion of
   God, nothing in opposition to God. It should be nothing in our esteem,
   so far as it would be something separate from God, or in co ordination
   with God: Isa. xl. 17, All nations before him are as nothing, less than
   nothing and vanity;' Job vi. 21, Now ye are nothing.' All friends
   cannot help, our foes cannot hurt us, not the greatest of either kind:
   Isa. xxxiv. 12, All her princes shall be nothing.' In regard of the
   effects which the world promiseth to its deluded lovers, all is as
   nothing; not only that it can do nothing to our needy souls to relieve
   us from the burden of sin, nothing towards the quiet and true peace of
   our wounded consciences, nothing to our acceptance with God, nothing
   for strength against corruptions and temptations, nothing at the hour
   of death; but it can do nothing for us during life, nothing to relieve
   and satisfy us in the world without God. Therefore God is still to be
   owned and trusted
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON III.

   Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a
   pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
   cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge
   concerning thee; and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at
   any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.--Mat. IV. 5, 6.

   IN this second temptation I shall give you--(1.) The history of it;
   (2.) Observations upon it.

   I. The history of it. There,

   1. What Satan did.

   2. What he said.

   3. The soreness of the temptation.

   1. What he did: Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and
   setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple.' There--(1.) Take notice of
   the ground which the devil chose for the conflict: He taketh him up
   into the holy city, and setteth him on the pinnacle of the temple.' By
   the holy city is meant Jerusalem, for this name is given to it in other
   scriptures: Isa. lviii. 2, They call themselves of the holy city.' And
   Isa. lii. 1, O Jerusalem, the holy city;' and in many other places. It
   was so called, because it was the seat of God's worship, and the place
   where God manifested his gracious presence with his people. If you ask
   why now it was called the holy city, since it was a city of blood, the
   seat of all wickedness, in which the law of God was depraved, their
   religion corrupted, their religion polluted? I answer, Yet there was
   the temple of the Lord. Some relics of good and holy men, some grace
   yet continued, and the only place that owned the true God, though with
   much corruption. The more especial place which the devil chose for the
   conflict was pteru'gion tou ierou, the pinnacle of the temple,' or the
   wing of the temple;' meaning the border round about the flat covering
   of the temple to hinder any one from falling off easily, which might be
   adorned with pinnacles and spires, from whence one might easily fall.
   (2.) How the devil got him there? Whether Christ was carried through
   the air, or went on his feet, following him of his own accord? The last
   seemeth to be countenanced by Luke; that he led him to the pinnacle of
   the temple, Luke iv. 9, e'gagen auton; yet the former is preferred by
   most ancient and modern interpreters, and not without reason. For
   Christ voluntarily to follow the devil, and to go up to the top of the
   temple, and stand on one of the pinnacles thereof, it seemeth
   improbable, and would take up more time than could be spent on this
   temptation. He that would not obey the devil persuading him to cast
   himself down, that he might not tempt God, would not voluntarily have
   gone up with him, for that would have been the beginning of a
   temptation, to yield so far. Most probably, then, Satan was permitted
   to carry him in the air, without doing him any hurt, to Jerusalem, and
   one of the pinnacles of the temple and battlements thereof. But how
   Christ was carried in the air, visibly or invisibly, the scripture
   showeth not: it affirmeth the thing, but sets not down the manner. We
   must believe what it asserteth, reverence what it concealeth. Here was
   a real translation, a transportation from place to place, not
   imaginary, for then Christ had been in no danger. And again, not
   violent, but voluntary--a carrying, not a haling--a leading, not a
   forcing, as the wrestler is drawn on to the combat. As he suffered
   himself to be drawn to death by Satan's instruments, so by the devil to
   be translated from place to place. The officers of the high priest had
   power to carry him from the garden to Annas, from Annas to Caiaphas,
   from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate
   again, and then from Gabbatha to Golgotha, which could not have been
   unless this power had been given them from above, as Christ himself
   telleth Pilate, John xix. 11. So God, for his greater glory and our
   instruction, permitted this transportation; therefore this translation
   is not to be imputed to the weakness of Christ, but his patience,
   submitting thus far that he might experience all the machinations of
   Satan; and the transporting is not to be ascribed to the tempter's
   strength, but his boldness. Christ did not obey him, but submitted to
   the divine dispensation, and would fight with him not only in the
   desert, but in the holy city: and no wonder if Christ suffered Satan to
   carry him, who suffered his instruments to crucify him.

   2. What he said to him, ver. 6, where take notice--(1.) Of the
   temptation itself, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down.' (2.)
   The reason alleged to back it, For it is written, He shall give his
   angels charge concerning thee,' &c.

   [1.] The temptation itself: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself
   down.' Mark what was the mote in the devil's eye, that Christ was
   declared to be the Son of God, the Messiah and Saviour of the world. He
   would have him to put it to this proof in the sight of all Jerusalem,
   wherein, if he failed, and had died of the fall, the Jews would think
   him an impostor; if he had escaped, he had submitted to the devil's
   methods, and so had run into the former sins mentioned before in the
   first temptation, his doing something at the devil's direction; his
   disbelief of the divine oracle, unless manifested by such proof as
   Satan required; and besides a tempting of divine providence--the
   ordinary way was down stairs. He would have him leap, and throw himself
   over the battlements. It would be too long to go down stairs; he will
   teach him a nearer way: to cast himself down and fear no hurt, for if
   he were the Son of God he might securely do so. But chiefly Christ was
   not to begin his ministry by miracles, but doctrine--not from a
   demonstration of his power, but wisdom. The gospel was to be first
   preached, then sealed and confirmed by miracles; and Christ's miracles
   were not to be ludicrous, but profitable--not fitted for pomp, but
   use--to instruct and help men, rather than strike them with wonder. Now
   this would discredit the gospel, if Christ should fly in the air;
   besides, we must not fly to extraordinary means, where ordinary are
   present.

   Only, before I go off, observe that Satan did not offer to cast him
   down; that God did not suffer him to do, because he sought to bring
   Christ to sin. If Satan had cast him down, Christ had not sinned.

   [2.J The reason by which he backeth the temptation. It is taken from
   scripture: For it is written, He shall give his angels charge
   concerning thee.' The scripture is in Ps. xci. 11, 12, where the words
   run thus: He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
   all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash
   thy foot against a stone.' Where,

   First, Observe the devil's cunning in citing scripture. The apostle
   telleth us that Satan is sometimes transformed into an angel of light,
   2 Cor. xi. 14. And we read that once he took the habit and guise of a
   prophet, 1 Sam. xxviii. 18; and indeed he deceiveth more by the voice
   of Samuel than by the voice of the dragon. We read of ta bathe tou
   Satana, The depths of Satan,' Rev. ii. 24. Here he cometh like a
   divine, with a Bible in his hand, and turneth to the place; here the
   enemy of God cometh with the word of God, and disguiseth the worst of
   actions with the best of words, opposeth God to God, and turneth his
   truth to countenance a lie. Being refuted by scripture, he will bring
   scripture too, and pretendeth to reverence that which he chiefly
   hateth. Christians, you have not to do with, a foolish devil, who will
   appear in his own colours and ugly shape, but with a devout devil, who,
   for his own turn, can pretend to be godly.

   Secondly, That he citeth such a scripture, which exceedingly conduceth
   to commend the happiness of the godly; for God will not only be the
   keeper and guardian of them that fear him, but hath also appointed the
   ministry of angels; and the argument of the tempter seemeth to be taken
   from the less to the greater; for if it be true of every one that
   trusts in God, and dwelleth in the shadow of the Almighty, that God
   will have such a care of him, much more will he have a care of his
   beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased. Therefore, you that are
   declared to be so from heaven, and having such an occasion to show
   yourself to be the Son of God with so much honour and profit, why
   should you scruple to cast yourself down?

   But wherein was the devil faulty in citing the scripture? Some say in
   leaving out those words, in all thy ways. This was Bernard's gloss--in
   viis, non in praecipitiis: will keep you in your ways or duties, not in
   your headlong actions; these were none of his ways, to throw himself
   down from the battlements of the temple. This is not to be altogether
   rejected, because it reaches the sense; yet this omission was not the
   devil's fault in citing this scripture; for, all thy ways signifieth no
   more but in all thy actions and businesses, and that is sufficiently
   implied in the words cited by Satan. But the devil's error was in
   application. He applieth the word of God, not to instruct, but deceive;
   rather to breed a contempt, disdain, and hatred of scriptures, than a
   reverent esteem of them; to make the word of God seem uncertain; or if
   a reverence of them, to turn this reverence into an occasion of deceit;
   more particularly to tempt God to a need less proof of his power. We
   are not to cast ourselves into danger, that providence may fetch us
   off. God will protect us in the evils we suffer, not in the evils we
   commit--not in dangers we seek, but such as befall us besides our
   intention.

   3. The soreness of this temptation, which appeareth in several things.

   [1.] The change of place. For a new temptation, he maketh choice of a
   new place; he could do no good on him in the wilderness, therefore he
   taketh him and carrieth him into the holy city. Here was a public place
   where Christ might discover himself with profit, and the edification of
   many, if he would but submit to the devil's methods. In the temple the
   Messiah was as in his own house, where it was fit the Messiah should
   exhibit himself to his people. There was an old prophecy, Mal. iii. 1,
   The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come into his temple, even the
   messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in.' And he was to send
   forth his rod out of Zion, even the law of his kingdom: Ps. cx. 2. If
   he would yield to this advice and vain glorious ostentation of his
   power before that numerous multitude which continually resorted to the
   holy things performed in the temple, how soon should he be manifested
   to be the Son of God, or the power of the great God. The devil doth not
   persuade him to cast himself from a rock or top of a tree in the
   desert--that had been temerity and rashness--but from a pinnacle of the
   temple, an holy place, and a place of much resort. But the Son of God
   was not to be discovered to the world by the devil's methods. That had
   been such a piece of ostentation and vainglory as did not become the
   Son of God, who came to teach the world humility. But, however, the
   temptation is grievous: in so good a design, in such an holy place,
   there could no ill happen to the Son of God, nor a better occasion be
   offered of showing himself to many, so to confirm the Jews in the truth
   of the oracle they had of late heard from heaven.

   [2.] The change of temptations. Since he will trust, the devil will put
   him upon trusting; he shall trust as much as he will. There he tempted
   him to the use of unlawful means to preserve his life, here to the
   neglect of things lawful. There, that God would fail him if he were
   still obedient to the Spirit, and did not take another course than
   divine providence had as yet offered to him; here, that God would not
   forsake him, though he threw himself into danger. There, that he would
   fail though he had promised; here, that he would help though he had not
   promised. That faith which sustained him in his hunger would preserve
   him in this precipice; if he expected his preservation from God, why
   not now? He had hitherto tempted him to diffidence, now to prefidence,
   or an over-confident presumption that God would needlessly show his
   power. It is usual with the tempter to tempt man on both sides;
   sometimes to weaken his faith, at other times to neglect his duty. He
   was east out of heaven himself, and he is all for casting down.

   [3.] The temptation was the more strong, being veiled under a pretence
   of scripture, and so Christ's weapons seem to be beaten back upon
   himself. The devil tempted him to nothing but what he might be
   confident to do upon the promise of God. Now it is grievous to God's
   children, when the rule of their lives and the charter of their hopes
   is abused to countenance a temptation.

   II. The observations.

   1. Observe, that the first temptation being rejected by Christ, Satan
   maketh a new assault. Though he get the foil, he will set on us again;
   like a troublesome fly that is often beaten off, yet will return to the
   same place. Thus the devil, when he could do no good upon his first
   patent against Job's goods and children, cometh and sueth for a new
   commission, that he might touch his flesh and bones: Job ii. 4, 5, Skin
   for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life. But put
   forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
   curse thee to thy face.' Satan is incessant in his attempts against the
   saints, and is ready to assault afresh upon every occasion. Now this
   cometh to pass by Satan's unwearied malice, who is a sworn enemy to our
   peace and welfare--he still seeketh to devour' us, 1 Peter v. 8; also
   from God's providence, who permitteth this that we may not be careless
   and secure after temptation, though we have gotten the victory; for our
   life is a continual warfare: Job vii. 1, Is there not an appointed time
   for man upon earth?' The same word signifieth also a warfare. Man's
   life is a perpetual toil, and a condition of manifold temptations and
   hazards, such as a soldier is exposed to; therefore we must perpetually
   watch. We get not an absolute victory till death. Now this should the
   more prevail with us, because many of God's people have failed after
   some eminent service performed for God. Josiah, after he had prepared
   the temple, fell into that rash attempt against Pharaoh Necho which
   cost him his life: 2 Chron. xxxv. 20, After all this, when Josiah had
   prepared the temple, Necho, king of Egypt, came up to fight against
   Carchemish by Euphrates; and Josiah went out against him.' And Peter,
   after he had made a glorious confession, giveth his Master carnal
   counsel: Mat. xvi. 18, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build
   my church.' &c.; and yet, ver. 23, Get thee behind me, Satan.' Many,
   after they have been much lifted up in consolation, do readily
   miscarry. First, he made a glorious confession, a sign of great faith;
   then carnal wisdom vents itself in some counsel concerning the ease of
   the flesh. Oh, what need have we to stand upon our guard, till God
   tread Satan under our feet! As one of the Roman generals, whether
   conquering or conquered, semper instaurat pugnam, so doth Satan.

   2. Observe, God may give Satan some power over the body of one whom he
   loveth dearly. For Satan is permitted to transport Christ's body from
   the wilderness to the holy city, and to set it on a pinnacle of the
   temple. As it is very consistent with God's love to his people to
   suffer them to be tempted in their souls by the fiery darts of Satan,
   so he may permit Satan to afflict their bodies, either by himself, or
   by witches, who are his instruments. Thus he permitted Satan to afflict
   Job, chap. ii. 6, 7, And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thy
   hand, but save his life. So went Satan forth from the presence of the
   Lord, and smote Job with sore boils, from the sole of his foot unto his
   crown.' The devil may have a threefold power over the bodies of men:--

   [1.] By transportations, or carrying them from one place to another,
   which usually is not found but in those that give up themselves to his
   diabolical enchantments. Or,

   [2.] In possessions, which were frequent and rife in Christ's time: My
   daughter is sorely vexed with a devil.' Mat. xv. 22. Or,

   [3.] In diseases, which is more common. Thus he afflicted Job's body
   cleaveth fast unto him.' It is dvrblyl a thing of Belial.' as if it
   were a pestilential disease from the devil. So some understand that,
   Ps. xci. 3, Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler,
   and from the noisome pestilence.' As if those sudden darts of venom by
   which we are stricken in the plague came from Satan. Certainly evil
   angels may have a great hand in our diseases: Ps. lxxviii. 49, He cast
   upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and
   trouble, by sending evil angels among them.' But I press it not much.
   Only,

   (1.) A word of patience, that we would submit to God, though our trials
   be never so sharp. We must yield to that measure of humiliation which
   it shall please God to prescribe. If he should give leave to Satan to
   inflame our blood and trouble the humours of our body, we must not
   repine; the Son of God permitted his sacred body to be transported by
   the devil in the air.

   (2.) A word of comfort. Whatever power God permitteth Satan to have
   over our bodies, or bodily interests, yet it is limited; he cannot hurt
   or molest any further than God pleaseth. He had power to set Christ on
   a pinnacle of the temple, but not to cast him down. He had a power to
   touch Job's skin, but a charge not to endanger his life: Job ii. 6,
   Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his life.' God sets bounds and
   limits to the malice of Satan, that he is not able to compass all his
   designs. Job was to be exercised, but God would not have him die in a
   cloud, his life was to be secured till better times.

   (3.) A word of caution. Let not the devil make an advantage of those
   troubles which he bringeth upon our bodies, or the interests of the
   bodily life, yet let him not thereby draw you to sin. Here the devil
   may set Christ upon a precipice, but he can do him no further hurt; he
   may persuade us to cast down ourselves, but he cannot cast us down
   unless we cast down ourselves, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso. His main
   spite is at your souls, to involve you in sin. God may give him and his
   instruments a power over your bodily lives, but he doth not give him a
   power over the graces of the saints. The devil aimeth at the
   destruction of souls; he can let men enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
   season, that he may deprive you of delight in God and celestial
   pleasures; he can be content that you shall have dignities and honours
   if they prove a snare to you. If the devil seek to bring you to
   poverty, trouble, and nakedness, it is to draw you from God. He careth
   not for the body but as it may be an occasion to ruin the soul.

   3. Observe, If Satan lead us up, it is to throw us down. He taketh up
   Christ to the pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, Cast thyself
   down.' He bringeth up many by little and little to some high place,
   that by their aspiring they may at length break their necks. Thus he
   did Haman, and so he doth many others, whose climbing maketh way for
   their greater fall. The devil himself was an aspirer, and fell from
   heaven like lightning: Luke x. 18, I beheld Satan as lightning fall
   from heaven.' And though in show he may seem to befriend many that
   hearken to his temptations, yet in the end he crieth, Down with them,
   down with them, even to the ground.' God's manner is quite contrary;
   when he meaneth to exalt a man, he will first humble him, and make him
   low: Mat. xxiii. 12, Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and
   he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.' But the devil's way is
   to lift them up to the clouds, that he may bring them down to the
   lowest pit of destruction. Adam, in conceit, must be like God, that
   indeed he may be like the beasts that perish: Ps. xlix. 20, Man that is
   in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.'

   4. Observe, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down.' The
   temptation is quite contrary to what it was before. Then it was to
   preserve life by unlawful means, now to endanger life by the neglect of
   means lawful; there to distrust God's care of our preservation when he
   hath set us about any task or work, here to presume on his care without
   warrant. The devil tempts us sometimes to pamper the flesh, sometimes
   to neglect it in such a way as is destructive to our service. Thus the
   devil hurrieth us from one extreme to another, as the possessed man
   fell oft-times into the fire, and oft into the water.' Mat. xvii. 15.
   Those that are guided by Satan reel from one extremity to another;
   either men slight sin and make light of it, or sinners are apt to
   sorrow above measure, as the incestuous Corinthian: 2 Cor. ii. 17, Lest
   perhaps such an one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.' And
   the apostle showeth there that these were the enterprises of Satan.
   Some men are careless of God's interest in the world, or else heated
   into the activity of a bitter zeal. Some are of a scrupulous spirit,
   that they may make conscience of all things; and the devil hurrieth
   them into a large atheistical spirit, that they make conscience of
   nothing. How often have we known a fond scrupulosity to end in a
   profane licentiousness, when they have been wearied out of that kind of
   frame of spirit! Some are dead and heartless, like Gallio,--care for
   none of these things;' fight Christ, fight Antichrist, it is all one to
   them; and usually they are such as formerly have been heated with a
   blind and bold madness: as Peter at first refused to have his feet
   washed by Christ, and then would have head, hands, feet and all washed,
   John xiii. 8, 9, being out in both. What sad work is there made in the
   church of God by Solifidians and Nullifidians: heretofore it was all
   faith and free grace misapplied and misunderstood; and now it' is all
   morality and virtue, while Christ is neglected, and the mystery of the
   gospel little set by or valued. It is ever the devil's policy to work
   upon the humour of people. If they will reform the church, it shall be
   to a degree of separation, and condemning all churches and Christians
   that are not of their mode; if they be for uniting, Christ's
   unquestionable interests must be trodden underfoot, and all care of
   truth and reformation must be laid aside. If he can destroy religion
   and godliness no other way, he will be religious and godly himself; but
   it is either, as to private Christians, to set them upon overdoing,
   that he may make them weary of the service of Christ; or, as to the
   public, by crying up some unnecessary things, which Christ never
   commanded. If men be troubled with sin, and see a necessity of the
   gospel, and prize the comforts of it, the gospel must be
   over-gospelled, or else it will not serve their turns; and that
   over-gospel must be carried to such a length as to destroy the very
   gospel, and free grace itself. The devil first tempted the world to
   despise the poor fishermen that preached the gospel; but the world,
   being convinced by the power of the Holy Ghost, and gained to the
   faith, then he fought by riches and grandeur to debase the gospel; so
   that he hath got as much or more by the worldly glory he puts upon
   Christ's messengers as by persecution. Then, when that is discovered,
   the devil will turn reformer; and what reformation is that? the very
   necessary support and maintenance of ministers must be taken away. All
   overdoing in God's work is undoing. If Christ will trust, the devil
   will persuade him to trust, even to the degree of tempting God.

   5. Observe, That the devil himself may pretend scripture to put a
   varnish upon his evil designs; for here he seeketh to foil Christ with
   his own weapons: which serveth to prevent a double extreme.

   [1.] One is, not to be frighted with the mere noise and sound of
   scriptures, which men bring to countenance their errors. See whether
   they be not wrested and misapplied; for the devil may quote scripture,
   but he perverts the meaning of it. And usually it is so by his
   instruments; as that pope, who would prove a double power to be in
   himself, temporal and spiritual, by that scripture, Ecce duo gladii!
   Behold, here are two swords!' Luke xxii. 38. It is easy to rehearse the
   words of scripture, and therefore not the bare words, but the meaning
   must be regarded.

   [2.] The other extreme is this: Let none vilify the scriptures, because
   pleaded by Satan; for so he might as well vilify human reason, which is
   pleaded for all the errors in the world; or law, because it is urged
   sometimes to justify a bad cause. For it is not scripture, that is not
   a nose of wax, as Papists say. It is a great proof of the authority and
   honour of scriptures, that Satan and his greatest instruments do place
   their greatest hopes of prevailing by perverting and misapplying of it.

   6. Observe, That God hath given his angels a special charge about his
   people, to keep them, from harm. Here I shall show:--

   [1.] That it is so.

   [2.] Why it is so.

   First, That it is so is evident by the scripture, which everywhere
   shows us that angels are the first instruments of his providence, which
   he maketh use of in guarding his faithful servants: Heb. i. 14. The
   apostle saith, Are they not all, leitourgika pneumata, ministering
   spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall be the heirs of
   salvation?' Their work and employment is to attend us at God's
   direction, not to be worshipped and served by us by any devotion. They
   are ministering spirits.' not ours, but Christ's; he that serveth hath
   a master whom he serveth, and by whom he is sent forth: their work and
   employment is to attend us indeed, but at the command and direction of
   their own Master. They are not at our beck to go and come at our
   pleasure, neither do they go and come at their inclination, but at the
   commission of God: their work is appointed by him, they serve us as
   their Master's children, at his command and will; and whom do they
   serve? The heirs of salvation.' They are described, Titus iii. 7, That
   being justified by grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope
   of eternal life.' They are not ministers of conversion and
   sanctification: to this ministry Christ hath called men, not angels;
   but in preserving the converted the angels have a hand. Therefore it is
   notable they are sometimes called God's angels: Ps. ciii. 21, Bless the
   Lord, all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his that do his pleasure;'
   sometimes their angels: Mat. xviii. 10, Take heed that ye despise not
   one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven their
   angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.'

   But whether every one hath an angel-guardian is a curious question.
   Sometimes one angel serveth many persons: Ps. xxxiv. 7, The angel of
   the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivered)
   them;' and sometimes many angels are about one person: 2 Kings vi. 17,
   And, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots round about
   Elisha.' And here in the text quoted by Satan, He shall give his angels
   charge concerning thee.' There is not mention made of one, but many
   angels, and the angels in general are said to be ministering spirits.
   When soldiers are said to watch for a city, it is not meant that every
   citizen hath a soldier to watch for him.

   The only place which seemeth to countenance that opinion is Acts xii.
   15, Then said they, It is his angel.' But if Peter had a peculiar angel
   to guard him, and look after him then, when he was in great trouble,
   and detained in prison, it doth not follow that every person and
   everywhere should have an angel-guardian. Besides, an assertion in
   scripture must be distinguished from men introduced speaking in
   scripture. It showeth, indeed, that it was the opinion of the Jews at
   that time, which these holy men had imbibed and drunk in. Or it may be
   the word angel is only taken for a messenger sent from Peter. Why
   should an angel stand knocking at the door, who could easily make his
   entrance? And is it credible that the guardian angels do take their
   shape and habit whose angels they are? It is enough for us to believe
   that all the angels are our guardians, who are sent to keep us and
   preserve us, as it pleaseth God.

   But what is their ministry and custody? It is not cura animarum, care
   and charge of souls; that Christ taketh upon himself, and performeth it
   by his Spirit; but ministerium externi auxilii, to afford us outward
   help and relief: it is custodia corporis, they guard the bodily life
   chiefly. Thus we find them often employed. An angel brought Elijah his
   food under the juniper-tree: 1 Kings xix. 5. An angel stirred the
   waters at the Pool of Siloam: John v. 4. An angel was the guide of the
   way to Abraham's servant: Gen. xxiv. 7, He will send his angel before
   thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.' Angels
   defend us against enemies: Ps. xxxiv. 7, The angel of the Lord
   encampeth round about them that fear him and delivereth them;' 2 Kings
   xix. 35, The angel of the Lord went out and smote in the camp of the
   Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand.' An angel opened the
   prison doors to the apostles: Acts v. 19, and xii. 7.

   But were not all these services extraordinary and miraculous which we
   may not now expect?

   Ans. The visible ministry was extraordinary, proper to those times but
   the invisible is perpetual and ordinary, as Abraham's servant did not
   see the angel in the journey. The devil worketh in and about wicked men
   invisibly, so do the good angels.

   Secondly, Reasons why it is so.

   (1.) To manifest the great love and care which God hath over his
   people; therefore he giveth those blessed spirits, which behold his
   lace, charge concerning his people on earth; as if a nobleman were
   charged to look to a beggar by the prince of both.

   (2.) We understand the operation of finite agents better than infinite.
   God is so far out of the reach of our commerce, that we cannot
   understand the particularity of his providence.

   (3 ) To counterwork the devil: evil angels are ready to hurt us, and
   therefore good angels are ready to preserve us. Well might the devil be
   so well versed in this place; he hath often felt the effects of it; he
   knew it by experience, being so often encountered by the good angels in
   his endeavours against the people of God.

   (4.) To begin our acquaintance, which in heaven shall be perfected:
   Heb. xii. 22, Ye are come to an innumerable company of angels.'

   Use I. To show the happy state of God's people. No heirs of a crown
   have such guards as they have. Christ dwelleth in their hearts as in a
   throne: Eph. iii. 17, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.'
   The Holy Spirit guardeth them against all cares and fears: Phil. iv. 7,
   And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your
   hearts and minds through Jesus Christ.' And the good angels are as a
   wall and camp about them: Ps. xxxiv. 7, The angel of the Lord encampeth
   round about them that fear him, and delivereth them;' Mat. xviii. 10,
   Despise not one of these little ones, for verily I say unto you, that
   in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is
   in heaven.' If the angels make an account of them, surely men should
   not despise them; yea, rather, God esteemeth so much of the meanest of
   these little ones, that the good angels, who daily enjoy God's glorious
   presence, are ministering spirits appointed to attend them. If the Lord
   and his holy angels set such a price on the meanest Christians, we
   should be loth to despise and offend them.

   2. It should breed some confidence and comfort in Christians in their
   sore straits and difficulties, when all visible help seemeth to be cut
   off. This invisible ministry of the angels is matter of faith: 2 Kings
   vi. 16, 17, And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are
   more than they that be with them. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I
   pray thee, open the young man's eyes, that he may see. And the Lord
   opened the young man's eyes, and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was
   full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.' These were no
   other but the angels of God, which were as an host to defend them. Open
   the eye of faith, you may see God, and his holy angels to secure you.

   3. Take we heed how we carry ourselves, because of this honourable
   presence. In congregations there should be no indecency, because of the
   angels.' 1 Cor. xi. 10. In all our ways let us take heed that we do not
   step out of God's way. Do nothing that is unseemly and dishonest; they
   are spies upon us. And it is profitable for us, that they may give an
   account of us to God with joy, and not with grief.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON IV.

   Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord
   thy God.--Mat. IV. 7.

   HERE is Christ's answer to the second temptation, where two things are
   observable:--

   First, That Christ answered.

   Secondly, What he answered.

   First, That Christ answered. Christ answered, the more to convince and
   confound this old deceiver, that he might not think that he was
   ignorant of his sleights, or that he fainted in the conflict; as also
   to instruct us what to do in the renewed assaults of the devil, to keep
   up our resistance still, not letting go our sure hold, which are the
   scriptures.

   Secondly, What he answered, It is written,' &c. But would it not have
   been more satisfactory to have said, It is sufficiently manifest to me
   that I am the Son of God, and cared for by him, and that it is not for
   the children of God to run upon precipices?

   I answer: It is not for human wisdom to interpose and prescribe to
   Christ, who was the wisdom and power of God. His answer is most
   satisfactory, for two reasons:--

   1. It striketh at the throat of the cause.

   2. It doth with advantage give us other instructions.

   1. Christ cutteth the throat of the temptation by quoting a passage of
   scripture, out of Deut. vi. 16, Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God,
   as ye tempted him in Massah.' If we must not tempt God, then it doth
   not become Christ to tempt his Father's providence for a new proof of
   his filiation and care over him. Therefore the devil's temptation was
   neither good nor profitable, to put either his sonship or the care of
   God's providence to this trial; as if he had said, I shall not require
   any more signs to prove my filiation, nor express any doubt of his
   power and goodness towards me, as the Israelites did: Exod. xvii. 7,
   And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the
   chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord,
   saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?' To which story this prohibition
   of tempting God alludeth.

   2. He doth with advantage give us other instructions; as,

   [1.] That we must not esteem the less of scripture, though Satan and
   his instruments abuse it; and that nothing is more profitable to
   dissolve doubts and objections raised from scripture, than to compare
   one scripture with another. For scripture is not opposite to scripture;
   there is a fair agreement and harmony between the truths therein
   compared; and one place doth not cross another, but clear and explain
   another. One place saith he hath a great care of his people, and useth
   the ministry of angels for that end and purpose; but another place
   saith, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God;' they must not seek out
   dangers, and forfeit their protection by unreasonable presumption.

   [2.] It teacheth us that what the scripture speaketh to all, is to be
   esteemed as spoken to every singular person, for they are included in
   their universality. In Deuteronomy it is, Ye shall not tempt the Lord
   your God;' but Christ accommodateth it to his own purpose, Thou shalt
   not tempt the Lord thy God.' He that is not to be tempted by a
   multitude, is not to be tempted by any one. So Ps. xxvii. 8, When thou
   saidst, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will
   I seek.' God's words invite all, but David maketh application to
   himself.

   [3.] Christ subjects himself to the moral law, and did apply the
   precepts thereof to himself, no less than to us; and so is a pattern of
   obedience to us, that we ought to direct and order all our actions
   according to the law and word of God.

   Doct. Tempting of God may be a usual, but yet it is a great and heinous
   sin. In speaking to this point, I shall show:--

   I. What this tempting of God is.

   II. The heinousness of the sin.

   I. What is this tempting of God? And here let me speak:--

   1. To the object.

   2. To the act.

   First, The object, The Lord thy God. To us Christians there is but one
   only true God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now some times we are said
   to tempt God, and sometimes Christ, and sometimes the Spirit of God.

   [1.] In scripture we are said to tempt God, as Ps. xcv. 9, When your
   fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.' We tempt God either
   explicitly or implicitly.

   (1.) Explicitly, by plain and direct words, which tend to God's
   dishonour; or a doubting of his prescience, power, and providence, if
   they have not all things given them according to their fancies and
   humours. As Ps. lxxviii. 18, 19, They tempted God in their hearts, by
   asking meat for their lusts. Yea, they spake against God, and said, Can
   God provide a table in the wilderness?' So Exod. xvii. 7, Is the Lord
   in the midst of us, or no?' They doubted whether God's presence were
   among them, when they had continually such pregnant proofs of it. The
   words may either bear this sense, Who knows that God is present? or,
   Now see whether God be present, or takes any care of us, yea or no.

   (2.) Implicitly, or by interpretation, which is a more secret way of
   tempting God, when the act speaketh it, whatever be the intention of
   the doer. As those who were about to lay the burden of the rites of
   Moses's law on the new converts of the Gentiles: Acts xv. 10, Now,
   therefore, why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the necks of the
   disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?' That
   is, why do you not acquiesce in the will of God, apparently manifested,
   as if ye did go about to try whether God did require anything of his
   servants besides faith in Christ? His will was clearly evident in the
   case by what happened to Cornelius; or as if ye would try whether God
   will take it well that ye should impose upon his disciples a yoke that
   he approveth not.

   [2.] We are said to tempt Christ; and he may be considered either as in
   the days of his flesh, or in his state of glory, and with respect to
   his invisible presence:--

   (1.) In the days of his flesh he was frequently tempted by the scribes
   and Pharisees, who would not be satisfied in his mission,
   notwithstanding all the signs and wonders that he had wrought among
   them; or else sought to accuse and disgrace him, and prejudice the
   people against him; so Mat. xvi. 1, The Pharisees with the Sadducees
   came, and tempting him, desired him that he would show them a sign from
   heaven.' So Mat. xxii. 18, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?' when the
   Pharisees and the Herodians came to question him about paying tribute.
   So Luke x. 25, A certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him,' &c.

   (2.) In his state of glory, and with respect to his invisible presence.
   So the Israelites in the wilderness tempted him before his coming in
   the flesh, and Christians may now tempt him after his ascension into
   heaven. Both are in one place: 1 Cor. x. 9, Neither let us tempt
   Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.'
   What was their tempting of Christ in the wilderness? If he be
   considered as God, he had a subsistence before he was incarnate of the
   Virgin; and in this sense, as they tempted God, so they may be said
   .also to tempt Christ; for all the affliction, shame, and disgrace done
   to that people are called the reproach of Christ: Heb. xi. 25, 26,
   Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
   enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of
   Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.' So their murmuring
   might be called a tempting of Christ. Christ was the perpetual head of
   the church, who in his own person did lead the people, and was present
   in the midst of them under the notion of the angel of the covenant. The
   eternal Son of God guided them in the wilderness: Exod. xxiii. 20-23,
   Behold, I will send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and
   to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and
   obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your
   transgressions; for my name is in him. But if thou shalt indeed obey
   his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thy
   enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries; for mine angel shall
   go before thee, and bring thee in unto the land of the Amorites,' &c.
   This angel can be no other than Christ, whose office it is to keep us
   in the way, and to bring us into the place which Christ hath prepared
   for us; he it is that must be obeyed by the people of God, and pardon
   their transgressions; in him is God's name, for he will not communicate
   it to any other that is not of the same substance with himself: God is
   in him, and he in the Father, and his name is Jehovah our
   Righteousness.' So Exod. xxxiii. 14, My presence shall go with thee,
   and I will give thee rest.' My presence, that is, my angel, spoken of
   before, called the angel of his presence:' Isa. lxiii. 9, In all their
   affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them.'
   This angel is called Jehovah: Exod. xiii. 21, And the Lord went before
   them by day in a pillar of a cloud,' &c. This angel of God's presence
   was no other than Jesus Christ, the conductor of them in the
   wilderness, who safe-guarded them, and secured them all the way from
   Egypt to Canaan. And we Christians may also tempt Christ, for the
   apostle warneth us against it: we tempt Christ, now he is ascended into
   heaven, when we disobey his laws, question his authority, doubt of his
   promises, after sufficient means of conviction, that he is the Messias,
   the Son of God; grow weary of his religion, loathing spiritual manna,
   and begin to be glutted with the gospel, and are discouraged in the way
   to our heavenly Canaan, whither we are travelling.

   [3.] The Holy Ghost is said also to be tempted: Acts v. 9, How is it
   that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?'--namely,
   by their hypocrisy and dissimulation, putting it to the trial, whether
   he could discover them in their sin, yea or no; they had endeavoured,
   as much as in them, lay, to deceive the Spirit by keeping back part of
   the price; that is, by that practice they would put it to the trial,
   whether the Holy Ghost, yea or no, could find out that cheat and
   fallacy. It is not barely to deceive the apostles, who were full of the
   Holy Ghost, and had a discerning spirit, though to them they brought
   their lie. No, saith the apostle, Ye have not lied unto men, but unto
   God,' ver. 4; and therefore they are said to tempt the Holy Ghost.'
   whether he could find them out or no, though they had so many
   experiences of his care and respect to the church, and all affairs
   belonging thereunto; and so the injury was done, not to the apostles,
   but to the Holy Ghost himself.

   Secondly, The act. What is this temptation of God? Temptation is the
   proving and making trial of a thing or person, what he is, and what he
   will do. Thus we tempt God when we .put it to the trial whether God
   will be as good as his word, and doubt of the comminatory and
   promissory part thereof, or whether he will be such an one as he is
   taken to be. Now, this is lawful or unlawful according as the trial is
   made humbly and dutifully, or else proudly and sinfully, whether God
   will do such a thing as we have prescribed him. And again, as the trial
   is made necessarily or unnecessarily. Sinfully we are said to tempt God
   when we make an unnecessary experiment of his truth, goodness, and
   power, and care of us, having had sufficient assurance of these things
   before.

   [1.] There is a tempting or proving of God in a way of duty. So we are
   bidden, Mal. iii. 10, Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that
   there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now therewith, saith the
   Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour
   you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.'
   God there submitteth to a trial upon experience; though we are to
   believe him upon his bare word, yet he will have us to wait for the
   good things promised; and in this sense it is said, The word of the
   Lord is a tried word, he is a buckler to all them that trust m him, Ps
   xviii 30. All those that build any hope upon it, and wait to see what
   the Lord will do, will find that God will stand to his word. This is a
   constant duty to observe God's truth and faithfulness. To suspend our
   belief till the event is distrust; but to wait, observing what God will
   do as to the event, is an unquestionable duty.

   [2.] There is an allowed trying of God in some cases. I cannot say it
   is a duty, because it is only warrantable by God's special indulgence
   and dispensation; and I cannot say it is a sin, because of God's
   gracious condescension to his people: Judges vi. 39, And Gideon said
   unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but
   this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece;
   let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let
   there be dew.' The request was not of distrust and malice, but of
   infirmity and from a weak faith; not out of infidelity to tempt God,
   but out of humility; being sensible of his own weakness, he desired
   this help, for the further confirmation of his faith concerning his
   calling to this work, as an instrument authorised, and the issue and
   success of it; and also to assure others who followed him. To this head
   I refer Thomas his proof and trial: John xx. 25, Except I see in his
   hand the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the
   nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.' Here was
   weakness in Thomas, to suspend his faith upon such a condition; but an
   apostle was to be auto'ptes, an eye-witness of those things which were
   done especially of his resurrection; and, therefore, Christ meekly
   condescended to his request, ver. 27, Reach hither thy finger, and
   behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side,
   and be not faithless but believing.' I put it among infirmities: he
   alloweth him his trial of sense, but with some rebuke. To this head may
   be referred that of Hezekiah, who, when he was sick of a mortal
   disease, and the Lord had extraordinarily promised him, on his
   mourning, that he should be recovered again, he asks a sign for the
   confirmation of his faith and God grants it him: 2 Kings xx. 8, 9. And
   the instance of Ahaz, who when the prophet bid him ask a sign.' he
   said, Isa. vii. 12, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.' He
   believed nothing of what the prophet had spoke, and was resolved to go
   on in his way, but he pretended a reverent and religious respect to
   God. This kind of tempting God is tolerable, being an act of
   condescension in God to the weakness of his people.

   [3.] There is a sinful tempting of God, and this is done two ways:--

   (1.) Generally every transgression, in a general sense, is a tempting
   of God: Num. xiv. 22, They have tempted me now these ten times, and
   have not hearkened to my voice.' Every eminent and notable provocation
   of theirs is called a tempting of God. Hereby they make trial of God's
   justice, whether he will execute vengeance upon them or no. Thus we
   tempt Christ when we fall into any voluntary and known sin, we put it
   to the trial what he will or can do; we enter into the lists with God,
   provoke him to the combat: 1 Cor. x. 22, Do we provoke the Lord to
   jealousy? are we stronger than he?' We try whether God will be so
   severe as his threatening speaks him to be, as if we would make some
   experiment of his anger, justice, and power. This kind of tempting of
   God is compounded of infidelity and presumption. There is infidelity in
   it when we dare sin against the clear light and checks of conscience,
   and venture upon his threatenings. You cannot drive a dull ass into the
   fire that is kindled before him: Prov. i. 17, Surely in vain the net is
   spread in the sight of any bird. And there is presumption in it,
   therefore these voluntary acts of rebellion are called presumptuous
   sins: Ps. xix. 13, Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins.'
   Gross and scandalous sinners are described to be such as tempt God:
   Mal. iii. 15, And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
   wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.'
   And Ananias and Sapphira are said to tempt the Holy Ghost.' Acts v. 9.
   By open voluntary sins men dare God to his face; by secret sins we put
   it to the trial whether God be an all-seeing God, and will discover
   this hypocrisy. Both conclude they shall do well enough, though they
   break his laws, and run wilfully upon evil practices forbidden by his
   law.

   (2.) More particularly we tempt God two ways--in a way of distrust or
   presumption. Both these arise from unbelief, though they seem to be
   contrary extremes; for though presumption may seem to arise from an
   over-much confidence,, yet if it be narrowly searched into, we shall
   find that men presume upon unwarrantable courses, because they do not
   believe that God will do what is meet to be done in his own time or in
   his own way. As, for instance, had the Israelites believed that God, in
   his own time, and in his own way, would have destroyed the Canaanites,
   they would not have presumed, against an express charge, to have gone
   against them without the ark and without Moses, as they did: Num. xiv.
   40, to the end: they presumed to go up unto the hill-top, and then they
   were discomfited. But presumption in some being most visible, in others
   distrust, therefore we make two kinds of them.

   [1st.] In a way of distrust. And that is done several ways, but all
   agree in this: not content with what God hath done already to settle
   our faith, we prescribe means of our own, and indent with him upon
   terms of our own making. So the Israelites, Exod. xvii. 7, And he
   called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the
   chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord,
   saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?' They had sufficient signs of
   God's presence--the pillar of a cloud and fire, that went before them
   by day and by night; but they would have signs of their own. So the
   Jews are said to tempt Christ, because they sought a sign from heaven:
   Mat. xvi. 1, The Pharisees also, with the Sadducees, came, and,
   tempting, desired him that he would show them a sign from heaven.' He
   had given sufficient evidence of his mission and divine power in
   casting out devils and healing the sick and diseased; but they would
   have a sign from heaven, some sign of their own prescribing. The devil
   is ready to put such thoughts into our minds. If God be with us, let
   him show it by doing this or that; and we are apt to require stronger
   proofs of God's power and presence with us than he alloweth. This is a
   frequent sin now-a-days, and men are many ways guilty of it.

   First, Some will not believe the gospel except they see a miracle or
   hear an oracle. Christ representeth their thoughts, Luke xvi. 30, Nay,
   father Abraham, if one went to them from the dead, then they would
   repent.' They would have other ways of assurance than God alloweth, and
   are not content with his word and works, by which he revealeth himself
   to us, but will, at their own pleasure, make trial of his will and
   power, and then believe. These tempt God, and therefore no wonder if
   God will not do for them that which they require.

   Secondly, Some will not believe God's providence, but make question of
   his power and goodness, and care over us and our welfare, when he hath
   given us sufficient proof thereof. When he hath taken care to convince
   our infidelity by supplying our wants, and hath done abundantly enough
   already for evidencing his power, justice, and truth, and readiness to
   help us, we will not believe unless he give us new and extraordinary
   proof of each, such as we prescribe to him: Ps. xcv. 9, 10, When your
   fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works. Forty years long was I
   grieved with this generation, and said, It is a people that do err in
   their hearts, and they have not known my ways.' They saw his works,
   were fed with miracles, and clothed with miracles, yet they must have
   new proof still. Two ways of tempting him as to his providence the
   scripture mentions:--

   One was their setting God a task of satisfying their conceits and
   carnal affections: Ps. lxxviii. 18, And they tempted God in their
   hearts, by asking meat for their lusts.' Of this sin they are guilty
   that must be maintained at such a rate, must have such provision for
   them and theirs, or else they cannot believe his truth and care of
   them. As the Israelites, God must give them festival diet in the
   wilderness, or else they will no longer believe his power and serve
   him.

   The other way of tempting God, with respect to his providence, was by
   confining him to their own time, manner, and means of working: Ps.
   lxxviii. 41, Yea, they turned back, and tempted God, and limited the
   Holy One of Israel.' To limit the Holy One is to confine him within a
   circle of their own making, and if he doth not help them by their
   means, and at their time, as those in the text, they will not tarry
   God's leisure, they think there is no depending on him for any succour.
   Thus they set bounds to his wisdom and power, as if he could do no more
   than they conceive to be probable. Thus also we prescribe means and
   time to God, take upon us to set rules to him how he should govern the
   world. And one usual way of tempting God now is, when we will not go
   fair and softly in the path and pace of God's appointing, but are
   offended at the tediousness thereof, and make haste, and take more
   compendious ways of our own: Isa. xxviii. 16, He that believeth will
   not make haste;' but he that believeth not is precipitant, must have
   God's mercy, power, and goodness manifested to them in their own way
   and time.

   Thirdly, Some will not be satisfied as to their spiritual estate
   without some sensible proof, or such kind of assurance as God usually
   vouchsafeth not to his people. As suppose they must be fed with
   spiritual dainties, and overflow with sensible consolation in every
   holy duty, or else they are filled with disquieting thoughts about
   their acceptance with God. We must have matters of faith put under the
   view and feeling of sense, or else we will not take comfort in them.
   But we must not limit God to give proofs of his love, nor prescribe
   such signs as are not promised by him, but study our case in the word.
   For God will not always treat us by sensible experience. Thomas is
   allowed to touch Christ, but Mary is not allowed to touch him: John xx.
   17, compared with ver. 27.

   [2dly.] In a way of presumption; so we tempt God when, without any
   warrant, we presume of God's power and providence. As here the devil
   tempted Christ to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the temple, to
   try if he would take the charge of him in the fall; where upon Christ
   replieth, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.' Now this is done
   several ways.

   First, When we presume upon God's help, forsaking the ordinary way and
   means. Christ would not throw himself down, when he could go down by
   the stairs or steps of the temple. Down-stairs and over the battlements
   is not all one. Christ, that could walk upon the sea in the distress of
   his disciples, in ordinary cases taketh a ship. Whosoever will not use
   the ordinary means that God hath appointed, but in ordinary cases
   expects extraordinary supplies, tempteth God. God is able to bring
   water out of the rock, when there is nothing but rock and stone; but
   when we may hope to find spring-water, we must dig for it. God can rain
   manna out of heaven; but when the soil will bear corn, we must till it.
   When Elisha was in a little village, not able to defend him from the
   Syrians, he had chariots and horsemen of fire to defend him, 2 Kings
   vi. 17; but when he was in Samaria, a strong, walled town, and the king
   of Israel sent to fetch his head, he said to those that were with him,
   Shut the door,' ver. 32. Christ in the wilderness miraculously fed
   many; but near the city he sent his disciples to buy bread,' John iv.
   8. When the Church of God had need of able helps at first, gifts were
   miraculously conferred; but afterwards every man to his study, 1 Tim.
   iv. 15, Meditate upon these things, give thyself wholly to them, that
   thy profiting may appear to all.' In short, God's omnipotency is for
   that time discharged, when we have ordinary means to help ourselves. To
   disdain ordinary means, and expect extraordinary, is as if a man should
   put off his clothes, and then expect God should keep him from cold.

   Secondly, When we expect the end without the means. If Hezekiah had
   refused the bunch of figs, or Paul's companions to tarry in the ship,
   they had tempted God. When we desire any blessing, we must not refuse
   or neglect any good means for attaining of it. In spiritual things this
   is very usual; men hope to have the end without the means. In temporal
   things we will soon confess there must be means used, for if any would
   not work, neither should he eat.' 2 Thes. iii. 10. In warfare no
   victory is to be hoped for without fighting; only in spiritual matters
   we think to do well enough, though we never put to our endeavours to
   cry for knowledge, and to dig for it; this is a tempting of God: Prov.
   ii. 3-5, If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
   understanding; if thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as
   for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
   find the knowledge of God.' We dream of heaven when there is no
   mortification, no exercising ourselves unto godliness. A great many say
   as Balaam did, Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
   end be like his,' Num. xxiii. 10; but they care not for living the life
   of the righteous. If they can but charm themselves into a secure
   presumption of salvation, they never give diligence to make their
   calling and election sure. This cometh from hardness of heart, not
   strength of faith. Many, defer their conversion to the last, and then
   think that in the twinkling of an eye they shall in a trice be in
   heaven with Elias in whirlwind. It was a prayer of Sir Thomas More,
   Domine, Deus, fac me in iis consequendis operam collocare, pro quibus
   obtinendis te orare soleo--Lord! make me to bestow pains in getting
   those things, for the obtaining of which I use to pray to thee.'
   Otherwise we tempt God.

   Thirdly, When without call we rush into any danger, or throw ourselves
   into it, with an expectation God will fetch us off again. As if Christ,
   when nobody went about to thrust him down, should wilfully have cast
   himself down. Whether the danger be certain, or inevitable, or very
   probable, we must not throw ourselves on it; but, when God calls us,
   then we may expect his help according to his promise; as to go into
   places or houses infected. In spiritual cases it is often done; men
   that by often experience have found such and such things to be
   occasions to them of sinning, yet presume to do the same again; these
   tempt God, ride into the devil's quarters, go into dangerous places and
   companies where they are like to be corrupted; as Peter went into the
   high-priest's hall, and those that go to live in Popish families. We
   pray that we be not led into temptations, but when we lead ourselves,
   what shall become of us? as we do when, we cast ourselves upon
   temptations, and dangerous occasions of sin.

   Fourthly, When we undertake things for which we are not fitted and
   prepared, either habitually or actually: as to speak largely without
   meditation. When an unlearned man undertakes the handling a weighty
   controversy, and a good cause wanteth shoulders, we tempt God. When we
   undertake things above bodily strength, all will condemn us; so to
   undertake things that we have no ability to perform is unlawful. The
   sons of Sceva would take upon them to exorcise the devil, And the man
   in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and
   prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and
   wounded,' Acts xix. 16.

   Fifthly, Another sort of tempting God is, when we come to him with an
   idol in our hearts; that is, when people are resolved of a thing, they
   will go and ask counsel of God. In all matters we resolve on we are to
   take God's leave, and counsel, and blessing; but they first resolve and
   then ask God's counsel. And, therefore, God saith, Ezek. xiv. 4, Every
   man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart, and
   putteth the stumbling-block of his iniquity before his face, and cometh
   to the prophet, I the Lord will answer him that cometh according to the
   multitude of his idols.' Balaam had a mind to the wages of
   unrighteousness, but yet he durst not go without God, and, till God had
   permitted him, he would be asking again and again: Num. xxii. 12,
   compared with the 20th and 22d verses. God answered him in wrath,
   according to the idol of his heart. Thus you see men tempt God, when,
   either out of diffidence or presumption, they seek an experience of his
   wisdom, power, justice, truth, goodness, against his word and command,
   and the order he hath established; as the Israelites, when means
   failed, murmured and prescribed time, means, and manner of deliverance,
   as if they would subject God to their lusts.

   II. The heinousness of the sin.

   1. Because it is a great arrogancy when we seek thus to subject the
   Lord to our direction, will, and carnal affections. Prescribing to God
   argueth too great an ascribing to ourselves. Certainly the Lord can not
   endure that his people, who ought wholly to depend upon him, submit to
   him, and be "ruled by him, should prescribe as they please how and when
   he should help them; and that his power and goodness should lacquey
   upon, and be at the beck of, our idle and wanton humours. The direction
   of the affairs of the world is one of the flowers of God's crown. Now
   to dislike of his holy government is a presumptuous arrogancy in the
   creature; we will take upon us to model our mercies and choose our
   means, and will not tarry the time that he hath appointed for our
   relief, but will anticipate it, and shorten it according to our own
   fancies. God is sovereign, we are as clay in his hands; he is our
   potter, and must prescribe the shape in which we must be formed, and
   the use we must be put to, Jer. xviii. 6: O house of Israel, cannot I
   do with you as the potter, saith the Lord? Behold as the clay is in the
   potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel.' He hath full
   right to dispose of the creature as he pleaseth, and according to the
   counsel of his own will, to which we are to be subject without
   murmuring or repining. We cannot say to him, What makest thou? or why
   dost thou this?' Isa. xlv. 9: Woe unto him that striveth with his
   maker! let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth: shall
   the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work,
   He hath no hands.' Tempting before the event is the same almost with
   murmuring after the event.

   2. It is great unbelief, or a calling into question God's power mercy,
   and goodness to us. We should entirely depend upon God for salvation,
   and whatsoever is necessary to salvation, and that he will supply our
   wants, and bring us out of every strait, in a way most conducing to our
   own welfare and his honour. But now we are not satisfied with the
   assurance God hath given us in those laws of commerce, which are
   established between him and us; we must have extraordinary proofs, or
   else we question all. Tempting God seemeth rather to be opposed to the
   fear and reverence that we should have of him; yet, primarily and in
   itself, it is rather opposite to our trust. And though we take it for a
   sin which argueth too much trust, or an unwarrantable boldness in
   expecting unusual ways of help from God, yet generally it belongeth to
   unbelief and diffidence, and ariseth from it. For, therefore, we put
   him to proof, tempt, or make trial of God, because we distrust his
   help, and are not satisfied with his goodness and power, till we have
   other testimonies thereof, than are ordinarily dispensed. Therefore
   this reason is given of their tempting God, because they believed not
   God, and trusted not in his salvation,' Ps. lxxviii. 22. They must have
   their own salvation, their own way of supply or deliverance, or else
   they cannot trust God if he doth not help them at their time and by
   their means.

   3. It looseneth the bonds of all obedience, because we set up new laws
   of commerce between God and us; for when we suspect God's fidelity to
   us, unless he do such things as we fancy, we suspect our fidelity to
   him. Therefore disobedience is made the fruit of tempting God: Ps.
   lxxviii. 56, Yea, they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept
   not his testimonies.' They that tempt God cast away God's rule, and
   God's terms of obedience, and make others to them selves. The question
   is, whether God shall direct us, or we him? We say, unless God will do
   thus and thus, we will no longer believe his power and serve him.

   4. It is great ingratitude, or a lessening God's benefits and works
   already done for us: Ps. lxxviii. 20, Behold he smote the rock, that
   the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread
   also? can he provide flesh for his people?' As if what he had done
   formerly were nothing. Now, God cannot endure to have his benefits
   lessened, or his former works forgotten and despised.

   5. It is wantonness, rather than want, puts us upon tempting of God.
   There is a humour in men; we are very desirous to try conclusions,
   condemning things common, and are fond about strange novelties. It was
   told the Israelites, as plain as could be, that they should not reserve
   manna till the morning; and they need not to have reserved it, they had
   fresh every day; yet they would needs keep it for experiment's sake, to
   try whether it would stink or no: Exod. xvi. 20. And though they were
   forbidden to gather it on the Sabbath-day, having on the evening before
   enough for two days, and it was told them they should find none on the
   Sabbath-day, yet they must try. Where need is, there a man may commit
   himself to the providence of God, and rely upon him; and where means
   fail us, God can help us by prerogative, that we may say with Abraham,
   when we have no help present, In the mount of the Lord it shall be
   seen,' Gen. xxii. 14; and with Moses, when the Red Sea was before them,
   and the enemy was behind them, Fear ye not, stand still, and ye shall
   see the salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to-day,' Exod.
   xiv. 13. When Elias was in distress, the angel brought him meat, 1
   Kings xix. 5, 6; when Hagar and Ishmael were in the wilderness, and the
   bottle spent, then God comforted her from heaven, Gen. xxi. 17; when
   the three children were in the fiery furnace, then God sent an angel to
   be their deliverer, Dan. iii. 28. But now, in wantonness to desire
   extraordinary proofs of God's care over us, when he hath in ordinary
   ways provided for us, is to tempt the Lord: Ps. cvi. 14, They lusted
   exceedingly in the desert, and tempted God in the wilderness.' When
   they had so many convictions of God's power and providence over them,
   which should in reason have charmed them into a full and cheerful
   resignation and dependence upon him, they, remembering the flesh-pots
   in Egypt, must have their luxuriant appetites gratified; and because
   they had not that festival plenty, which could not be expected in the
   wilderness, they reproached Moses for having brought them out of Egypt,
   to die in the wilderness; and now God must show them a miracle, not for
   the supply of their wants, but to pamper and feed their lusts: Ps.
   lxxviii. 18, 19, And they tempted God in their t heart, by asking meat
   for their lust: yea, they spake against God; they said, Can God furnish
   a table in the wilderness?' A table must be prepared; he must give them
   festival diet in the wilderness.

   6. It argues impatiency: Ps. cvi. 13, 14, They soon forgat his works;
   they waited not for his counsel, but lusted exceedingly in the
   wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.' The word signifies they
   made haste, took it ill they were not presently brought into that
   plenty that was promised: Num. xx. 5, Wherefore have ye made us to come
   up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it is no place of
   seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates, neither is there any
   water to drink,' which was the plenty that was promised in the land of
   Canaan. Thus they made haste, were impatient of staying God's time of
   giving them this inheritance; and because they had it not presently,
   they wished themselves back again in Egypt. Tempting is because we
   cannot attend the performance of God's promise in his own time. They
   went out passionately in the pursuit of their plenty, which they looked
   for; and as soon as they discovered any difficulty, conclude they were
   betrayed, not waiting with patience God's time, when he should
   accomplish his promises made to them.

   7. The greatness of the sin is seen by the punishments of it. One is
   mentioned: 1 Cor. x. 9, Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them
   also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.' They were bitten of
   serpents, because they tempted God, and murmured because of the length
   of the way, that they could not get presently into Canaan; and the
   apostle tells us that all the things which happened to Israel of old
   happened to them os tu'poi, as patterns of providence. A people might
   easily read their own doom and destiny, if they would blow off the dust
   from the ancient providences of God, and observe what proofs and
   characters of his justice, wisdom, and truth are engraven there. The
   desert of sin is still the same, and the exactness of divine justice is
   still the same; and therefore what hath been is a pledge and document
   of what may be, if we fall into like crimes. God is impartially and
   immutably just; he is but one: Gal. iii. 20. God is one, always
   consonant unto himself, and doth like unto himself: his power is the
   same, so is his justice. Even the historical part of the word is a kind
   of prophecy, not only a register and chronicle of what is past, but a
   kind of calendar and prognostication of what is to come. As other
   histories in scripture are left upon record for our learning, so
   especially the history of Israel's passage through the wilderness into
   Canaan.

   Use. Let us not tempt God in any of the kinds mentioned.

   1. Not by requiring new grounds of faith, when God hath given
   sufficient already; not by cherishing scepticism and irresolution in
   point of religion, till new nuncios come from heaven, with a power to
   work miracles, and to be endowed with extraordinary gifts, as the
   Seekers do. Many waver in religion, would fain see an apparition, and
   have some extraordinary satisfaction, which God would not give them
   upon every trifling occasion. The Pharisees must have a sign from
   heaven; the Papists would have the Protestant teachers show their
   commission by miracles; the Jews would believe if Christ came down from
   the cross. To suspend our faith till God gives us our own terms is to
   tempt God; and to dispossess you of this conceit, consider:--

   [1.] Signs and wonders done in one age and time for the confirmation of
   the true religion, should suffice all ages and times afterwards; and it
   is a tempting God to ask more signs and wonders for the confirmation of
   that truth, which is sufficiently confirmed already, if there be a good
   and safe tradition of these things to us. The giving of the law was
   attended with thunderings and lightnings, and the sound of a terrible
   trumpet, Exod. xix., by which means the law was authorised, and owned
   as proceeding from God. Now, it was not needful this should be repeated
   in every age, as long as a certain report and records of it might
   convey it to their ears. In the setting up a new law, signs and wonders
   are necessary to declare it to be of God; but when the church is in the
   possession of it, these cease. So in the Christian church; when the
   gospel was first set on foot, it was then confirmed with signs and
   wonders, but now they are unnecessary. See the law and gospel compared:
   Heb. ii. 2-4, For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every
   transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward:
   how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the
   first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
   that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and
   wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
   according to his own will?'

   [2.] If you had lived in the age of signs and wonders, there were hard
   hearts then, unbelievers then, and blasphemers then, and tempters of
   God then: Ps. lxxviii. 22-24, Because they believed not in God, and
   trusted not in his salvation, though he had commanded the clouds from
   above, and opened the doors of heaven, and had rained manna upon them
   to eat, and had given them of the corn of heaven,' &c., to ver. 32, For
   all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works.'
   Extraordinary works will not work upon them upon whom ordinary works
   will not prevail.

   Object. But for them that have to do with the conversion of Indians and
   remote parts of the world, is it a tempting of God to ask the gift of
   miracles?

   Ans. I cannot say so. God may be humbly sought unto about direction in
   the gifts of tongues, and healing, being so necessary for the
   instruments employed, as well as the conviction of the nations. I dare
   not determine anything in the case, but I am satisfied with Acostus his
   reasons why miracles are not afforded by God now, as well as in the
   primitive times. Then simple and unlearned men were sent to preach
   Christianity among the nations, where many were armed and instructed
   against it with all kind of learning and philosophy; but now learned
   men are sent to the ignorant, and are superior to them in reason, and
   in civility and authority; and, besides, present them a religion far
   more credible than their own, that they cannot easily withstand the
   light of it.

   2. Do not run into any wilful and known sin, as if you would try how
   far the patience of God will go, nor abuse his fatherly goodness by
   going on still in your trespasses. When a man will try the patience of
   God without any regard of his threatenings, or the in stances of his
   wrath, which are before his eyes, he puts it to the proof whether God
   will punish him, yea or no. Remember you are no match for him: Isa.
   xlv. 9, Woe unto him that striveth with his maker! let the potsherds
   strive with the potsherds of the earth.' As Abner said to Asahel: 2
   Sam. ii. 21, 22, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and
   lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour. But
   Asahel would not turn aside from following of him. And Abner said again
   to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should I smite
   thee to the ground?' So if you will needs be tempting and trying
   conclusions, and making experiments, let men meddle with their match,
   those who are equal to them selves, not challenging one infinitely
   above them; let frail man cope with man, but let him take heed of
   meddling with God: Ezek. xxii. 14, Can thine heart endure, or can thine
   hands be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee?' Many foolish
   people say, as those in the prophet, It is an evil, and I must bear
   it;' endure it as well as I can. What! endure the loss of heaven!
   endure the wrath of the Almighty God! If Rachel could not endure the
   loss of her children, nor Jacob the supposed loss of Joseph, but, says
   he, I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning,' Gen. xxxvii.
   35. If Achitophel could not endure the rejectment of his counsel, and
   Haman could not endure to be slighted by Mordecai, and many cannot
   endure the loss of a beloved child; how wilt thou endure the loss of
   eternal happiness? The disciples wept bitterly when Paul said, Ye shall
   see my face no more.' Acts xx. 38. What will ye do, then, when God
   shall say, Ye shall see my face no more? Ah wretch! how canst thou
   endure the wrath of God? Thou canst not endure to be scorched a few
   days with feverish flames; thou canst not endure the acute pains of
   stone and gout, when God armeth the humours of thine own body against
   thee; thou canst not endure the scorching of a little gunpowder
   casually blown up; thou canst not endure the pains of a broken arm or
   leg; and can you endure the wrath of God, when God himself shall fall
   upon you with all his might?

   3. When we are destitute and sorely distressed, let us wait upon God
   with patience, according to the tenor of his promises, and tarry his
   leisure, without prescribing time and means. God knoweth the fittest
   season, and delighteth oftentimes to show our impatience and try our
   faith: Mat. xv. 28, O woman, great is thy faith!' And that his help may
   not be ascribed to chance or our industry, and that we may the more
   prize blessings, consider you cannot be more distressed than Christ
   was, who seemed abandoned to Satan's power, distressed with sore hunger
   through his long fasting. The devil was permitted to have power over
   his body, to carry him to one of the pinnacles of the temple, and yet
   he discovered an invincible confidence and trust in God, that he would
   not step the least step out of God's way for his preservation in so
   imminent a danger.

   Now that you may not tempt God:--

   [1.] Let your heart be deeply possessed with apprehensions of the
   goodness, wisdom, and power of God. The scripture telleth us for his
   goodness: Ps. cxix. 68, Thou art good, and doest good;' and again, Ps.
   cxlv. 9, The Lord is good to all.' For his wisdom: Isa. xxviii. 29, He
   is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.' His purposes are
   often hidden from us, but he doeth all things well; God can do more for
   us than seemeth probable at the present; and therefore let us not tempt
   him by confining him to our time, means, and manner. He may love us,
   and yet delay our help: John xi. 5, 6, Jesus loved Lazarus.' and yet,
   ver. 6, When he heard that he was sick, he abode two days still in the
   same place where he was.' Then, for his power and sovereign dominion,
   there is not a better argument for confidence than the preface and
   conclusion of the Lord's Prayer. Whatsoever state you are reduced to,
   God is still to be trusted, who is Our Father, which is in heaven.' and
   whose is the kingdom, power, and glory:' 2 Tim. i. 12, I know whom I
   have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I
   have committed unto him against that day.' Whatsoever our straits be,
   he is a God still to be trusted.

   [2.] Be firmly persuaded of God's care and providence over his people,
   and so careth for you in particular. This is assured to us by promises
   and by experiences. By promises: 1 Pet. v. 7, Casting all your care
   upon him, for he careth for you;' Phil. iv. 6, 7, Be careful for
   nothing: but in everything by prayer and supplication, with
   thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God; and the peace
   of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and
   minds through Jesus Christ.' By experiences: Mat. xvi. 8, 9, O ye of
   little faith! why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought
   no bread? Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of
   the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?' Christ was angry
   with his disciples, that they should be troubled about bread, since
   they had lately such experience of his power to provide bread at
   pleasure. Use the means God puts into your hands, and refer the success
   to him. You need not be anxious about anything in this world.

   [3.] Let all this produce in you an holy obstinacy of trust and
   obedience, or an invincible confidence in God, and close adherence to
   him, whatever your dangers, straits, and extremities be, and this will
   guard your heart against all tempting of God:--

   (1.) A resolute trust and dependence: Job xiii. 15, Though he slay me,
   yet will I trust in him.' This is the soul that is prepared to be true
   to God, and contentedly to bear whatever he sendeth.

   (2.) A constant adherence to our duty: Wait on the Lord, and keep his
   way,' Ps. xxxvii. 34. Do not go one step out of God's way for all the
   good in the world. The greatest extremities are to be borne rather than
   the least sin yielded to: Dan. iii. 17, 18, Our God, whom we serve, is
   able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace; and he will deliver
   us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O
   king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
   which thou hast set up.' Please God, and God will be always with you,
   when you seem to be left destitute: John viii. 29, And he that sent me
   is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those
   things that please him.'
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON V.

   Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
   showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and
   saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
   down and worship me.--Mat. IV. 8, 9.

   THIS is the third temptation. In handling it I shall use the former
   method, give you the history of the temptation, and observations
   thereupon.

   In the history.

   I. The introduction, ver. 8.

   II. The temptation itself, with the grievousness of it, ver. 9.

   III. Christ's reply, ver. 10.

   First, In the introduction we have--

   1. The place the devil taketh him unto: an exceeding high mountain.

   2. The fact: he showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
   glory of them.

   1. The place chosen for the conflict, an exceeding high mountain.' For
   the mountain, the scripture would not name it, and we need not
   anxiously inquire after it, whether any near Jericho, as some say, or
   as others, some mountain near Jerusalem; and possibly the highest above
   the rest was chosen by the tempter. The pinnacle of the temple was not
   proper, because Jerusalem was surrounded with higher mountains on all
   sides: Ps. cxxv. 2, As the mountains are round about Jerusalem,' &c. He
   chose an high mountain, because of the fairer prospect, where the
   horizon might be as spacious as was possible, and the sight not
   hindered by any interposing object. God took Moses into Mount Pisgah,
   and showed him the land of Canaan, Deut. xxxiv. 1. The devil, who
   affecteth to do in evil as God doth in what is good, taketh Christ into
   a mountain. He leadeth us high, and promiseth us high things, that
   suiteth with his disposition; but it endeth in a downfall that suiteth
   with his condition. The close is still cast thyself down,' or else, as
   here, fall down and worship me.' The devil's taking him up thither is
   to be explained the same way with his taking him up to the pinnacle of
   the temple.

   2. The fact, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
   glory of them.' But how could the devil from one mountain show him all
   the kingdoms of the world, when there is none so high as that we can
   see the latitude of one kingdom, much less through all, partly through
   the unequal swellings of the earth, and partly through the weakness of
   the eye, which cannot reach so far? The sight could go no further than
   the horizon, and the other hemisphere is not to be seen at all; that
   part which we see is much less than that part which we see not.
   Therefore how could he show him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
   glory thereof? Ans. These words must not be taken rigorously; but that
   he showed them:--(1.) In compendio. (2.) In speculo. (3.) In colloquio.

   [1.] In compendio. It maybe understood of so many kingdoms as could
   fall under the sight of a man looking round about him from some eminent
   place; as God is said to show Moses all the land of Canaan, when he did
   actually see only a part thereof. From that high mountain the devil
   gave him a view of all that was to be seen from thence; many castles,
   towns, and fruitful fields might be seen as a sample of the rest. It is
   a synechdochical hyperbole, he that showeth a part of a thing, and the
   chiefest part, may be said to show the thing itself.

   [2.] In speculo, besides what he might reach by his sight. By way of
   representation and external visible species, he represented to Christ
   all the rest of the kingdoms of the world and the pomp and glory
   thereof as in a map. For Satan can object to the eyes of men the
   species and images of divers things; and there is no absurdity to think
   that this way he showed his utmost art and cunning to represent the
   world to Christ in as splendid and inviting a manner as he could. If
   you ask, therefore, why he carried him to a high mountain--he might
   have done this in a valley or any other place as well? I answer, it is
   true if the discovery had been only by representation, or if the devil
   could have deluded Christ's fancy or imagination, so as to impress
   these species upon it so far as that he should seem to see what he did
   not see, a valley would have served turn as well as a mountain; but
   this was done without it, and with it, showing the glory of the world
   as in a map and picture, and therefore a convenient place is chosen.

   [3.] In colloquio, by discourse. The temptation might be helped on by
   the devil's pointing at the several quarters of the world, with words
   relating the glory thereof, what splendour and glory the kings and
   nations had which adored him, all which Christ should have if he would
   fall down and worship him. Now all this while Satan is but making way
   for his purpose, thinking Christ would be ravished with this glorious
   sight. Possibly it was not a mere dumb show, but the tempting objects
   were amply set forth by Satan's speech.

   Secondly, The temptation itself, where we may consider the nature and
   the grievousness of it.

   1. The nature of the temptation, where observe two things:--

   [1.] An offer or a promise: all these things will I give thee.

   [2.] A postulation or demand: if thou wilt fall down and worship me.

   [1.] An offer or promise: all these things will I give thee.' This is a
   vain boast of the tempter, who ascribeth to himself that which was
   proper to God, and promiseth to Christ those things which were all his
   before. God had said, Ps. ii. 8, Ask of me, and I will give thee the
   heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
   thy possession.' This the devil, who affecteth to be like God,
   arrogateth unto himself, as if he would make him the universal king of
   the world. In Luke it is, chap. iv. 6, All this power will I give thee,
   and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever
   I will I give it.' But you must not always look for truth in the
   devil's speeches: he is not lord of the world to dispose of it at his
   own pleasure. And yet it is not to be supposed he would come with a
   downright untruth to the Son of God, if there were no pretence or
   varnish for it. Therefore we must distinguish between the devil's lie
   and the colour thereof.

   (1.) Certain it is that God doth govern all the affairs of this world,
   and doth put bounds and limits to Satan's power, beyond which he cannot
   pass, and doth often hinder his endeavours, and turn them to the quite
   contrary end and purpose; and if he doth not hinder them, yet he
   directeth them for good to his people. Therefore that power that Satan
   hath is not given, but permitted; not absolute, but limited. It is a
   lie that Satan can give these things at pleasure; see these scriptures:
   Ps. xxiv. 1, The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the
   world, and they that dwell therein;' Dan. ii. 21, He changeth the times
   and the seasons; he removeth kings, and setteth up kings;' and ver. 37,
   The God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and
   glory.' All the alterations that are in the earth are of the Lord; he
   pulleth down, and raiseth up, as seemeth good unto him. Therefore this
   power of disposing kingdoms belongeth unto God.

   (2.) That the Son of God is the right heir of the world: Heb. i. 2,
   Whom he hath appointed heir of all things.' To whom the nations are
   given: Ps. ii. 8, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
   inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession;'
   Mat. xxviii. 18, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.'
   And therefore it was impudence in him to arrogate this power, and to
   promise these things to the Lord which were his before.

   (3.) Though this was a lie, yet here is the colour of the lie. God
   permitteth that men sometimes by indirect means become great in honour
   and dignity in this world; all which are done by the instinct of Satan
   and his help. And evil men often succeed in their attempts, and from
   hence Satan is called the prince of this world: John xii. 31, Now shall
   the prince of this world be cast out;' John xiv. 30, The prince of this
   world cometh, and hath nothing in me;' John xvi. 11, Of judgment,
   because the prince of this world is judged.' Yea, Paul goeth higher,
   and calleth him the god of this world:' 2 Cor. iv. 4, In whom the god
   of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not.' But
   this is by usurpation, not just right. And the devils are called, Eph.
   vi. 12, The rulers of the darkness of this world,' as the wicked
   consent to his empire and evil suggestions. But all this implieth but a
   limited and restrained kingdom; and the devil's impudence and falsehood
   lieth in this, that he interprets God's permission for a commission,
   his connivance for a conveyance. Indeed, there are two lies in the
   devil's offer: one assertory, as if the power and glory of the world
   were at his disposal; the other promissory, as if he would invest
   Christ in the full and peaceable possession thereof; whereas indeed he
   went about to divest and dispossess the Son of God of his right, or to
   tempt him to do a thing contrary to his kingdom; for he knew the
   abasement of Christ was the way to his glory, the cause of man's
   happiness, and the ruin of the kingdom of the devil; therefore he
   seeketh to prevent this by these magnificent promises.

   [2.] The postulation or demand: if thou wilt fall down and worship me.'
   Here the devil appeareth in his own likeness. Before it was, if thou be
   the Son of God;' now it is, fall down and worship me.' Before he
   appeared as a friend to advise him in his hunger; then as a divine to
   instruct him how to discover himself as the Messiah; now as a plain
   usurper of God's worship. And he demands but one act of prostration,
   such as was given to the kings of the East; and the Jews in that manner
   did worship God. Therefore this was the vilest and most blasphemous
   suggestion which Satan could devise, that the Son of God should stoop
   to God's rebel. Here we see the devil not only importunate, but
   impudent.

   2. The grievousness of the temptation, that will appear in these
   considerations:--

   [1.] Because it was represented in a matter grateful and pleasing. It
   was unnecessary to turn stones into bread, dangerous to throw himself
   down from a pinnacle of the temple; but it might seem sweet and
   grateful to behold the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof; for
   surely the glory of the world is a bewitching object, and would much
   move a carnal heart. And therefore he produceth this tempting object,
   and sets it before Christ himself. Mark, he showed him the glory only,
   not the burdens, the labours, the cares, those storms of jealousy and
   envy which those encounter with who are at the top. This way did he now
   choose wherewith to assault Christ. Had he really represented the
   world, with all the vexations attending it, the temptation had not been
   so great; but he showeth the kingdoms of the world, and the glory
   thereof: the bait, not the hook; he talketh highly of small things,
   commendeth what is pleasing, but hideth the bitter of these luscious
   sweets; he offereth Christ the glory of the kingdoms of the world, but
   dissembleth the cares, the troubles, the dangers. Alas! we see the best
   side of those that live in courts, their gorgeous apparel, their costly
   entertainments, their power and greatness; but their fears of being
   depressed by superiors, jostled by equals, undermined by inferiors, are
   hidden from us.

   Therefore the temptation was dexterously managed by the devil, in that
   he showed him the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof.
   Temptations of the right hand are more dangerous than those of the left
   hand.

   [2.] He showeth the bait before he offereth the temptation, that the
   world might speak for him before he spake for himself, and prepared the
   mind of Christ by this bewitching object before he cometh either with
   his offer or demand. And then afterwards, before he maketh his demand,
   he premiseth his offer: All these things will I give thee.' The offer
   is made before the spiteful condition is mentioned. Observe the
   different methods of Christ and Satan:--Satan maketh show of glory
   first, but Christ of the cross. Satan offereth the benefit before he
   seemeth to require the service, as here he doth first offer and then
   ask; but fallaciously, for indeed he requireth a present act, but only
   promiseth a future compensation: I will give thee' all these things.
   Christ telleth us the worst at first: Mat. xvi. 24, If any man will
   come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow
   me.' The issue showeth the fraud of the tempter, and the misery of
   those poor deluded souls who hearken to him. On the contrary, the
   sincerity of our Lord, and the happiness of those who obey him, will
   soon appear. The devil will have all paid before he part with any
   thing; no worship, no glory. But I am carried too far: my purpose was
   only to show his dexterity and cunning, how he sets a colour upon sin
   before he mentions it, by glorious promises, and the manifold pleasure
   and profit which comes by it.

   [3.] He doth not seek to move him by naked words, but by the sight of
   the thing itself. Objects move the senses, senses draw away the mind;
   nor are they the porters of the soul so much as the corrupters: Ps.
   cxix. 37, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou
   me in thy way.' If we let loose our senses without a guard, we soon
   contract a deadness of heart. There is nothing so soon led away as the
   eye, it is the broker between the heart and the object; the eye gazeth
   and the heart lusteth; this is the window by which Satan hath crept in,
   and all manner of taint hath been conveyed into the soul. In the first
   sin, Eve was corrupted this way: Gen. iii. 6, And when the woman saw
   that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes,
   &c., she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat.' Gazing on the fruit
   with delight, her heart was ensnared. We read of Potiphar's wife, She
   cast her eyes on Joseph,' Gen. xxxix 7; Achan, Josh. vii. 21, When I
   saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred
   shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I
   coveted them, and took them.' First he saw, then he coveted, then he
   took them, then he hid them, then Israel falls, and he is attached by
   lot. So it is said of Shechem and Dinah: Gen. xxxiv. 2, He saw her, and
   took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.' So of Samson: Judges xvi.
   1, He went to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her.'
   David was ensnared by his eyes: 2 Sam. xi. 2, From the roof he saw a
   woman washing herself, and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.'
   Naboth's vineyard was ever in Ahab's eye, as being near his palace,
   therefore he is troubled and falls sick for it, 1 King xxi. 1, 2. Now,
   because so many have been betrayed by their senses, the devil taketh
   this way to tempt Christ, as knowing this is the next way to the heart.

   [4.] He taketh him into an high mountain, that he might look far and
   near, and see the more provinces, cities, and kingdoms, to move him the
   more. The devil was sensible that small things were not to be offered
   to Christ, and therefore dresseth out the temptation in as' glorious a
   manner as he can. The chapman of souls is grown thirsty of late, he
   doth not offer all the kingdoms of the earth and the glory thereof, he
   knoweth that we will accept of less with thanks. The devil buyeth many
   at a very easy price; he needeth not carry them so high as the
   mountain; they are contented with a little gain that is got by a
   fraudulent bargain in the shop. If we stand in our window, or at our
   doors, we meet with temptations enough to carry us away. He needeth not
   come with kingdoms, or with the glory of all the world: thirty pence,
   the price of a slave, is enough to make Judas betray his master, Mat.
   xxvi. 15; and the prophet telleth us of some that will transgress for
   handfuls of barley and pieces of bread, Ezek. xiii. 19. And those
   pretended prophets, too, making God the author and maintainer of their
   lies and deceits. And, again, of those that respect persons, whether
   magistrates or ministers: Prov. xxviii. 21, To have respect of persons
   is not good, for for a piece of bread will that man transgress.' And
   another prophet telleth us of those that sell the poor for a pair of
   shoes,' Amos ii. 6, and viii. 6. Those will take any price. And the
   apostle saith of Esau, Heb. xii. 16, For one morsel of meat he sold his
   birthright.' So that the devil may abate a great deal of what he
   offered Christ. He need not say to such, You shall have all these
   things.' Nay, hold you! You shall have this petty gain, that slight
   pleasure and carnal satisfaction. It is a wonder to consider what small
   things make up a temptation to many, yea, to most. The world is so
   corrupt that they will violate conscience with a small hire. We are not
   tempted with great things, less will serve the turn. But the devil knew
   that small matters were no temptation to Christ, therefore he carrieth
   him to the mountain, that he might see the glory of all the earth, to
   make the temptation the more strong.

   [5.] He showeth him the kingdoms of the world, en stigme chronou, Luke
   iv. 5, in a moment of time,--that circumstance is not to be passed
   over. When many objects and glorious come together of a sudden, they do
   the more surprise us. Therefore, the more to affect Christ with the
   splendour of these things, and on a sudden to prevail upon him, which
   otherwise he was not likely to do, he did not represent the glory of
   these kingdoms of the world to Christ that he might see them one after
   another, but all together, that there might be less time for
   consideration, that so his mind might be the more blinded by the
   appearing splendour of the tempting object, and his heart the more
   captivated thereby. Diverse things seen in one view do more surprise us
   than if viewed by a leisurely contemplation. Alas! we are sometimes
   overborne by the violence of a temptation, sometimes overtaken by the
   suddenness of it: Gal. vi. 1, Brethren, if one be overtaken in a
   fault,' prolemphthe, inconsiderately and suddenly surprised by a sin.
   We do many things preposterously and in haste, which we repent of by
   leisure. Thus the devil thought to surprise Christ, but he was aware of
   him.

   [6.] In other temptations the tempter doth only ask a thing to be done,
   but here he doth ask and promise things glorious, profitable, and
   pleasing to carnal sense, and such as seem every way desirable. The
   offers of gain and glory are promised to the temptation.

   [7.] He craveth but one thing, a very small thing, and this under the
   hope of the greatest advantage: one act of external adoration, easy to
   be performed; if Christ would but kneel to him, not as supreme God; an
   inferior adoration would have contented him: yield but a little, do but
   fall down and worship,' it shall be enough. As the heathens of old said
   to the Christians, Do but touch the censer. The commendation of God's
   servants was, that they had not bowed the knee to Baal,' Rom. xi. 4.
   The devil knoweth if he can get us to a little he shall get us to more;
   and the least reverence is too much to such an impure spirit.

   Secondly, The observations.

   I. Observe from that again the devil taketh him, That we must expect
   not only to be tempted, but to be often tempted. Satan hath both his
   wiles and darts: Eph. vi. 11, 16. He sometimes assaulteth us with the
   one, sometimes with the other. Therefore--

   1. Be not secure, but watch, and stand upon your defence. It is a
   careless soul that can sleep in so great a danger. There is yet a
   malicious tempting devil alive, who would sift you as wheat.' Luke
   xxii. 31; and somewhat within you which would betray you to him if you
   be not wary; and you may meet with such snares as you have not yet met
   withal.

   2. Be not overmuch troubled and dejected if you be assaulted afresh.
   You must make your way to heaven almost every step by conflict and
   conquest. Remember your baptismal vow, the obligation of which ceaseth
   not till your life be ended; and then you shall be out of gunshot and
   harm's way. Therefore still follow the captain of your salvation
   wherever he leadeth you. The more trials the more glory.

   3. Avoid rash judgment and censure, if the same happen to others.
   Pirates do not use to set upon an empty vessel. The best are most
   assaulted. God permitteth it for their trial, and Satan hath the
   greatest spite at them.

   II. Observe, That the more grievous temptations follow the lighter
   ones, and the last assaults and trials are usually the greatest. This
   is so, if you respect either the dexterity and cunning of the tempter,
   represented before, or the foulness of the temptation, viz., to
   idolatry. The best of God's children may be tempted to the most
   execrable sins. Thus usually doth Satan reserve his worst assaults for
   the last, and his last temptation is commonly the sorest. Dying beasts
   bite shrewdly; so Satan rageth most when he hath but a short time.
   Therefore, since our warfare is not over, let us prepare for the worst
   brunt, and the last efforts of Satan. If God will crown us fighting, we
   have no cause to complain. Many of God's servants, whom he could not
   draw to worldliness, sensuality, or vainglory in their lifetime, he
   will seek to inject blasphemous thoughts into their minds at last. But,
   though it be grievous, be not dismayed, your conquest is sure and near.

   III. Observe, The world and worldly things are the bait and snare which
   the tempter offereth to Christ and his followers. As here, when he
   would make his last onset upon Christ, he sets before him the kingdoms
   of the world, and the glory of them,' as the matter of the temptation.

   1. There are three enemies of our salvation, the devil, the world, and
   the flesh:--they are reckoned up together, Eph. ii. 2, 3, Wherein in
   time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to
   the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the
   children of disobedience. Among whom also we all had our conversation
   in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the
   flesh and of the mind.' The devil is the deceiver and grand architect
   of all wickedness; the flesh is the principle that he worketh upon, or
   that rebelling faculty within us that would be pleased before God; the
   world is the bait by which the devil would deceive us and steal away
   our hearts from God, for it suiteth with our fleshly appetites and
   desires. More distinctly that Satan is an enemy appeareth from his
   name, that signifieth an adversary, and in many places of scripture he
   is so called; as Mat. xiii. 25; While men slept, the enemy came and
   sowed tares among the wheat,' compared with the 39th verse, the enemy
   that sowed them is the devil.' He is the great enemy to God and man: 1
   Pet. v. 8, Your adversary the devil like a roaring lion walketh about,'
   &c. The flesh is an enemy, yea, our greatest enemy, for it warreth.
   against the soul: 1 Pet. ii. 11, Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war
   against the soul.' If you indulge the flesh, you are willing to lose
   your souls. Yea, it warreth against the spirit or better part, as
   contrary to it: Gal. v. 17, For the flesh lusteth against the spirit,
   and the spirit against the flesh:' other things could do us no harm
   without our own flesh. We are tempted to sin by Satan, encouraged to
   sin by the example and custom of the world, but inclined to sin by our
   own flesh. The world is an enemy of our salvation, as well as the devil
   and the flesh; all the other enemies get strength by it. By the bait of
   worldly things the devil pleaseth the flesh; we are in continual danger
   of being everlastingly undone by it. Whosoever is a lover of the world
   is presumed to be a professed enemy of God: James iv. 4, Know ye not
   that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever will be
   a friend of the world is the enemy of God;' 1 John ii. 15, If any man
   love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.' It is an enemy,
   because it keepeth us from God, who is our chief good, and the
   enjoyment of him among his blessed ones, which is our last end. There
   is a neglect cf. God and heavenly things where the world prevaileth.

   2. The devil maketh use of the world to a double end.

   [1.] To divert us from God and heavenly things, that our time, and
   care, and thoughts may be wholly taken up about things here below: Luke
   xii. 19, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine.
   ease, eat, drink, and be merry;' Phil. iii. 19, 20, They mind earthly
   things; but our conversation is in heaven.' These are perfectly
   opposite. Some are of the world, and speak of the world, and wholly
   mind the world, and are governed by the spirit of this world, seldom
   look higher, or very coldly and slightly. Thus that which should be
   thought of in the first place is scarce thought of at all. But,
   remember, he doth but offer you worldly things to deprive you of
   heavenly.

   [2.] To draw us to some open sin for the world's sake, as here he
   tempted Christ to idolatry, and Demas to defection from the faith: 2
   Tim. iv. 10, Demas hath forsaken us, having loved this present world.'
   Others to some carnal, fraudulent, oppressive course, whereby they are
   spotted by the world. The whore of Babylon propoundeth her abominations
   in a golden cup,' Rev. xvii. 4; and the great motive here is, All this
   will I give thee.' Though the devil cometh not in person to us with his
   offers, he doth by his instruments; as Balak, when he sent to Balaam to
   curse the Israelites, he promised him great rewards: Num. xxii. 17, I
   will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will do whatsoever thou
   sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people.' So
   when he doth entice you by the motions of your own hearts to anything
   that is unlawful, to falsehood, deceit, or unjust gain, or to get and
   keep wealth by any base or unjust means, or doing something that is
   base and unworthy of your religion.

   [3.] I observe that temptations from the world may prevail with us.
   Satan maketh use of a twofold artifice. The one is to greaten the
   worldly object, the other is to make us large promises of success,
   happiness, and contentment in our evil enterprises.

   (1.) He useth this sleight here; he doth in the most enticing manner
   lay the world before Christ as a splendid object, to greaten it in
   Christ's thoughts and apprehensions. Therefore, when we begin to
   magnify the riches, pomp, and pleasures of the world, the devil is at
   our elbow, and we are running into the snare. And therefore, if we
   begin to say, Happy is the people that is in such a case,' it is time
   to correct ourselves and say, Yea, happy is the people whose God is the
   Lord,' Ps. cxliv. ib. Take heed the devil doth not gain this advantage
   over you, to make you follow the world with the greatest earnestness,
   and spiritual and heavenly things in a slight and overly manner.
   Esteem, desires, resolutions of worldly greatness, though not upon base
   conditions, begin the temptation. You think it is a fine thing to live
   in pomp and at ease, to swim in pleasures, and begin to resolve to make
   it your business. The devil hath you upon the hip, it is an hour of
   temptation.

   (2.) His next course is to make large offers and promises by his
   instruments or your own thoughts, that though you neglect God and
   heaven, and do engage in some sinful course, you shall do well in the
   world, and enjoy full satisfaction. There is a double evil in Satan's
   offers and promises:--

   First, They are false and fallacious: All these things will I give
   thee.' Satan maketh fair offers of what he cannot perform. He promiseth
   many things, but doth only promise them. He offereth the kingdoms of
   the world to Christ, but cannot make good his word; he showeth them to
   Christ, but cannot give them. And this is the devil's wont, to be
   liberal in promises, to fill the minds of those that hearken to him
   with vain hopes, as if he could transfer the riches and honours of the
   world to whom he pleaseth, whereas they are shame fully disappointed,
   and find their ruin in the very things in which they sought their
   exaltation, and their projects are crossed, for the earth is the
   Lord's, and the fulness thereof.' 1 Cor. xi. 26.

   Secondly, All the devil's offers and promises have a spiteful condition
   annexed. He pretendeth to give, but yet selleth at the dearest rates.
   It is but a barter and exchange; a flat bargain, but no gift. He must
   have our souls, God is dishonoured, his laws broken, his Spirit
   grieved. The devil staineth his grant with unjust covenants, and
   exacteth more than the thing is worth.

   Two ways then must we defeat the temptation:--

   (1.) Not believing his promises, that I must be beholden to sin to make
   me happy. Those that by unlawful means get up to honour and wealth seem
   to have accepted the devil's offer; they think he is lord of the world,
   and all the kingdoms and the glory thereof. Do not look upon wealth as
   the devil's gift, as a thing to be gotten by fraud, flattery,
   corruption, bribery: alas! it is put into bags with holes.' Hag. i. 6.
   It is called the deceitfulness of riches.' Mat. xiii. 22. They promise
   that contentment and happiness which they cannot give. There is sure
   dependence on the Lord's, but none on Satan's promises. Young men that
   are to begin the world, take up this resolution: take what God sendeth,
   but resolve never to take wealth out of Satan's hands; what God sendeth
   in the fair way of his providence, by his blessing on your lawful
   endeavours: Prov. x. 4, The hand of the diligent maketh rich;' and ver.
   22, The blessing of the Lord it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow
   with it.' When you deal righteously, and do not barely heap up treasure
   to yourselves, but seek to grow rich toward God, to subordinate all to
   heaven and a better pursuit: otherwise God can find a moth and a thief
   for your estates.

   (2.) The other way is, to consider what a sad bargain you make by
   gratifying the devil, and hearkening to his counsel: Mat. xvi. 26, What
   is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
   soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?' A man never
   gets anything with Satan, but he shall lose that which is more
   precious; he never maketh a proffer to our advantage, but to our loss
   and hurt. Follow the world as hard as you can, lie, cozen, cheat, and
   you shall be rich; put the case, It is so, but I must lose my soul, not
   in a natural, but legal sense: Job xxvii. 8, What is the hope of the
   hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul?' He
   hath far better things from us than we have from him; a birthright for
   a mess of pottage, the hopes of heaven for an opulent condition here
   below. The bird buys the fowler's bait at a dear rate when his life
   must go for it. Thy soul must be lost, which all the gold and silver in
   the world cannot redeem and recover.

   [4.] I observe again that Christ by his refusal hath taught us to tread
   the world under our feet, and all the glory of it should be an
   ineffectual and cold motive to a sanctified soul. If we have the same
   spirit that was in Christ, it will be so. All the kingdoms of the
   world, and the glory of them, was far too little to make up a
   temptation to him. A mortified heart will contemn all this in
   comparison of our duty to God, and the comfort of a good conscience,
   and the hopes of glory. Surely they have not the spirit of Christ who
   are taken with small things, with a Babylonish garment, or some petty
   temptation.

   Uses. The use is to teach us how to counterwork Satan.

   1. Since he worketh upon the fleshly mind, we are to be mortified and
   grow dead to the world. We profess faith in a crucified Lord; we must
   be like him, crucified as he was crucified; then shall we glory in the
   cross of Christ, when we feel the virtue of it, and are planted into
   the likeness of it: Gal. vi. 14, God forbid that I should glory, save
   in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified
   unto me, and I unto the world.' Grow more dead to the riches, honour,
   pomp, pleasure, the favour, fear, love, wrath, praise and dispraise of
   men, that we may readily deny these things, so far as opposite to the
   kingdom of Christ, or our duty to God, or as they lessen our affections
   to him. We die as our esteem of those things doth decay; till the man's
   temper be altered there is no hope to prevail by argument. Only they
   that are made partakers of a divine nature do escape the corruption
   that is in the world through lust.

   2. Since he worketh by representation and promise, you must be prepared
   against both.

   [1.] As he worketh by representation of the fair show and splendid
   appearance of worldly things, you must check it:--

   (1.) By considering the little substance and reality that is in this
   fair appearance: 1 Cor. vii. 31, The fashion of this world passeth
   away,' schema. It is but a draft, an empty pageantry; so it is called,
   Ps. xxxix. 6, A vain show;' an image, shadow, or dream, that vanisheth
   in a trice. So Prov. xxiii. 5, Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which
   is not?' It was not a while ago, and within a little while it will not
   be again, at least to us it will not be; we must shortly bid good-night
   to all the world: 1 Pet. i. 24, All flesh is grass, and the glory
   thereof as the flower of the grass.' David saith, Ps. cxix. 86, I have
   seen an end of all perfection.' It is good often to inter mingle these
   serious thoughts of the frailty of all sublunary enjoyments, to keep us
   modest in what we have, or desire to have, that we may not be blinded
   with the delusions of the flesh, and enchanted with an admiration of
   worldly felicity.

   (2.) As the devil seeketh to open the eye of sense, so must we open the
   eye of faith: 2 Cor. iv. 18, We look not at the things which are seen,
   but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
   temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.' Things unseen
   must be every day greatened in our eyes, that all our pursuit after
   things seen may be subordinated to our desires of, and labour after,
   things unseen. There we must see the greatest reality, or else we have
   not the true Christian faith: Heb. xi. 1, Faith is the substance of
   things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.' It is such an
   evidence of the worth and reality of the unseen glory as draweth off
   the heart from things seen, which are so pleasing to the flesh. Faith
   sets it before the eye of the soul in the promises of the gospel: Heb.
   vi. 18, Who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before
   us.' Heb. xii. 2, Who for the joy that was set before him endured the
   cross.' &c.

   [2.] As he dealeth with us by promise. Everything we hope to get by sin
   is a kind of promise or offer of the devil to us; as suppose by
   unconscionable dealing in our calling. Here consider two things:--

   (1.) The falsity of the devil's promises.

   (2.) The truth and stability of God's promises.

   (1st.) The falsity of Satan's promises. Either he giveth not what he
   promised, as he promised our first parents to be as gods: Gen. iii. 5,
   Ye shall be as gods;' and what ensued? Ps. xlix. 12, Man that is in
   honour and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish;' degraded
   to the beasts, as the brutish and bestial nature prevailed in him when
   he fell from God. Or else, if we have them, we were better be without
   them; we have them with a curse, with the loss of better things: Jer.
   xvii. 13, O Lord, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that
   depart from me shall be written in the earth.' They are condemned to
   this felicity: we have them with stings of conscience:--Mat. xxvii. 4,
   5, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood; and he cast
   down the pieces of silver in the temple, and went and hanged himself;'
   --which are most quick and sensible when we come to die: Jer. xvii. 11,
   He that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
   of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.' Now rise up in
   indignation against the temptation. Shall I sell my birthright? lose my
   fatness to rule over the trees?--as the olive-tree in Jotham's parable,
   Judges ix. 9.

   (2dly.) The sufficiency and stability of God's promises.

   First, Sufficiency: Gen. xvii. 1, I am the Almighty God; walk before
   me, and be thou perfect;' 1 Tim. iv. 8, Godliness is profitable for all
   things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which
   is to come;' --of heaven and of earth: Mat. vi. 33, Seek ye first the
   kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things
   shall be added to you.' It may be you have less than those that indulge
   themselves in all manner of shifts and wiles, but you shall have
   enough, not to be left wholly destitute: Heb. xiii. 5, He hath said, I
   will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.' And you shall have it with
   contentment: Prov. xv. 6, In the house of the righteous is much
   treasure, but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble;' and better is
   a little with righteousness, than great revenues with sin,' Prov. xvi.
   8. And you have it so as not to lose other things.

   Secondly, Stability: 2 Cor. i. 20, All the promises of God in him are
   Yea, and in him Amen;' and Heb. vi. 18, That by two immutable things,
   in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
   consolation,' &c.; Ps. cxix. Ill, Thy testimonies have I taken as an
   heritage for ever: they are the rejoicing of my heart.'

   IV. Observe--Fall down--The pride of the devil: he sinneth from the
   beginning, 1 John iii. 8. The sin of pride was fatal to him at first,
   and the cause of those chains of darkness in which now he is held; yet
   still he sinneth the same sin, he requireth adoration, and would be
   admitted into a partnership of divine worship. He obtained it from
   pagans and idolaters, not from Christ. The angel deprecates and detests
   it: Rev. xix. 10, And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said
   unto me, See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy
   brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship thou God.' So Rev.
   xxii. 9, I fell down to worship before the face of the angel that
   showed me these things. And he said to me, See thou do it not: for I am
   thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them that
   keep the sayings of this book: worship God.' Paul, when the priests at
   Lycaonia were about to sacrifice to him: Acts xiv. 14, 15, When the
   apostles heard of it, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the
   people, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do you these things? We also
   are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should
   turn from these vanities unto the living God.' But the evil angels they
   are apt to invade the right of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VI

   Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written,
   Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
   serve.--Mat. IV. 10.

   THIRDLY, Christ's answer and reply, which is double:

   I. By way of rebuke, defiance, and bitter reprehension: Get thee hence,
   Satan.

   II. By way of confutation: For it is written, &c.

   1. The rebuke showeth Christ's indignation against idolatry: Get thee
   hence, Satan.' This was not to be endured. Twice Christ useth this form
   of speech, hupage, Satana, to Satan tempting him to idolatry here, and
   when his servant dissuaded him from suffering: Mat. xvi. 23, Get thee
   behind me, Satan, for thou art an offence to me; for thou savourest not
   the things that be of God, hut those that be of men.' This suggestion
   intrenched or touched upon the glory of God, the other upon his love to
   mankind; and Christ could endure neither; Satan is commanded out of his
   presence with indignation. The same zeal we see in his servants: in
   Moses in case of idolatry, Exod. xxxii. 19, He brake the tables; so in
   case of contradiction to the faith of Christ, Paul taketh up Elymas,
   Acts xiii. 10, O full of subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the
   devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert
   the right ways of the Lord?' Open blasphemy must be abhorred, and
   needeth not only a confutation but a rebuke. Besides, it was an
   impudent demand of Satan to require adoration from him, to whom
   adoration is due from every creature; to ask him to bow down before
   him, to whom every knee must bow: and therefore a bold temptation must
   have a peremptory answer. There is no mincing in such cases. It is no
   way contrary to that lenity that was in Christ; and it teacheth us, in
   such open cases of blasphemy and downright sin, not to parley with the
   devil, but to defy him.

   2. By way of confutation: For it is written, Thou shalt worship the
   Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.' Where observe:--

   [1.] Christ answereth to the main point, not to by-matters. He doth not
   dispute the devil's title, nor debate the reality of his promises; to
   do this would tacitly imply a liking of the temptation. No; but he
   disproveth the evil of the suggestion from this unclean and proud
   spirit: a better answer could not be given unto the tempter. So that
   herein we see the wisdom of Christ, which teacheth us to pass by
   impertinent matters, and to speak expressly to the cause in hand in all
   our debates with Satan and his instruments.

   [2.] He citeth scripture, and thereby teacheth that the word of God,
   laid up in the heart and used pertinently, will ward off the blows of
   every temptation. This weapon Christ used all along with success, and
   therefore it is well called, The sword of the Spirit.' Eph. vi. 17. It
   is a sword, and so a weapon both offensive and defensive: Heb. iv. 12,
   The word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged
   sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
   the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents
   of the heart.' And a sword of the Spirit.' because the Spirit is the
   author of it: 2 Pet. i. 21, Holy men of God spake as they were moved by
   the Holy Ghost.' He formed and fashioned this weapon for us; and
   because its efficacy dependeth on the Spirit, who timeously bringeth it
   to our remembrance, and doth enliven the word and maketh it effectual.
   Therefore it teacheth us to be much acquainted with the Lord's written
   word. The timely calling to mind of a word in scripture is better than
   all other arguments,--a word forbidding or threatening such an evil:
   Ps. cxix. 11, Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin
   against thee;' pressing the practice of such a duty when we are slow of
   heart: Ps. cxix. 50, Thy word hath quickened me;' or a word speaking
   encouragement to the soul exercised with such a cross: Heb. xii. 5, Ye
   have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto
   children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor
   faint when thou art rebuked of him;' Ps. cxix. 92, Unless thy law had
   been my delight, I should then have perished in mine affliction:' still
   it breaketh the strength of the temptation, whatsoever it be.

   [3.] The words are cited out of the book of Deuteronomy. Indeed out of
   that book all Christ's answers are taken, which showeth us the
   excellency of that book. It was of great esteem among the Jews, and it
   should be so among all Christians, and it will be so of all that read
   it attentively. The church could not have wanted it.

   [4.] The places out of which it is cited are two: Deut. vi. 13, Thou
   shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and swear by his name;' and
   again, Deut. x. 20, Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him,
   and to him shalt thou cleave.' Christ, according to the Septuagint,
   Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.'
   Mo'no, only, which is emphatical, seemeth to be added to the text, but
   it is necessarily implied in the words of Moses; for his scope was to
   bind the people to the fear and worship of one God. None was so wicked
   and profane as to deny that God was to be feared and worshipped; but
   many might think that either the creatures or the gods of the Gentiles
   might be taken into fellowship of this reverence and adoration. Him is
   only him; auto is exclusive, if mo'no were left out. See the place,
   Deut. vi. 13, 14, Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
   shalt swear by his name; ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods
   of the people which are round about you.' And in other places it is
   expressed; as 1 Sam. vii. 3, If you prepare your hearts unto the Lord,
   and serve him only.' The devil excepts not against this interpretation,
   as being fully convinced and silenced by it. And it is a known story
   that this was the cause why the pagans would not admit the God of the
   Jews, as revealed in the Old Testament, or Christ, as revealed in the
   New, to be an object of adoration, because he would be worshipped
   alone, all other deities excluded. The gods of the heathens were
   good-fellow gods, would admit partnership; as common whores are less
   jealous than the married wife: though their lovers went to never so
   many besides them selves, yet to them it was all one, whensoever they
   returned to them and brought their gifts and offerings.

   [5.] In this place quoted by our Saviour there is employed a
   distinction of inward and outward worship. Fear is for inward worship,
   serve is for outward worship, and the profession of the same. Fear in
   Moses is expounded worship by Christ; so Mat. xv. 9, compared with Isa.
   xxix. 13, In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
   commandments of men;' but in the prophet it is Their fear towards me is
   taught by the precepts of men.' He that worshippeth feareth and
   reverenceth what he worshippeth, or else all his worship is but a
   compliment and empty formality. So that the fear of God is that
   reverence and estimation that we have of God, the serving of God is the
   necessary effect and fruit of it; for service is an open testimony of
   our reverence and worship. In this place you have worship and service,
   both which are due to God only. But that you may perceive the force of
   our Saviour's argument, and also of this precept, I shall a little
   dilate on the word service, what the scripture intendeth thereby. Satan
   saith, Bow down and worship me:' Christ saith, Thou shalt worship the
   Lord thy God, and him only .shalt thou serve.' Under service, prayer
   and thanksgiving is comprehended: Isa. xliv. 17, And the residue
   thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto
   it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me, for
   thou art my god.' This is one of the external acts whereby the idolater
   showeth the esteem of his heart: so Jer. ii. 27, Saying to a stock,
   Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth.' So,
   under serving, sacrifice is comprehended: 2 Kings xvii. 35, Ye shall
   not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor
   sacrifice to them.' Again, burning of incense: Jer. xviii. 15, My
   people have forgotten me, they have burnt incense to vanity.' Preaching
   for them; Jer. ii. 8, The pastors also have transgressed against me,
   and the prophets prophesied by Baal.' Asking counsel of them: Hosea iv.
   12, My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth
   unto them; for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and
   they have gone a whoring from under their God.' So building temples,
   altars, or other monuments unto them: Hosea viii. 14, Israel hath
   forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples;' and xii. 11, Their altars
   are as heaps in the furrows of the fields.' Erecting of ministries, or
   doing any ministerial work for their honour: Amos v. 26, Ye have borne
   the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chium your images, the star of your
   god, which ye made to yourselves;' as God appointed the Levites to bear
   the tabernacle for communion in the service of them: 1 Cor. x. 18, Are
   not they that eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?' ver. 21,
   Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils; ye cannot be
   partakers of the Lord's table and of the table of devils.' So 2 Cor.
   vi. 16, 17, What agreement hath the temple of God with idols?' In
   short, for it is endless to reckon up all which the scripture
   comprehendeth under service and gestures of reverence: Exod. xx. 5,
   Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them.' Bowing the
   knee: 1 Kings xix. 18, I have left me seven thousand in Israel, which
   have not bowed the knee to Baal.' Kissing them: Hosea xiii. 18, They
   kiss the calves.' Lifting up the eyes: Ezek. ii. 15. He hath not lift
   up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel.' Stretching out the
   hand: Ps. xliv. 20, If we have stretched our hands to a strange God.'
   So that you see all gestures of reverence are forbidden as terminated
   to idols. Thus strict and jealous is God in his law, that we might not
   bow down and worship the devil, or anything that is set up by him.

   Doct. That religious service and religious worship is due to God only,
   and not to be given to saint, or angel, or any creature.

   Thus Christ defeateth the devil's temptation, and thus should we be
   under the awe of God's authority, that we may not yield to the like
   temptation when the greatest advantages imaginable are offered to us.
   Here I shall show:--

   I. What is worship, and the kinds of it.

   II. I shall prove that worship is due to God.

   III. Not only worship, but service.

   IV. That both are due to God alone.

   1. What is worship? In the general it implieth these three things: an
   act of the judgment, apprehending an excellency in the object
   worshipped; an act of the will, or a readiness to yield to it, suitably
   to the degree of excellency which we apprehend in it; and an external
   act of the body whereby it is expressed. This is the general nature of
   worship, common to all the sorts of it.

   2. The kinds of it. Now worship is of two kinds--civil and religious.
   Religious worship is a special duty due to God, and commanded in the
   first table. Civil honour and worship is commanded in the second table.
   They are expressed by godliness and righteousness,' 1 Tim. vi. 11; and
   godliness and honesty,' 1 Tim. ii. 2.

   [1.] For religious worship. There is a twofold religious worship. One
   when we are right for the object, and do only worship the true God;
   this is required in the first commandment. The other when we are right
   for the means, when we worship the true God by such means as he hath
   appointed, not by an image, idol, or outward representation. Opposite
   to this there is an evil idolatrous sinful worship, when that which is
   due to the Creator is given to any creature; which is primary or
   secondary. Primary, when the image or idol is accounted God, or
   worshipped as such, as the sottish heathens do. Or secondary, when the
   images themselves are not worshipped as having any godhead properly in
   themselves, but as they relate to, represent, or are made use of, in
   the worship of him who is accounted God. We shall find this done by the
   wiser heathens, worshipping their images, not as gods themselves, but
   as intending to worship their gods in these and by these. So also among
   some who would be called Christians. Thus the representing the true God
   by images is condemned, Deut. iv. 15-17, Take ye good heed unto
   yourselves, for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord
   spake unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire, lest ye corrupt
   yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure,
   the likeness of male or female.' Again, sinful worship is twofold: more
   gross of idols, representing false gods, called worshipping of devils;
   or more subtle, when worship is given to saints or holy men: Acts x.
   25, 26, As Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his
   feet, and worshipped him. But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up; I
   myself also am a man.' Acts xiv. 14. 15, Paul and Barnabas, when they
   heard this, rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out
   and saying, Sirs, why do you these things? we also are men of like
   passions with you,' &c. Or to angels: Rev. xxii. 8, When John fell at
   the angel's feet to worship him, he said, See thou do it not; for I am
   thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets.'

   [2.] Civil worship is when we give men and angels due reverence, and--

   (1.) With respect to their stations and relations, whatever their
   qualifications be, as to magistrates, ministers, parents, great men; we
   are to reverence and honour them according to their degree and quality:
   according to the fifth commandment, Honour thy father and thy mother;'
   1 Thes. v. 13, and to esteem them very highly in love for their work's
   sake.' Or,

   (2.) A reverential worshipping or esteeming them for their
   qualifications of wisdom and holiness: Acts ii. 47, Good men had favour
   with all the people.' Such respect living saints get, such angels may
   have when they appear: Gen. xviii. 2, Abraham bowed himself towards the
   ground:' and Gen. xix. 1, Lot rose up to meet them, and bowed himself
   with his face towards the ground.'

   Now, whether the worship be civil or religious may be gathered by the
   circumstances thereof; as if the act, end, or other circumstances be
   religious, the action or worship itself must be so also. It is one
   thing to bow the knee in salutation, another thing to bow in prayer
   before an image.

   II. That worship is due to God. These two notions live and die
   together--that God is, and that he ought to be worshipped. It appeareth
   by our Saviour's reasoning, John iv. 24, God is a spirit, and they that
   worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.' He giveth
   directions about the manner of worship, but supposeth it that he will
   be worshipped. When God had proclaimed his name and manifested himself
   to Moses, Exod. xxxiv. 8, Moses made haste, and bowed himself and
   worshipped.' It is the crime charged upon the Gentiles, that when they
   knew God, they glorified him not as God,' Rom. i. 21. They knew a
   divine power, but did not give him a worship, at least competent to his
   nature. God pleadeth his right: Mal. i. 6, If I be a father, where is
   mine honour? If I be a master, where is my fear?' And God, who is the
   common parent and absolute master of all, must have both a worship and
   honour, in which reverence and fear is mixed with love and joy; so that
   if God be, worship is certainly due to him. They that have no worship
   are as if they had no God. The psalmist proveth atheism by that: Ps.
   xiv. 1, The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God;' and ver. 4,
   They call not upon God.' The acknowledgment of a king doth imply
   subjection to his laws; so doth the acknowledgment of his God imply a
   necessity of worshipping him.

   III. That both worship and service is due to God: Him shalt thou
   worship, and him shalt thou serve.' The worship of God is both internal
   and external: the internal consisteth in that love and reverence which
   we owe to him; the external, in those offices and duties by which our
   honour and respect to God is signified and expressed: both are
   necessary, both believing with the heart, and confession with the
   mouth: Rom. x. 9, 10, If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
   Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart that God raised him from the
   dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto
   righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.'
   The soul and life of our worship and godliness lieth in our faith,
   love, reverence, and delight in God above all other things; the visible
   expression of it is in invocation, thanksgiving, prayers, and
   sacraments, and other acts of outward worship. Now, it is not enough
   that we own God with the heart, but we must own him with the body also.
   In the heart: Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.'
   Ps. ii. 11. Such as will become the greatness and goodness of God; with
   outward and bodily worship you must now own him in all those prescribed
   duties in which these affections are acted. The spirit must be in it,
   and the body also. There are two extremes. Some confine all their
   respect to God to bodily worship and external forms: Mat. xvi. 8, This
   people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with
   their lips; but their hearts are far from me.' They use the external
   rites of worship, but their affections are no way suited to the God
   whom they worship: it is the heart must be the principal and chief
   agent in the business, without which it is but the carcase of a duty,
   without the life and the soul. The other extreme is, that we are not
   called to an external bodily worship under the gospel. Why did he then
   appoint the ordinances of preaching, prayer, singing of psalms,
   baptism, and the Lord's supper? God, that made the whole man, body and
   soul, must be worshipped of the whole man. Therefore, besides the
   inward affections, there must be external actions, whereby we express
   our respect and reverence to God.

   IV. That both these, religious worship and service, are due to God
   alone. I prove it by these arguments:--

   1. Those things which are due to God as God are due to him alone, and
   no creature, without sacrilege, can claim any part and fellowship in
   that worship and adoration, neither can it be given to any creature
   without idolatry. But now religious worship and service is due to God
   as God: He is thy Lord, and worship thou him.' Ps. xlv. 11. Our worship
   and service is due to him, not only for his super-eminent excellency,
   but because of our creation, preservation, and redemption. Therefore we
   must worship and serve him, and him only: Isa. xlii. 8, I am the Lord;
   that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, nor my praise
   to graven images.' God challengeth it as Jehovah, the great self-being,
   from whom we have received life and breath, and all things. This glory
   God will not suffer to be given to another. And therefore the apostle
   showeth the wretched estate of the Galatians, chap. iv. 8: When ye knew
   not God, ye did service to them that by nature are no gods;' that is,
   they worshipped for gods those things which really were no gods. There
   is no kind of religious worship or service, under any name whatsoever,
   to be given to any creature, but to God only; for what is due to the
   Creator as Creator cannot be given to the creature.

   2. The nature of religious worship is such, that it cannot be
   terminated on any object but God; for it is a profession of our
   dependence and subjection. Now, whatever invisible power this worship
   is tendered unto must be omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent.
   Omniscient, who knows the thoughts, cogitations, secret purposes of our
   heart, which God alone doth: 1 Kings viii. 39, Give unto every one
   according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest; for thou, even thou
   only, knowest the hearts of all the children of men.' It is God's
   prerogative to know the inward motions and thoughts of the heart,
   whether they be sincere or no in their professions of dependence and
   subjection. So omnipresent, that he may be ready at hand to help us and
   relieve us: Jer. xxiii. 23, 24, Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar
   off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him?
   saith the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord.' The
   palace of heaven doth not so confine him and enclose him but that he is
   present everywhere by his essential presence, and powerful and
   efficacious providence. Besides omnipotent: Ps. lvii. 2, I will cry
   unto God most high, unto God who performeth all things for me.' Alas!
   what a cold formality were prayer if we should speak to those that know
   us not, and who are not near to help us, or have no sufficiency of
   power to help us! Therefore these professions of dependence and
   subjection must be made to God alone.

   3. To give religious worship to the creatures, it is without command,
   without promise, and without examples, and therefore without any faith
   in the worshipper, or acceptance of God. Where is there any command or
   direction, or approved example, of this in scripture? God will accept
   only what he commanded, and without a promise it will be unprofitable
   to us: and it is a superstitious innovation of our own to devise any
   religious worship for which there is no example at all whereby it may
   be recommended to us. Certainly no action can be commended to us as
   godly which is not prescribed of God, by whose word and institution
   every action is sanctified which otherwise would be common; and no
   action can be profitable to us which God hath not promised to accept,
   or hath accepted from his people. But giving religious worship to a
   creature is of this nature.

   4. It is against the express command of God, the threatening of
   scripture, and the examples recorded in the word. Against the express
   command of God--both the first and second commandments, the one
   respecting the object, the other the means; that we must not serve
   other gods, nor go after them, nor bow down unto them. It is against
   the threatenings of the word in all those places where God is said to
   be a jealous God.' God is said to put on jealousy as a cloak.' Isa.
   lix. 17; that is, the upper and outmost garment. He will be known, and
   plainly profess himself to be so. So Exod. xxxiv. 14, The Lord, whose
   name is Jealous, is a jealous God.' Things are distinguished from the
   same kind by their names, as from different kinds by their natures.
   Now, from the lego'menoi theo`i, God will be distinguished by his
   jealousy, that he will not endure any partners in his worship. It is
   against examples: Rev. xix. 10, and xxii. 8, When I had heard and seen,
   I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which showed me
   these things. And he said unto me, See thou do it not,' &c. The
   argument is, I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets,
   and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God.'

   Use 1. To condemn those who do not make conscience of the worship of
   God. There are an irreligious sort of men that never call upon him, in
   public or in private, in the family or in the closet; but wholly forget
   the God that made them, at whose expense they are maintained and kept.
   Wherefore had you reasonable souls, but to praise, honour, and glorify
   your Creator? Surely if God be your God, that is, your Creator and
   preserver, the duty will presently fall upon you: Thou shalt worship
   the Lord thy God.' If you believe there is a God, why do not you call
   upon him? The neglect of his worship argueth doubting thoughts of his
   being; for if there be such a supreme Lord, to whom one day you must
   give an account, how dare you live without him in the world? All the
   creatures glorify him passively, but you have a heart and a tongue to
   glorify him actually. Man is the mouth of the creation, to return to
   God the praise of all that wisdom, goodness, and power which is seen in
   the things that are made. Now you should make one among the worshippers
   of God. A heathen could say, Si essem luscinia, &c. Are you a
   Christian, and have such advantages to know more of God, and will you
   be dumb and tongue-tied in his praises?

   2. To condemn the idolatry of the Papists. Synesius said that the devil
   is eidolochare`s, that he rejoiceth in idols. Here we see what was the
   upshot of his temptations, even to bring men to worship and bow down
   before something that is not God. Herein he was gratified by the
   heathen nations, and no less by the Papists. Witness their worshipping
   of images, their invocation of the Virgin Mary and other saints, the
   adoring before the bread in the Eucharist, &c. I know they have many
   evasions; but yet the stain of idolatry sticketh so close to them, that
   all the water in the sea will not wash them clean from it. This text
   clearly stareth them in the face, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
   and him only shalt thou serve.' Not saints, not angels, not images, &c.
   They say, Moses only said, and Christ repeateth it from him, Thou shalt
   worship the Lord thy God;' but not only, so that the last clause is
   restrictive, not the first, but some worship may be given to the
   creature. Civil, we grant, but not religious; and worship is the most
   important word. They distinguish of Latrei'a and Doulei'a. The devil
   demanded of Christ only proskune'sai, fall down and worship me;' not as
   the supreme author of all God's gifts, but as subordinate: all these
   things are delivered unto me.' But then Christ's words were not
   apposite to refute the tempter's impudency. Besides, for the
   distinction of Doulei'a and Latrei'a, the words are promiscuously used;
   so their distinction of absolute and relative worship; besides that
   they are groundless, they are unknown to the vulgar, who promiscuously
   give worship to God, saints, images, relics. Some of the learned of
   them have confessed this abuse, and bewailed it:--Espencaeus, a
   Sorbonnist: Are they well and godly brought up, who, being children of
   an hundred year old, that is, ancient Christians, do no less attribute
   to the saints, and trust in them, than to God himself, and that God
   himself is harder to be pleased and entreated than they?' So George
   Cassander: This false, pernicious opinion is too well known to have
   prevailed among the vulgar, while wicked men, persevering in their
   naughtiness, are persuaded that only by the inter cession of the saints
   whom they have chosen to be their patrons, and worship with cold and
   profane ceremonies, they have pardon and grace prepared them with God;
   which pernicious opinion, as much as was possible, hath been confirmed
   by them by lying miracles. And other men, not so evil, have chosen
   certain saints to be their patrons and helpers, have put more
   confidence in their merits and intercession than in the merits of
   Christ, and have substituted into his place the saints and Virgin
   mother. Ludovicus Vives: There are many Christians which worship
   saints, both men and women, no otherwise than they worship God; and I
   cannot see any difference between the opinion they had of their saints,
   and that the Gentiles had of their gods.' Thus far he, and yet Rome
   will not be purged.

   3. Use is to exhort us to worship and serve the Lord our God, and him
   only.

   [1.] Let us worship him. Worship hath its rise and foundation in the
   heart of the worshipper, and especially religious worship, which is
   given to the all-knowing God. Therefore there must we begin; we must
   have high thoughts, and an high esteem of God. Worship in the heart is
   most seen in two things--love and trust. Love: Deut. vi. 5, Thou shalt
   love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
   with all thy might.' We worship God when we give him such a love as is
   superlative and transcendental, far above the love that we give to any
   other thing, that so our respect to other things may give way to our
   respect to God. The other affection whereby we express our esteem of
   God is trust. This is another foundation of worship: Ps. lxii. 8, Trust
   in the Lord at all times, pour out your hearts before him.' Well, then,
   inward worship lieth in these two things--delightful adhesion to God,
   and an entire dependence upon him. Without this worship of God we
   cannot keep up our service to him. Not without delight, witness these
   scriptures: Job xxvii. 10, Will he delight himself in the Almighty?
   will he always call upon God?' Isa. xliii. 22, But thou hast not called
   upon me, Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel!' They that
   love God, and delight in him. cannot be long out of his company, they
   will seek all occasions to meet with God, as Jonathan and David, whose
   souls were knit to each other. So for dependence and trust, it keepeth
   up service, for they that will not trust God cannot be long true to
   him: Heb. iii. 12, Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart
   of unbelief in departing from the living God.' They that distrust God's
   promises will not long hold out in God's way, for dependence begets
   observance. When we look for all from him, we will often come to him,
   and take all out of his hands, and be careful how we offend him and
   displease him. What maketh the Christian to be so sedulous and diligent
   in duties of worship? so awful and observant of God? His all cometh
   from God, both in life natural and spiritual. In life natural: Ps.
   cxlv. 15-20, The eyes of all things wait on thee, and thou givest them
   their food in due season. Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the
   desire of every living thing.' &c.; The Lord is nigh unto all them that
   call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfil the
   desire of them that fear him; he will hear their cry and will save
   them. The Lord preserveth all them that love him.'--implying that
   because their eyes are to him, the author of all their blessings,
   therefore they call upon him and cry to him.

   [2.] Serve him. That implieth external reverence and worship. Now we
   are said to serve him, either with respect unto the duties which are
   more directly to be performed unto God, or with respect to our whole
   conversation.

   (1.) With respect unto the duties which are more directly to be
   performed unto God, such as the word, prayer, praise, thanksgiving,
   sacraments, surely these must be attended upon, because they are acts
   of love to God, and trust in God; and these holy duties are the ways of
   God, wherein he hath promised to meet with his people, and hath
   appointed us to expect his grace, and therefore they must not be
   neglected by us. Therefore serve him in these things; for, Mark iv. 24,
   With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you.' It is a rule
   of commerce between us and God.

   (2.) In your whole conversation: Luke i. 74, 75, That we might serve
   him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the
   days of our life.' A Christian's conversation is a continual act of
   worship; he ever behaveth himself as before God, doing all things,
   whether they be directed to God or men, out of love to God, and fear of
   God, and so turneth second table duties into first table duties. Pure
   religion and undefiled, before God and the Father, is this, to visit
   the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
   unspotted from the world.' James i. 27, Eph. v. 21, 22, Submitting
   yourselves one to another in the fear of God;' and next verse, Wives,
   submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.' So alms
   are a sacrifice: Heb. xiii. 16, But to do good and to communicate,
   forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.'

   [3.] Worship and serve God so as it may look like worship and service
   performed to God, and due to God only, because of his nature and
   attributes. His nature: John iv. 24, God is a Spirit, and they that
   worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.' When hearts
   wander, and affections do not answer expressions, is this like worship
   and service done to an all-seeing Spirit? His attributes; Greatness,
   goodness, holiness--

   (1.) His greatness and glorious majesty: Heb. xii. 28, Let us serve him
   acceptably, with reverence and godly fear.' Then is there a stamp of
   God's majesty on the duty.

   (2.) His goodness and fatherly love: Ps. c. 2, Serve the Lord with
   gladness, and come before his presence with singing.'

   (3.) His holiness: 2 Tim. i. 3, I thank God, whom I serve from my
   forefathers, with pure conscience;' 2 Tim. ii. 22, With them that call
   on the Lord out of a pure heart.'
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VII.

   Then the devil leaveth him, and behold angels came and ministered unto
   him.--Mat. IV. 11.

   IN these words you have the issue and close of Christ's temptations.
   The issue is double:--(1.) In respect of the adversary; (2.) In respect
   of Christ himself.

   I. In respect of the adversary: then the devil leaveth him.

   II. In respect of Christ himself: behold angels came and ministered
   unto him.

   I shall consider in both the history and the observations.

   First, The history of it, as it properly belongeth to Christ: and
   there--

   1. Of the first branch, the recess of Satan: Then the devil leaveth
   him.'

   [1.] It was necessary to be known that Christ had power to chase away
   the devil at his pleasure; that, as he was an instance of temptations,
   so he might be to us a pattern of victory and conquest. If Satan had
   continued tempting, this would have been obscured, which would have
   been an infringement of comfort to us. The devil being overcome by
   Christ, he may be also overcome by us Christians: 1 John v. 18, He that
   is begotten of God keepeth himself, and the wicked one toucheth him
   not.' That is, he useth all care and diligence to keep himself pure,
   that the devil draw him not into the sin unto death, and those
   deliberate, scandalous sins which lead to it. Christ having overcome
   Satan, in our name and nature, showeth us the way how to fight against
   him and overcome him.

   [2.] Christ had a work to do in the valley, and therefore was not
   always to be detained by temptations in the wilderness. The Spirit,
   that led him thither to be tempted, led him back again into Galilee to
   preach the gospel: Luke iv. 14, Jesus returned in the power of the
   Spirit into Galilee.' All things are timed and ordered by God, and he
   limiteth Satan how far and how long he shall tempt.

   [3.] In Luke it is said, chap. iv. 13, He departed from him, a'chri
   kairou, for a season.' He never tempted him again in this solemn way
   hand to hand; but either abusing the simplicity of his own disciple:
   Mat. xvi. 22, 23, Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying,
   Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee. But he turned
   and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan! thou art an offence unto
   me;' or else by his instruments, laying plots to take away his life; as
   often, but especially in his passion: Luke xxii. 53, This is your hour,
   and the power of darkness.' So John xiv. 30, The prince of this world
   cometh, and hath nothing in me.' Satan shall join with the Jews to
   destroy me, but they shall find nothing to lay to my charge; nor,
   indeed, have they power to do me any hurt, but that, in obedience to my
   Father's will, I mean voluntarily to lay down my life for sinners. So
   he had a permitted power over him, and was the prime instrumental cause
   of his sufferings; set aside his voluntary condescension to be a ransom
   for sinners, Satan had not any power over him, or challenge against
   him. Well, then, though he lost his victory, he retained his malice.

   2. The second branch, the access of the good angels: And behold the
   angels came and ministered to him.' There observe three things:

   [1.] The note of attention: behold. The Holy Ghost would excite our
   minds, and have us mark this: the angels are always at hand to serve
   Christ, but now they come to him in some singular manner some notable
   appearance there was of them, probably in a visible form and shape; and
   so they presented themselves before the Lord to minister to him, as the
   devil set himself before him to molest and vex him. As Christ's
   humiliation and human nature was to be manifested by the devil's coming
   to him and tempting assaults, so the honour of his divine nature by the
   ministry of angels, lest his temptations should seem to derogate from
   his glory. When we read the story of his temptations, how he was
   tempted in all parts like us, we might seem to take scandal, as if he
   were a mere man; therefore his humiliation is counterbalanced with the
   special honour done to him: he was tempted as man, but, as God,
   ministered unto by angels.

   [2.] Why they came not before the devil was departed? I answer:--

   (1.) Partly to show that Christ had no help but his own when he
   grappled with Satan. When the temptations were ended, then the good
   angels came, lest the victory should seem to be gotten by their help
   and assistance. They were admitted to the triumph, but they were not
   admitted to the fight: they were not spectators only in the conflict
   (for the battle was certainly fought before God and angels), but
   partners in the triumph: they went away to give place to the combat,
   but they came visibly to congratulate the conqueror after the battle
   was fought and the victory gotten. Our Lord would alone foil the devil,
   and, when that was done, the angels came and ministered unto him.

   (2.) Partly to show us that the going of the one is the coming of the
   other. When the devil is gone, the angels come. Certainly it is true on
   the contrary: 1 Sam. xvi. 14, The Spirit of the Lord departed from
   Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him;' and it is true in
   this sense, if we entertain the temptation, we banish the good angels
   from us: there is no place for the good angels till the tempter be
   repulsed.

   [3.] Why now, and to what end, was this ministry?

   (1.) To put honour on the Redeemer, who is the head and lord of the
   angels: Eph. i. 20, 21, He hath set him at his own right hand in the
   heavenly places, far above all principalities and powers, &c., and gave
   him to be the head over all things to the church.' So 1 Pet. iii. 22,
   Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels, and
   authorities, and powers, being made subject to him.' Christ, not only
   as God, but as mediator, hath all of them subject to him: Heb. i. 6,
   And unto the Son he saith, Let all the angels of God worship him.'
   They, as subjects and servants, are bound to obey him. Therefore, on
   all occasions they attend on Christ; at his birth: Luke ii. 13, 14, A
   multitude of the heavenly host praised God, saying, Glory be to God on
   high, on earth peace, good will towards men.' Now, in his temptations,
   The angels came and ministered unto him.' At his passion: Luke xxii.
   43, There appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening him.' At
   his resurrection, An angel rolled away the stone from the grave,' and
   attested the truth of it, Mat. xxviii. 2. At his ascension, the angels
   declared the manner of his going to heaven, and return to judgment,
   Acts i. 10, 11. So now they come to attend Christ, as subjects on their
   prince, to tender their service and homage to him, and receive his
   commands.

   (2.) For his consolation, inward and outward.

   First, Inward, as messengers sent from God; and so their coming was a
   token of God's special love and favour to him, and care over him. The
   devil had mentioned in one of his temptations, He shall give his angels
   charge over thee.' This is a truth, and in due time to be verified; not
   at Satan's instance, but when God pleased. Therefore it was a comfort
   to Christ to have solemn messengers sent from heaven to applaud his
   triumph.

   Secondly, Outward, they were sent to serve him, either to convey him
   back from the mountain, where Satan had set him, or to bring him food,
   as they did to Elijah: 1 Kings xix. 5, 6, And as he lay and slept under
   a juniper-tree, behold then an angel touched him, and said unto him,
   Arise and eat. And he looked, and behold there was a cake baken on the
   coals, and a cruse of water at his head: and he did eat and drink, and
   laid him down again.' Diakonein, the word here used, is often taken in
   that sense in the New Testament: Mat. viii. 15, She arose and
   ministered unto them.' that is, served them at meat. So Mat. xxv. 44,
   When saw we thee an hungered, &c., and did not minister unto thee?' The
   name of deacons is derived hence, as they served tables.' or provided
   meat for the poor, Acts vi. 2. So Luke x. 40, My sister hath left me,
   diakanein, to serve alone.' meaning, to prepare provisions for the
   family: so Luke xvii. 8, Gird thyself and serve me.' that is, at the
   table: again, Luke xxii. 27, Whether is greater, he that sits at meat,
   or he that serveth?' or ministereth. So John xii. 2: They made a
   supper, and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those that sat at the
   table with him.' Thus the angels ministered unto Christ. This sort of
   ministry agreeth with what was said of his hunger, which was the
   occasion of Satan's temptations.

   Secondly, The observations. As Christ is a pattern of all those
   providences which are dispensed to the people of God.

   Doct. 1. That the days of God's people's conflicts and trials will not
   always last.

   There are alternative changes and vicissitudes in their condition upon
   earth; sometimes they are vexed with the coming of the tempter, and
   then encouraged and cheered by the presence of angels; after storms
   come days of joy and gladness,--the devil departeth, and the angels
   came and ministered to him:' So Ps. xxxiv. 19, Many are the afflictions
   of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all.' Here is
   their present conflict and their final conquest. Look on a Christian on
   his dark side, and there are afflictions, and afflictions many for
   number and kind; look on his luminous part, and there is the Lord to
   take care of him, to deliver him; and the deliverance is complete,--the
   Lord delivereth him out of them all.' God will put an end to their
   conflict sooner or later; sometimes visibly in this life, or if he doth
   not deliver them till death, or from death, he will deliver them by
   death; then he delivereth them from all sin and misery at once, for
   death is theirs. The reasons are these:--

   1. God considereth what will become himself, his pity and fidelity.

   [1]. His own pity and mercy: James v. 11, Ye have heard of the patience
   of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very
   pitiful, and of tender mercy.' God will give an happy end to our
   conflicts and trials, as he did to Job, that he may be known to be a
   God pitiful and merciful: Job is set up as a public visible instance
   and monument of God's tender mercy. We must not measure our afflictions
   by the smart, but the end of them; what the merciful God will do at
   length: the beginning is from Satan, but the end from the Lord. If we
   look to the beginning, we draw an ill picture of God in our minds, as
   if he were harsh, severe, and cruel to his creatures, yea, to his best
   servants; but in the end we find him very tender of his people, and
   that sense hath made lies of God. At the very time when we think God
   hath forgotten us, he is ready to hear and to remove the trouble: Ps.
   xxxi. 22, I said in my haste, I am cut off; nevertheless thou heardest
   the voice of my supplications.' The Son of God was hungry, transported
   and carried to and fro by the devil, from the pinnacle of the temple to
   a high mountain, tempted by a blasphemous suggestion to fall down and
   worship the impure spirit; but at length the devil leaveth him, and the
   angels came and ministered to him.'

   [2.] His fidelity, which will not permit him to suffer you to be
   tempted above measure. We do not stand to the devil's courtesy, to
   tempt us as long as he list, but are in the hands of the faithful God:
   1 Cor. x. 13, There hath no temptation taken you but what is common to
   man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
   that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to
   escape, that ye may be able to bear it.' What a heap of consolations
   are there in that one place as--(1.) That temptations are but ordinary
   and to be looked for: there is no peirasmo`s, but it is anthro'pinos,
   incident to human nature; it hath nothing extraordinary in it. If the
   Son of God in human nature was not exempted, why should we expect a
   privilege apart to ourselves, not common to others? (2.) That God's
   conduct is gentle; he inflicteth nothing and permiteth nothing to be
   inflicted upon you beyond measure, and above strength; but, as Jacob
   drove as the little ones were able to bear, so God proportioneth trials
   to our strength. Before you have final deliverance, you shall have
   present support. (3.) That he will, together with the temptation, give
   e'kbasin, a passage out, a way to escape. And all this is assured to us
   by his faithfulness; the conflict shall be tolerable when it is at the
   highest, and the end comfortable. God doth bridle the malice and hatred
   of Satan and his instruments; he hath taken an obligation upon himself
   to do so, that he may omit no part of his care towards us. A good man
   will not overburden his beast.

   2. The Lord considereth also our frailty, both with respect to natural
   and spiritual strength.

   [1.] Natural strength. The Psalmist telleth us, that He will not always
   chide, and keep his anger for ever,' Ps. ciii. 9. Why? One reason is,
   that He knoweth our frame, and remembereth we are dust.' ver. 14. He
   may express his just displeasure, and correct us for our sins for a
   while: but he taketh off his punishing hand again, because he knoweth
   we are soon apt to faint and fail, being but a little enlivened dust,
   of a weak constitution, not able to endure long troubles and vexations.
   Job pleadeth, chap. vi. 12, Is my strength the strength of stones? or
   is my flesh of brass?' We have not strength to subsist under perpetual
   troubles, but are soon broken and subdued by them.

   [2.] With respect to spiritual strength, the best are subject to great
   infirmities, which oft betray us to sin, if our vexations be great and
   long: Ps. cxxv. 3, The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of
   the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hands to iniquity.'
   The oppressions of wicked men shall not be so lasting and durable as
   that the temptations should be of too great force; this might shake the
   constancy of the best. He knoweth nothing in divinity that knoweth not
   that God worketh congruously, and attempereth his providence to our
   strength, and so will not only give an increase of internal grace, but
   lessen and abate the outward temptation; that his external government
   conduceth to the preservation of the saints, as well as his internal,
   by supporting their spirits with more liberal aids of grace. Therefore
   God will cause the temptation to cease when it is overpressing. But all
   must be left to his wisdom and holy methods.

   3. With respect to the devil and his instruments, to whose malice he
   sets bounds, who otherwise would know no measure.

   [1.] For the devil, see Rev. ii. 10: Fear none of those things which
   thou shalt suffer. Behold! the devil shall cast some of you into
   prison, that you may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days.'
   Mark how they are comforted against the persecution coming upon them:
   Partly because the cause was clearly God's, for all this trouble was by
   the instigation of the devil, making use of his instruments;--Eph. ii.
   2, he is called the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
   worketh in the children of disobedience:' Partly because the
   persecution raised would not be universal--some of you, not all--and
   those not persecuted unto the death, but only cast into prison: Partly
   from the end, that they should be tried it was not penal or
   castigatory, but probatory;--the devil would destroy you, but God would
   suffer you only to be tried, so that they should come forth like the
   three children out of the furnace, without singeing of their garments,
   or like Daniel out of the lions' den, without a scratch or maim, or as
   Christ here--the devil got not one jot of ground upon him: Partly from
   the duration, ten days--that is, in prophetical account, ten years,
   reckoning each day for a year: Num. xiv. 34. It was not long; the
   saddest afflictions will have an end. All which showeth how God
   bridleth and moderateth the rage of Satan, and his evil influence.

   [2.] For his instruments, God saith, Zech. i. 15, I am very sorely
   displeased with the heathen that were at ease; for I was but a little
   displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.' The instruments of
   God's chastisements lay on without mercy, and being of cruel minds and
   destructive intentions, which are heightened in them by Satan, are
   severe executioners of God's wrath; and if God did not restrain them by
   the invisible chains of his providence, we should never see good day
   more. Well, then, you see the reasons why the children of God, though
   they have many troubles and conflicts, yet they are not everlasting
   troubles.

   Use of instruction to the people of God. It teacheth them three
   lessons--comfort, patience, obedience.

   1. Comfort and encouragement to them that are under a gloomy day. This
   will not always last. He may try you for a while, and you may be under
   great conflicts, and wants, and difficulties, as he tried the woman of
   Canaan with discouraging answers; but at last, Woman, great is thy
   faith; be it unto thee even as thou wilt,' Mat. xv. 28. He tried his
   disciples when he meant to feed the multitude: John vi. 5, 6, Whence
   shall we buy bread that all these may eat? This he said to prove them,
   for he himself knew what he would do.' A poor believer is tried,
   children increase, trading grows dead in hard times; how shall so many
   mouths be filled? He promiseth Abraham a numerous posterity, but for a
   great while he goeth childless. He promiseth David a kingdom, yet for a
   while he is fain to shift for his life, and skulk up and down in the
   wilderness. He intended to turn water into wine, but first all the
   store must be spent. He meaneth to revive the hearts of his contrite
   ones, but for a while they lie under great doubts and fears. Moses'
   hand must be made leprous before it wrought miracles. Jesus loved
   Lazarus, and meant to recover him, but he must be dead first. But I
   must not run too far. There will be tedious conflicts and trials, but
   yet there is hope of deliverance: God is willing and God is able. He is
   willing, because he is sufficiently inclined to it by the grace and
   favour that he beareth his people: Ps. cxlix. 4, The Lord taketh
   pleasure in his people; he will beautify the meek with salvation.' The
   Lord loveth their persons, and he loveth their prosperity and
   happiness: Ps. xxxv. 27, He hath pleasure in the prosperity of his
   servants.' He is able either as to wisdom or power. Wisdom: 2 Pet. ii.
   7, The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation.' Many
   times we know not which way, but God knoweth; he is never at a loss.
   Then for his power: power hath a twofold notion, of authority and
   might. He hath authority enough. The sovereign dominion of God is a
   great prop to our faith. All things in the world are at his disposal to
   use them for his own glory: Ps. xliv. 4, Command deliverances for
   Jacob.' Angels, devils, men, the hearts of the greatest men, are all at
   his command. He hath might and strength: Dan. iii. 17, Our God, whom we
   serve, is able to deliver us,' and what then can let?

   2. Patience: we must be contented, with the Son of God, to tarry his
   leisure, and undergo our course of trial, as Christ patiently
   continued, till enough was done to instruct the Church: Isa. xxviii.
   16, He that believeth will not make haste.' The people of God miscarry
   in their haste: Ps. xxxi. 22, I said in my haste, I am cut off, but
   thou heardest the voice of my supplication:' Ps. cxvi. 11, I said in my
   haste, All men are liars;' even Samuel and all the prophets who had
   assured him of the kingdom. It will come in the best time when it
   cometh in God's time, neither too soon nor too late; it will come
   sooner than your enemies would have it, sooner than second causes seem
   to promise, sooner than you deserve, soon enough to discover the glory
   of God to you: Ps. xl. 1, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he
   inclined unto me, and heard my cry.' God will not fail a waiting soul;
   his delay is no denial, nor a sign of want of love to you: John xi. 5,
   Jesus loved Lazarus;' and yet, ver. 6, When he had heard that he was
   sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he was.' It may
   come sooner than you expect: Ps. xciv. 18, When I said, My foot
   slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.' David was apt to think all
   was gone, help would never come more to him, and in that very season
   God delivered him.

   3. Obedience: the son of God submitted to the Holy Spirit while the
   impure spirit tempted him. If you would look for a ceasing of the
   conflict, do as he did, carry it humbly, fruitfully, faithfully to God.

   [1.] Humble carriage will become you under your conflicts: 1 Pet. v. 6,
   Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
   exalt you in due time.' The stubbornness of the child maketh his
   correction double to what it otherwise would be. The more submissive
   you are, the more the cross hath its effect; whether you will or no,
   you must passively submit to God.

   [2.] Carry it fruitfully, otherwise you obstruct the kindness of the
   Lord. He proveth us, that we may be fruitful: John xv. 2, Every branch
   in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away; and every branch that
   beareth fruit he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.' The
   rod hath done its work when it maketh us more holy; then the
   comfortable days come: Heb. xii. 11, Now no chastening for the present
   seemeth to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it yieldeth
   the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised
   thereby.' Righteousness brings peace along with it, inward and outward.
   This maketh amends for the trouble. Then God beginneth to take it off.

   [3.] Carry it faithfully to God, still opposing sin and Satan; for the
   more you give way to Satan, the more you are troubled with him, and
   your misery is increased, not lessened. But if you repel his
   temptations, he is discouraged: Eph. iv. 27, Neither give place to the
   devil.' The devil watcheth for a door to enter and take possession of
   your hearts, that he may exercise his former tyranny. If he gaineth any
   ground, he makes fearful havoc in the soul, and weakeneth not only our
   comfort but our grace. Therefore imitate Christ's resolution and
   resistance here. But this will deserve a point by itself. Therefore:

   Doct. 2. When the devil is thoroughly and resolutely resisted, he
   departeth.

   As here, when the adversary was put to the foil, he went his way.
   Therefore this is often pressed upon us in scripture: James iv. 7,
   Resist the devil and he will flee from you.' If you resist his
   suggestions to malice, envy, and strife, he is discouraged; so 1 Pet.
   v. 9, Whom resist, stedfast in the faith.' We must not fly nor yield to
   him in the least, but stoutly and peremptorily resist him in all his
   temptations. If you stand your ground, Satan falleth. In this spiritual
   conflict Satan hath only weapons offensive, cunning wiles, and fiery
   darts, none defensive; a believer hath weapons both offensive and
   defensive, sword and shield, &c.; therefore our safety lieth in
   resisting.

   About which is to be considered:--

   1. What kind of resistance this must be.

   2. Arguments to persuade and enforce it.

   3. What graces enable us in this resistance.

   1. For the kind of resistance.

   [1.] It must not be faint and cold. Some kind of resistance may be made
   by general and common graces; the light of nature will rise up in
   defiance of many sins, especially at first, before men have sinned away
   natural light; or else the resistance at least is in some cold way. But
   it must be earnest and vehement, as against the enemy of God and our
   souls. Paul's resistance in his conflicts was with serious dislikes and
   deep groans: Rom. vii. 9, The good that I would I do not, but the evil
   which I would not, that I do;' and ver. 24, Oh wretched man that I am!
   who shall deliver me from the body of this death?' In apparent cases a
   detestation and vehement indignation is enough,--Get thee behind me,
   Satan!' in other cases there need strong arguments and considerations,
   that the temptation may not stick when the tempter is gone, as the
   smutch remaineth of a candle stuck against a stone wall. When Eve
   speaketh faintly and coldly, the devil reneweth the assault with the
   more violence: Gen. iii. 3, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye
   touch it, lest ye die.' As to the restraint, she speaketh warmly, and
   with some impatience of resentment, not eat' nor touch,' --in the
   commination too coldly, lest ye die.' when God had said, ye shall
   surely die.' A faint denial is a kind of grant; therefore slight
   Satan's assaults with indignation. Though the dog barketh the traveller
   passeth on. Satan cannot endure contempt. At other times argue for God
   stoutly; thy soul and eternal concernments are in danger. No worldly
   concernment ought to go so near to us as that which concerneth our
   eternal good and the salvation of our souls. What would the devil have
   from thee but thy soul, and its precious enjoyments, peace of
   conscience, hope of everlasting life? What doth he bid?--worldly
   vanities. As the merchant putteth up his wares with indignation when
   the chapman biddeth an unworthy price.

   [2.] It must be a thorough resistance of all sin, take the little
   foxes,' dash Babylon's brats against the stones.' Lesser sticks set the
   great ones on fire. The devil cannot hope to prevail for great things
   presently. At first it is, Hath God said?' and then, Ye shall not
   surely die.' The approaches of Satan to the soul are gradual, he asketh
   a little, it is no great matter. Consider the evil of a temptation is
   better kept out than gotten out. Many think to stop after they have
   yielded a little; but when the stone at the top of a hill begins to
   roll downward, it is hard to stay it, and you cannot say how far you
   shall go. I'll yield but once,' saith a deceived heart; I'll yield but
   a little, and never yield again.' The devil will carry thee further and
   further, till he hath not left any tenderness in thy conscience. Some
   that thought to venture but a shilling, by the witchery of gaming have
   played away all; so some have sinned away all principles of conscience.

   [3.] It must not be for a while, but continued; not only to stand out
   against the first assault, but a long siege. What Satan cannot gain by
   argument he seeketh to gain by importunity; but resist him, stedfast in
   the faith,' as his instrument spake to Joseph, day by day.' Gen. xxxix.
   10. Our thoughts by time are more reconciled to evil. Now we must keep
   up our zeal to the last. To yield at last is to lose the glory of the
   conflict. Therefore rate away the importunate suitor, as Christ doth.

   2. Arguments to persuade it.

   [1.] Because he cannot overcome you without your own consent. The
   wicked are taken captive by him at his will and pleasure.' 2 Tim. ii.
   26, because they yield themselves to his temptations; like the young
   man, Prov. vii. 22, He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to
   the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the stocks.' There is
   a consent, or, at least, there is not a powerful dissent. Satan's power
   lieth not in a constraining efficacy, but persuasive allurement.

   [2.] The sweetness of victory will recompense the trouble of
   resistance. It is much more pleasing to deny a temptation than to yield
   to it; the pleasure of sin is short-lived, but the pleasure of
   self-denial is eternal.

   [3.] Grace, the more it is tried and exercised, the more it is
   evidenced to be right and sincere: Rom. v. 3-5, Knowing that
   tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience, and experience
   hope, and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
   abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given to us.' It is a
   comfortable thing to know that we are of the truth, and to be able to
   assure our hearts before God.

   [4.] Grace is strengthened when it hath stood out against a trial; as a
   tree shaken with fierce winds is more fruitful, its roots being
   loosened. Satan is a loser and you a gainer by temptations wherein you
   have approved your fidelity to God; as a man holdeth a stick the faster
   when another seeketh to wrest it out of his hands.

   [5.] The more we resist Satan, the greater will our reward be: 2 Tim.
   iv. 7, 8, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
   kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
   righteousness.' The danger of the battle will increase the joy of the
   victory, as the dangers of the way make home the sweeter. There will a
   time come when he that is now a soldier will be a conqueror: Rom. xvi.
   20, The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.'

   [6.] Where Satan gets possession, after he seemeth to be cast out, he
   returneth with the more violence, and tyranniseth the more: Mat. xii.
   45, Then goeth he and taketh with himself seven other spirits more
   wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the last
   state of that man is worse than the first.'

   [7.] The Lord's grace is promised to him that resisteth. God keepeth us
   from the evil one, but it is by our watchfulness and resistance; his
   power maketh it effectual. We are to strive against sin and keep
   ourselves, and God keepeth us by making our keeping effectual.

   3. What are the graces that enable us in this resistance? I answer, the
   three fundamental graces, faith, hope, and love, so the spiritual
   armour is represented: 1 Thes. v. 8, But let us, who are of the day, be
   sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and for an helmet
   the hope of salvation.'

   [1.] A strong faith: 1 Pet. v. 9, Whom resist, stedfast in the faith.'
   This is, in the general, a sound belief of eternity, or a deep sense of
   the world to come: when we believe the gospel with an assent so strong
   as constantly to adhere to the duties prescribed, and to venture all
   upon the hopes offered therein.

   [2.] A fervent love, arising out of the sense of our obligations to
   God, that we do with all readiness of mind set ourselves to do his
   will, levelling and directing our actions to his glory. Love is strong
   as death, and many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods
   drown it,' Cant. viii. 6, 7. This love will neither be bribed nor
   frightened from Christ.

   [3.] A lively hope, that doth so long and wait for glory to come, that
   present things do not greatly move us, either delights: 1 Pet. i. 8,
   Whom having not seen ye love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
   believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory;' or the
   terrors of sense: Rom. viii. 18, For I reckon that the sufferings of
   this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
   revealed in us.'

   Doct. 3. That those that come out of eminent conflicts are usually
   delivered by God in a glorious manner.

   Christ was a pattern of this: The devil leaveth him, and behold angels
   came and ministered unto him.' When God delivered his people, after a
   long captivity, he delivered them with glory, and some kind of triumph,
   when he turned the Egyptian captivity: They borrowed of the Egyptians
   jewels of silver and jewels of gold and raiment. And the Lord gave the
   people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto
   them such things as they required; and they spoiled the Egyptians,'
   Exod. xii. 35, 36. So, in the Babylonian captivity, Cyrus chargeth his
   subjects, in the place where the Jews remain, to furnish them with all
   things necessary for their journey: Ezek. i. 4, And whosoever remaineth
   in any place, where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him
   with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, besides
   the freewill-offering for the house of God, that is in Jerusalem.' So,
   in a private instance: Job xlii. 10, 11, And the Lord turned the
   captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the Lord gave
   Job twice as much as he had before. Then came there unto him all his
   brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his
   acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house, and they
   bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the Lord had
   brought upon him; every man also gave him a piece of money, and every
   one an earring of gold.' It is said, The Lord turned the captivity of
   Job.' because he had been delivered to Satan's power till the Lord set
   him at liberty again, and then all his friends had compassion on him,
   even those that had despised him before relieved him. So Isa. lxi. 7,
   For your shame you shall have double, and for confusion they shall
   rejoice in their portion; therefore in their land they shall possess
   the double, ever lasting joy shall be unto them.' They should have
   large and eminent honour, double honour for their shame, such a
   reparation would God make them for all the troubles and damages they
   had sustained. So, in an ordinary providence, God raiseth up comforters
   to his servants after all the injuries done them by Satan's
   instruments. And so also in spirituals; the grief and trouble that
   cometh by temptation is recompensed with more abundant consolation
   after the conquest and victory; and God delighteth to put special marks
   of favour upon his people that have been faithful in an hour of trial.
   Now God doth this:--

   1. To show the world the advantage of godliness, and close adhering to
   him in an hour of temptation: Ps. cxix. 56, This I had, because I kept
   thy precepts.' And Ps. lviii. 11, So that a man shall say, Verily there
   is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judgeth in the
   earth.'

   2. To check our diffidence and murmurings under trouble. Within a while
   and God's children will see they have no cause to quarrel with God, or
   repent that they were in trouble. For sometimes God giveth not only a
   comfortable but a glorious issue. There is nothing lost by waiting on
   providence; though we abide the blows of Satan for a while, yet abide
   them; God is, it may be, preparing the greater mercy for you: Isa. xxv.
   9, And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have
   waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited
   for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.' Afflictions are
   sharp in their season, but the end is glorious.

   Use. Do not always reckon upon temporal felicity, refer that to God,
   but do as Jesus, who, in his sharp trials, Heb. xii. 2, 3, For the joy
   that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is
   set down at the right hand of the throne of God.' There is a sure crown
   of life: James i. 12, Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for
   when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
   hath promised to them that love him.' That is enough to content a
   Christian, the eternal reward is sure. In this world he shall receive
   with persecution an hundred-fold, but in the world to come eternal
   life: Mark x. 29, 30, There is no man that hath left house, or
   brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
   lands, for my sake and the gospel's, but he shall receive an
   hundred-fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
   mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world
   to come eternal life.'

   Doct. 4. That God maketh use of the ministry of angels in supporting
   and comforting his afflicted servants.

   He did so to Christ, he doth so to the people of Christ. Partly for the
   defence and comfort of the godly: Ps. xxxiv. 7, The angel of the Lord
   encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them;' Heb. i.
   14, Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to
   them who shall be the heirs of salvation?' Their ministry is now
   invisible, but yet certain. And partly also for the terror of their
   enemies. When David had said, The Lord hath chosen the hill of Sion to
   dwell in,' Ps. lxviii. 16, he adds, ver. 17, The chariots of God are
   twenty thousand, even thousands of angels;' implying that no kingdom in
   the world hath such defence, and such potent and numerous armies as the
   church hath, and the kingdom of Christ. God hath fixed his residence
   there, and the angels serve him, and attend upon him; and he will be no
   less terrible to his foes in Sion, that oppose the gospel, than he
   showed himself in Sinai, when he gave the law. Where the king is there
   his attendants are; so where Christ is the courtiers of heaven take up
   their station. Now Christ is with his church to the end of the world,
   therefore these thousands of angels are there, ready to be employed by
   him. Now we may be sure of this ministry.

   1. They delight in the preaching of the gospel, and the explication of
   the mysteries of godliness: 1 Pet. i. 12, Which things the angels
   desire to look into;' Eph. iii. 10, To the end that now, unto the
   principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known by the
   church the manifold wisdom of God.'

   2. They delight in the holy conversation of the godly, as they are
   offended with all impurity, filthiness, and ungodliness. If good men be
   offended at the sins of the wicked, as Lot's righteous soul was vexed
   from day to day with their ungodly deeds,' 2 Pet. ii. 8, much more are
   these holy spirits, especially when all things are irregularly carried
   in the worship of God: 1 Cor. xi. 10, For this cause ought the woman to
   have power on her head, because of the angels;' 1 Tim. v. 21, I charge
   thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that
   thou observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing
   nothing by partiality.'

   3. They fight against the devil, and defend the godly in their extreme
   dangers. When the devil cometh into the church of God, like a wolf into
   the flock, they oppose and resist him. Therefore there is said to be
   war in heaven, that is, in the church, between Michael and his angels,
   and the devil and his angels: Rev. xii. 7, And there was war in heaven,
   Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon fought
   and his angels.' In the highest heaven there is no war. In short, the
   angels and believers make one church, under one head, Christ; and at
   length shall both live together in the same place.

   Why doth God make use of the ministry of angels? and how far?

   1. To manifest unto them the greatness and glory of his work in the
   recovering mankind, that their delight in the love and wisdom of God
   may be increased. All holy creatures delight in any manifestation of
   God, the angels more especially: 1 Pet. i. 12, Which things the angels
   desire to look into;' Eph. iii. 11, To the intent that now, unto the
   principalities and powers in heavenly places, may be known by the
   church the manifold wisdom of God.' Though they themselves be not the
   parties interested, the spectators, not the guests; yet they are
   delighted in the glory of God, and are kindly affectionated to the
   salvation of lost men; and that they may have a nearer view of this
   mystery, God gratifieth them by sending them often to attend upon the
   dispensation of the gospel, and to assist in it so far as is meet for
   creatures. They are present in our assemblies: see 1 Cor. xi. 10, 1
   Tim. v. 21. They see who is negligent in his office, who hindereth the
   preaching of the gospel; they observe what is the success of it, and
   when it obtaineth its effect: Luke xv. 7, There shall be joy in heaven
   over one sinner that repenteth.' They are hereby more excited to praise
   and glorify God, and are careful to vouchsafe their attendance about
   the meanest that believe in him: Ps. xci. 11, 12, He shall give his
   angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear
   thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.'

   2. To maintain a society and communion between all the parts of the
   family of God. When God gathered together the things in heaven and in
   earth, he brought all into subjection and dependence upon one common
   head, Jesus Christ: Eph. i. 10, That in the dispensation of the fulness
   of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both
   which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him.' Men by
   adoption, angels by transition, are taken into the family of Christ.
   Now there is some intercourse between the several parts thereof. Our
   goodness extendeth not to them, but is confined to the saints on earth,
   in whom should be our delight; yet their help may be useful to us, they
   being such excellent and glorious creatures; but we are forbidden to
   invoke them or trust in them. God doth employ them in the affairs of
   his people. Their help is not the fruit of our trust in them, but their
   obedience to God; and it is seen in frustrating the endeavours of Satan
   and his instruments, and other services wherein Christ employeth them.
   God showed this to Jacob in the vision of the ladder, which stood upon
   earth, and the top reached to heaven--a figure of the providence of
   God, especially in and about the gospel: John i. 51, Hereafter you
   shall see the heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and
   descending upon the Son of man;' to carry on the work of the gospel,
   and to promote the glory and interest of Christ's kingdom in the world.
   Thus far in the general we may be confident of.

   3. To preserve his people from many dangers and casualties, which fall
   not within the foresight of man, God employeth the watchers,' as they
   are called in the Book of Daniel, chap. iv. 13, 17, for he is tender of
   his people, and doth all things by proper means. Now the angels having
   a larger foresight than we, they are appointed to be guardians. This
   they do according to God's pleasure, preventing many dangers, which we
   could by no means foresee. They observe the devil in all his walks, and
   God useth them to prevent his sudden surprisals of his people, as
   instances are many.

   4. Because they are witnesses of the obedience and fidelity of Christ's
   disciples, and, so far as God permitteth, they cannot but assist them
   in their conflicts. Thus Paul, 1 Cor. iv. 9: We are made a spectacle
   unto the world, and to angels and to men.' Now the angels, that are
   witnesses to their combats and sufferings, cannot but make report to
   God: Mat. xviii. 10, Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
   ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold
   the face of my Father which is in heaven.' The angels which are
   appointed by God to be their guardians have their continual recourses,
   and returns to God's glorious presence. Now, being so high in God's
   favour, and having continual access to make their requests and
   complaints known to him, they will not be silent in the behalf of their
   fellow-servants, that either the trial may be lessened, or grace
   sufficient may be given to them.

   5. They do not only keep off hurt, but there are many blessings and
   benefits that we are partakers of by their ministry. As the angel of
   the Lord delivered Peter out of prison: Acts xii. 7, And behold the
   angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison; and
   he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up
   quickly; and his chains fell off from his hands,' &c. But he doth not
   give thanks to the angel, but to God; ver. 11, Now I know of a surety
   that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me,' &c. He
   directeth it to God, not to the creature. The angels do us many
   favours; all the thanks we do them is that we do not offend them by our
   sins against God; other gratitude they expect not.

   6. Their last office is at death and judgment. In death, to convey our
   souls to Christ: Luke xvi. 22, And it came to pass that the beggar
   died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom;' that so we
   may enjoy our rest in heaven. In the last day they will gather the
   bodies of Christ's redeemed ones from all parts of the world, after
   they have been resolved into dust, and mingled with the dust of other
   men, that every saint may have his own body again, wherein he hath
   obeyed and glorified God: Mat. xxiv. 31, And he shall send his angels
   with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his
   elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.' That
   is, from all parts and quarters of the world, that their souls may
   return to their old beloved habitations, and then both in body and in
   soul they may be for ever with the Lord.

   Use. Now this is a great comfort to the church and people of God, when
   the powers and principalities on earth are employed against them, to
   consider what powers and principalities attend upon Christ. We serve
   such a master as hath authority over the holy angels, to employ them at
   his pleasure; and in their darkest condition his people feel the
   benefit of it. As the angel of the Lord appeared to Paul in a dreadful
   storm: Acts xxvii. 23, 24, There stood by me this night the angel of
   the Lord, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying, Fear not, Paul,' &c. So
   to Christ in his agonies: Luke xxii. 43, There appeared an angel to him
   from heaven strengthening him.' So against Satan, the good angels are
   ready to comfort us, as the evil angels are ready to trouble and tempt
   us. Let us then look to God, at whose direction they are sent to help
   and comfort us.

   Doct. 5. If God taketh away ordinary helps from us, he can supply us by
   means extraordinary, as he did Christ's hunger by the ministry of
   angels. Therefore till God's power be wasted there is no room for
   despair. We must not limit the Holy One of Israel to our ways and
   means, as they did: Ps. lxxviii. 41, They turned back, and tempted God,
   and limited the Holy One of Israel.'
     __________________________________________________________________

                         THE TRANSFIGURATION OF CHRIST.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON I.

   And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and
   bringeth them into an high mountain apart.--Mat. XVII. 1; with,

   It came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter,
   and John, and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.--Luke IX. 28.

   I MEAN to handle the transfiguration of Christ, which was:--

   1. A solemn confirmation of his person and office.

   2. A pledge of that glorious estate which is reserved for us in heaven.

   1. It was a confirmation of his person and office, as appeareth Mat.
   xvii. 5, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye
   him.' So Peter, who was one present, urgeth it, 2 Pet. i. 16-18, We
   have not followed cunningly-devised fables when we made known unto you
   the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses
   of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory,
   when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is
   my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came
   from heaven we heard when we were with him in the holy mount.' And John
   also: John i. 14, We beheld his glory, as the glory of the
   only-begotten of the Father.' They were eye and ear witnesses, and
   therefore could affirm the certainty of this doctrine.

   2. It is a pledge of our glorious estate; for Christ's body was adorned
   with heavenly glory, and he had spoken, chap. xvi. 27, of his coming in
   the glory of the Father; and now he gives his disciples a pledge and
   earnest of it.

   In this introduction four things are observable:--

   1. The time: after six days.

   2. The persons whom he takes with him: Peter, James, and John.

   3. The place he brings them to: into an high mountain apart.

   4. The preparative action: he went up into a mountain to pray.

   First, The time. The evangelist Luke saith, about an eight days;'
   Matthew and Mark, after six days.' The reconciliation is easy. Matthew
   and Mark spake of the space of time between the day of prediction, and
   the day of transfiguration exclusively; Luke includeth them both. The
   Jews called that flux of time between one Sabbath and another, eight
   days, including not only the intervening week, but both the Sabbaths.
   According to their custom Luke speaketh; Matthew of the time between.

   Secondly, The persons chosen to attend him in this action: Peter,
   James, and John.'

   1. Why three?

   2. Why those three?

   1. Why three? So great an action as this was needed valuable testimony;
   for the law saith, In the mouth of two or three witnesses everything
   shall be established,' Deut. xvii. 6. Now Christ would go to the utmost
   of the law, and would have, not two only, but three witnesses, as the
   apostle speaks 1 of three witnesses in heaven and three on earth, 1
   John v. 7, 8; so here are three and three--three from heaven, God the
   Father, Moses, and Elias; and three from earth, Peter, James, and John.

   2. Why those three? Many give divers reasons. Peter had led the way to
   the rest in that notable confession of Christ, Mat. xvi. 16, and is
   conceived to have some primacy for the orderly beginning of actions in
   the college of the apostles. James was the first apostle who shed his
   blood for Christ, Acts xii. 2; and John was the most long-lived of them
   all, and so could the longer give testimony of those things which he
   heard and saw, till the church was well gathered and settled. Others
   give other reasons. But to leave conjectures, it is certain that these
   had many singular favours afforded them above the rest of the twelve,
   as appeareth partly in this, that Christ changed their names, calling
   Peter, Cephas, or a stone; and the other two Boanerges, sons of
   thunder, which was a token that Christ loved these more than the rest.
   Yea, among these, John was his bosom favourite, and therefore called
   often the disciple whom Jesus loved.' partly because he was in the
   whole course of his life more intimate with these than with the rest of
   the disciples. You shall see when he raised Jairus's daughter from
   death to life, Luke viii. 51, he suffered nobody to go in but Peter,
   James, and John, and the father and mother of the maiden. So these very
   persons were those who in Mount Olivet were conscious to his agonies:
   Mat. xxvi. 27, He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and
   began to be sorrowful and very heavy.' Now these who were to be
   conscious to his agonies are first in Mount Tabor beholders of his
   great majesty and glory, for their better encouragement and preparation
   for his and their own sufferings.

   Thirdly, The place: He bringeth them into an high mountain apart.' This
   mountain is supposed to be Tabor, though not named by the
   evangelists--a fit place both for height and secrecy, both which were
   necessary to the double action that was to be performed there, either
   his transfiguration or prayer.

   1. To his transfiguration height and secrecy were necessary.

   [1.] Height: This work required not only a mountain, but a high
   mountain, for his transfiguration was a middle state between the
   infirmity of his flesh and the glory that he now possesseth. So the top
   of a very high mountain was chosen; it is as a middle place between
   heaven, the habitation of God, and earth, the habitation of men.
   Besides, since Moses and Elias were to appear in this action, and that
   with bodies above the state of those natural bodies which we have here
   below, it was more agreeable this should be done in a mountain than in
   the lower parts of the earth; yea, moreover, they were so nearer to
   heaven, to which they went back again.

   [2.] Secrecy was necessary to his transfiguration, for Christ was about
   a business which he would not have presently to come abroad, and
   therefore it was to be confined to the knowledge of a few, who were to
   be called up from the rest into an high mountain: ver. 9, Jesus charged
   them that they should tell the vision to no man till the Son of man was
   risen from the dead;' and what was done before many will hardly be
   concealed. The due time for the general and public manifestation of the
   divine glory was not yet come, therefore he would not have it
   unseasonably divulged. And hereby he teacheth us modesty. Christ was
   crucified in the city before all, but transfigured in the mountain only
   before a few.

   2. The other action, of prayer, doth very well agree with height and
   secrecy.

   [1.] For height: Though God heareth us everywhere, where soever we lift
   up pure hands, without wrath and doubting,' yet a mountain is not
   altogether disagreeable to this duty. It is good to be as near heaven
   as we can. I am sure it is good to get up the heart there. We have a
   freer prospect of heaven from a mountain, and may look up to those
   blessed regions where our God is; therefore Christ often chose a
   mountain to pray in, not only now, but at other times: Mat. xiv. 23.
   Certainly when we pray we should turn our backs upon all earthly
   things, and have our hearts and minds carried up to him to whom our
   prayers are directed, and that place where he dwelleth.

   [2] Secrecy is necessary for this duty, partly to avoid ostentation:
   Mat. vi. 6, When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut thy
   doors.' Public prayer must be performed before others, but not private,
   for fear of hypocrisy; so also to increase fervency. Secret prayers are
   usually most ardent. Ille dolet ver qui sine teste dolet. My soul
   shall weep sore in secret places,' Jer. xiii. 17. And Peter went out
   and wept bitterly,' Mat. xxvi. 75. And Jacob wrestled with God alone,
   Gen. xxxii. 24. Frequency of objects draws away the mind, obstructeth
   our affections, abates the vehemency of our zeal, fills us with carnal
   thoughts; therefore Christ retireth himself and his three disciples,
   that being separated from all distractions, they might attend the
   prayer and the vision without interruption.

   Fourthly, The preparative action. In Luke it is, He went into a
   mountain to pray.' Christ had two ends; he told his disciples the one,
   but concealeth the other.--He spake only of prayer, the more to hide
   the thing from the rest of the apostles, which would soon be evident
   enough to those whom he took along with him. Now this telleth us that
   every weighty business should be begun with prayer. When we go about
   the performance of weighty and serious duties, we should withdraw
   ourselves from all occasions which may hinder us and distract us
   therein, as our Lord, being to give himself to prayer, goeth apart into
   a mountain.

   In this introduction I shall only take notice of two things:--

   1. The choice of his company.

   2. His preparative action: he prayed, and whilst he prayed he was
   transfigured.

   1. Of the choice of his company: he took Peter, James, and John. That
   Christ doth not use all his servants alike familiarly in every thing,
   partly because he had his liberty; for in matters of free favour it is
   not acceptance of persons to pass by some and admit others no, not in
   the most necessary spiritual dispensations: Mat. xi. 27, All things are
   delivered to me of my Father, and no man knoweth the Son but the
   Father, and he to whomsoever the Father will reveal him.' The plea of
   the Lord of the vineyard will ever hold firm and valid: Mat. xx. 15, Is
   it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own?' But this is a
   thing of another nature. The dispensing of his arbitrary respects,
   acceptance of persons in judgment, is a violation of justice, but not
   in matters of free favour, partly because he would consecrate and
   hallow spiritual friendship, and commend it to us by his own example;
   and, therefore, though he loved all his disciples, yet he chose out
   some for intimacy and special converse. These were ekle'kton
   eklekto'teroi, the flower of the apostles, either because, of their
   suitableness, he had a special inclination to them, or, for their
   sincerity and eminency in grace, he delighted in them more than in the
   rest. Sicut se habet simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis, ad magis:
   if I love all that are godly, I love those most who are most godly. Now
   as Christ consecrated holy friendship in his own person, so was it
   exemplified in his disciples, for I find a great friendship between two
   of these mentioned in the text, John and Peter. You find them mostly
   together: John xx. 2-4, Mary Magdalene runneth and cometh to Peter, and
   to the other disciple whom Jesus loved; Peter went forth and the other
   disciple, and came to the sepulchre. So Acts iii. 1, Now Peter and John
   went up together into the temple .at the hour of prayer:' John xxi. 7,
   The disciple whom Jesus loved said unto Peter, It is the Lord;' and
   John xxi. 21, 22, Peter, seeing the disciple whom Jesus loved, said,
   Lord, and what shall this man do?' as willing to know the future state
   of his friend. So Acts viii. 14, Peter and John go to Samaria to
   confirm the disciples. See John xviii. 15, And Simon Peter followed
   Jesus, and so did another disciple, and that other disciple was known
   unto the high priest,' meaning himself. So that in these and other
   places you still find Peter and John together as very near and fast
   friends: they always keep together, possibly for spiritual assistance;
   for Peter was of an hot temper, John the disciple of love; Peter hasty
   and of a military valour, John all for lenity and peace. Well, then,
   though we ought to seek peace with all men as much as is possible, Rom.
   xii. 18, and there should be special concord and communion with all
   Christians--Philadelphi'a riseth higher than Aga'pe, 2 Pet. i. 7--yet
   friendship and inward conversation should only be with a few, such as
   may be helps to us in godliness, and may promote our mutual good,
   temporal and spiritual. So did Christ, who had twelve disciples, single
   out three of them for greatest intimacy; and so did Peter, who, though
   he had eleven colleagues, and held concord with all, yet his intimate
   friendship was with John, the disciple whom Jesus loved. It is good to
   hold friendship with those who are beloved of God, and one who, by his
   love and lenity, might cool his heats and abate his hasty fervours,
   which were so natural to him.

   Now, having so fair an occasion, I shall treat of spiritual friend
   ship, for an heavenly, faithful friend is one of the greatest treasures
   upon earth. A friend is valuable in secular matters, much more a
   spiritual friend: Prov. xxvii. 17, As iron sharpeneth iron, so doth the
   countenance of a man his friend,' --that is, when he is dull his friend
   setteth an edge upon him.

   [1.] Friendship is necessary for every one that would live in the
   world, because man is zoon politiko`n, a sociable creature. Man was not
   made to live alone, but in company with others for mutual society and
   friendship; and they that fly all company and live to and by themselves
   are counted inhuman: Eccles. iv. 9-12, Two are better than one, for if
   they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him that is
   alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to lift him up. Again,
   if two lie together, they have heat; but how can one be warm if he lie
   alone? And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him.' Thus
   far Solomon. The Egyptians in their hieroglyphics expressed the
   unprofitableness of a solitary man by a single millstone, which alone
   grindeth no meal, but with its fellow is very serviceable for that
   purpose. The Lord appointed mankind to live in society, that they might
   be mutually helpful to one another. Surely God never made them to live
   in deserts; the wild beasts love to go alone, but the tame in flocks
   and herds. The Lord doth give variety of gifts to the sons of men; to
   all some, but to none all, that one might stand in need of another, and
   make use of one another; and the subordination of one gift to another
   is the great means of upholding the world. Man is weak and insufficient
   to himself, and wanting the help of others, needeth society, and is
   inclined to it by the bent of his nature.

   [2.] Though man affecteth society, yet in our company we must use
   choice, and the good must converse with the good, for these reasons:

   (1.) Partly because like doth best sort with like. Friendship is
   founded in suitableness and maintained by it--eadem velle et nolle, to
   will and nill the same things, breedeth an harmony of minds; the godly
   will have special love to the godly, and they that fear God will be
   companions of them that fear him, Ps. cxix. 63; they must needs be more
   dear and precious to them than others, as a wicked man easily smelleth
   out a fit companion for him: Ps. 1. 18, When thou sawest a thief, then
   thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers.'
   Like will to like; every man showeth his temper in his company. The
   fowls of heaven flock together according to their several kinds; ye
   shall not see doves flocking with the ravens, nor diverse kinds
   intermixed. Men that delight in excess of drink choose company suitable
   to their brutish humour; those that delight in gaming choose such as
   make no conscience of their time, or have no care of their souls. That
   which every one is taken withal he loveth to do with his friends,
   therefore they that love God delight in those that love him, those that
   are most apt to stir them up to the remembrance of everlasting things
   and the preparation necessary: so they are of singular use to us.

   (2.) If they be not like to us, intimacy and converse will make us like
   to them. Every man is wrought upon by his company; we imitate those
   whom we love and with whom we frequently converse: Prov. xiii. 20, He
   that walketh with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools
   shall be destroyed.' As a man that walketh in the sun is tanned
   insensibly, so, if we are not aware, we adopt their manners and
   customs, and get a tincture from them, especially in evil; for we are
   more susceptible of evil than of good--as the sound get a sickness from
   the diseased sooner than the sick get health from the sound. Or in the
   types of the law: that which was clean, by touching the unclean became
   unclean, but the unclean were not purified by touching the clean: Prov.
   xxii. 24, 25, Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious
   man thou shalt not go, lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy
   soul.' A man would think that of all sins wrath and anger should not be
   propagated by converse, the motions and furies of it being so uncomely
   and indecent to any be holder; yet secretly a liking of the person
   breedeth a liking of the sin, and a man is habituated into such a frame
   of spirit as they have whom he hath chosen for his companions. Now this
   should be regarded by us, because we are sooner made evil by evil
   company than good by good company; therefore how careful should we be
   to converse with such as may go before us as examples of godliness, and
   provoke us by their strictness, heavenly-mindedness, mortification, and
   self-denial, to more love to God, zeal for his glory, and care of our
   own salvation. Especially doth this concern the young, who, by the
   weakness of their judgment or the vehemency of their affections and
   want of experience, may easily be drawn into a snare.

   (3.) Because our love to God should put us upon loving his people and
   making them our intimates; for religion influenceth all things--our
   relations, common employments, friendship, and converse: 1 John v. 1,
   Every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten
   of him.' The new nature inclineth to both: there is an inward
   propension and inclination needing no outward provocation and
   allurements: 1 Thes. iv. 9, As touching brotherly love, ye need not
   that I write unto you, for you yourselves are taught of God to love one
   another.' God's teaching is by effectual impression or inclining the
   heart. It is a smart question that of the prophet, 2 Chron. xix. 2,
   Shouldest thou hate the godly, and love those that hate the Lord?'
   Surely a gracious heart cannot take them into his bosom: he loveth all
   with a love of good will, as seeking their good, but not with a love of
   complacency, as delighting in them. Our neighbour must be loved as
   ourselves--our natural or carnal neighbour as our natural self, with a
   love of benevolence, and our spiritual neighbour as our spiritual self,
   with a love of complacency. We have hated our sinful neighbour as we
   hate ourselves; much, more as to love of benevolence we must neither
   hate ourselves, our neighbour, nor our enemy. But it is complacency we
   are speaking of, and so the wicked is an abomination to the righteous,'
   Prov. xxix. 27. The hatred of displacency is opposite to the love of
   complacency, as the hatred of enmity to the love of benevolence. We
   cannot enter into a confederacy and intimate kindness with them.

   (4.) Because that love which is built upon holiness is the most durable
   and lasting. There is a confederacy in evil, as between drunkards with
   drunkards, and robbers with robbers: Prov. i. 14, Cast in thy lot
   amongst us, let us all have one common purse.' Or when men conspire
   against the truth and interest of Christ in the world; as Gebal and
   Ammon and Amalek leagued themselves against God's people, divided in
   interests but united in hatred; as the Pharisees and Herodians agreed
   together to tempt Christ; and Herod and Pilate, though otherwise no
   very good friends, agreed to mock him. This is unitas contra unitatem,
   as Austin; or consortium factionis, a bond of iniquity. Now this
   friendship is soon dissolved, for these men, though they agree in evil,
   yet have contrary lusts and interests; and besides, partners in evil
   are usually objects reviving guilt; their very presence upbraids the
   consciences of one another with the remembrance of their past sins; and
   sin, though it be sweet in the committing, yet it is hateful and bitter
   in the remembrance of it. Again, there is a civil friendship built on
   natural pleasure and profit. Certainly men are at liberty to choose
   their company as their interests and course of employments leads them.
   This may be a society for trade or civil respect; it cannot be a true
   and proper friendship, for riches, which are so frail and slippery, can
   never make a firm tie and bond of hearts and minds: Prov. xiv. 20, The
   poor is hated even of his own neighbour, but the rich hath many
   friends;' Prov. xix. 6, Many will entreat the favour of a prince, and
   every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts: all the brethren of the
   poor do hate him,' &c. And as it is a fluid, so it is a base and sordid
   friendship that is built upon riches, for that concerneth the estate
   rather than the soul. Well, then, religious friendship, which is built
   upon virtue and grace, and is called the unity of the spirit,' Eph. iv.
   3, is the most firm bond of all. Sinful societies are soon dissolved,
   and the profane, though they seem to hold together, yet upon every
   cross word may fall out and break; and civil friendship, which is only
   built upon pleasures and profit, standeth upon a brittle foundation.
   Certainly the good and the holy are not so changeable as the bad and
   the carnal. Besides, that friendship which is built upon honesty and
   godliness, is amicitia per se, the other is amicitia per accidens. It
   cometh from constitution of soul and likeness of spirits, and the good
   we seek may be possessed without envy; the friends do not straiten and
   intrench upon one another. Again, there is a virtuous friendship, which
   consists in a harmony of minds, or an agreement in some common studies.
   This is more noble, and more like true friendship than society for
   trade and temporal interests; but yet this friendship is not so
   durable, for at last it must be broken off by death; but the godly are
   everlasting companions. Besides, self-love and envy are more apt to
   invade other friendships; but the godly, if they be true to the laws of
   spiritual friendship, they seek the good of one another as much as
   their own, and rejoice in the graces of one another as much as in their
   own.

   [3.] Though we owe this religious friendship to all that fear God, yet
   some few may he chosen for our intimacy and spiritual solace. We owe it
   in some respects to all that fear God, and must dispense the general
   acts of friendship to them: Acts iv.32, The multitude of them that
   believed were of one heart and of one soul.' And Christian love is
   called sundesmos tes teleiotetos, the bond of perfectness,' Col. iii.
   14, because it is the band by which holy and Christian societies,
   called churches, are bound together and preserved; otherwise, like a
   besom unbound, they fall all to pieces. But yet this doth not hinder
   but that some may be chosen for our intimacy. Christ, that denied
   himself to many of the commodities of human life, would not live
   without special friends, and would enjoy this virtuous solace; and in
   David and Jonathan we have an instance of it: 1 Sam. xviii. 1, And the
   soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David.' Certainly too many
   cannot perform the acts of intimate friendship to us, nor we to them.
   The love being like a river dispersed into several channels, must needs
   be shallower and weaker; therefore our choice friends must be but few:
   inter binos et bonos was the old rule, though it need not be so
   straitly confined.

   [4.] In the choice of these few friends we must use caution. (1.) Such
   as are near to us, with whom we have frequent and familiar converse,
   and perform a mutual interchange of all offices of love: Prov. xviii.
   24, A man that hath friends must show himself friendly, and there is a
   friend which sticketh closer than a brother.' Consanguinity and
   affinity is not so near a tie as this friendship. (2.) Not only near,
   but those who are holy, prudent, and good: Prov. xiii. 20, He that
   walketh with the wise shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be
   destroyed.' (3.) Such as are most likely to be faithful: Job vi. 15,
   16, My brethren have dealt deceitfully with me as a brook, and as the
   stream of brooks they pass away'--pools in winter, when less need of
   water, but dried up in summer, when water in those parched countries
   was a great commodity. So many seem to be great friends, heighten our
   expectation; but in our necessities and straits leave us destitute. Ye
   see me cast down and are afraid,' saith Job, as if I should be a burden
   to you.' Dearest friends may disappoint us; their affection wants an
   inward principle; it is a winter brook, and not a spring. Therefore,
   since the heart of man is so deceitful, and not only deceitful, but
   though sincere for the present, very changeable; and this is so
   important an interest of human life, and the vexation of a
   disappointment in a bosom friend is so grievous, and involveth us in
   many inconveniences, natural and spiritual; for Solomon telleth us,
   Prov. xxv. 19, Confidence in an unfaithful friend in time of trouble,
   is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.' When we think to eat
   with the broken tooth, or to walk with the foot out of joint, we are
   put to grievous pain and torment; therefore we should go to God, and
   pray him to direct us in the choice of intimate friends. David sadly
   regrets a disappointment in a friend: Ps. lv. 12-15, For it was not an
   enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it: nor was it he
   that hated me that did magnify himself against me; then I would have
   hid myself from him: but it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and
   mine acquaintance.' &c. A deceitful friend may become the greatest foe,
   and we resent their ingratitude more than the injuries of others, when
   they abuse their trust and the familiarity they had with us. The worst
   that a professed enemy can do is not so grievous as the treachery of a
   professed friend. This is more piercing, less to be avoided; therefore,
   whom we have used most familiarly and freely, loved as our soul and
   life, from such we expect the same firm and hearty friendship.
   Therefore it concerneth us to seek to God that we may have a godly wise
   man with whom we may be free in all cases of mind or conscience, and to
   whom we may freely open ourselves, and be strengthened in the service
   of God. It is a great part of our contentment and happiness, therefore,
   that we may not be deceived in our choice. Let us go to God who knoweth
   hearts, and God hath a great hand in this: Ps. lxxxviii. 8, Thou hast
   put away my acquaintance from me; thou hast made me an abomination to
   them.' By the providence of God they left him as a man whose condition
   they were afraid to look upon. And again, ver. 9, Lover and friend hast
   thou put far from me; they stand aloof from me as an execrable thing.'
   He owneth providence in it.

   [5.] When friends be thus chosen, there must be a faithful discharge of
   the duties of friendship, both in counsels and reproofs; for the godly
   use this friendship chiefly for spiritual ends.

   (1.) In counsel, for Solomon telleth us, Prov. xxii. 9, As ointment and
   perfume rejoice the heart, so doth the sweetness of a man's friend by
   hearty counsel.' As sweet perfumes are a reviving, so to be supported
   in good resolutions, or directed and guided in our way to heaven by a
   faithful friend, is very cheering and comfortable. And we read, 1 Sam.
   xxiii. 16, 17, that Jonathan went to David, and strengthened his hand
   in God.' Whereas, on the contrary, a carnal friend is the greatest bane
   that may be, who doth strengthen us in evil; an instance whereof we
   have in Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, 2 Sam. xiii. 3, 4, and Amnon had a
   friend whose name was Jonadab, and Jonadab was a subtile man;' and he
   gave him counsel how he should surprise his sister, to defile her, and
   satisfy his incestuous lust. Such a friend is really and truly our
   greatest foe. He was a friend to his vice, but a foe to his person and
   soul; whereas a true friend, whose friendship is grounded on godliness,
   will be a foe to our sins, by whole some admonition and rebukes, and a
   friend to our soul's salvation.

   (2.) Reproofs: that is also a part of friendship: Prov. xxvii. 6,
   Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are
   deceitful.' A faithful friend's wounds are a more sincere testimony
   than an enemy's kisses, and so afterwards they will be interpreted:
   Prov. xxviii. 23, He that rebuketh a man, afterwards shall find more
   favour than he that flattereth with his tongue.' For this we must trust
   God, though for the present we displease our friends. So Lev. xix. 17,
   Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart by suffering sin upon
   him.' It is kindness to his soul to reprove him. In the general, holy
   friendship must be improved to the use of edifying: Rom. i. 11, 12, I
   long to see you, to impart some spiritual gift unto you, that I may be
   comforted together with you by the mutual faith of you and me.'

   [6.] After the best care is used, you must remember that our friends
   are but an outward help, which God can continue or withdraw at his
   pleasure; and that our chief help, comfort, and counsel cometh of God.
   So it was with Christ: John xvi. 32, Behold the hour is come that ye
   shall be parted every man to his own, and shall leave me alone; and yet
   I am not alone, because the Father is with .me.' Christ was forsaken of
   his disciples, but not forsaken of his Father. So Paul, 2 Tim. i. 16,
   At my first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me;' Ps.
   xli. 9, My familiar friend, in whom I trusted, hath lifted up his heel
   against me.' Those that have been acquainted with the secrets of your
   soul may not only grow strange to you, but betray you; therefore, do
   not over-value any earthly friend. Man will be man still, that God may
   be God, all in all unto his people: and when we are deserted of men, we
   must learn to trust in God, who never faileth us, fail who will: Ps.
   xxvii. 10, When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will
   take me up;' and cxlii. 4, 5, I looked on my right hand and beheld, and
   no man would know me: refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul. I
   cried unto thee, O Lord; I said, Thou art my refuge and portion in the
   land of the living.' We are left alone for God to help us. The
   defectiveness of all worldly friends shows us more of the goodness of
   God.

   2. The preparative action: he went up into a mountain to pray, and
   whilst he prayed he was transfigured.

   [1.] In that he prayed, it teacheth us to hallow all our actions by
   prayer. We do not bid ourselves God speed, unless we recommend our
   affairs to God; whatsoever assurance we have of the blessing, yet we
   must pray: Jer. xxix. 10-12, For thus saith the Lord, After seventy
   years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good
   word towards you, in causing you to return to this place, &c. Then
   shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
   hearken unto you;' Ezek. xxxvi. 37, I will for this be inquired of by
   the house of Israel to do it for them.' Therefore we should be daily in
   the practice of this duty, and not look upon it as a work that may well
   be spared. If Christ, who as to his divine nature was equal with God,
   surely we should often come and prostrate ourselves before him in this
   act of holy adoration. Christ had right and title to all, all was his
   due, yet he was much in prayer. How dare we go about any business
   without his leave, counsel, and blessing; and usurp any of his
   blessings without begging them by prayer?

   [2.] While he prayed he was transfigured, Luke ix. 29; which teacheth
   us two things:--

   (1.) That we have the highest communications from God in prayer, for
   then Christ's shape was altered. By prayer the soul hath the most
   familiar converse with God that possibly it can have, and also by the
   means of this duty God hath most familiar converse with us. In our
   prayers to God we have experience of the operations of the Spirit: Rom.
   viii. 26, Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for we know
   not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself helpeth
   us with groanings which cannot be uttered;' Jude 20, But ye, beloved,
   building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy
   Ghost;' and in God's answering our prayer we have experience of the
   comforts of the Spirit, and those spiritual solaces which he secretly
   giveth to his people. Hannah, when she had prayed, went away, and her
   countenance was no more sad,' 1 Sam. i. 18. In praying we put forth the
   groans of the spirit; in the answer God gives the joys of the spirit:
   Ps. xxxiv. 5, They looked unto him and were lightened, and their faces
   were not ashamed.'

   (2.) That we should pray so as that the heart may be raised and lifted
   up unto God, and in some sort made like God. When Christ prayed to God,
   he is made partaker of the divine glory, as Moses also, by conversing
   with God, his face shined, Exod. xxxiv. 29, 30. This was extraordinary;
   but sure the oftener we converse with God the more holy and heavenly
   should we grow, more like him in spirit, be changed into the glory of
   the Lord spiritually; and so we are, if we be instant and earnest in
   prayer. If we have communion with God, there will be some assimilation
   to God.

   Use. It reproveth our remiss, feeble, benumbed souls. There is no life
   in prayer, no working up the heart to God and heaven; either our
   prayers are formal and cursory--James v. 16, deesis energoumene--or our
   prayers are doctrinal, instructive rather than warning. [30] We get
   lightly over duties, but we should get life by prayer. This duty is not
   to inform the judgment, but to raise the affections, that they be all
   in a flame; or else we content ourselves with a dull narrative, without
   getting up the heart to a sight of God and heaven; or are seldom in
   praises or adoration of the excellences of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [30] Qu., warming?'--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON II.

   And he was transfigured before them; and his face did shine as the sun,
   and his raiment was white as the light.--Mat. XVII. 2; with,

   And, as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his
   raiment was white and glistering.--Luke IX. 29.

   IN both these texts, compared together, you may observe two things:--

   1. The circumstance of time: during prayer.

   2. The transfiguration itself.

   [1.] More generally propounded, he was transfigured before them.

   [2.] More particularly explained by the change of his face and raiment.
   The form of any man is most seen in his face. There was a glorious
   shining brightness. Luke saith, The fashion of his countenance was
   altered;' Matthew, that His face did shine as the sun.' And in the
   glorious description of God in the prophet Habakkuk, it is said, chap.
   iii. 2, And his brightness was as the light.' For his garments, Luke
   saith, His raiment was white and glistering;' Mark, chap. ix. 3, White
   as the snow, so as no fuller on earth could whiten them;' but Matthew,
   white as the light,' which carrieth it higher. The works of nature
   exceed those of art. The transfiguration that was plainly to be seen in
   his face was accomplished also in other parts of his body. All his body
   was clothed with majesty, so as it could not be obscured and hidden by
   his garments.

   Now, first I shall speak of the circumstances of time, and then of the
   transfiguration itself.

   I. Of the time: and as he prayed.' Now what Christ prayed for is not
   specified. (1.) If he asked common blessings, and prayed only in order
   to his usual solace and converse with God, it showed the success of
   vehemency in prayer. Christ prayed at such a rate as that he was
   transfigured and changed into the likeness of God in prayer. (2.) If He
   asked to be transfigured for the confirmation of his disciples, it
   showeth God's readiness to answer fervent and earnest prayers.

   1. Of the first consideration. If Christ's prayer were of ordinary
   import, it teacheth us that we should pray so that the heart may be
   raised and lifted unto God in prayer, and in some sort made like unto
   God. Let us state this matter aright.

   [1.] It must be granted that this shining of Christ's countenance as
   the sun, while he prayed, was extraordinary, and a dispensation
   peculiar to the Son of God. So also was the shining of Moses's face
   while he conversed with God in the mount, Exod. xxxiv. 29, 30. And for
   ordinary Christians to expect the like is to put a snare upon
   themselves, for these things are proper only to the end for which God
   appointed them.

   [2.] This must be also considered, that the eminent and extraordinary
   passions and affections in the soul do discover themselves in the body,
   especially in the face; for it is said of Stephen, that when he was
   heightened into a great zeal for Christ, Acts vi. 15, that All that sat
   in the council, looking stedfastly upon him, saw his face as it had
   been the face of an angel.' Angels have not bodies or faces, but they
   often assume bodies, and then they appear with a glorious and bright
   countenance, as the angel of the Lord that appeared at the sepulchre:
   Mark xxviii. 3, His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment
   white as snow.' Now such a glory and gladness did God put upon the
   countenance of his servant Stephen, that he looked like an angel.
   Something extraordinary there might be in the case, but yet there was
   an ordinary reason for it. Stephen's mind was filled with such an
   incredible solace in the sense of God's love, that he showed no
   troubledness, but a mind so unconcerned and freed from, all fear and
   sorrow, as if he had been among the angels of God in full glory, and
   not among his enemies, who sought his blood; and so may God raise the
   hearts of his people sometimes, as if they had put their heads above
   the clouds, and were in the midst of the glory of the world to come
   among his blessed ones. If that were extraordinary, Solomon tells us,
   Eccles. viii. 1, that a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine,' as it
   gives him readiness and tranquillity of mind, and cheerfulness of
   countenance. Guilt and shame cast down the countenance, but
   righteousness and wisdom embolden it, more particularly in prayer. As
   our confidence and joy in God is increased, it bewrayeth itself in the
   countenance: Ps. xxxiv. 15, They looked unto him and were lightened,
   and their faces were not ashamed.' They are revived and encouraged, and
   come away from the throne of grace other manner of persons than they
   came to it.

   [3.] That some kind of transformation is wrought by prayer, appeareth
   by these considerations:--

   (1.) That as God is glorious in himself, so he maketh him that cometh
   to him partaker of his glory. For certainly all communion with God
   breedeth some assimilation and likeness unto God. It is clear in
   heavenly glory, when we see him as he is, we shall be like him, 1 John
   iii. 2; and it is clear also in our communion with him in the Spirit;
   for the apostle telleth us, that by Beholding the glory of the Lord as
   in a glass, we are changed into the same image, from glory to glory,
   even as by the Spirit of the Lord,' 2 Cor. iii. 18. Not only doth
   vision or immediate intuition produce this effect, but also spiritual
   specular vision, or a sight of God in the ordinances, produces a divine
   and God-like nature, inclining us to hate sin and love righteousness.
   The more we are above with God, the more we are like him. We see it in
   ordinary converse: a man is as the company that he keepeth. He that
   walketh with wise men shall be wise.' saith Solomon. but a companion of
   fools shall be destroyed,' Prov. xiii. 20. Now it is not imaginable
   that a man should converse often with God fervently, seriously, and not
   be more like him. He that liveth in a mill, the dust will stick upon
   his clothes. Man receiveth an insensible taint from his company. He
   that liveth in a shop of perfumes, often handleth them, is conversant
   among them, carrieth away somewhat of the fragrancy of these good
   ointments; so by conversing with God we are made like him.

   (2.) Nearer we cannot come to God, while we dwell in flesh, than by
   lifting up the heart to him in fervent prayer. This is the intimate
   converse and familiarity of a loving soul with God; therefore it is
   called a lifting up the heart to God. He will not come down to us,
   therefore we lift up the heart to him: Lam. iii. 41, Let us lift up our
   hearts with our hands to God in the heavens.' So Ps. xxv. 1, Unto thee,
   Lord, do I lift up my soul;' and Ps. lxxxvi. 4, Rejoice the soul of thy
   servant, for unto thee do I lift up my soul;' so Ps. cxliii. 8, Cause
   me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul unto
   thee.' All these places show that there can be no sincerity and
   seriousness in this duty, unless there be this ascension of the soul to
   God; it is an act of spiritual friendship, therefore called an
   acquainting ourselves with God.' Job xxii. 21. Now as acquaintance is
   kept up by frequent visits, so prayer is called a giving God a visit:
   Isa. xxvi. 16, In their trouble they have visited thee.' Well, then,
   here is the greatest intimacy we have with God. In the word, God speaks
   to us by a proxy and ambassador--another speaketh for him. In the
   Lord's Supper we are feasted at his cost, and remember him; but we are
   not admitted into his immediate presence, as those that are feasted by
   the king in another room than he dineth in. But prayer goeth up to God,
   and speaketh to himself immediately; and therefore this way of commerce
   must needs bring in much of God to the soul.

   (3.) In fervent prayer we have a double advantage--we get a sight of
   God, and exercise strong love to God; and both conduce to make us like
   God.

   (1st.) We get a sight of God, for in it (if it be seriously performed)
   we turn our back upon all other things, that we may look to God as
   sitting upon the throne, governing all things by his power for his
   glory. By faith we see the invisible one, Heb. xi. 27. Surely if we do
   not see God before the eye of our faith when we pray to him, we worship
   an idol--not the true and living God, who is, and is a rewarder of them
   that diligently seek him. Our hearts should be shut up against the
   thoughts of any other thing, and confined only to the object to whom we
   direct our worship. I reason thus: If a Christian foreseeth the Lord
   before him in all his ways, and keepeth always as in his eye and
   presence, surely he should set the Lord before him in his worship and
   in his prayers, Ps. xvi. 8. A good Christian doth always keep as in
   God's eye and presence, much more when he calleth upon his name. Now
   every sight of God doth more affect and change the heart. As none but
   the pure in heart see God, so none see God but are most pure in heart.
   There is a self-purifying in moral things; purity of heart maketh way
   for the sight of God, Mark v. 8. So the sight of God maketh way for the
   purity of heart: 3 John 11, He that doth evil hath not seen God.' A
   serious sight of God certainly worketh some change in us.

   (2dly.) In prayer, a strong love to God is acted, for it is the
   expression of our delight in him: Job xxvii. 10, Will he delight
   himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God?' Now we are
   changed into the likeness of him in whom we delight in. Love
   transformeth and changeth us into the nature of what is loved. There is
   the difference between the mind and the will: the mind draweth things
   to itself, but the will followeth the things it chooseth, and is drawn
   by them as the wax receiveth the impression of the seal. Carnal objects
   make us carnal, and earthly things earthly; and heavenly things
   heavenly, and the love of God godly: Ps. cxv. 8, They that make them
   are like unto them, so are all they that put their trust in them,'
   stupid and senseless as idols: it secretly stamps the heart with what
   we like, and esteem, and admire.

   [4.] There are agents in prayer to help us to improve this advantage.

   (1.) The human spirit.

   (2.) The new nature; and,

   (3.) The Spirit of God.

   (1.) The human spirit, or our natural faculty, so that, by our under
   standings, we may work upon our wills and affections: surely God maketh
   use of this, for the Holy Ghost doth not work upon a man as upon a
   block; and we are to rouse up ourselves, and to attend upon this work
   with the greatest seriousness imaginable. The prophet complains, Isa.
   lxiv. 7, There is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up
   himself to take hold of thee. Without this it is but dead and cold
   work, and if there be no more than this, it is but dry literal work:
   not that fervent effectual prayer which will change the heart, deesis
   energoumene, James v. 16. The energou'menoi were those that were
   inspired and possessed by a spirit; therefore it must be a prayer that
   not only hath understanding and will in it, but spirit and life in it.
   However, we are to put forth our utmost endeavour, and raise the
   natural spirit as far as we can.

   (2.) The second agent is the new nature, which inclineth us to God as
   our chief good and last end. This also must be taken in, for the Holy
   Ghost doth not blow as to a dead coal; the new nature is made up of
   faith, hope and love, and all these must be acted in prayer: faith, or
   the firm belief of God's being, and providence, and covenant; For how
   shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?' Rom. x. 14.
   Then love to God, or the desire of the fruition of him in heavenly
   glory, praying in the Holy Ghost: Keep yourselves in the love of God.'
   Jude 20, 21. If I do not love God, and desire to enjoy him, and delight
   in as much of God as I can get here, certainly there will be no life in
   prayer, or no ravishment and transport of soul, no spirit of desire
   animating our requests, and no spiritual solace and delight in our
   converse with God. Hope is also necessary to fervent praying, for a man
   coldly asketh for what he doth not hope for. Hope respecteth both means
   and end--supplies of grace by the way, and our final fruition of God in
   glory. This is called trust in scripture, and is the great ground and
   encouragement of prayer: Ps. lxii. 8, Trust in the Lord at all times;
   pour out your souls before him.' Prayer is the act of a trusting soul.
   Now these graces quicken our natural faculties, as they elevate and
   raise our hearts and minds to God and heaven.

   (3.) The third agent in prayer is the Holy Spirit. He is sometimes said
   to pray in us, Rom. viii. 26; sometimes we are said to pray in him,
   Jude 20. The divine Spirit exciteth those graces in us which incline us
   to God; he raiseth our minds in the vision and sight of God. In thy
   light shall we see light,' Ps. xxxvi. 9; and he raiseth our hearts to a
   desire after and delight in God, for all that spiritual solace and joy
   is called joy in the Holy Ghost;' for both unutterable groans and
   unspeakable joys are of his working: Rom. viii. 26, The Spirit itself
   maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered;'
   compared with 1 Pet. i. 8, In whom, though ye see him not, yet
   believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.' Well,
   then, these work a kind of an ecstasy. If you would pray so as to be
   transported, transformed in prayer, something you must do as reasonable
   creatures, something as new creatures, and the Spirit influenceth all,
   and causeth the soul to follow hard after God. We must put forth our
   utmost endeavour, stir up the gift of God in us; and though we cannot
   command the influences of the Spirit, yet he is never wanting to a
   serious soul as to necessary help. Pray thus, and you will find, as the
   help of the Spirit in prayer, so the comforts of the Spirit as the
   success of prayer.

   [5.] As there is daily and constant prayer in which we must ever bewray
   a seriousness and sincerity for these daily supplies of grace, so there
   are extraordinary occasions, because of some great business, conflict,
   or temptation: in those the heart and mind must be more than ordinarily
   raised and stirred. In every prayer of Christ there was not a
   transfiguration; and we read of our Lord Jesus, that in his agonies he
   prayed, ektene'steron, more earnestly than at other times, Luke xxii.
   44; and upon eminent occasions, as the necessities of the saints are
   greater, so their acts of prayer are more earnest. On these weighty
   occasions many Christians are wholly swallowed up with the thoughts of
   God, and carried beyond themselves by their high love to God, and
   earnest desires of the spiritual blessings they stand in need of, so
   that they seem to be rapt into heaven in their admiration of God and
   delight in him.

APPLICATION.

   Use. To reprove our feeble, remiss, and benumbed requests. There is no
   life in our prayers, no working up of the heart to God and heaven, no
   flames of love, no transports of soul by the vision and sight of faith,
   no holy and ardent desires after God, or spiritual solace and delight
   in him.

   Reasons--1. We pray cursorily, and go about prayer as a customary task
   for fashion's sake; we come with a few cold devotions morning and
   evening, and so God is near in our mouths, and far from our reins.'
   Jer. xii. 2. Oh, take heed of this! Nothing breeds slightness and
   hardness of heart so much as perfunctory praying. The rule is, Continue
   instant in prayer.' Rom. xii. 12. And it is said of the saints that
   they Served God instantly night and day.' en ektenei'a, Acts xxvi. 7,
   that they might come to the blessed hope, with the united service of
   all their powers and faculties.

   2. Our prayers are doctrinal and instructive, rather than affectionate
   and warming. We get light by other duties, but we should get life by
   prayer. This duty is not to inform the judgment, but to raise the
   affections, that they may be all flame. Other duties are feeding
   duties, but this is a spending duty, an egression of the soul after
   God: Ps. lxiii. 8, My soul followeth hard after thee.' A man may better
   spend two hours in hearing than half an hour in praying, if the heart
   be employed in it as it ought to be, in the sight of God, and an
   earnest desire after him. The prayers in scripture are all
   supplications or doxologies; there is no excursion into doctrines and
   instructions.

   3. Else we are lamenting sin, and spend the time in confessing sin,
   which also hath its use in the seasons thereof; but are seldom in
   praises or adorations of the excellences of God, and the wonderful
   mysteries of his love in our redemption by Jesus Christ. Yet it is
   said, Ps. xxii. 3, O Lord, that inhabitest the praises of Israel.'
   These are the things that do most ravish the heart, and raise it in the
   contemplation of that glorious God to whom we speak; and fill us with
   the ecstasies of love, that we may be more like him--holy, wise, and
   good, as he is holy, wise, and good.

   4. We think a dry narrative to be enough; that is, the fruit of a human
   spirit, or a mere product of memory and invention is a sufficient
   prayer, without acting faith, hope, or love in it, or those spiritual
   and heavenly desires which are the life of prayer: Ps. x. 17, Lord,
   thou hast heard the desire of the humble, thou wilt prepare their
   heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear.' The ardency of humble
   addresses is God's own gift, and he will never reject and despise those
   requests that, by his own Spirit and appointment, are direct and
   brought to him.

   But what if I have not those strong and earnest desires? I answer, Yet
   keep not off from prayer: for,

   [1.] Good desires must be asked of God, for it is said, he prepareth
   the heart.

   [2.] Such desires as we have must be expressed, and that is the way to
   increase them, and to quicken us more. A sincere heart, that would
   serve God with his best, findeth more in a duty than he could expect,
   and by praying gets more of the fervency and ardours of praying: as a
   bell may be long a-raising, but when it is up, it jangleth not as it
   did at first.

   [3.] Those cold affections which we have are killed by disuse and
   turning away from God; therefore go to him to get thy heart warmed.

   2. Of the second consideration. If he prayed for this transfiguration,
   observe:--

   That God often answereth his people in the very time while they are
   praying: Isa. lviii. 9, When they call I will answer, and when they cry
   he shall say, Here I am.' This hath been the course of God's dealing
   with the prayer-makers all along: Abel, Gen. iv. 4, God had respect
   to;' it is enepu'risen, set his offering on fire. Daniel prayeth, and
   saith he, Dan. ix. 21, While I was speaking in prayer, the angel
   Gabriel was sent unto me;' and he said, At the beginning of thy
   supplications the commandment came forth.' While many of the disciples
   were gathered together praying, God sent Peter to them, Acts xii. 12,
   13. While Cornelius was in the act of prayer, At the ninth hour of the
   day,' which was the hour of prayer, he saw in a vision the angel of
   God,' Acts x. 3-9. While Peter went up to the house-top to pray, then
   he had the heavenly vision. So when Paul was in prayer, Ananias was
   sent to him: Acts ix. 11, Behold he prayeth;' and then God taketh care
   of him. So Acts iv. 31, When they had prayed, the house was shaken, and
   they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.' Thus God delighteth to
   honour his own ordinance, and to reward the waiting soul, that is
   frequent and constant in this way of waiting upon God, which should
   encourage us to be more frequent and serious in this work. You shall
   see how, in the very act of prayer, God hath--(1.) averted judgments;
   (2.) bestowed mercies and favours.

   [1.] He hath put a stop to judgments: Ps. xcix. 6-8, Moses and Aaron
   among the priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name: they
   called upon the Lord, and he answered them; he spake unto them in the
   cloudy pillar; they kept his testimonies and the ordinance that he gave
   them. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God; thou wast a God that
   forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.' The
   drift of the Psalmist in this place is to show, by eminent instances of
   holy men that were most notable for prayer, how they have stopped
   judgments when they began to be executed. Moses, at his prayer God was
   propitiated, after the provocation of the golden calf; for it is said,
   Exod. xxxii. 11, Moses besought the Lord his God;' ver. 14, The Lord
   repented of the evil which he thought to do.' The second, Aaron's
   making an atonement for the people, whereby the plague was staid: Num.
   xvi. 46, Take a censer quickly, for wrath is begun;' and ver. 48,
   presently the plague was stayed. Upon Samuel's prayer the Philistines
   were discomfited when they were overrunning Israel, 1 Sam. vii. 5, with
   ver. 9, 10. With every one of these God was pleased to talk and commune
   as a friend. Such honour was God pleased to put on these his faithful
   servants; and when the people had provoked God, and God's wrath was
   already gone out against them for their crying sins, their prayers were
   so effectual as to divert the plagues and obtain remission.

   [2.] So powerful, also, are they for obtaining blessings: Elijah (James
   v. 17, 18), though a man of like passions with us.' yet he could lock
   heaven and open it at his pleasure; 1 Kings xviii. 42, 45, the rain
   came as soon as Elijah put himself into a zealous posture to obtain it.
   Often success hath overtaken the prayer, and the blessing has been
   gotten before the supplication hath been ended. Isaac went out to meet
   with God, to meditate or pray, and he espied Rebecca afar off. Isa.
   lxv. 24, Before they call I will answer, and whilst they are yet
   speaking I will hear.' Oh, therefore, let us not entertain hard
   thoughts of God, as if he did not regard our suits and requests, and
   prayer were a lost labour.

   II. I come now to the transfiguration itself, as it is here propounded
   and explained.

   Doct. That one necessary and solemn act of Christ's mediation and
   manifestation to the world was his transfiguration before competent
   witnesses.

   This was one solemn act, and part of Christ's manifestation to the
   world, for we have the record of it here; and it was necessary, for
   Christ doth nothing in vain. And here are competent witnesses, three
   persons of eminent holiness, before whom all this was done, and they
   were eye-witnesses of his majesty, and ear-witnesses of the oracle
   which they heard from heaven, or the voice from the excellent glory.

   I shall open:--

   First, The nature of this transfiguration.

   Secondly, The ends of it.

   First, The nature of this transfiguration. It was a glorious alteration
   in the appearance and qualities of his body, not a substantial
   alteration in the substance of it. It was not a change wrought in the
   essential form and substance of Christ's body, but only the outward
   form was changed, being more full of glory and majesty than it used to
   be or appeared to be.

   Two things are to be handled:--

   1. How it differed from his body at another time, whilst he conversed
   here on earth.

   2. How this change differed from the state of his body as it is now in
   glory.

   1. How his body, now transfigured, differed from his body at other
   times during his conversing with men. Though the fulness of the Godhead
   dwelt in him always, yet the state of his body was disposed so as might
   best serve for the decency of human conversation; as the sun in a
   rainy, cloudy day is not seen, but now, as it might, discover his
   divine nature, it would break out in vigour and strength.

   [1.] It was not a change or alteration of the substance of the body, as
   if it were turned into a spiritual substance. No; it remained still a
   true human, mortal body, with the same nature and properties it had
   before, only it became bright and glorious.

   [2.] As the substance of the body was not changed, so the natural shape
   and features were not changed, otherwise how could it be known to be
   Christ? The shape and features were the same, only a new and wonderful
   splendour put upon them.

   [3.] This new and wonderful splendour was not in imagination and
   appearance only, but real and sensible. If it had been in imagination,
   show, and appearance, it would make Christ like those deceivers who
   would dazzle the eyes of beholders with a false appearance, as magical
   impostors, or those apish imitators of divine glory; as Herod Agrippa,
   of whom we read, Acts xii. 21-23, how he appeared in royal state and
   made an oration, and they said, The voice of a God, and not of a man.'
   Josephus telleth us the manner, how he sat in the sun with glistering
   garments of cloth of silver, and when the sun beams did beat upon it,
   the people cried him up as krei'ttona tes thne'tes phu'seos, as
   something higher and more excellent than a mortal creature. No; this
   was not a phantastical representation, but a real impression of divine
   glory on the body of Christ.

   [4.] Although this appeared in the face chiefly, as the most
   conspicuous part of the body,--the text saith his face did shine as the
   sun, yet more or less the other parts of his body were clothed with
   majesty and glory, and thence was the splendour derived to his
   garments.

   2. How his body transfigured differed from his glorified body. This
   must be stated also, for Christ, by his transfiguration, was not
   admitted into the fulness of the state of glory, but only giveth some
   glimpse and resemblance of it. These two estates agree in the general
   nature, but some clarity, glory, and majesty is put upon Christ's
   glorified body that was not now. But the difference is:--

   [1.] Partly in the degree and measure; the clarity and majesty of
   Christ's glorified body is greater and more perfect. Here is a
   representation, some delineation, but not a full exhibition of His
   heavenly glory.

   [2.] Partly in continuance and permanency. This change was not
   perpetual, but to endure for a short time only, for it ceased before
   they came down from the mount.

   [3.] The subject or seat of this glory differed, the body of Christ
   being then corruptible and mortal, but now incorruptible and immortal.
   If Christ's body had been immortal and impassible, then Christ could
   not die.

   [4.] Here are garments, and a glorified body shall have no other
   garments than the robes of immortality and glory in heaven. Christ
   shall be clothed with light as with a garment.

   Secondly, The ends of it. By this transfiguration God would show:--

   1. What Christ was.

   2. What he should be; and also,

   3. What we shall be.

   1. What Christ was. The dignity of his person and office. That he was
   the eternal Son of God, and the mediator of the new covenant; the great
   prophet whom God would raise up to his people.

   [1.] The dignity of His person was seen, for the transfiguration was a
   ray of the divine glory. It was not the addition of any glory to Christ
   which he had not before, but a manifestation of the glory which he had,
   though obscured under the veil of our flesh; for the fulness of the
   Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. ii. 9, And we beheld his glory, as
   the glory of the only-begotten Son of God.' John i. 14. But it is said,
   2 Pet. i. 17, that he received from God the same honour and glory. This
   is spoken of him as mediator; the glory of the Son of God incarnate was
   so obscured, for our sakes, that he needed this solemn act to represent
   him to the world.

   [2.] His office: the great prophet of the church, Hear ye him.' A
   greater prophet than Moses. Moses saw the face of God, but he was in
   the bosom of God. Moses, his face shone, but not as Christ's, for it
   could be hidden by a veil; Christ darts his glory through his garments.
   Moses, his shining was terrible; Christ's was comfortable--the apostles
   were loath to lose the sight of it.

   2. To show what Christ should be; for this was a pledge with what glory
   he should come in his kingdom, Mat. xvi. 27: it prefigured the glory of
   his second coming. Thus, for the confirmation of their faith, Christ
   would give his disciples a glimpse of his glory; he knew they would be
   sorely assaulted and shaken by the ignominy of his cross. But what is
   all this to us? We see not his glory.

   [1.] What was once done and sufficiently attested needs not to be
   repeated; but it is a great satisfaction to us that we have a glorious
   head and chief; when we suffer for him we need not be ashamed of our
   sufferings. The apostles urge this concerning us as well as them.

   [2.] The immediate manifestations of him who dwelleth in light
   inaccessible would undo us while we are in our mortal bodies. Blessed
   be God that he hath chosen fit means to reveal himself to us, that we
   may behold the glory of the Lord in a glass, 2 Cor. iii. 18, by the
   ministry of the word and other ordinances. The Israelites were sensible
   how little they could endure him who is, as it were, all sun, and all
   light, and all fire: Exod. xx. 18, 19, Let not God speak to us, lest we
   die.' Elijah wrapt his face in a mantle when God appeared unto him, 1
   Kings xix. 13; when Christ appeared to Paul from heaven he trembled and
   was astonished, and was three days without sight, as you may see, Acts
   ix. 9. There was a special reason why an apostle should see him in
   person.

   [3.] We shall see this glory when fit for it: John xvii. 24, Father, I
   will that they whom thou hast given me may be with me where I am, that
   they may behold my glory which thou hast given me.' The queen of Sheba
   took a long journey to behold the glory of Solomon, that was but a
   temporal, fading, and earthly glory. Now much more transcendent is the
   glory of Christ's body in heaven; this we shall see to all eternity.

   3. To show what we shall be; for Christ is the pattern, primum in
   unoquoque genere, &c.

   [1.] It showeth the possibility of our having a glorified body. When
   the Lord is pleased to let forth and communicate his glory, he is able
   to adorn and beautify our earthly and obscure bodies. The body of man
   in its composition hath a great mixture of earth, which is dark and
   obscure. Now God can make this clod of earth to shine as the star or
   sun for brightness: Phil. iii. 21, Who shall change our vile body, that
   it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
   working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.' We are apt
   to say, How can it be? If we consider the infinite and absolute power
   of God, and this instance of Christ, it will make it more reconcilable
   to your thoughts, and this hard point will be of easier digestion to
   your faith.

   [2.] The certainty of it, as well as the possibility; for Christ
   assumed our body, not for passion only, but for glorification, that
   therein he might be an instance and pattern to us. For if the head be
   glorious, so will the members also. How base soever the people of God
   seem to be in this world, yet in the life to come they shall be
   wonderfully glorious: Mark xiii. 43, The righteous shall shine as the
   sun in the kingdom of their father.' So Col. iii. 3, 4, Now our life is
   hidden with Christ, but when he who is our life shall appear, we shall
   appear with him in glory;' 1 John iii. 2, When he shall appear we shall
   be like him, for we shall see him as he is;' 2 Thes. i. 10, Christ
   shall be glorified in his saints, and admired in all them that
   believe.' All these places show we shall be partakers of this glory.

   [3.] The manner. Glorification taketh not away the substance and
   natural properties of the body, for there is a glorious
   transfiguration, but no abolition of the substance of Christ's body; it
   was the same body of Christ before and after transfiguration. Glory
   freeth us from natural infirmities, but it doth not strip us of natural
   properties. Christ hath showed in his own body what he can or will
   perform in ours--these same bodies, but otherwise adorned, touto to`
   soma tes tapeino'seos: and with these eyes shall I see God.' Job xix.
   26, 27: Touto to` phtharto`n, This corruptible must put on
   incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality,' 1 Cor. xv. 53.

   Use 1. Be transformed that you may be transfigured: Be ye transformed
   by the renewing of your minds,' Rom. xii. 2. The change must begin in
   the soul (2 Cor. iii. 18), and thence it is conveyed to the body. The
   lustre of grace maketh way for the splendour of glory: Prov. iv. 18,
   The path of the just is as the shining light, which shineth more and
   more to the perfect day.' The way of the wicked is an increasing
   darkness--ignorance, sin, outer darkness.

   2. Be contented to be like Christ in reproaches, disgraces, and neglect
   in the world, that you may be like him in glory. Bear the reproach of
   Christ: Heb. xiii. 13, Let us go forth therefore unto him without the
   camp, bearing his reproach;' Heb. xi. 26, Esteeming the reproach of
   Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.' Prefer it before
   all earthly honour: Acts v. 41, And they departed from the council,
   rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name;'
   and 2 Sam. vi. 22, I will yet be more vile and base in my own sight.'
   Your Lord is a glorious Lord, and he can put glory upon you.

   3. To wean our hearts from all human and earthly glory. What is a
   glorious house to the palace of heaven, glorious garments to the robes
   of immortality? The glory of Christ should put out the glory of these
   petty stars that shine in the world, as the sun puts out the fire. We
   have higher things to mind; it is not for eagles to catch flies, or
   princes to embrace the dunghill.

   4. Since this glory is for the body, do not debase the body, to make it
   an instrument of sin: 1 Thes. iv. 4, Possess your vessels in
   sanctification and honour.' Do not offend God to gratify the body, as
   they do, Rom. xiv. 13, who make provision for the flesh to fulfil the
   lusts thereof.' Do not spare the body to do God service: Acts xxvi. 7,
   Unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and
   night, hope for to come; for which hope's sake, King Agrippa, I am
   accused of the Jews:' 2 Cor. vii. 1, Having therefore these promises,
   dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the
   flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.'
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON III.

   And behold there appeared unto him Moses and Elias talking with
   him.--Mat. XVII. 3; with,

   And behold there talked with him two men, Moses and Elias, who appeared
   in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at
   Jerusalem.--Luke IX. 30, 31.

   HAVING spoken of Christ's transfiguration, we come now to speak of
   those special accidents and adjuncts which happened at the time of his
   transfiguration. Here are two mentioned:--

   1. The extraordinary apparition of Moses and Elias.

   2. Their conference with our Saviour.

   In the first:--

   1. The persons who appeared: Moses and Elias.

   2. The manner of their appearing. Luke saith, They appeared in glory.'
   Since the scripture affixeth a behold, or note of attention, wherever
   this history is mentioned, it will not be unprofitable for us to
   consider it a little.

   First, Who appeared: Moses and Elias. These were there in person, as
   well as Christ was there in person; for it is not a vision, but a thing
   really done and transacted. Christ would have but two, being to give us
   a glimpse only, not the full lustre and splendour of his glory and
   majesty, as he will at the last day, when he shall come in the glory of
   the Father, and all his holy angels with him.

   But why these two?

   1. With respect to the gospel or new law which he was to set up, it is
   for the confirmation thereof that Moses and Elias appear talking with
   him, showing the harmony and agreement between them, and the
   subordination of their dispensation to Christ and salvation by him.
   Moses was the person by whom the law was given, and Elias was a
   principal prophet. The law is represented by Moses, and the prophets by
   Elias. Both did frequently foretell and prefigure the death and
   resurrection of Christ, and all the scripture which was then writ ten
   was usually called by this term, law and prophets: Acts xxiv. 14,
   Believing all things that are written in the law and the prophets;' and
   Mat. xi. 13, For all the law and the prophets prophesied until John;'
   Luke xvi. 24, They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them;' so
   Acts xxvi. 22, I witness no other things than those which Moses and the
   prophets say should come to pass;' so Mark vii. 11, Whatsoever ye would
   that men should do to you, do you the same to them, for this is the law
   and the prophets.' Well, then, the books of the Old Testament are
   frequently and solemnly thus called law and prophets; the Messiah was
   spoken of and foretold in both, and the godly before his coming waited
   for him as such. One place I had almost forgotten: Rom. iii. 21, The
   righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by
   the law and the prophets.' Which showeth that not only the person of
   Christ was set forth, but also his institution and gospel dispensation.
   Well, to manifest this consent, here is law and prophets, Moses and
   Elias friendly conferring with Christ, or rather attending upon him, as
   servants upon their Lord. Christ and Moses, Christ and the prophets,
   are not at variance, as the Jews suppose, but here is a fair agreement
   betwixt them.

   2. With respect to the persons themselves, there are many special
   reasons. These had been the most faithful and laborious servants of the
   Lord, and public eminent instruments of his glory: Moses a giver of the
   law. and Elias a restorer of the law; Moses faithful in all the house
   of God, and Elias zealous for the glory of God. Both had ventured their
   lives: Moses by encountering Pharaoh, and Elias Ahab. Both had seen the
   glory of God in Mount Horeb, and spake with God also: Moses, Exod.
   xxxiii. 11, He saw the Lord face to face, and spake with him as a man
   doth with his friend;' and Elias, 1 Kings xix. Both had fasted forty
   days, as Christ also did; therefore conveniently were these chosen.

   3. With respect to our profit and instruction, Christ would not choose
   two angels for this service, but two men. Here the business was not to
   see glorified spirits, but glorified bodies; therefore the angels,
   having no bodies of their own, and must appear in assumed bodies, if in
   any, are not fit; therefore two men that had bodies wherein they might
   appear.

   But you will say, If two men must appear in glorified bodies, why not
   Enoch rather than Moses, who was translated into heaven, and remaineth
   there with a glorified body as well as Elias?

   Ans. Enoch had no public charge; Enoch lived before the legal
   dispensation. These both belonged to it, and were chief in it, of great
   authority among the Jews. Enoch hath an honourable testimony in the
   word of God, but had no public office and charge in the church, which
   the other two had, and managed with great fidelity. By the appearance
   of Moses the whole legal economy is supposed to appear in his person,
   and by the appearance of Elias the prophetical ministry, which was a
   kind of chancery to the law, is supposed to appear also. Both do, as it
   were, deliver over to Christ their whole dispensation, and lay it down
   at his feet, as the magistrates that are to go out of office solemnly
   resign the ensigns of their authority to him that succeedeth; and also
   they come both to reverence the majesty of their supreme Lord. In
   short, it is for our comfort that one that died, and one alive in
   glory, should come to show that Christ is Lord of quick and dead, Rom.
   xiv. 9. Moses was dead, Elias translated: these two come, the one to
   give a pledge of the glory of the world to come, the other of the
   resurrection of the dead, which is the way and introduction to it; and
   both these persons come to attend and adore our Saviour and do homage
   to him.

   Secondly, They appeared in glory, that is, in a corporeal shape,
   shining with brightness and glory as Christ's body did, bating only for
   the degree and proportion, that there might be a difference between the
   Lord and his servants. Now, whether they appeared in bodies formed and
   assumed for the present purpose, and to be laid down again, as we do
   our garments, or in their own proper bodies, is often disputed by
   interpreters, upon this occasion. That they appeared in bodies is
   certain, for bodily acts and properties are ascribed to them as their
   talking with Christ, their being seen by the apostles; for a spirit
   cannot be seen. If in bodies, why not their own? It is as easy to the
   Lord to cause them to appear in their own bodies as in a body assumed
   for this special purpose and service; and they were known by the
   disciples to be Moses and Elias. not by the external lineaments, for
   they never saw them in person before, but either were made known to
   them by some internal revelation, or by Christ's words, or by some
   words of Moses and Elias themselves; but which way soever they knew
   them, certain it is they knew them, and took them to be Moses and
   Elias, therefore Moses and Elias they were, both as to soul and body.
   The apostles that were admitted to this transfiguration were not to be
   deceived by a false appearance, for they were admitted to be confirmed
   in the truth of Christ's person and office, that by what they saw they
   might confirm others. How would it weaken the testimony if what they
   saw appearing before them in glory were not the bodies of Moses and
   Elias, but only other bodies assumed! Concerning Elias the matter is
   without difficulty, for since he saw not death, but was translated both
   body and soul into heaven, why should he lay down his own body and take
   another to come and serve Christ upon this occasion? Cause sufficient
   there was why he should come from the blessedness of heaven to Mount
   Tabor; no cause why he should lay aside his own proper body. It is no
   loss nor trouble, but advantage, to blessed and heavenly creatures to
   be serviceable to their Redeemer's glory, though it be to come out of
   the other into this world. But concerning Moses the matter is more
   doubtful. We read that he died in Mount Nebo, and his body was buried
   by God in the plains of Moab, so that his grave was known to no man
   unto this day, Deut. xxxiv. 5, 6. Some think it was preserved from
   putrefaction by the extraordinary power of God, that he might resume it
   at this time. The Jews say that God sucked out Moses's soul from his
   body with a kiss, and afterwards restored it again, and so he liveth in
   immortality; but he that looketh for divinity among the Jewish rabbins
   will much sooner find a ridiculous fable than any sound doctrine.
   Suffice it to us that he was really dead and buried, and his body
   mouldered into dust as our bodies are, and now, on this special
   occasion, raised out of the dust; but after this, whether it were laid
   down in dust again or carried into heaven, it is not for us to deter
   mine: it may be either, according to the analogy of the Christian
   faith. If his body returned to corruption again, surely it is a great
   honour that it was raised up for this special use: I say it was a great
   joy to these prophets to see all their predictions fulfilled in Christ.
   If we say it entered into glory, what inconvenience was there if God
   would indulge him this peculiar prerogative, to be raised from the dead
   and enjoy blessedness both in soul and body before the last day? He
   granted it to Enoch and Elias, and those who came out of their graves
   after Christ's death, Mat. xxvii. 53: the great harvest is at the last
   day, but some first-fruits before.

   Secondly, Their conference with our Saviour: they talked with him.'
   saith Matthew; they spake of his decease which he should accomplish at
   Jerusalem,' saith Luke. They talked with Christ, not with the apostles.
   Here is an apparition to them, but no parley and intercourse between
   them and the glorified saints. The saints that are glorified are out of
   the sphere of commerce of the living; nay, it is a question whether
   they heard at all what was said to Christ; but of that in the next
   verse.

   Here observe three things:--

   1. What they spake of Christ's death.

   2. The notion by which his death is set forth: it is e'xodos.

   3. The necessity of undergoing it, in the word plerein, which he should
   accomplish at Jerusalem.'

   1. What they spake of none could divine, unless it had been told us,
   and the evangelist Luke telleth us that it was of his death. This
   argument was chosen:--

   [1.] Because it was at hand. The next solemn mediatory action after
   this was his death and bloody sufferings. After he was transfigured in
   the mount he went down to suffer at Jerusalem.

   [2.] This was an offence to the apostles, that their master should die:
   Mat. xvi. 22, 23, Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying,
   Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee.'

   [3.] This was the Jews' stumbling-block: 1 Cor. i. 23, We preach Christ
   crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block.'

   [4.] This was prefigured in the rites of the law, foretold in the
   writings of the prophets. In the figures of the law it was represented:
   Heb. ix. 22, And almost all things are by the law purged with blood,
   and without the shedding of blood there is no remission;' especially
   the apostle urgeth the entering of the high priest with blood to the
   mercy-seat, ver. 23, 24. All the legal sacrifices were slain, and their
   blood brought before the Lord. So the predictions of the prophets: Isa.
   liii. 10, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to
   grief, when thou shalt make thy soul an offering for sin.' &c.; and
   Dan. ix. 26, The Messias shall be cut off, but not for himself.' In
   short, that Christ should die for the sins of the world, was the great
   thing represented in the law and prophets. Rabbi Simeon and Rabbi
   Hadersim out of Daniel, that after Messias had preached half seven
   years he shall be slain.

   [5.] It was necessary that by death he should come to his glory, of
   which now some glimpse and foretaste was given to him: Luke xxiv. 46,
   Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and rise from
   the dead the third day'--that is, with respect to the predictions; ver.
   44, All those things which were written in the law of Moses, and the
   prophets, and the book of Psalms, concerning me may be fulfilled;' and
   again, Luke xxiv. 25, 26, Oh fools, and slow of heart to believe all
   that the prophets have spoken! ought not Christ to have suffered these
   things, and to have entered into his glory?'

   [6.] The redemption of the church by Christ is the talk and discourse
   we shall have in heaven; the angels and glorified spirits are blessing
   and praising him for this: Rev. v. 9, Thou art worthy, for thou wert
   slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood.' The angels, ver. 12,
   Worthy is the lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and
   wisdom, and strength, and glory, and honour, and blessing.' The
   redeemed church, and glorified saints and angels, have all one song,
   and one praise--the honour of the Lamb that was slain.

   [7.] It is an instructive pattern to us, that Christ, in the midst of
   his transfiguration, and the glory which was then put upon him, forgot
   not his death. In the greatest advancements we should think of our
   dissolution. If Christ in all his glory discoursed of his death, surely
   it more becometh us, as necessary for us to prevent the surfeit of
   worldly pleasures, we should think of the change that is coming; for
   Surely every man at his best estate is vanity.' Ps. xxxix. 5. In some
   places they were wont to present a death's head at their solemn feasts.
   Merry days will not always last, death will soon put an end to the vain
   pleasures we enjoy here, and the most shining glory will be burnt out
   to a snuff.

   2. The notion by which his death is expressed: his decease, e'xodon,
   which signifies the going out of this life into another, which is to be
   noted:--

   [1.] In respect unto Christ his death was e'xodos, for he went out of
   this mortal life into glory, and so it implieth both his suffering
   death and also his resurrection: Acts ii. 24, God hath raised him up,
   having loosed the pains of death, because it was impossible he should
   be holden of it.' The grave was like a woman ready to be delivered; it
   suffered throes till this blessed burden was egested.

   [2.] With respect to us. Peter calls his death exodon: 2 Pet. i. 15, I
   will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease.' The death of the
   godly is a going out but from sin and sorrow to glory and immortality,
   as Israel's going out of Egypt (whence the second Book of Moses is
   called Exodus) was no destruction and cessation of their being, but a
   going out of the house of bondage into liberty. Paul saith, I desire to
   be dissolved,' analusai, Phil. i. 23--a setting sail for the other
   world. In scripture language the body is the house, the soul is the
   inhabitant: 2 Cor. v. 1, We know that if our earthly house of this
   tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
   with hands, eternal in the heavens.' The soul dwelleth in the body as a
   man in a house, and death is but a departure out of one house into
   another--not an extinction, but a going from house to house.

   3. The necessity of undergoing it, in the word plerein. This word
   accomplish noteth three things:--

   [1.] His mediatorial duty, with a respect to God's ordination and
   decree declared in the prophecies of the Old Testament, which when they
   are fulfilled are said to be accomplished. Whatsoever Christ did in the
   work of redemption was with respect to God's will and eternal decree:
   Acts iv. 28, To do whatsoever thy hand and counsel determined before to
   be done.' Now this was the more binding, being it was a declared
   counsel in the prophecies and figures of the Old Testament, therefore
   Christ cried out at his death, John xix. 30, It is finished,' or
   accomplished--meaning principally that the prophecies, and figures, and
   types which prefigured his death were all now accomplished.

   [2.] His voluntary submission, which he should accomplish,' noteth his
   active and voluntary concurrence. It is an active word, not passive,
   not to be fulfilled upon him, but by him; for though his death in
   regard of his enemies was violent and enforced, yet he voluntarily
   underwent it for our sakes; no man could have taken his life from him
   unless he had laid it down, John x. 18; it was not forced upon him, but
   he yielded to it by a voluntary dispensation. As to men, it was an act
   of violence; but as to his Father, it was an act of obedience; as to
   us, an act of love. On Christ's part his enemies could not have touched
   him against his will, as indeed they cannot also one hair of our heads
   but as God permitteth.

   [3.] That it was the eminent act of his humiliation, for this cause he
   assumed human nature. His humiliation began at his birth, continued in
   his life, and was accomplished in dying: all was nothing without this,
   for less could not serve the turn than the death of the Son of God.
   Then all sufferings were undergone which were necessary to take away
   sin; therefore there is a consummation or perfection attributed to the
   death of Christ: Heb. x. 14, By one offering he hath perfected for ever
   them that are sanctified.' There is done enough to expiate sin, to open
   a way to heaven and happiness. This accomplisheth all that is necessary
   by way of merit and satisfaction.

   Now what shall we learn from hence, for surely such solemn actions of
   Christ were not in vain?

   I. A notable argument to confirm the Christian faith, namely, the
   consent between the law and the prophets and Christ; for Moses and
   Elias are all Christ's ministers and servants, agreeing in one with
   him, and therefore appear at his transfiguration, where he is
   proclaimed to be the beloved Son of God, and the great doctor of the
   church, whom all are bound to hear under pain of damnation.

   I will prove two things:--

   First, The necessity of this appearance, both to the Jews and us
   Gentiles.

   1. To the Jews in that age; for there were three opinions concerning
   Christ. Some had a blasphemous opinion of him, as if he were an
   imposter, and called him Samaritan and devil. So the chief priests and
   Pharisees, Mat. xxvii. 63, We remember that that deceiver said, while
   he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again;' and Mat. xii.
   24, This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince
   of the devils.' Generally they looked upon him as an enemy to Moses:
   John ix. 29, We know that God spake to Moses; as for this fellow, we
   know not whence he is.' Others had a more moderate opinion, who were
   alarmed by his miracles, and convinced by his holiness: Mark vi. 14-16,
   Some said it is Elias, others said it is a prophet, Jeremias, or one of
   the prophets; but Herod said it is John whom I beheaded, who is risen
   from the dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in
   him.' Herod's conscience could not digest John's murder, therefore he
   twice saith it is John, it must needs be John. The third opinion was
   that of the disciples, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,'
   John vi. 69. Now, to set all at rights, to confute the blasphemous
   Jews, to rectify the moderate Jews, to confirm the disciples, here come
   Moses and Elias to justify him. They would not have owned him if a
   blasphemer and imposter, nor have come from heaven to honour him and do
   him homage if he had been an ordinary prophet; therefore they appear in
   glory, and talk with him of his death.

   2. With respect to the modern Jews, and us Gentiles, this apparition
   was necessary to confirm us in the faith both of Christ's person and
   office; that he was the great teacher sent from heaven to make known
   the way of salvation to lapsed mankind; and Moses and Elias must be
   hereafter silent. Now the great prophet and doctor of the church is
   brought forth; and no other revelation or dispensation is to be
   expected or regarded, now he is brought forth. There is need that this
   should be sufficiently evidenced, partly because Christ had the law of
   Moses to repeal, which was well known to the Jews to be God's own law,
   else they and every true subject of God might refuse to obey him:
   partly because he had a new law to promulgate, even the law of faith
   and gospel ordinances, and so must manifest his authority before they
   can be received and submitted unto with that firm assent and consent
   which is necessary: partly because he himself was to be received and
   entertained as the Redeemer of the world, who had expiated our sins by
   his decease at Jerusalem, which was a new work, yet man's salvation lay
   upon it. And his death there was clouded with many prejudices; for they
   put him to death as a false prophet, guilty of blasphemy and sedition.
   Therefore it needed to be made manifest that such a man of sorrows,
   reckoned among transgressors, was the Saviour and Redeemer of the
   world.

   Secondly, The sufficiency of this evidence. For if Moses and Elias
   appear in glory to countenance this dispensation, and declare their
   hearty concurrence and consent, there is no reason Jew or Gentile
   should scruple it. If Moses the lawgiver, and Elias, so zealous for the
   law, consent, why should the Jews refuse the gospel so agreeable to
   their dispensation, or the Gentiles question a doctrine so long ago
   manifested to the church by God, long before Christ and his apostles
   were in being? Those that lived in so many different ages could not lay
   their heads together to cheat the world with an untruth. There is a
   double argument maybe drawn hence:

   1. The matter of fact. Moses and Elias did appear to witness their
   consent. Now this dependeth upon the testimony of the apostles present,
   whose testimony was by other means ratified and made valuable: 2 Pet.
   i. 16-18, For we have not followed cunningly-devised fables, when we
   made known unto you the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
   eye-witnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father
   honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
   excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And
   this voice which came from heaven we heard when we were with him in the
   holy mount.'

   2. Their consent in doctrine, which is obvious in all their writings.
   The apostles related nothing concerning Christ but what Moses and the
   prophets had foretold, and what was history in the New Testament was
   prophecy in the Old, either as to the person of Christ, or as to his
   kingdom the duties and privileges thereof: John v. 39, Search the
   scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
   they that testify of me.' So ver. 45-47, Do not think that I will
   accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuseth you, even Moses,
   in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me,
   for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how will ye
   believe my words?' The Old Testament beareth witness of Christ's
   person, natures, offices, birth, life, sufferings, and the glory that
   should ensue: 2 Pet. i. 19-21, We have also a more sure word of
   prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as to a light that
   shineth in a dark place, till the day dawn, and the day-star arise in
   your hearts. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is
   of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by
   the will of men, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the
   Holy Ghost.' The apostles taught the same things the prophets had
   written, only applied them to Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had
   crucified, that they might know that he was Lord and Christ. The
   heathens take notice that at that time when Christ appeared, there was
   Vetus et constans fama (Sueton.); Ex antiquis sacerdotum libris
   (Tacitus)--that their King, Messiah, should come.

   Use 1. For confutation of the Jews, and to show their obstinacy in not
   receiving Christ as the Messiah. God had told Moses, Deut. xviii. 18, I
   will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee;
   and will put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all
   that I shall command him; and whosoever will not hearken unto him, I
   will require it of him;' which cannot be under stood of any other
   prophet but Christ the Messiah; for it is said, Deut. xxxiv. 10, 11,
   There arose not a prophet in Israel like unto Moses, who knew the Lord
   face to face, in all the miracles and wonders which the Lord sent him
   to do.' But the Messias doth match and overmatch him. He was a man as
   Moses was; for the promise was made on that occasion, Let me hear the
   voice of the Lord God no more, nor see this great fire, that we die
   not.' Saith God, They have well spoken: I will raise up a prophet like
   unto thee from among their brethren.' He must be a lawgiver as Moses,
   but of a more perfect law; he must be such an one as should see God
   face to face; he is of a divine nature, approved to the world by
   miracles, signs, and wonders. As Moses was, so Christ. Moses divided
   the sea as dry land, Christ walked upon it; Moses healed the bitter
   waters that were sick, Christ raised the dead. All the prejudice is,
   that he changed the law of Moses into the rites and institutes of the
   Christian religion. Ans. That was necessary, the substance being once
   come, that the shadows and ceremonies should be abolished; and besides,
   these were proper and peculiar to one nation in the world, namely,
   Judea; the exercise permitted but in one only place of that country,
   namely, Jerusalem, whither they were all to repair three times each
   year. But the Messiah's law was to be common to all men serves for all
   countries, times, places, persons, for he was to be the light of the
   Gentiles, as well as the glory of his people Israel. How should nations
   so far distant from Jerusalem repair thrice every year? or a woman
   dwelling in England or America repair thither for purification after
   every childbirth? Lev. xii. When Moses delivered the law to them: Deut.
   xviii. 15, The Lord thy God will raise thee up a prophet like unto me,
   unto him shalt thou hearken.' And the prophets, when they prophesy of
   his law: Isa. ii. 3, The law shall go forth out of Zion, and the word
   of God from Jerusalem.' Moses's law was published from Sinai, not from
   Sion; but the preaching of the gospel began at Jerusalem, and from
   thence was spread over all the world. Again it is said, Isa. xlii. 4,
   The isles shall wait for his law;' that is, the maritime countries. I
   pursue it no farther now.

   2. To us Christians. Our religion is true: oh, let us be true in the
   profession of it; otherwise it will little help us in the day of our ac
   counts: 2 Thes. i. 8, Taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
   that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.' You stand upon the
   vantage-ground, but are not taller in stature than heathens and Jews.
   Disciples in name, not in deed: John viii. 31, If ye continue in my
   words, then are ye my disciples indeed:' Christians of letter, not of
   the spirit. Oh, reverence Christ, if Moses and Elias did him homage.
   When we have found truth, let us look after life; and having owned the
   true religion, express the power of it.

   II. The next thing we learn is the necessity and value of Christ's
   death. For Moses and Elias insist upon his decease at Jerusalem; which
   quite contradicteth the Jewish deceit, and establisheth the Christian
   hope. The death of Christ for our redemption is the great article of
   the Christian faith, the thing foretold and prefigured by law and
   prophets, Luke xxiv. 44; and the ground of our comfort and peace: Isa.
   liii. 4, 5, Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows;
   yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he
   was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities:
   the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are
   healed.'

   Let us consider:--

   1. The notions by which Christ's death is set forth.

   2. The necessity of it.

   First, The notions by which Christ's death is set forth. Two solemn
   ones: a ransom, and a mediatorial sacrifice.

   1. A ransom, lutron anti pollon, Mat. xx. 28; antilutron, 1 Tim. ii. 6,
   Who gave himself a ransom for all.' A ransom is a price given to a
   judge, or one that hath power of life and death, for to save the life
   of one capitally guilty, or by law bound to suffer death, or some other
   evil and punishment. This was our case: God was the supreme judge,
   before whose tribunal man standeth guilty, and liable to death; but
   Christ interposed that we might be spared, Job xxxiii. 24, Deliver him
   from going down to the pit, for I have found a ransom.' There is a
   price or recompense given in our stead.

   2. A mediatorial sacrifice: Isa. liii. 3, When thou shalt make his soul
   an offering for sin;' Eph. v. 2, Christ hath loved us, and hath given
   himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling
   savour.' He hath undertook the expiation of our sins, and the
   propitiating of God. God's provoked justice would not acquit the
   controversy it had against us till it were appeased by a proper
   sacrifice: 1 John ii. 2, He is the propitiation for our sins.'

   Secondly, The necessity of it.

   1. The sins and guilty fears of mankind needeth such a remedy. We are
   naturally sensible that the punishment of death is deserved and due to
   us by the law of God: Rom. i. 32, They which commit such things are
   worthy of death.' Now these fears are not easily appeased: Micah vi. 6,
   7, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the
   high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of
   a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with
   ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my first-born for my
   transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?' Christ
   came and died to free us from them, that we might serve God cheerfully:
   Heb. ii. 14, 15, Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of
   flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, that through
   death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the
   devil;' Heb. ix. 14, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
   through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
   your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God?'

   2. The glory of God requires it:--

   [1.] To declare his justice: Rom. iii. 25, 26, Whom God hath set forth
   to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
   righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
   forbearance of God: to declare, I say, at this time his righteousness;
   that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in
   Jesus.' If God will pardon sin, there must be a fit means to keep up
   the honour of his justice, and the authority of his law; for sin is not
   a wrong done to a private party offended, but a disobedience to
   authority, and disturbeth the order of government.

   [2.] To declare his holiness, that he is a pure and holy God, hating
   sin. This was demonstrated in the sufferings of Christ, and the dear
   rate at which it was expiated; for if this was done in the green tree,
   what shall be done in the dry?

   Use 1. Oh, then, be affected with this great mystery, the death which
   the Son of God accomplished at Jerusalem; look upon it under a double
   notion. With respect to his Father's command, it was an act of
   obedience, carried on with such humility, patience, self-denial,
   resignation of himself to God, charity, pity, as the like cannot be
   done by man or angel: Rom. v. 19, By the obedience of one many were
   made righteous;' Phil. ii. 8, He humbled himself, and became obedient
   to death, even the death of the cross.' This commendeth obedience to
   us. It was an act of love: Gal. ii. 20, Who loved me, and gave himself
   for me;' Rev. i. 5, To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins
   in his blood.' He thought no price too dear for our salvation. Let us
   love him, again, who loved us first: 1 John iv. 19, We love him,
   because he first loved us;' and be contented to suffer with him and for
   him, that we may enter into his glory: Rom. viii. 17, If so be that we
   suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.' if he call us
   thereunto.

   2. Feel the virtue of it in heart and conscience. In heart: by our
   dying to sin, then we are planted into the likeness of his death, Rom.
   vi. 5. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
   affections and lusts thereof,' Gal. v. 24; Who his own self bare our
   sins in his body on the tree, that we, being dead to sin, should live
   unto righteousness.' Then glory in it: Gal vi. 14, God forbid that I
   should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
   world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.' In conscience: 1 John
   v. 10, He that believeth in the Son of God hath the witness in
   himself,' &c.; Heb. xii. 24, And to Jesus, the mediator of the new
   covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things
   than the blood of Abel'--doth it appease our guilty fears, and purge
   our consciences from the stain and guilt of sin.

   III. The state of future glory and felicity.

   1. The dead in the Lord are not perished, but live for ever with God in
   heaven; for here they appear long after their departure hence: Luke xx.
   38, He is not the God of the dead, but of the living; for all live unto
   him.' They all live to God. Though they are gone out of the sphere of
   our commerce, they have another life with God. Now fix this in your
   hearts, for many carry it so as if there were no immortality or life to
   come: we do not vanish into the air when we die. Moses is somewhere,
   and Elias somewhere, in the hand of God, and can appear when God will
   have them.

   2. The saints appeared in a true, and in their own bodies, to establish
   the faith of the resurrection; their bodies were reserved for this use.
   One of them was already in glory in soul and body, the other now raised
   out of the dust after many years' burial. And why cannot God gather up
   our dust again and enliven it, that we may accompany Christ at his
   coming?

   3. This instance showeth also the degrees of glory. All the saints have
   their portion in bliss, but not a just equality. Moses and Elias
   appeared in glory, not Enoch; nor were any of the rest admitted to this
   solemnity. Here were three choice disciples, when the rest stood at a
   remote distance; so two glorified saints, but the rest not admitted to
   this honour, but stood waiting for his glorious ascension. There is
   difference on earth in the worldly state--some have greater riches,
   honours, and dignity than others; difference in the church, both in
   gifts and graces; yea, a difference in hell--some have a hotter, others
   a cooler punishment. So in heaven, according to eminency in holiness
   and faithfulness with God; otherwise there would not be a suitableness
   in God's dispensations.

   4. The perfect subjection of the glorified spirits to the will of God,
   either to remain in the vision of God, or to be employed in the service
   of their Redeemer. We should think that a self-denial which they count
   an happiness, to come from heaven to Mount Tabor; they take up or lay
   down a body as God pleaseth. Heaven is a state not only of perfect
   happiness, but of exact conformity to God.

   5. We shall have the company of the blessed saints in heaven. The
   disciples here did not only enjoy the company and sight of Christ, but
   the company and sight of Moses and Elias, being glorified saints. So in
   the heavenly life: Mat. viii. 11, it is made a part of our blessedness
   in the kingdom of God to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;' and
   Heb. xii. 23, Ye are come to the general assembly and church of the
   first-born, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all,
   and to the spirits of just men made perfect.' Here we are joined to
   them by faith and hope; there by sight and fellowship. The company of
   wicked men is now grievous and tedious to us, Ezek. ii. 6; but we shall
   have better company hereafter. Here we often part with our choicest
   friends and acquaintance, but there we shall meet and never part more.
   It is not to be imagined but that we shall have the comfort of our
   glorified fellow-creatures. The body hath its objects and felicity fit
   for a body.

   6. The saints shall know one another, as the disciples knew Moses and
   Elias, though not by countenance, having never seen them before, but by
   revelation. Christ told them who they were, and we who have known
   before our old acquaintance shall know them again. Memory is not
   abolished, but perfected; we shall make one body, one society. Now we
   shall not converse as strangers; Abraham knew Lazarus, Luke xvi. 25.
   Ministers, 1 Thes. ii. 19, What is our hope, or joy, or crown of
   rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at
   his coming?' Christ's argument, Luke xvi. 9, Make to yourselves friends
   of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive
   you into everlasting habitations.' Angels know not only themselves, but
   all the elect now; how else do they minister about them? They know the
   least believer: Mat. xviii. 10, Take heed that ye offend not one of
   these little ones, for I say unto you that in heaven their angels do
   always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.' And they are
   at length to gather them from the four winds: Mat. xiii. 41, The Son of
   man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his
   kingdom all things that do offend.'

   7. The conference of the blessed saints. We shall be with them,, speak
   to them, hear them speak to us, though not after an earthly manner. We
   have now bodies, and so tongues and lips, which are the instruments of
   speech; ears, which are the instruments of hearing. Now these would
   seem vain and to no purpose if there were no use of speech and hearing.
   It was a blessed thing for Peter, James, and John to stand by and hear
   the conference between Christ, Moses, and Elias: 1 Kings x. 8, Happy
   are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually
   before thee, and hear thy wisdom.' Much more may it be said here.

   Use. Well, then, Christian religion is true, Christ's death necessary,
   eternal life certain. Oh let our time, and hearts, and care be taken up
   about these great and glorious things; meditate on them, seek after
   them. First begin with the sureness of Christian doctrine, that you may
   lay a good foundation; that Christ is the teacher of the church, who
   hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel,' 2 Tim.
   i. 10; then penitently sue out your pardon, in the name of Christ,
   depending on the merit of his death; and make this eternal life and
   happiness your choice, and the scope of your life and conversation: 2
   Cor. iv. 18, While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
   things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal;
   but the things which are not seen are eternal.'
     __________________________________________________________________

  SERMON IV.

   Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be
   here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee,
   and one for Moses, and one for Elias.--Mat. XVII. 4; with,

   But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and when
   they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with
   him. And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto
   Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
   tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias; not
   knowing what he said.--Luke IX. 32, 33.

   WE are upon the adjuncts of Christ's transfiguration.

   The first was the appearance of Moses and Elias talking with him.

   The second is the entertainment which the apostles gave to this
   glorious dispensation, or their behaviour under it. Three things are
   observable:--

   1. Their posture for some while: and Peter and they that were with him
   were heavy with sleep.

   2. Peter's motion when they were awake: let us build here three
   tabernacles.

   3. The censure of it: not knowing what he said.

   First, Their posture after the transfiguration was begun: And Peter and
   they that were with him were heavy with sleep.' This sleep might arise
   either from a common natural cause, or from a special cause peculiar to
   this dispensation.

   1. A common natural cause, being tired with labour in ascending the
   mountain, for it was u'pselos li`an, exceeding high.' Or it was with
   watching, for they tarried there all night, and Christ continued long
   in prayer, and possibly being a little withdrawn from them, as in his
   agonies, he was transfigured before them.

   2. The special cause of this sleep was the extraordinary apparition, as
   the prophets often were in a deep sleep and trance when they saw the
   like: Dan. viii. 18, As the angel Gabriel was speaking to me, I fell
   into a deep sleep, with my face towards the ground.' Again, Dan. x. 9,
   When I heard his voice, then was I in a deep sleep.' So the prophet
   Zechariah, in the midst of his visions: Zech. iv. 1, The angel of the
   Lord wakened me as one in a deep sleep.' Any eminent passion causeth
   sleep, and they were astonished so with these visions and
   representations, that nature fainted under them, and they fell into a
   sleep; so the apostles seeing Christ, in the midst of fervent prayers,
   transfigured before them.

   Now, whether it came from the one cause or from the other, we must
   conclude this sleep was a weakness on their parts, but directed and
   overruled by God for just and wise reasons.

   1. It was a weakness and infirmity on their part, for questionless they
   were to attend with all vigilancy to this manifestation of our
   Saviour's glory, and observe the passages of it. Why else did he take
   them into the mountain apart, but as witnesses of it, as they were to
   watch in his agonies? So in his transfiguration. It was a fault then:
   Mat. xxvi. 40, When he cometh he findeth them asleep. What! could you
   not watch with me one hour?' But the best men are clogged with human
   infirmities, in the most glorious manifestations of God to them.

   2. The providence of God is to be observed in this sleep. That which
   came to pass through their fault was ordered by God's providence; for
   if they had been awake, they had heard all the discourse that passed
   between Christ and the two great prophets, which neither their present
   condition nor the state of the time did permit. Christ had told them
   that he should suffer an ignominious death, which they did not
   thoroughly understand; nor could they reconcile it with the present
   thoughts which they had of the Messiah; nor was it fit for them to hear
   all, how the death of Christ was foretold in the prophecies, prefigured
   in the sacrifices, shadowed out in all the rest of the types of the
   law, and sung of in the book of Psalms, to satisfy the justice of God,
   and open a way for his mercy and the gift of the Holy Spirit. Christ
   would not have the great work of his dying hindered, and these things
   they were not to learn from Moses and Elias, but he would teach them
   himself after the resurrection: Luke xxiv. 44-46, These are the words
   that I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must
   be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and in the
   prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. Then opened he their eyes
   that they might understand the scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it
   is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
   dead the third day.' And the full knowledge of them was reserved till
   the pouring out of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost. If they had
   heard them now, they would have begotten scruples and troublesome
   thoughts in their minds, and hindered the present service.

   Observe hence our weakness during the time we are environed with
   mortality, that we cannot bear up long under spiritual duties; either
   our hearts are soon overcharged with wonder and astonishment, or else
   we yield to natural infirmities. However, let it be a warning to us
   against sleepiness in the worship of God. It is true the best may be
   surprised with it, as here Christ's disciples. Yet it was a sin in them
   to be asleep when Christ was at prayers, and it is a sin God hath
   severely punished; witness Eutychus: Acts xx. 9, And there sat in the
   window a young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and
   as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from
   the third loft, and was taken up dead.' Mark, though the sermon
   continued till midnight, and it was a youth that slept, yet he fell
   down as dead. It was a small sin--a sin of infirmity--a boy's sin; yet
   God would leave this warning. I do not animadvert too severely upon
   this infirmity, only give you caution. Christ praying all night on
   Mount Tabor, this weakness prevailed on these choice apostles, and
   elsewhere during the time of Christ's agonies. Yet we are to strive
   against it, and be sure it may be said of us as of them: Mark xxvi. 41,
   The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.' Make conscience of
   avoiding this sin; do not compose yourselves to sleep; do not come to
   these duties spent with labours and worldly cares, nor clogged with
   excess of meat or drink, nor having defrauded ourselves of necessary
   refreshing by sleep, by vain pleasures the night before.

   Secondly, Their carriage when they were awake. When they awaked, they
   saw his glory, and the two men that stood with them; they saw Christ
   transfigured before they fell asleep, but I think they saw not Moses
   and Elias before, but now saw them, that they might give testimony of
   it to the church, not by common fame and hearsay, but as eye-witnesses;
   and they knew Moses and Elias either by information from Christ, or
   some secret instinct and revelation of the Spirit, or as hearing some
   part of the discourse, they heard enough to show what they were, or
   what the general matter of their discourse was. But that which is most
   remarkable is Peter's motion and proposal, It came to pass, as they
   departed from him--just as they were parting'--Peter said, Lord, it is
   good for us to be here: let us make three tabernacles; one for thee,
   one for Moses, and one for Elias.' He mentioned no distinct tabernacle
   for himself and fellow-disciples, because they would be with Christ,
   attending on their master in his tent.

   The motion in the general is rash, sudden, and unadvised; but being
   made by a good man, though under a passion, there is something good and
   something bad in it.

   1. That which was good in it is, he yet retaineth his reverence.

   [1.] That he submitteth his proposal to the judgment of his Lord and
   Master, wherein he expresseth his reverence of Christ--Lord, if thou
   wilt.' He desireth a continuance of this dispensation, leaveth it to
   his consent, acknowledging herein his wisdom and authority.

   [2.] It showeth the valuableness and felicity of conversing with Christ
   and the glorified saints; for when but two of them appear in glory,
   talking with Christ, Peter said it is good to be here, to continue and
   abide in this place together with thyself, Moses, and Elias. What a
   blessed dignity is this! The glory of heaven is so ravishing and
   satisfactory to the soul, that the soul can rest in the least glimpse
   and degree of it! If a glimpse, what is the fulness? If the splendour
   of his humanity not yet glorified be so great, what is the glory of his
   God head? If a sight of these things at a distance, what is the
   participation when the glory shall be revealed in us, or we shall
   appear with him in glory? If Moses and Elias, what is the company of
   all the saints and angels? If it be thus at Mount Tabor, what will it
   be in heaven, when all the world is renewed and refined, and the church
   gathered together in one great assembly?

   [3.] The nature of a state of glory, and how easily it maketh us to
   forget all things here below. Peter had a family, and household affairs
   to mind; for we read in the Gospel that his wife's mother was sick and
   cured by Christ: Mat. viii. 14. He had friends, and a brother called
   Andrew, who was one of the disciples of Christ, left below in the
   valley: John i. 40. Nay he forgot his own present condition of life,
   which could not long brook his remaining in that mountain, without the
   supply of food, and other necessaries. Now all this showeth that when
   we are translated to heaven, we shall be so ravished with that kind of
   life we shall have there, as that all sense and memory of things that
   we have left behind shall cease, as Peter being ravished with this
   sight and spectacle, thinketh not of kindred, friends, or household, or
   any kind of worldly comfort, but saith only, it is good to be here; so
   that it teacheth us that the delights of the other world make us forget
   all our concernments here below: all shall be forgotten and swallowed
   up in that heavenly delight we shall have there.

   2. That which was evil in it.

   [1.] That he mistook the nature of the present dispensation. This was
   to be a representation, not a fruition, to be transient and momentary;
   for confirmation, not possession; rather a viaticum, a bit by the way,
   than a feast. It was good and commendable to be affected with joy and
   delight in the presence and company of Christ, and Moses, and Elias,
   but it was not to be rested in as their full reward.

   [2.] If this request had taken place, the work of our redemption had
   been hindered. What had become of Christ's death and passion, which he
   should accomplish at Jerusalem? All our happiness dependeth on that,
   and if God should give way to our carnal desires, what mischief would
   ensue! If Christ had hearkened to him, he would not have gone up to
   Jerusalem to suffer, nor would any man living have dared to lay hands
   upon him while he continued in this glory and majesty.

   [3.] This request was injurious to Moses and Elias, that they should
   utterly forsake their heavenly mansions for an abode on earth, and
   therefore to desire their continuance there was to desire their loss.
   They were a little time to appear on earth with Christ, and then to
   return to their blessedness, or to the enjoyment of the sight of God in
   the third heavens.

   [4.] It was injurious to Christ. To hope to learn something from. Moses
   and Elias which Christ could not teach them, and to equal them with his
   Lord and Master, in building tabernacles for all three alike and
   without difference, was some lessening of his respect to Christ. If
   they were to learn anything from them, they were to consult the books,
   not the persons: Luke xvi. 29, They have Moses and the prophets; let
   them hear them.' And the desires of extraordinary means argueth a,
   contempt of ordinary.

   [5.] It was an error to imagine that tabernacles were necessary for
   Moses and Elias, who now appeared in such heavenly glory in the mount.
   They needed not earthly houses and tents to dwell in, to defend them
   from the injuries of the weather, neither had they such present
   conveniencies to prepare them.

   Thirdly, The censure of the Holy Ghost: Luke saith, not knowing what he
   said.' In Mark, chap ix. 6, He wist not what to say; for they were sore
   afraid.' They were words of a man in a rapture, or surprised with great
   astonishment. There were two affections, dazzled with the majesty of
   this glory, and transported with joy. There was also a great fright.
   Usually, ta` lu'pera phobera`, such things as bring a hurt, occasion
   fear, and also things of excellent glory; such as surpass our present
   meanness; as here the change of Christ's person, and the glorious
   appearance of the great prophets, so long since separated from the
   commerce of mankind.

   Observe, before we proceed, the inconvenience of great and excessive
   passions: they make us speak we know not what. Peter is an instance in
   scripture. Let us keep to him. You see him surprised with a great
   passion of fear, when at Christ's command a great draught of fish came
   to hand in an unlikely time: Luke v. 8, 9, Depart from me; for I am a
   sinful man, O Lord. For he was astonished, and all that were with him,
   at the draught of fishes that they had taken.' You find him at other
   times transported with a passion of excessive reverence or humility:
   John xiii. 8, Lord, thou shalt never wash my feet.' With a passion of
   love, or pity to his Master: Lord, let it be far from thee; this shall
   not be unto thee,' when his Master had foretold his death: Mat. xvi.
   22, in case of contempt of Christ. Here with a passion of joy or
   ravishment, or transport of soul, Lord, it is good for us to be here.'
   Now all these passions were religiously exercised; but it is dangerous
   when religion, which should bridle and govern our passions, is made the
   matter and fuel of them. Passionate joy, or passionate fear, passionate
   reverence, or passionate zeal, and anger, may easily transport us to
   some uncomely action or motion; for though in all these there was
   religion at top, yet sin at the bottom; and, therefore, you see how
   much it concerneth us to moderate and reduce ourselves to a due temper;
   for passion causeth us to do things without and against reason; yea, to
   speak and do we know not what; and when religious matters overheat our
   affections, we may err exceedingly.

   Now, having opened this part of the history, let us observe some thing
   that conduceth to our practical instruction.

   Doct. 1. That the state and condition of the glorified saints is a most
   delightful state and condition.

   For when Peter had but a glimpse of it in the transfiguration of
   Christ, it seemed so ravishing and transporting, that here would he
   abide and stay by it; so was he affected with joy in the company and
   presence of Christ, and Moses and Elias appearing with him, that all
   his natural comforts and relations were forgotten. This would
   compensate all. If once we be gotten into this blessed estate, we shall
   never desire to come out of it, and part with it. This which the
   disciples had was but a little glimpse and taste of the life to come.
   This must needs be so; it is called joy: Mat. xxv. 21, Enter thou into
   the joy of thy Lord;' and fulness of joy: Ps. xvi. 11, In thy presence
   there is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for ever
   more.' No better estate can be expected. The soul is at rest, as having
   obtained its end. And it is also proved by the privileges and benefits
   the saints shall enjoy in the world to come.

   1. A freedom from all evil, which here are matter of grief to us. And

   2. The fruition of all good, which may any way bring joy, and delight,
   and contentment.

   1. There is a freedom from all evil. There is a twofold evil, either of
   sin or punishment. In heaven there is neither sin nor misery.

   [1.] To begin with sin, that is the worst evil, because it maketh us
   hateful to God, and grieveth the saints most: Rom. vii. 24, Oh wretched
   man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?' If
   any man had cause to complain of afflictions, Paul much more, being
   often imprisoned, whipped, stoned; but his lusts troubled him more than
   scourges; and his captivity to the law of sin more than prisons. God's
   children are most weary of the world, because they are sinning here
   whilst others are glorifying of God, and enjoying God and the company
   of his blessed ones. Now in heaven there is no sin: Eph. v. 27, there
   is neither spot nor blemish, nor wrinkle on the face of the glorified
   saints. Their faces were once as black as yours, but now they are
   washed in the Lamb's blood and fully cleansed; now with much ado we
   mortify sin, but then it is nullified. But if we subdue the power of
   sin, we do not get rid of the being of it, but then we are rid of all
   at once--of all sin, and temptation to sin. There was a serpent, a
   tempter in Paradise, but there is none in heaven; the devil is shut
   out, and the old man is left in the grave never to rise more.

   [2.] There is not the least evil of affliction: Rev. xxi. 4, All tears
   shall be wiped away from their eyes.' Whatsoever is painful and
   burdensome to nature, is a fruit of sin, a brand and mark of our rebel
   lion against God. Therefore, when sin is done away, affliction, which
   is the fruit of it, is done away also. In hell there is evil, and only
   evil; in heaven, happiness, and only happiness. Here our wounds are
   healed, but the scars remain--something to put us in mind that we have
   sin yet dwelling in us; but there all the effects of it cease--there is
   neither death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain.

   2. They shall enjoy all good things, which shall bring joy and comfort
   to them. In blessedness there is a confluence of all good; our joys are
   full and eternal.

   [1.] There is the immediate sight and presence of God and Jesus Christ,
   who shall be all in all to them: 1 Cor. xiii. 12, Now we see through a
   glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; then shall I
   know as also I am known.' And John xvii. 24, Father, I will that they
   also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am; that they may
   behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before
   the foundation of the world.' We are brought into the presence of him
   who is blessedness itself.

   [2.] The society of all the blessed angels and saints glorified: Mat.
   viii. 11, Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down
   with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.'

   [3.] The perfection of all heavenly gifts both in soul and body.

   (1.) In soul: that is the heaven of heaven: 1 John iii. 2, Now are we
   the sons of God; but it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but this
   we know, that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall
   see him as he is;' Ps. xvii. 15, When I awake I shall be satisfied with
   thy image and likeness.' By knowing we come to love, and by loving God
   we know him. There is vision, assimilation, satisfaction. The object is
   efficacious, the intimation vigorous and clear, the subject prepared
   for the impression.

   (2.) In body: Phil. iii. 21, Who shall change our vile body, that it
   may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.' The body shall be endued
   with all glorious qualities, as brightness, strength, agility. It is a
   body wholly impassible and incorruptible, fit for the operations of a
   glorified soul, and with it shall for ever remain, a glorious temple of
   the Holy Ghost; therefore it is good to be here.

   Use 1. Let this draw forth our love to such a blessed estate, which is
   so full of delight and contentment, and wean us from these things which
   are most pleasing in the world.

   1. The best estate in the world is but vanity, altogether vanity, Ps.
   xxxix. 5, mingled with some grievances. Wealth hath its incident cares,
   and honour its tortures, and all pleasures here are but bitter sweets;
   there is a worm that feedeth on our gourd, and will in time wither it.
   At last death cometh, and then the lust of the world is gone: 1 John
   ii. 17, The world passeth away, and the lust thereof.' The godly
   themselves have but a mixed estate, because of remaining infirmities,
   they live here in a vale of tears and snares, and sin doth not gasp its
   last till death removeth us from this sinful flesh, and puts us into
   the sight of God himself. Wherefore the saints are groaning and longing
   for the parting day, when putting off the flesh we shall put off sin,
   and come and dwell with God for ever.

   2. None are translated into heaven but such whose hearts are there
   first: 2 Cor. v. 2, In this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed
   upon with our house which is from heaven;' Phil. i. 23, I desire to be
   dissolved and to be with Christ;' Rom. viii. 23, We that have the
   first-fruits of the Spirit groan within ourselves, waiting for the
   adoption, the redemption of our bodies.' A Christian waiteth and
   longeth for a purer state of bliss and immortality. The first-fruits
   show what the harvest will be, and a taste what the feast will prove;
   though they are thankful for this refreshing by the way, yet they are
   longing to be at home--cannot be contented without it.

   3. The excellency of this estate requireth it: if it be not worth your
   desires and best affections, it is little worth. Christ procured it for
   us by a life of labours and sorrows, and the pangs of a bitter, cursed
   death; and when all this is done shall not we desire it and look after
   it?--that is foul ingratitude. Oh then let your hearts be upon it;
   desire must go before delight.

   Use 2. To move us to labour for it, and seek it in the first place, and
   to get it assured that we have a part in this blessed and joyful
   condition: Mat. vi. 33, Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the
   righteousness thereof;' Luke xiii. 24, Strive to enter in at the strait
   gate;' so 2 Pet. i. 10, Give diligence to make your calling and
   election sure.' What profit is it to know that there is such a blessed
   and joyful estate, if we have no interest in it? Heaven is worth our
   pains, and will bear all the cost we can lay out upon it. So the
   children of God thought: Acts xxvi. 7, Unto which promise our twelve
   tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to come.' If we do
   not desire it, we do not believe it; if we do not labour for it, we do
   not desire it.

   Use 3. Let us comfort ourselves with the hopes of this blessed and
   joyful condition.

   1. Against all the miseries and afflictions of this present life. These
   are necessary; we would sleep too quietly in the world if we did not
   sometimes meet with thorns in our beds; we should be so pleased with
   our entertainment in the way as we should forget home. But God
   awakeneth us out of our drowsy fits by sharp afflictions, as if he
   said, Arise, depart hence, this is not your rest,' Micah ii. 10. While
   we wallow in sensual comforts our hearts say, it is good being here.

   2. When there is a joyful and blessed condition beyond them, it is some
   comfort in this shipwreck of man's felicity that we can see banks and
   shores, a landing-place where we may be safe and enjoy our repose. To
   you that are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be
   revealed from heaven with his mighty angels,' 2 Thes. i. 7. Here our
   days are sorrow and our travail grief, but there is our repose.

   3. That our joy and contentment is so infinitely above our sorrow and
   trouble, 2 Cor. iv. 7, so that in all the troubles and sorrows of this
   life, we may look beyond them and through them to the joy and comfort
   of the life to come. This joy is set before us in the promises of the
   gospel: Heb. xii. 2, Christ, for the joy that was set before him,
   endured the cross,' &c., and Heb. vi. 18, Who have fled for refuge to
   lay hold on the hope set before us,' we see it by faith, though not by
   sense.

   Doct. 2. That one of the diseases of mankind is that we catch at
   felicity, without considering the way that leadeth to it.

   Peter seeing and apprehending this estate to be an estate of happiness
   and glory, doth not consider what he must first do and first suffer
   before he could come to converse with Christ and the glorified saints.
   Our Saviour had lately told him that he must deny himself, and take up
   his cross and follow him; but Peter overlooketh all this, and saith, It
   is good to be here.' He would be glorified before he was abased and had
   suffered all the afflictions foretold, and would have his wages before
   he had done his work. Every one would enjoy Christ's glory and
   happiness, but we do not like his yoke--are loth to submit to his
   cross. If we would enjoy happiness with Christ and the glorified
   saints, we must be humbled with them and suffer with them first. But we
   would triumph before we had fought any battle, and receive the crown
   before we have run our race, and reap in joy before we have sowed in
   tears, or performed that necessary work that God requires at our hands.

   Now the reasons of it are these:--

   1. Because by nature we love our own ease and contentment: Gen. xlix.
   15, He saw that rest was good.' We are loth to undergo the cross, and
   desirous to enjoy happiness and glory before and without afflictions;
   but this is an untimely and preposterous desire, proceeding from
   self-love. God hath appointed another order, that the cross should go
   before the crown: Rom. viii. 17, If so be that we suffer with him, that
   we may be glorified together.'

   2. From the libertinism and yokelessness of our natures, and that
   spirit of unsubjection which is so natural to us: Rom. viii. 7, The
   carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of
   God, neither indeed can be;' Ps. ii. 3, Let us break their bands
   asunder, and cast away their cords from us.' Duties are more
   displeasing to the flesh than happiness, and we like pardon and life
   more than we like strictness, purity, and that watching and striving,
   and waiting, and exercising ourselves unto godliness which the
   scripture calleth for.

   Use. To press us to get this disease cured, and our hearts reconciled
   to our duty as well as to our happiness. These considerations may be a
   help to you.

   1. God is a governor as well as a benefactor, and must be respected in
   both relations; and therefore we must not only desire and wait for his
   benefits, but submit to his government. His government is seen in his
   laws and providence. In his laws he appoints our duty, in his
   providence he appoints our trials; to refuse either is to question his
   sovereignty: Ps. xii. 4, Who have said, With our tongue will we
   prevail: our lips are our own: who is lord over us?' Exod. v. 2, And
   Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let
   Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go;' so also
   not to submit to his trials. Therefore now, if we love God as a
   benefactor, we must be subject to him as our true and proper sovereign,
   who will bring us to heaven in what way he pleaseth.

   2. The terms and means appointed conduce to mortify our love to the
   false happiness, for one great part of religion is to draw off our
   hearts from the vain pleasures and honours of the world, the other part
   is to carry us on in the pursuit of the true happiness--a recess from
   the world and an access to God, mortification and vivification. We
   shall sit down with present things if we abandon ourselves to our
   sensual inclinations, Luke xvi. 25, so that our desires of the true
   happiness will be feeble and easily controlled if we submit not to the
   means.

   3. The care and due observance of the means showeth the value and
   respect to the true happiness. If we do not labour for it and suffer
   for it, we do not value it according to its worth. There is a simple,
   naked estimation, and a practical esteem. Naked approbation, Rom. ii.
   18, And knowest his will, and approvest the things that are excellent,
   being instructed out of the law.' The practical esteem is a
   self-denying obedience, Rom. ii. 7, To them who by patient continuance
   in well-doing seek for glory,' &c. Then they respect means and end
   together, and submit to the one to obtain the other. If the wicked are
   said to despise eternal happiness, it is not simply as happiness, nor
   as eternal, for they that love themselves would be happy, and
   everlastingly happy; but it is in conjunction with the means, as the
   Israelites despised the pleasant land, and murmured in their tents: Ps.
   cvi. 24, Yea, they despised the pleasant land; and they believed not
   his word; but murmured in their tents, and hearkened not to the voice
   of the Lord.' The land was a good, fertile land, but afar off, and
   because of giants and walled towns, and so not thought worthy the pains
   and difficulties to be undergone. Heaven is a good place, but out of
   indulgence to the ease of the flesh we dislike difficulties and
   strictness of holy walking.

   4. The difficulty of salvation lies not in a respect to the end but the
   means, and therefore the trial of our sincerity must rather be looked
   for there. There is some difficulty about the end, to convince men of
   an unseen felicity; but that may be done in part by reason, but
   savingly and thoroughly by the Spirit of revelation: Eph. i. 18, The
   eyes of your understandings being enlightened; that ye may know what is
   the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
   inheritance in the saints.' But man is sooner convinced than converted,
   than drawn off from worldly vanities, that he may seek after this
   happiness; and usually we have a quicker ear for offers of happiness
   than precepts of duty and obedience. Balaam, Num. xxiii. 10, Oh that I
   could die the death of the righteous, and that my latter end were like
   his!' John vi. 34, Evermore give us this bread' of life; but a true
   Christian, If by any means I may attain to the resurrection of the
   dead,' Phil. iii. 11.

   5. The necessity of this self-denying resignation of ourselves to God,
   to bring us to heaven in his own way, is necessary. That we may begin
   with God: Luke xiv. 26, If any man come to me, and hate not father, and
   mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his
   own life also, he cannot be my disciple.' And also that we may be true
   to him, and go on with him, and be fortified against all the
   difficulties we meet with in the way to heaven: Heb. xi. 35, Others
   were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a
   better resurrection.' But none of these things move us,' Acts xx. 24:
   Mat. xx. 22, Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and
   to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?'

   6. There is such an inseparable connexion between the end and means,
   that God will not give us the one without the other. If we believe,
   mortify, wait, suffer, then shall we reign with him--otherwise not.

   Doct. 3. Much evil would ensue if we had our desires in all those
   things that we think good for us.

   Peter said, It is good for us to be here;' but, alas! how ill would it
   have been for the world if Christ had abode still in the mount. Peter's
   instance showeth us two things:--

   1. That we are apt to consult with our own profit rather than public
   good. The world needed him, he had great business to do in the valley;
   but he would be in the mount. It is our nature, if it be well with
   ourselves, to forget others. Peter little minded his fellow-apostles,
   the redemption of the world, the conversion of nations, &c.

   2. How much we are out when we judge by present sense and the judgment
   of flesh. We consult with the ease of the flesh, and so desire rest
   more than pains and labour; what pleaseth rather than what profiteth.
   Peter saith, It is good to be here.' but he must labour first, suffer
   first, before he entereth into glory.

   Well, then, let us learn by what measure to determine good or evil.

   1. Good is not to be determined by our fancies and conceits, but by the
   wisdom of God; for he knoweth what is better for us than we do for
   ourselves, and the divine choices are to be preferred before our
   foolish fancies; and what he sendeth and permitteth to fall out is
   better for us than anything else. Could we be persuaded of this, how
   would we be prepared for a cheerful entertainment of all that is, or
   can, or shall come, upon us. God is wiser than we, and loves us better
   than we do ourselves. The child is not to be governed by his own fancy,
   but his father's discretion, nor the sick man by his own appetite, but
   the skill of the physician. It is expedient God should displease his
   people, for their advantage: John xvi. 6, 7, Because I have said these
   things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you
   the truth: it is expedient for you that I go away.' We are too much
   addicted to our own conceits: Christ's dealing is expedient and useful,
   when yet it is very unsatisfactory to us. He is to be judge of what is
   good for us, his going or tarrying, and not we ourselves. We are
   short-sighted creatures, distempered with passions; our requests many
   times are but ravings, we ask of God we know not what, as the two
   brethren, Mat. xx. 22, we pray ourselves into a mischief and a snare,
   and it were the greatest misery if God would carve out our condition
   according to our own fancies and desires.

   2. That good is to be determined with respect to the chief good and
   true happiness. Now what is our chief happiness, but the enjoyment of
   God? Our happiness doth not consist in outward comforts, riches,
   health, honour, civil liberty; or comfortable relations, as husband,
   wife, children; but our relation to and acceptance with God. Other
   things are but additional appendages to our happiness: Mat. vi. 33,
   prostethesetai, they shall be added to you.' Therefore poverty is good,
   afflictions are good; they take nothing from our essential, solid
   happiness, rather help us in the enjoyment of it, as it increaseth
   grace and holiness, and so we enjoy God more. Surely that is good that
   sets us nearer to God, and that evil that separateth us from him.
   Therefore sin is evil because it makes an estrangement between us and
   God: Isa. lix. 2, Your iniquities have separated between you and your
   God, and your sins have hid his face from you.' But affliction is good,
   because many times it makes us the more earnestly to seek after him:
   Hosea v. 16, In their affliction they will seek me early.' Therefore
   every condition is good or evil, as it sets us farther off or draweth
   us nearer to God; that is good that tendeth to make us better, more
   like unto God, capable of communion with him, and conduceth to our
   everlasting happiness. So it is good that man bear the yoke from his
   youth.' that he be trained up under the cross, in a constant obedience
   to God, and subjection to him, and so be fitted to entertain communion
   with him. If afflictions conduce to this end they are good, for then
   they help us to enjoy the chief good.

   3. That good is not always the good of the flesh, or the good of out
   ward prosperity; and, therefore, certainly the good of our condition is
   not to be determined by the interest of the flesh, but the welfare of
   our souls. If God should bestow upon us so much of the good of the
   outward and animal life as we desire, we could not be said to be in a
   good condition: if he should deny us good spiritual, we should lose the
   one half of the blessings of the covenant by doting upon and falling in
   love with the rest. The flesh is importunate to be pleased, but God
   will not serve our carnal appetites. We are more concerned as a soul
   than as a body: Heb. xii. 10, He verily chasteneth us for our profit,
   that we might be partakers of his holiness.' Certain it is God will
   chasten us for our profit. What do we call profit? the good things of
   this world, the great mammon which so many worship? If we call it so,
   God will not; he meaneth to impart some spiritual and divine benefit,
   which is a participation of his own holiness. And truly the people of
   God, if they be in their right temper, value themselves, not by their
   outward enjoyments, but by their inward improvement of graces: 2 Cor.
   iv. 16, For this cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish,
   yet the inward man is renewed day by day.' A discerning Christian puts
   more value upon holiness wrought by affliction than upon all his
   comforts; so that though affliction be evil in itself, it is good as
   sanctified.

   4. A particular good must give way to a general good, and our personal
   benefit to the advancement of Christ's kingdom and the glory of God.
   The advancement of Christ's kingdom, or the good of the church, must be
   preferred before our personal benefit or contentment. Paul could want
   the glory of heaven for a while, if his continuance in the flesh were
   needful for the saints: Phil. i. 24, To abide in the flesh is more
   needful for you.' We must not so desire good to ourselves as to hinder
   the good of others. All elements will act contrary to their particular
   nature, for the conservation of the universe, so for the glory of God.
   That may be good for the glory of God which is not good for our
   personal contentment and ease. Now the glory of God is our greatest
   interest; if it be for the glory of God that I should be in pain,
   bereft of my comfort, my sanctified subjection to the will of God must
   say it is good: John xii. 27, 28. Here you must have the innocent
   inclination of Christ's human nature, Father, save me from this hour;'
   and the overruling sense of his duty, or the obligation of his office,
   but for this cause came I to this hour.' We are often tossed between
   inclination of nature and conscience of duty; but in a gracious heart
   the sense of our duty and the desire of glorifying God should prevail
   above the desire of our own comforts, ease, safety, and welfare. Nature
   would be rid of trouble, but grace submits all our interests to God's
   honour, which should be dearer to us than anything else.

   5. This good is not to be determined by the judgment of sense, but by
   the judgment of faith; not by present feeling, but future profit. That
   which is not good may be a means to good. Affliction for the present is
   not pleasant to natural sense; nor for the present is the fruit evident
   to spiritual sense; but it is good, because in the issue it turneth to
   good: Rom. viii. 28, All things work together for good to them that
   love God,' &c. While God is striking, we feel the grief and the cross
   is tedious; but when we see the end, we acknowledge it is good to be
   afflicted: Heb. xii. 11, No affliction for the present seems joyous,
   but grievous; nevertheless afterwards it yields the peaceable fruits of
   righteousness to them that are exercised therein.' A good, present, is
   the cause of joy; and an evil, present, is the cause of sorrow. But
   there are two termini diminuentes, terms of abatement, pro`s to`
   paro`n, and dokei, present sense, and the conceits of the sufferer.
   When we are but newly under the affliction, we feel the smart, but do
   not presently find the benefit; but within a while, especially in the
   review, it is good for me. It is matter of faith under the affliction,
   it is matter of sense afterwards. God's physic must have time to work.
   That which is not good may be good; though it be not good in its
   nature, it may be good in its use; and though for the present we see it
   not, we shall see it. Therefore good is not to be determined by
   feeling, but by faith. The rod is a sore thing for the present, but the
   bitter root will yield sweet fruit. If we come to a person under the
   cross, and ask him, What! is it good to feel the lashes of God's
   correcting hand? to be kept poor, sickly, exercised with losses and
   reproaches, to part with friends and relations, to lose a beloved
   child? he would be apt to answer, No. But this poor creature, after he
   hath been exercised, and mortified, and gotten some renewed evidences
   of God's favour; ask him, then, Is it good to be afflicted? Oh yes, I
   had been vain, neglectful of God, wanted such an experience of the
   Lord's grace. Faith should determine the case when we feel it not.

   Well, then, let us learn to distinguish between what is really best for
   us and what we judge to be best. Other diet is more wholesome for our
   souls than that which our sickly appetite craveth. It is best many
   times when we are weakest, worst when strongest: all things are good as
   they help on a blessed eternity: so sharp afflictions are good. That
   part of the world that is governed by sense will never yield to this.
   You cannot convince a covetous man that the loss of an estate is good;
   or a worldly, rich man that poverty is good; or an ambitious man that
   it is good to be despised and contemned; or a sensual, voluptuous man
   that it is good to be in pains, that the body be afflicted for the good
   of the soul: they will never believe you. But those that measure all
   things by eternity, they know that poverty makes way for the true
   riches, and ignominy for the true glory, want for fulness of pleasures,
   and misery mortifies sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON V.

   While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and
   behold, a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son,
   in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.--Mat. XVII. 5.

   IN this branch of the story two things are remarkable, and there is a
   behold prefixed before either of them to excite our attention. First,
   they see a bright cloud, and then they hear a voice out of the cloud.

   First, Of the cloud: and while he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud
   overshadowed them. It was not a dark cloud, as upon Mount Sinai, when
   God gave the law, but a bright one, yet not so bright and lightsome but
   that it was mixed with some obscurity. It was no natural and ordinary
   cloud, such as are commonly engendered in the air above us, but
   extraordinary and supernatural, created by God for this occasion. The
   use of it was double.

   1. To convey Moses and Elias out of their sight when this conference
   was ended. Therefore some expound that which is said, Luke ix. 34, They
   feared as they entered into the cloud,' after this manner, the
   disciples feared when they saw Moses and Elias entering into the
   cloud--that is, involved and covered in it. It is said of Jesus Christ
   himself, when he ascended into heaven, Acts i. 9, A cloud received him
   out of their sight.'

   2. To be a token of the extraordinary presence of God, whose voice
   immediately came out of the cloud, as also to veil the glory thereof,
   which was best done by a cloud, a thing of a middle nature between
   terrestrial and celestial bodies. When Solomon builded the temple the
   Lord showed his special presence there by filling the house with a
   cloud, 1 Kings viii. 10. This way of apparition God useth to moderate
   the splendour of his excellent glory. We are not able to behold God as
   he is, and must not pry into his glory; there is a cloud and veil upon
   it.

   Secondly, They heard a voice: and behold, a voice out of the cloud
   which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear ye
   him.

   1. Observe, That there was a voice distinctly and audibly heard. Though
   God did sensibly now manifest his presence in the mount with Christ,
   and did audibly speak to them, yet he did not appear in any distinct
   form and shape, either of man or any other living creature, but all was
   done by a voice out of the cloud; so Deut. iv. 12, Ye heard the voice
   of the words, but saw no similitude,' and ver. 15, Take good heed to
   yourselves, for ye saw no similitude in the day that the Lord spake to
   you in Horeb, lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make to you any graven
   image.' The similitude of any figure, &c. The voice of God may with
   less danger come to us than any sight or representation of him.

   2. The matter, or what this voice said: This is my beloved Son; hear ye
   him. By this voice there is:--

   [1.] A testimony given to Christ.

   [2.] A command to hear him; or,

   (1.) The dignity of Christ. He is the beloved Son of God, in whom he is
   well pleased.

   (2.) A suitable respect bespoken for him.

   The words are few, but yet contain the sum of the whole gospel, and
   they are spoken, not by a man, nor by an angel, but by the Lord
   himself, and therefore they should be entertained with the more
   reverence. The apostle Peter, who was one of the parties present, could
   never forget this testimony of the Father concerning his Son Jesus
   Christ: 2 Pet. i. 17, He received from the Father honour and glory,
   when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory. This is
   my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;' and besides, what Christ
   speaketh of another voice from heaven is true of this: John xii. 30,
   This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes,' not so much to
   encourage him in his suffering as to our edification and instruction.
   All the testimonies given unto Christ from heaven tended to point him
   out to sinners as the true Messiah, approved and accepted of God;
   therefore these words should ever be in our minds, especially when we
   draw nigh to God in solemn duties.

   I shall begin with the dignity, honour, and glory of Christ, solemnly
   declared from heaven. There are three things in it:--

   1. The relation between him and the Father: he is a Son.

   2. The dearness of that relation: his beloved Son.

   3. The complacential satisfaction which he taketh in him, and the price
   of our redemption paid by him: in whom I am well pleased.

   Doct. That it is the main and principal point of the gospel, and of
   great necessity to be known and believed to salvation, that Jesus
   Christ is the beloved Son of God, in whom he is well pleased.

   1. I shall open this testimony given to Christ.

   2. Speak of the importance and weight of it.

   I. Of the testimony given to Christ.

   1. Let me open the term that expresseth his filiation, that he is God's
   Son. Christ is the Son of God properly so called, a Son only-begotten:
   John iii. 16, God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten
   Son;' eternally begotten, Prov. viii. 22, 23, I was set up from
   everlasting, the Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before
   his works of old.' A Son co-equal with his Father, John v. 18. The Jews
   sought to kill him because he said God was his Father, making himself
   equal with God, patera idion elege ton Theon, his own proper Father. So
   co-essential, of the same substance with his Father, John i. 1, In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God.' Now thus is he the Son of God.

   Why is it mentioned there?--

   [1.] To show the special dignity of Christ above all others. He is the
   Son of God: Christians are the sons of God, but in a different
   manner--he by nature, we by adoption. Though God have many sons by
   creation and adoption, yet Christ is his Son in a peculiar and proper
   way, by eternal generation, and communication of the same essence, o
   uio`s agapeto`s, that Son, that beloved Son; so a Son as none else is;
   the Son of God, properly so called.

   [2.] To distinguish him from Moses and the prophets. From Moses, Heb.
   iii. 5, 6, Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, but
   Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house we are.' &c.; so from
   the rest of the prophets: Heb. i. 1, 2, God at sundry times, and in
   divers manners, spake in times past unto the fathers by the prophets,
   but hath in these last days spoken to us by his Son, whom he hath
   appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the world.' This is
   the great doctor of the church; now as to meekness above Moses, as to
   zeal above Elias, as to familiarity and communion he was with God and
   was God.

   [3.] To show the old prophecies were fulfilled, which foretold the
   union of the two natures in his person, the predictions concerning one
   whose name should be Immanuel, God with us, and who should save and
   redeem the church, Isa. vii. 14; and of a child that should be the
   mighty God, the everlasting Father.' Isa. ix. 6. This the prophets
   foretold, that he should be God, and the Son of God: Micah v. 2, His
   going forth is from everlasting.' though born at Bethlehem; so the bud
   of the Lord and the fruit of the earth, Isa. iv. 2. The man God's
   fellow, Zech. xiii. 7; and in many other places the union of the two
   natures is asserted.

   2. He is the beloved Son.

   [1.] That God loved Christ. Christ is the object of his Father's love,
   both as the second person and as mediator. As the second person of the
   Trinity--two things are wont to attract love, nearness and likeness,
   they are both here. Nearness, he was in the bosom of the Father: John
   i. 18, The only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
   hath declared him.' Likeness is another load stone of affliction: [31]
   Heb. i. 3, He is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of
   his person.' Such as the Father is so is Christ.

   [2.] As mediator, so God loveth him on the account of his obedience:
   John x. 17, Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my
   life for the sheep;' John iii. 35, the Father hath loved him and put
   all things into his hand. The Father approved Christ's undertaking for
   sinners, delighted in it as an excellent way of glorifying his name,
   and recovering poor creatures out of their lost condition; and rested
   satisfied, and was pleased with his death, as a sufficient ransom for
   poor souls. Well, then, God loved him so as to trust the souls of all
   mankind in his hands, and to appoint him to be the great mediator, to
   end all differences between him and us; and the more he doth in
   pursuance of his office, the more beloved he is and acceptable to God.

   [3.] The testimony of his love to him as mediator; for his unspeakable
   rejoicing in him, as second person in the Trinity, we are not competent
   judges of. It is described: Prov. viii. 30, I was daily his delight,
   rejoicing always before him.' The mutual complacency which the divine
   persons take in one another is there set forth; God delighted in
   Christ, and Christ in God. But in the second love as mediator, God
   expressed his love to him in two things: the gift of the Spirit, and
   the glory of his human nature.

   (1.) The gift of the Spirit: John iii. 34, God giveth not the Spirit in
   measure to him, for the Father loveth the Son, and hath put all things
   into his hands.' This was the great expression of his love to Christ as
   mediator, not to make him a visible monarch of the world, but by the
   gift of his Spirit to be head of the church.

   (2.) The other expression of his love to him as mediator was the gift
   of everlasting glory: John xvii. 24, Father, I will that those whom
   thou hast given me should be where I am, and behold my glory, for thou
   hast loved me before the foundation of the world.' God's love to
   Christ, as mediator, was manifested in exalting him to glory, and this
   everlasting. These are the great expresses of God's love to Christ, as
   God incarnate, or appearing in our nature.

   Why is it put here?--

   [1.] To show the end for which Christ came; to represent the
   amiableness of God--that he is love, 1 John iv. 8, and hath love for
   his children. Christ is the pattern of all, for he is first beloved,
   and the great instance and demonstration of God's love to the world.

   [2.] To intimate the redundancy of this love; it overfloweth to us, for
   Christ being beloved, we are beloved also: Eph. i. 6, He hath made us
   accepted in the beloved,' to the praise of his glorious grace. It is an
   overflowing love; he is loved, and all that have an interest in him are
   loved. There is a twofold love in God--the love of benevolence and
   complacency. The elect from all eternity are loved by God with a love
   of benevolence, whereby he willed good unto them, and decrees to bestow
   good upon them; but the love of complacency and delight is that love
   whereby God accepteth us, delighteth in us, when he hath made us lovely
   as his own children, reconciled them by the death of Christ, renewed
   them by the Spirit of Christ, and furnished them with all the graces
   which make us acceptable to him, and precious in his sight.

   [3.] To show the kind and manner of the expressing of his love to his
   redeemed ones. Christ prayed: John xvii. 23, That the world may know
   that thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me.' And ver. 26: That the
   love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them.' that is, by the gift
   of the Spirit and everlasting glory. Though Christ was the beloved.
   Son, yet his state was but mean and despicable in the world; he was
   afflicted.' a man of sorrows.' pursued to the death, even a shameful,
   painful, accursed death; yet all this while he was full of the Holy
   Ghost, of his graces, comforts, and afterwards received to glory; and
   so will he love us. At this rate and tenor, his love bindeth him not to
   give us worldly greatness, but if we have the Spirit, and may be
   welcomed to heaven at the last, we have that which is the true
   discovery of God's love. So he manifested his love to the only-begotten
   Son, and therefore the adopted children should be contented with this
   love, if by the Spirit they may be enabled to continue with patience in
   well-doing, till they receive eternal glory and happiness.

   3. The next thing is en ho eudokesa, in whom I am well pleased.' This
   is to be interpreted of Christ as mediator, or God incarnate; for this
   was twice spoken--at Christ's baptism, Mat. iii. 17, and now at his
   transfiguration. Both imply his mediatorship; for his baptism had the
   notion of a dedication; he did then present himself to God as a
   mediator for us, to be the servant of his decree, as we in baptism
   dedicate ourselves to fulfil the precepts which belong to us, and as we
   are concerned to promote his glory in the world. Christ presented
   himself as a mediator, that is, as a prophet to acquaint us with the
   way of salvation, as a priest to pay a perfect ransom for us, as a king
   to give us all things, and defend and maintain all those who submit to
   his government till their glory be perfected, and they attain unto
   their final estate of bliss and happiness. Now, then, God from heaven
   declared himself well pleased; and now, again, when Christ had made
   some progress in the work, confirmeth it for the assurance of the
   world.

   This, then, must be interpreted:--

   [1.] As to Christ.

   [2.] As to those who have benefit by him and interest in him.

   [1.] As to Christ. He was well pleased; partly, as to the design--the
   reparation of lost mankind; partly, as to the terms by which it should
   be brought about; partly, as to the execution and management of it by
   Christ.

   (1.) As to the design. God was well pleased that lapsed mankind should
   be restored. At the first, God was pleased with his creation, Exod.
   xxxi. 17. On the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed;' that is,
   recreated in the view of his works, as the effects of his wisdom,
   power, and goodness. And Ps. civ. 31, The Lord shall rejoice in his
   works.' The Lord saw all to be good in the beginning and working, not
   to be repented of. This was God's rest and Sabbath, to take delight in
   his works. When he looked on it altogether, behold it was exceeding
   good; but afterwards man, the ungrateful part of the creation, though
   the masterpiece of it in this visible and lower world, fell from God
   his creator, and preferred the creature before him, to his loss and
   ruin; then God was so far displeased that he had reason to wish the
   destruction of mankind. It is said, Gen. vi. 6, that it repented God
   that he had made man;' that is, he was displeased with us, estranged
   from us, no more contented with us than a man is in what he repenteth
   of. For, properly, God cannot repent; but this is an expression to show
   how odious we were grown to him: Ps. xiv. 2, 3, The Lord looked down
   from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
   understand, and did seek after God. They are all gone aside, they are
   all together become filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not
   one.' Alas! there is a lamentable appearance of mankind to God's sight,
   now nothing good to be found in them; an universal defection, both in
   piety and humanity. But then Christ undertook the reparation of
   mankind, and the design was pleasing to God, that he might not lose the
   glory of his creation, and all flesh be utterly destroyed: Col. i. 19,
   20, It pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell; and,
   having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile
   all things unto himself.' The restoring of fallen man to friendship
   with God, and all things tending to it, were highly pleasing to God,
   namely, that Jesus Christ, the second person in the Trinity, should
   become a mediator; for that end he had a great affection and liking to
   this thing: eudokese, it is the same word used here, the thing is
   highly pleasing to God, that the breach should be made up; that man,
   who had lost the image, favour, and fellowship with God, should be
   again restored, by renewing his heart, reconciling his person, and
   admitting him again into communion with God, who was so justly provoked
   by him. God stood in no need of our friendship, nor could any loss come
   to him by our hatred and enmity; only it pleased the Father to take
   this way: Isa. liii. 10, for it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath
   put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he
   shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the'
   Lord shall prosper in his hand.'

   (2.) He is pleased with the terms. God, who is the supreme governor of
   the world, and the offended party, stood upon these terms, that the
   honour of his governing justice should be secured, and the repentance
   and reformation of man carried on. Strictly these must be done, or else
   man must lie under his eternal displeasure; if one be done and not the
   other, no reconciliation can ensue. Now that God is highly pleased with
   the satisfaction and compensation made to his governing justice: Heb.
   x. 6, 7, In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast no
   pleasure. Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God;' ver. 10, By
   the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of
   Christ once for all.' God rejected all other sacrifices, but was fully
   satisfied with this, as enough to expiate the sin of man. Christ
   delighted to give it, and God delighted to accept of it. He paid a
   perfect ransom for us, besides or above which he craved no more, but
   rested fully content in it. For the other, the renovation of man's
   nature, to put him into a capacity to serve and please God, for God
   would not admit us to privileges without change of heart and
   disposition: Acts v. 31, God exalted him to be a prince and saviour, to
   give repentance and remission of sins.' In short, God is so satisfied
   with these terms, that (1.) He seeketh no further amends for all their
   wrongs: Rom. iii. 25, Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation
   through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
   remission of sins that are past;' (2.) No further price for what they
   need: 1 Pet. i. 18, 19, Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things, as
   silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
   without spot and blemish.' The repentance of a sinner is pleasing to
   him, there is joy in heaven: Luke xv. 7, Joy in the presence of the
   angels over one sinner that is converted.' A feast was made at the
   return of the prodigal: As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure
   in the death of a sinner.' Our conversion is more pleasing to God than
   our destruction.

   (3.) He is pleased with the execution and management of it by Christ.
   He carried himself in the office of the mediator according to what was
   enjoined him: John viii. 29, I do always the things that please him.'
   John v. 30, I can of myself do nothing; as I hear I judge, and my
   judgment is just; because I seek not my will, but the will of the
   Father which sent me.' And did finish all that was necessary for the
   redemption of the elect before he died: John xix. 30, When Jesus had
   received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head,
   and gave up the ghost.' Evidences of this are his resurrection from the
   dead: Acts v. 30, 31, The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye
   slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to
   be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and remission
   of sins.' Heb. xiii. 20, The God of peace brought again the Lord Jesus
   from the dead, through the blood of the everlasting covenant.' As
   pacified in Christ, received into glory.' 1 Tim. iii. 16. Certainly God
   is well pleased, since he hath given not only a discharge, but a
   reward. The gift of the Spirit, for renewing the heart of man, which is
   the great pledge of God's being satisfied: John vii. 39, This he spake
   of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, for the
   Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
   glorified;' a sure evidence that our ransom is paid: Acts v. 32, And we
   are his witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Ghost, which he
   hath given to them that obey him.' A sacrifice of infinite value and
   esteem.

   [2.] That he is well pleased with us who have an interest in him. In
   our natural estate we are all displeasing unto God. Whatever we are in
   the purpose of his decree, we must look upon ourselves as we are in the
   sentence of his law; so Children of wrath.' Eph. ii. 3: Enemies by our
   minds in evil works.' Col. i. 21: Estranged from the womb.' Ps. lviii.
   3; so that all of us were cut off from the favour of God, obnoxious to
   his wrath; this is our miserable condition by nature, that we were no
   way pleasing to him, for without faith it is impossible to please God.'
   Heb. xi. 6. A sinner as a sinner can do nothing acceptable; indeed, God
   having found a ransom, is placabilis, but not placatus, not actually
   reconciled to us till we are in Christ; and he is placandus antequam
   placendus, to be appeased before he can be pleased; he is not actually
   reconciled till we are in Christ.

   (2.) Awakened sinners are not easily satisfied, so as to look upon
   themselves as pleasing unto God; for the conscience of sin is not
   easily laid aside, nor is the stain soon got out. And though the grant
   be passed in heaven, yet we have not the sense of it in our own hearts;
   for it is the blood of Christ can only do it: Heb. ix. 14, How much
   more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
   himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
   serve the living God?' The carnal offer thousands of rams, and rivers
   of oil, and the fruit of the body for the sin of their soul,' Micah vi.
   6, 7. They would give anything for a sufficient sin-offering; yea, the
   renewed and pardoned have not so firm a peace as to be able always to
   look upon themselves in a state of well-pleasing, therefore often beg
   that God would dissipate the clouds and cause the light of his
   countenance to break forth upon them: Ps. lxxx. 19, Turn us, Lord God
   of hosts; cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.' So that when
   there is a grant of pardon, and peace, and access to God, we have not
   always the sense.

   (3.) Yet the ground is laid. As soon as we have an interest in Christ,
   God is well pleased with us; if you consent to his mediation, and take
   him in his three offices, as a prophet, priest, and king. As a prophet,
   hear him; the business is put out of all question, that God will love
   you because he loved Christ. When you depend on him as a priest, you
   have reconciliation and access to God: Rom. v. 1, 2, Therefore being
   justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
   Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into the grace wherein we
   stand.' When you subject yourselves to him as a king, Col. i. 13, He
   hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.' Christ is dear to
   God, and to him all the subjects of his kingdom are dear also. So that
   if you will be more explicit in your duty, you may be more explicit in
   your comforts; if you will receive his doctrine, so as it may have
   authority over your hearts; if in the anguish of your souls you will
   depend on the merit of his sacrifice, and give up your selves to live
   in a constant obedience to his laws; you will find him to be a dear Son
   indeed, one very acceptable with God, for you also will be accepted
   with him, for his sake.

   II. Concerning the weight and importance of this truth.

   1. It is propounded as the foundation upon which God will build his
   church: Mat. xvi. 16-18, And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art
   Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto
   him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not
   revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say unto
   thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church:
   and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.'

   2. It is the question put to those that would enter upon Christianity:
   Acts viii. 37, If thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayest: and
   he answered and said, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God.' When
   they were serious in the profession, that was enough: 1 John v. 1,
   Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God.'

   3. This engaged the hearts of the disciples to tarry with him when
   others murmured at his doctrine. He that cleaveth to this profession
   carrieth himself accordingly, whatever temptations he hath to the
   contrary: we believe and are Sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of
   the living God.

   4. For this end the scriptures were written: These things are written,
   that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and
   that believing ye might have life through his name,' John xx. 31. By
   obedience to his laws, dependence on his promises.

   5. This is the ground of submission to Christ in all his offices, why
   we should hear him as a prophet in this place (which I shall more fully
   make manifest in the next sermon), why we should depend on him as a
   priest, for the virtue of his oblation and intercession: If God spared
   not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with
   him also freely give us all things?' Rom. viii. 32. 1 John iv. 10,
   Herein is love, not that we loved God, but he loved us, and sent his
   Son to be the propitiation for our sins.' 1 John ii. 1, If any man sin,
   we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.' The
   blood of Christ is of high esteem and infinite value, both as to merit
   and satisfaction, to purchase all manner of blessings for us, and to
   satisfy God's provoked justice for our sins. And if the Father be so
   well pleased with him, what can he not obtain at his hands? which is an
   encouragement in our prayers and supplications. So for our improvement
   of his kingly office, which respects duties and privileges; our duty
   with respect to the kingly office is subjection: Ps. ii. 12, Kiss the
   Son lest he be angry, and you perish in the midway.' Because Christ
   Jesus is the Son of God, he should be submitted unto and embraced with
   the heartiest love and subjection; for to kiss, is a sign of religious
   adoration, Hosea xiii. 2; as they kissed the calves, and offer homage
   and hearty subjection; as Samuel kissed Saul, because God had anointed
   him to be king over his people, 1 Sam. x. 1. So for privileges; he is
   God co-equal, coeternal with his Father, able to protect all those that
   apply themselves to him, till he bring them to eternal glory and
   happiness; and, therefore, it is said, 1 John v. 5, Who is he that
   overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of
   God?' That is the fortifying truth; this both cautioneth us against all
   the delights and snares, and supports us against all the terrors and
   fears of the world. If we have the Son of God for our prophet, priest,
   and king, we ought to carry ourselves with greater reverence, trust,
   and subjection.

   Use 1. Believe it, lay up this truth in your hearts by a firm and sound
   belief. There are in faith three things--assent, acceptance,
   dependence. The matter in hand calleth for all these.

   [1.] A firm assent; for here we have the testimony of God concerning
   his Son. The apostle tells us, that he that believeth not hath made God
   a liar, because he believeth not the testimony of God concerning his
   Son,' 1 John v. 10. The great testimony is this, that we have in hand
   that Jesus is his beloved Son, with whom he is well pleased; that he
   will give pardon and life to all that hearken to him, embrace his
   person, receive his doctrine, believe his promises, fear his threats,
   obey his precepts, the strictest of them. Oh! labour to work it into
   your hearts that indeed it is so. In matters of fact we receive the
   testimony of men, two or three credible men; why not in matters of
   faith?--the testimony of God evidenced to us by this solemn action, an
   account of which we have from ear-witnesses and eye-witnesses, who were
   men that hazarded their all for the delivery of this truth, and yet
   referred us to the surer word of prophecy, 1 Pet. i. 19. He was owned
   as a Son: Ps. ii. 7, Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee.'
   As a beloved Son, in whom God is well pleased: Isa. xlii. 1 , Behold my
   servant whom I uphold, my elect in whom my soul delighteth.' If you be
   not wanting to yourselves, you may have this witness in your hearts: 1
   John v. 10, He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in
   himself.' Oh! let us not give the flat lie to God. House up this
   languid faith. Is this true, or is it a cunningly devised fable?

   [2.] Faith is an acceptance of Christ, or an entering into a covenant
   with God by him. You must have the Son: 1 John v. 12, He that hath the
   Son hath life.' John i. 12, As many as received him, to them gave he
   power to become the sons of God, even to them which believe on his
   name.' Receiving, respects God's offer. God gives Christ, and we
   receive what God giveth,--to what end? Why, he giveth him as king,
   priest, and prophet, to dwell in our hearts by faith, to rule us and
   guide us by his word and Spirit, and maintain God's interest in us
   against the devil, the world, and the flesh, till we come to
   everlasting glory.

   [3.] Dependence. He is able to save to the uttermost all that come to
   God by him; therefore on him alone should we depend for all things
   necessary to salvation. Two things persuade this dependence:

   (1.) That nothing can be done without Christ: Acts iv. 12, Neither is
   there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven
   given among men whereby we must be saved.' Nothing can be done without
   Christ that may be effectual to our recovery, either for the paying of
   our ransom, or for the changing of our hearts. Alas! what could we do
   to please God, or profit our own souls? The work would cease for ever
   if it should lie upon our hands.

   (2.) That he can do what he pleaseth for the good of his redeemed ones:
   John xvii. 2, As thou hast given power over all flesh, that he should
   give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.' All that Christ
   did for our salvation did highly content and please the Father; he is
   satisfied with him; he can make us lovely in his sight: Eph. i. 6, To
   the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted
   in the beloved.' And will now joy in his people, Isa. lxv. 19, and rest
   in his love, Zeph. iii. 17. Well, then, let us believe; faith is a
   ratifying God's testimony concerning his Son; we believe what God hath
   said, that Christ is his Son; we receive him as he is freely offered,
   and subscribe to this declaration. The Father saith from heaven, This
   is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him.' So penitent
   believers must answer back again, This is our beloved Redeemer, in whom
   we are well pleased; let the Father hear him. He hath somewhat to say
   to the Father as well as to us; his doctrine concerneth us, but his
   intercession is made to God.

   Use 2. Entertain it with thankfulness. That such a remedy should be
   provided for us argueth the unspeakable love of God: 1 John iv. 9, Tn
   this was manifested the love of God to us, because that God sent 1m
   only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live by him.' That God
   should bestow his Son upon us to procure our salvation. God tried
   Abraham's love in sacrificing his son, but manifested his love to us in
   sending his own Son; He spared him not, but delivered him up for us
   all.' Now that such a remedy and ransom is found out for us, it should
   leave an impression of God's love on our hearts, that we may love him
   again who first loved us, 1 John iv. 19. Think nothing too dear for
   God, who thought no rate too dear to purchase our life and peace. As
   our salvation was precious to him, let his glory be dear to us; only
   let me tell you, this love must not be confined to a bare act of our
   reason, but you must pray to God to shed abroad this love in your
   hearts by the Holy Spirit, Rom. v. 5, that so you may study to love and
   please God, prize Christ and his precious benefits above all things in
   the world, and live to him who died for you, that you may feel the
   constraining efficacy and force of love.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] Qu., affection'?--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VI.

   This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased; hear ye him.--Mat.
   XVII. 5.

   I. THE design and intent of this scripture is to set forth the Lord
   Jesus as the great mediator, as appeareth--

   1. From the occasions upon which this voice came from heaven. At his
   baptism, which was Christ's dedication of himself to the work of a
   redeemer and saviour; and now at his transfiguration, to distinguish
   him from Moses and the other prophets, and publicly to instal him in
   the mediatory office.

   2. The matter of the words show his fitness for this office, for here
   you have:--

   [1.] His dignity: not a servant, but a Son: Heb. iii. 5, 6, Moses
   verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, but Christ as a Son
   over his own house.' Now the old prophecies foretold the union of the
   two natures in his person, and necessary it was that our mediator
   should be God-man. There is a congruity between his person and office,
   one fit to be familiar with man, and naturally interested in his
   concerns, and yet so high and near the Father as may put a sufficient
   value upon his actions, and so meet to mediate with God for us.

   [2.] The dearness between God and him: My beloved Son.' Christ is the
   object of his Father's love, both as the second person in the Trinity
   and mediator. The one is the ground of the other, for because he loved
   him he intrusted him with souls: John iii. 35, The Father hath loved
   him, and put all things into his hands' the elect and all things else,
   all power that conduceth to their salvation. Afterwards loved him as
   mediator: John x. 17, Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay
   down my life, that I might take it again.' Now such a beloved Son is
   fittest to mediate for us, and to come upon a design of love, to
   demonstrate God's great love to wretched sinners, and to be a pledge of
   that love which God will bestow upon us who are altogether so unworthy
   of it.

   [3.] His acceptableness to God, who is well pleased with the terms, the
   management of it.

   II. This work of mediator Christ executeth by three offices, of king,
   priest, prophet. For he is head and lord of the renewed state; a priest
   to offer a sacrifice for sin, which, having once offered, he for ever
   represents in heaven; he was also to be teacher of mankind, to acquaint
   us with the way of salvation. These offices are often alluded unto in
   scripture: Rev. i. 5, The faithful witness, the first-begotten from the
   dead, the prince of the kings of the earth;' so Heb. i. 2, 3, God hath
   spoken to us by his Son, he having by himself purged our sins, sat down
   on the right hand of the majesty on high.' The effect of them is more
   briefly described: John xiv. 6, I am the way, the truth, and the life.'
   The way was opened by his passion, and is kept open by his
   intercession. Truth as a prophet. Life we have from him, as prince of
   life, or head of the renewed estate. So the effects: 1 Cor. i. 30, But
   of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and
   righteousness, sanctification and redemption.' Wisdom as a prophet to
   cure our ignorance and folly; righteousness and sanctification as a
   priest; redemption as the king and captain of our salvation. The same
   benefits which he purchaseth as a king, he bestoweth as a priest,
   revealeth as a prophet. These three offices were typed out by the
   first-born, who were heads of families, and also prophets and priests.

   That though all the three offices be employed, yet the prophetical
   office is more explicitly mentioned, partly as suiting with the present
   occasion, which is to demonstrate that Christ hath sufficient authority
   to repeal the law of Moses, which the prophets were to explain,
   confirm, and maintain till his coming. But now Moses and Elias appear
   in person to certify their consent, and God his approbation, from
   heaven, to that new law of grace which Christ should set up; partly
   because it is not necessary that in every place all the offices should
   be mentioned; sometimes but one, as where Christ is called either king,
   priest, or prophet; sometimes two together, Heb. iii. 1, prophetical,
   sacerdotal: Consider the apostle and high priest of our profession,
   Christ Jesus;' sometimes his prophetical and kingly, Isa. lv. 4, Behold
   I have given him for a witness to the people, and for a leader and
   commander to the people:' partly because if Christ be received in this
   one office he will be received in all the rest; for as a prophet he
   hath revealed that doctrine which establisheth his kingly and priestly
   office, for he hath revealed all things necessary to salvation, and
   therefore his own sacrifice and regal power. Lastly, some think all
   expressly mentioned here. Thus Christ is God's beloved Son, and
   therefore the heir of all things, and lord and king, in whom he is well
   pleased--that is, pacified and satisfied with his offering as a priest,
   or appeased by his complete sacrifice. Hear him as the great prophet
   and doctor of the Church.

   This premised, I come now to observe:--

   Doct. That Christ is appointed by God the Father to be the great
   prophet and teacher, whose voice alone must be heard in the Church.

   I. That Christ is the great prophet and teacher of the Church
   appeareth:--

   1. By the titles given to him. He is compared with Moses the great
   lawgiver among the Jews: The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
   prophet from the midst of you like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken,'
   Deut. xviii. 15. He was to be like a Moses, but greater than Moses. A
   lawgiver as he, a man as he, one that saw God face to face as he, a
   mediator as he; but far other in all respects--a better law, a more
   glorious person, a more blessed mediator, working greater miracles than
   ever did Moses. So he is called our rabbi or master: Mark xxiii. 8, One
   is your master, even Christ, and ye are brethren.' The supreme
   authority, the original right is in Christ. We are not leaders and
   teachers, but fellow disciples; so Heb. iii. 1, Consider the apostle
   and high priest of our profession, Jesus Christ.' Again, he is called
   the angel or messenger of the covenant, Mal. iii. 1. Christ with a;
   great condescension took upon him the office of his Father's ambassador
   to the church, to promote the covenant of reconciliation between God
   and man, and make offers of it in preaching the gospel; and he it is
   that doth by his Spirit persuade the elect, and doth make his covenant
   sure to them. Once more, he is called Amen, the faithful and true
   witness,' Rev. iii. 14. There can be no prejudice against his
   testimony; he can never deceive nor be deceived; it is so, it will be
   so, as he hath said, Amen is his name.

   2. By the properties of his office: he hath three things to quality him
   for this high office:--

   [1.] Absolute supreme authority: and therefore we must hear him and
   hearken to him. This is usually made the ground and reason of the
   gospel invitation, to invite sinners to submit themselves to seek after
   God in this way: as Mat. xi. 27, 28, All things are delivered unto me
   of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither
   knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
   will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden,'
   &c. There is no true knowledge of God but by Christ and the gospel
   revelation which he hath established, therefore here we must seek rest
   for our souls: so John iii. 35, 36, The Father loveth the Son, and hath
   put all things into his hands. He that believeth on the Son hath
   everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son hath not seen life,
   but the wrath of God abideth on him.' First, his mediatorial authority
   is acknowledged; and then faith and obedience to the gospel is called
   for, for to the sentence of the Son of God we must stand or fall. So
   when Christ instituted and sent abroad his messengers to invite the
   world to the obedience of the gospel: Mat. xxviii. 18-20, All power is
   given to me both in heaven and in earth. Go ye, therefore, and teach
   all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
   and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
   have commanded you.' He hath absolute and supreme authority to gather
   his church, to appoint ministers and ordinances, to bestow the Spirit,
   to open and close heaven and hell as he pleaseth, to dispose of all
   affairs in the world for the furtherance of the gospel, and to enjoin
   the whole world obedience to his commands, and to embrace his doctrine.

   [2.] All manner of sufficiency and power of God to execute this office:
   John iii. 34, For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God, for
   God giveth not the Spirit by measure to him.' The former prophets had
   the Spirit in a limited measure bestowed on them by God, for such
   particular purposes as best pleased him; therefore all their prophecies
   begin, Thus saith the Lord, as having for every particular message and
   errand new revelation. But on Christ the Spirit descended once for all,
   and commanded the belief of all and obedience to all that he should
   say. Therefore it is said, Col. ii. 3, In him are all the treasures of
   wisdom and knowledge.' He is ignorant of none of those things which are
   to be known and practised in order to our eternal salvation; they are
   deposited with him to be dispensed to us.

   [3.] There is in him, a powerful efficacy. As he hath absolute
   authority to teach in his own name, and fulness of sufficiency to make
   known the mind of God to us; so he hath power to make his doctrine
   effectual. As when he dealt with his disciples, after he had opened the
   scriptures, he opened their understandings.' Luke xxiv. 25; so he
   opened the heart of Lydia.' Acts xvi. 14. He can teach so as to draw,
   John vi. 44, 45. He can excite the drowsy mind, change and turn the
   rebellious will, cure the distempered affections, make us to be what he
   persuadeth us to be. There is no such teacher as Christ, who doth not
   only give us our lesson, but an heart to learn; therefore to him we
   must submit, hear nothing against him, but all from him.

   II. About hearing him, that must be explained also.

   First, What it is to hear; it being our great duty, and the respect
   bespoken for him. In the hearing of words there are three things
   considerable--the sound that cometh to the ear, the understanding of
   the sense and meaning, and the assent or consent of the mind. Of the
   first the beasts are capable, for they have ears to hear the sound of
   words uttered. The second is common to all men, for they can sense such
   intelligible words as they hear. The third belongeth to disciples, who
   are swayed by their Master's authority. So that, Hear him, is not to
   hear as beasts, nor barely to hear as men, but to hear as disciples; to
   believe him, to obey him; to believe his doctrines and promises, and to
   obey his precepts. For his authority is absolute, and what he doth say,
   doth warrant our faith, and command our practice and obedience. I
   gather this partly from the word hear,' which not only signifies
   attention and belief, but obedience: as 1 Sam. xv. 22, To obey is
   better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.' where to
   obey and hearken are put as words of the same import and signification.
   Partly from the matter of Christ's revelation; he hath revealed not
   only doctrines to inform the mind, but precepts to reform the heart and
   practice. If we assent to the doctrine, but do not obey the precepts,
   we do not hear him. Therefore to hear him is to yield obedience to what
   he shall teach you; and when Christ cometh to take an account of the
   entertainment of the gospel, he shall come in flaming fire, taking
   vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of
   our Lord Jesus Christ.' Partly too from the intimate connexion there is
   between his prophetical and regal office. Christ is so a prophet, that
   he is also a sovereign; and doth not only give us counsel and
   direction, but a law, which we are to observe under the highest
   penalties. If the gospel were an arbitrary direction,, which we might
   observe or not observe, without any great danger to ourselves, surely
   it were folly to despise good counsel; but it hath the force of a new
   law from the great king and lawgiver of the world, therefore it must
   not only be believed but obeyed: Heb. v. 8, He that is the chief
   prophet of the church is also the king of saints. Partly also from the
   near connexion that is between faith and obedience. The matter which we
   believe is of a practical concernment, and doth not require only a
   simple faith, or bare belief, which were enough in points merely
   speculative, but a ready obedience. It is said, Rom. xvi. 26, The
   mysteries of the gospel are made manifest to all nations for the
   obedience of faith.' They are not matters of speculation and talk, but
   practice; and blessedness is pronounced on such as hear them and keep
   them: Luke xi. 28, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep
   it.' Many hear and talk, hear and stuff their minds with notions, but
   they do not frame themselves to the practice of what they hear. Many
   question not Christ's authority, but yet they do not regard his
   doctrine. Now, faith doth not only silence our doubts, but quicken our
   affections and enliven our practice.

   Secondly, How can we now hear Christ, since he is removed into the
   heaven of heavens, and doth not speak to us in person?

   Ans. Surely it doth not only concern the believers of that age, who
   conversed with Christ in the days of his flesh, but it is the general
   duty of all Christians to hear Christ; for during the whole gospel
   dispensation, God speaketh to us by his Son, Heb. i. 2: the revelation
   is settled, and not delivered by parcels, as it was to the ordinary
   prophets. Now we hear Christ in the scriptures: Heb. ii. 3, 4, How
   shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? which was first
   spoken by the Lord, and afterwards confirmed to us by them that heard
   him.' He began to speak and to declare the gospel both before and after
   his resurrection; and they that heard him were especially the apostles,
   who, being induced by the Holy Ghost, declared it first to the Jews,
   and then to the Gentiles, to whom it was continued by divers signs and
   wonders, as to the apostles, and to extraordinary messengers. Christ
   saith. Luke x. 16, He that heareth you heareth. me; and he that
   despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that
   sent me.' The despising of the messenger is the despising him that
   sendeth the message. A man's apostle is himself, is a Jewish proverb.
   As to ordinary ministers he saith, Lo, I am with you to the end of the
   world.' Mat. xxviii. 20; they are taken into part of the apostolical
   commission and blessings; they preach in Christ's name, and we, as in
   his stead, pray you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. v. 20; so that it is his
   voice and his message; he affordeth his presence and assistance unto
   the world's end. If you receive it with faith and obedience, you are in
   a course and way which will bring you to everlasting blessedness; but
   if you stand out obstinately against his message, you are in the way to
   everlasting misery, for refusing God's methods for your redemption.

   Thirdly, The properties of this hearing or submission to our great
   prophet.

   1. There must be a resolute consent or resignation of ourselves to his
   teaching and instruction. All particular duties are included in the
   general. First, we own Christ in his offices, before we perform the
   duties which each of those offices calleth for at our hands ml from
   us-before we depend on him as a priest, or obey him as a king.' As we
   receive him with thankfulness and love as our dearest Saviour, and with
   reverence and a consent of subjection as a sovereign lord, so also with
   a consent of resolution to follow his directions as our prophet and
   teacher, being convinced that he is sent from God to show us the way or
   life and happiness: John vi. 63, Lord to whom shall we go? thou hast
   the words of eternal life.' His doctrine showeth that there is such a
   thing, how it was purchased, which way it may be had, by God's offer
   and the terms prescribed. Before we take any particular direction from
   Christ about this or that duty, we must first consent in the general
   that he shall be our teacher and prophet. A particular consent to
   Christ in this relation is a necessary as to any of the rest.

   2. This resignation of our souls to Christ as a teacher as it must be
   resolute, so it must be unbounded and without reserves We must submit
   absolutely to all that he propoundeth, though some mysteries be above
   our reason, some precepts against the interest and inclination of the
   flesh, some promises seem to be against hope, or contrary to natural
   probabilities. There are some mysteries in the Christian religion,
   though not against reason, yet above natural reason. Now we must
   believe them upon Christ's word, captivantes omnem intellectum in
   obsequium Christi, 2 Cor. x. 5, Bringing into captivity every thought
   into the obedience of Christ.' All our disputings and reasonings
   against the Christian doctrine must be captivated by a submission to
   the authority of our teacher and prophet. A disciple is to be a
   learner, not a caviller; and some principles are not to be chewed but
   swallowed as pills on the credit of the physician, when it appeareth on
   other grounds that Christ is the great teacher sent from God. An as
   there are mysteries above our reason, so there be duties against the
   interest and inclination of the flesh. Many of Christ's precepts are
   displeasing to corrupt nature--to deny ourselves, to take up the cross,
   to mortify our appetites and passions, to cut off right hands, and to
   pluck out right eyes; that none shall be saved that are not regenerate
   and holy; that the non-condemnation is the privilege of those that walk
   not after the flesh but after the Spirit; that if we live after the
   flesh we shall die; that we must not seek great things for ourselves;
   that we must hate father and mother, and our own life, if we will be
   Christ's disciples. Flesh and blood can hardly down with these
   things--that there shall be such an exact day of account, such eternal
   torments in the other world; yet if this be revealed by our great
   prophet, as reason must not be heard against Christ, so the flesh must
   not be heard against Christ, nor the world heard against Christ; so if
   some of our hopes exceed the probability of natural causes: Rom. iv.
   18, he against hope believed in hope,' as the resurrection of the body.
   We must believe and obey him in what he offereth and commandeth,
   notwithstanding the contradiction of our carnal minds and hearts, in
   what is hard to be believed and practised, as well as in what is easy.

   3. It must be speedy as to the great solemn acts of submission. Do not
   delay to hear him: Heb. iii. 7, To-day, if you will hear his voice,
   harden not your hearts.' Christ must not be put off with dilatory
   shifts; if we refuse to hear to-day, Christ may refuse to speak
   to-morrow. The Father hath his time of waiting, the Son of his
   gospel-offers, the Spirit of his earnest motions: it is dangerous to
   slip our day; therefore, if you will hear him, hear him now! Hear him
   betimes; the season falleth under the precept as well as the duty: Now,
   while it is called to-day.'

   4. Your consent to hear him must be real, practical, and obediential,
   verified in the whole tenor and course of your lives and actions; for
   Christ will not be flattered with empty titles. Why call ye me lord and
   master, and do not the things which I say?' Luke vi. 46. If you pretend
   to hear his word, you must do it also, for you do not hear to please
   your minds with knowing, but that you may make it your serious care and
   business to serve, love, and please God. Many study Christianity to
   form their opinions rather than reform their hearts and practice. The
   great use of knowledge and faith is to behold the love of God in the
   face of Jesus Christ, that our own love may be quickened and increased
   to him again. If it serve only to regulate opinions, it is but dead
   speculation, not a living faith. A naked belief is but the sight of a
   feast,--it is the gracious soul doth eat and digest it; when our faith
   is turned into love and obedience, that is the true faith.

   III. The reasons why this prophet must be heard.

   1. Consider whose voice it is who speaketh--the only beloved Son of
   God, or God himself--and surely when he speaketh he must be heard: Heb.
   xii. 25, See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped
   not who refused him that spake from earth, much more shall not we
   escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven.' It is
   Christ doth speak, and God by him, commanding us to repent and believe
   the gospel; now to refuse him is a high contempt. God, when he gave the
   law, he spake on earth; but when he spake by Christ, he spake from
   heaven; for Christ came from heaven to acquaint us with the mind of
   God, and having done it, is returned to heaven again, from whence he
   sent down his Spirit on the apostles, who revealed his gospel to the
   world. This was a mystery hidden in the bosom of God, and brought to us
   thence by his only-begotten Son. Surely, with all humble submission, we
   should attend unto and obey his word: Ps. ciii. 20, Bless the Lord, ye
   his angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments,
   hearkening to the voice of his word.'

   2. The matter which he speaketh and we hear--the doctrine of the
   gospel; it is the most sweet, excellent, and comfortable doctrine that
   can be heard, or understood by the heart of man: Prov. viii. 6, Hear,'
   saith Wisdom, for I will speak of excellent things: and the opening of
   my lips shall be of right things.' This is the brightest light that
   ever shone from heaven, the profoundest wisdom, the greatest love and
   mercy that ever was or can be shown to sinful wretches, of the highest
   concernment to man; because his everlasting state lieth upon it, a
   state of everlasting woe or weal.

   Three things I shall take notice of:--

   [1.] The way of reconciliation with God manifested and discovered out
   of his intimate love to us. Man had fallen from the love of God to the
   creature, and was conscious to himself of having displeased his Maker,
   and so lay under the fears of his vindictive justice. Now God by Christ
   declareth his love to the offender in the fullest and most astonishing
   way, reconciling himself to him, and showeth his readiness to forgive
   and save him: 1 Tim. i. 15, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
   all acceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save aimers:
   of whom I am chief;' and, 2 Cor. v 19 God was in Christ reconciling the
   world to himself.' Oh, what should be more welcome to the creature than
   this news of this pardoning covenant founded in the blood of Christ!

   [2.] Our duty exactly stated, with convenient motives to enforce it.
   Not only the comfort of man is provided for but also our subjection to
   God, and that upon the freest and most comfortable terms, that we
   should serve him in love and glorify and please him, that we may be
   happy m his love to us; for the sum of religion is to love him and keep
   his commandments: John xiv. 21, 23, He that keepeth my commandments, he
   it is that loveth me: and if any man love me, he will keep my words.'
   To love him is our work, and to be beloved of him is our happiness; and
   ver. 24: He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the word
   which you hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me.' The gospel
   is the very word of God, both the Father's and the Son's; it is an act
   of loving, serving and pleasing God; for this is the word Christ
   preached, that we love God, and Christ loveth us again.

   [3.] A prospect of eternal happiness: 2 Tim. i. 10, He hath brought
   life and immortality to light through the gospel.' This is news but
   darkly revealed before, and without this man knew not how to satisfy
   all his capacities and desires, but was like Leviathan in a little
   pool. Nay, we have not only a prospect of it, but the offer of it as a
   reward appointed, if we will be sincere in our faith, love, and
   obedience: 1 John ii. 25, This is the promise that he hath promised us,
   even eternal life.' Everlasting joy and blessedness is propounded to
   us; Ph, then, hear him, if this be that he speaketh of.

   3. The danger of not hearing this prophet.

   [1.] For the present: to continue to slight and contemn the gospel is
   the mark that you are in a carnal, perishing condition: 2 Cor iv. 3, If
   our gospel is hid, it is hid to them that are lost;' John x. 3,
   My.sheep hear my voice;' and ver. 16, Other sheep are there which are
   not of this fold, and they shall hear my voice.' Christ's sheep,
   whether Jew or Gentile, they have all the same character, they all hear
   his voice; and ver. 27, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them and
   they follow me.' They distinguish his voice, own his voice, obey his
   voice. So John viii. 47, Whosoever is of God heareth God's words; ye
   therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God;' so that you lose
   all this comfort if ye do not hear the voice of Christ and his faithful
   servants.

   [2.] For the future: Deut xviii. 19, Whosoever will not hearken to the
   words which that prophet shall speak in my name, I will require or
   him;' that is he must look to answer it another day. Peter rendereth
   it: Acts iii. 23, Whosoever will not hearken to that prophet shall be
   destroyed among the people.' It is not a bodily punishment but eternal
   torment: John iii. 36, The wrath of God abideth on him;' Mark xvi. 16,
   He that believeth not shall be damned.' Thus you see how dangerous it
   is to refuse this prophet.

   Use 1. Of conviction to the carnal Christian for not submitting to
   Christ's authority. All Christians do it in pretence, but few that do
   it in reality. Doth his word come to you not only in word but in power?

   [1.] Do you seriously come to him that you may have pardon and life.
   When Christ had proved that he was the Son of God, the great prophet of
   the church, by the testimony of John, the testimony of his works, the
   testimony of his Father, and the testimony of the scriptures: John v.
   40, And ye will not come unto me that ye may have life;' --though John,
   his works, the Father, the scriptures, will prove him to be what he
   was, the Messias, the Saviour and Redeemer of the world, yet they would
   not come to him, nor believe, but wilfully rejected him, and their own
   blessedness. What the Jews did wilfully, carnal Christians do lazily;
   they prize his name and slight his office, do not come to him to be
   taught, sanctified, and drawn to God.

   [2.] Do you respect the word of the gospel, entertain it with reverence
   and delight, as the voice of the great prophet? Do you meditate on it,
   digest it as the seed of the new life, as the rule of your actions, as
   the charter of your hopes? A good man is described to be one that
   delighteth in the law of the Lord, and meditateth therein day and
   night,' Ps. i. 2; and, again, Ps. cxix. 97, Oh, how I love thy law! it
   is my meditation all the day long.' But, alas! few are of this temper:
   Hosea viii. 12, I have written to them the great, things of thy law,
   but they were counted as a strange thing, they contemned the word of
   God.' as if its directions were of little importance, or did not
   concern them. Most men live like strangers to the word of God, little
   conversant in it, as there were no great hazard in breaking it.

   [3.] Do you mingle it with faith in the hearing, that it may profit
   you, Heb. iv. 2, and feel the power of it for your good? But rather you
   shun it--run from it: John iii. 20, They that do evil hate the light,
   and will not come to the light, lest their deeds should be reproved.'
   The word is a torment rather than a comfort to you; you are afraid it
   will be found too true.

   [4.] Do you receive it as the word of God? 1 Thes. ii. 13. It may be
   you do not contradict the divine authority in the scriptures, but do
   you soundly believe them, and know the certainty of those things
   wherein you are instructed? Luke i. 4. Have you done anything to prove
   the supreme truth that Jesus is a teacher sent from God? Most men's
   faith is so weak and slight, because it is taken hand-over-head, there
   is no deepness of earth, Mark xiii. 6. You have some light sense of
   religion, but slight impressions are soon defaced, and truths easily
   taken up are as soon quitted; the more we search into the grounds of
   things the more we believe, Acts xvii. 11. The Bereans searched the
   scriptures whether those things were so or no.'

   [5.] Doth it come to you as the Mediator's word?--not in word only but
   in power,' 1 Thes. i. 5. There is a convincing power in the word: Acts
   ii. 37, When they heard these things, they were pricked in the heart,
   and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren what
   shall we do?' Many have not felt this power but they fear it: John iii.
   20, Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the
   light, lest his deeds should be reproved.' A converting power when it
   becometh the seed of a new life: 1 Pet. i. 23, Being born again, not of
   corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which
   liveth and abideth for ever.' A comforting power, giving the heirs of
   promise strong consolation, Heb. vi. 18. Do you find anything of this
   in your hearts? is it engrafted in your souls? James i. 21, Receive
   with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.'

   [6.] Do you hear him universally? It is said of the great prophet, Acts
   iii. 22, Him shall ye hear in all things that he shall say unto you.'
   Many will hear him in the offers of pardon, but not in the precepts of
   duty: you must take his whole covenant, the promises for your
   happiness, the duty for your work.

   [7.] Do you hear him so as to prefer God and Christ and the life to
   come above all the sensual pleasures and vain delights and worldly
   happiness which you enjoy here? Religion is obstructed, not soundly
   received, if your hearts be not taken off from these things: Luke viii.
   14, That which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard,
   go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this
   life, and bring no fruit to perfection.' He is not a scholar of Christ
   who is not more devoted to the love and obedience of God than any
   sensual satisfaction here below--unless you can renounce the devil, the
   world, and the flesh, and give yourselves to Christ, to be taught,
   sanctified, and saved, and brought home to God, to enjoy him in
   everlasting glory, and taught how to deny ungodliness and worldly
   lusts, Titus ii. 12.

   Use 2. Advice to weak Christians:--

   [1.] To excite themselves to obedience by this hear him, when dead and
   lifeless. Many times the heart is dull and needeth quickening.
   Conscience groweth sleepy and needeth awakening--you are too bold in
   sinning, cold and careless in spiritual and heavenly things. Now the
   first means to quicken us is Christ's divine authority: 2 Pet. i. 16,
   For we have not followed cunningly-devised fables, when we made known
   unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
   eye-witnesses of his majesty, when there came such a voice to him from
   the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased.' When you are customary in prayer and hearing--It is Christ's
   will; I must do it as I will answer it to him another day.

   [2.] When you do renounce some beloved lust or pleasing sin, urge your
   hearts with Christ's authority. Remember who telleth you of cutting off
   your right hand, and plucking out your right eye. How can I look the
   Mediator in the face, if I should wilfully break any of his laws,
   prefer the satisfaction of a base lust before the mercies and hopes
   offered me by Jesus Christ.

   [3.] In deep distresses, when you are apt to question the comfort of
   the promises. It is hard to keep the rejoicing of hope, without
   regarding whose word and promise it is: Heb. iii. 6, Whose house are
   ye, if ye hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of hope firm unto
   the end.'
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VII.

   And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were
   sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, be not
   afraid. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man save
   Jesus only.--Mat. XVII. 6-8.

   IN this part of the history are three things:--

   I. The disciples' fear and astonishment, ver. 6.

   II. Their comfortable and gracious recovery by Christ, ver. 7.

   III. The event and issue of all, ver. 8.

   I. Their astonishment: They fell on their faces, and were sore afraid.
   Their falling on their faces was not out of worship and reverence, but
   consternation, as those John xviii. 6, As soon as he said to them I am
   he, they went backward and fell to the ground.' The causes of their
   fear must be inquired into. These were holy men, the flower of Christ's
   disciples; they were men in an holy action--(for Belshazzar in his cups
   to tremble were no news)--they were not in the presence of an angry
   God, it was a gospel-voice that they heard: This is my beloved Son, in
   whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.' They had not a full dispensation
   of his glory, but only a glimpse of it, and that under a cloud and
   revealed in mercy; yet they were sore afraid. Upon any visions and
   apparitions of the divine majesty, God's servants fell to the earth:
   Ezek. i. 28, When I saw the appearance of the likeness of the glory of
   God, I fell on my face.' Paul, when Christ appeared to him from heaven,
   he fell to the earth, Acts ix. 4: Rev. i. 17, When I saw him, I fell at
   his feet as dead.' Abraham was cast into great horror, Gen. xv. 12,
   when God appeared solemnly to enter into covenant with him. So Isa. vi.
   5, Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone.' So Daniel x. 8, 9, When I
   saw this great vision, there was no strength in me: for my comeliness
   was turned into corruption, and I retained no strength. Yet heard I the
   voice of his words: then was I in a deep sleep upon my face, and my
   face was towards the ground.'

   Now I shall give--(1.) The special reasons why the manifestation and
   appearance of God to his great prophets did breed this astonishment and
   fear; (2.) What general note and observation may be concluded hence for
   our profit.

   1. The special reasons why these manifestations and appearances of God
   to his great prophets do breed this astonishment and fear--they are
   two:

   [1.] To humble them to whom he vouchsafed so great a favour. To humble
   them lest the glory of these heavenly visions should too much puff them
   up. Therefore there was ever some weakness discovered in those that did
   receive them. Jacob wrestled with God, but came off halting and maimed,
   though he prevailed, Gen. xxxii. 31. When he came off from seeing God
   face to face, he halted on his thigh. Paul was rapt into the third
   heaven, yet presently buffeted with a messenger of Satan, lest he
   should be lifted up with the abundance of revelations, 2 Cor. xii. 7.
   Corruption remaineth in us, and we are not able to bear these favours
   which God manifesteth to his choice servants, and therefore there is
   something to humble them in the dispensation, and to keep them from
   being puffed up with pride, something that is a balance to the great
   honour wherewith God hath honoured them.

   [2.] All those that received visions from him to teach his people, God
   would season them by leaving a stamp and impression of his excellency
   upon them. This was the preparation of the prophets, and a preparation
   of the disciples to fit them for the work of the gospel. A due
   representation of God's glory and excellent majesty doth qualify them
   for their duty; they are fittest to carry God's message and describe
   him to others who are thus qualified and prepared, and have some
   reverence and awe of God impressed upon their own hearts, and have felt
   the power of his great majesty: 2 Cor. v. 16, Knowing the terrors of
   the Lord, we persuade men.'

   The general conclusion and observation which we may draw from thence is
   this:--

   Doct. That God is of such glorious excellency and majesty, that we are
   not able to bear any emissions or extraordinary representations thereof
   in this state of frailty.

   1. I will prove that God is a great God and of glorious majesty.

   2. Give. you the reasons why we are not able to bear the extraordinary
   manifestations thereof in this state of frailty.

   1. That God is a God of great majesty, and ought to be reverenced by
   all that have to do with him. The point being a matter of sense, and
   evident by natural light, needeth not to be proved so much as improved.

   [1.] Scripture representeth him as such: Dan. ix. 4, he is called the
   great and dreadful God;' so Deut. vii. 21, A mighty God and terrible;
   and Nahum i. 5, A great and terrible God is he:' and again, Job xxxvii.
   22, With God is terrible majesty.'

   [2.] This eminently shineth forth both in his works of creation and
   providence, (1.) Creation, in the stupendous fabric of the heavens Jer.
   xxxii. 17-19, Ah Lord God! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the
   earth by thy great power and outstretched arm, and there is nothing too
   hard for thee,' &c. In that mighty collection of waters in the sea: we
   cannot look upon that vast expansion of the firmament, that huge body
   of waters in the sea, without some religious horror. What is the God
   that made all this? Jer. v. 22, Fear ye not me? saith the Lord: will ye
   not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for a bound to
   the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it; and though the
   waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they
   roar, yet can they not pass over it?' (2.) Providence, whether in his
   way of mercy or judgment. Mercy: what a majestic description of God is
   there, Ps. l. 1-5, yet there his presence m his church is described.
   The drift of the psalm is, to set forth God's power and majesty when he
   comes to call the Gentiles, and to set up the evangelical way of his
   worship, when the light of the gospel shall shine forth from Sion: Ps.
   lxv. 5, By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God,
   thou God of our salvation.' Though God is a God of salvation, yet the
   way of his delivering them carrieth majesty and terror with it. So his
   works of judgment: Ps. cxix. 120, My flesh trembleth for fear of thee;
   and I am afraid of thy judgments, when the wicked of the earth are put
   away like dross.' A lion trembleth to see a dog beaten before him, and
   it is imputed as a fault to the wicked that they do not take notice of
   it: Isa. xxvi. 10, They will not behold the majesty of God.'

   [3.] His greatness and majesty is such that we cannot comprehend it:
   Job xxxvi. 26, Behold, God is great, and we know him not, nor can the
   number of his years be searched out.' The greatness of God cannot be
   known, but only by way of negation, that he hath none of those
   infirmities which may lessen his being in our thoughts; or by way of
   comparison, that he is above all, God is greater than man, Jer. xxxvi.
   12.

   [4.] So great that he is fain to put a covering on, to interpose the
   clouds between us and him, for we are not able to bear his glorious and
   majestic presence: Job xxvi. 9, He holdeth back the face of his throne,
   and spreadeth his cloud upon it.' What would become of us if he should
   discover all his glory? This is his condescension to the lower world to
   appear under a veil, and cover his throne with clouds.

   But though we do not know his full majesty, yet there is enough
   discovered both to faith, reason, and sense, that God is great and
   glorious, both in himself and in all his works. Scripture declareth it
   to faith, and reason will soon subscribe to so evident a truth, that he
   that made and sustaineth all things must needs be a great God. What
   other conceptions can we form of him when we look to the heaven and
   this earth which he sustaineth by his great power, and he declareth
   himself to sense by his daily providence to be a God of great majesty.

   The proof of it needeth not so much to be spoke to as the improvement
   of it, which we are called upon for everywhere.

   (1.) It is a mercy that, being so great, he taketh notice of us: Ps.
   viii. 3, 4, When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
   moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; what is man, that thou
   art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou visitest him?' When
   we consider how the majesty of God shineth forth in the heavenly
   bodies, and those many glorious creatures God hath made besides us, we
   may wonder that God should esteem of man, and take care of man, and be
   so solicitous about man's welfare, who was formed at first out of so
   vile materials as the dust of the earth, and is still of so very frail,
   infirm, and mortal condition, and hath carried himself so unthankfully
   to God, that he should take care of him above his whole creation: Ps.
   cxiii. 6, 7, The Lord our God dwelleth on high, who humbleth himself to
   behold the things in heaven and earth.' That the great God of such
   glorious majesty should take notice of worms, and behold us not only by
   visiting, over-seeing, and governing the affairs of this lower world,
   but should condescend to this low estate of ours in taking our flesh,
   whose excellency and majesty is so great that he might despise the
   angels, of whom he hath no need; but to stoop so low towards men is
   matter of wonder, praise, and adoration.

   (2.) We should be humble in our conversing with him, considering what
   he is and we are: Job xlii. 5, 6, I have heard of thee with the hearing
   of the ear, now mine eye seeth thee, therefore I abhor myself in dust
   and ashes.' This should keep his children in a holy awe. Oh! how low
   should we lie before this great God: Gen. xviii. 27, Who am I, that am
   but dust and ashes, that I should speak unto God?'

   (3.) That we must not please ourselves with the performance of ordinary
   service to him, but we should raise it to an eminent degree of worship
   and adoration: Ps. xlviii. 1, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
   praised in the city of our God;' and Ps. cxlv. 3, Great is the Lord,
   and greatly to be praised.' Alas! the best we do is much beneath God.
   What low thoughts had Solomon of his stately temple 2 Chron. ii. 6, Who
   is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven of heavens is not able
   to contain him? who am I that I should build him an house?' Thus should
   we see that our best resolutions and performances come much short of
   the excellency and greatness of God. All formality and lifeless service
   proceedeth from hence, that we have not due and raised thoughts of his
   majesty and being: Mal. i. 14, I am a great king, saith the Lord of
   hosts.' The greatness of God calleth for other service than usually we
   give to him--he gets nothing from us that is perfect. But surely we
   should not put him off with our refuse, but spend the best of our
   strength, time, parts, and affections, in his service. Superficial
   dealing in it argueth mean thoughts of God, it is a lessening of his
   majesty.

   (4.) We serve a great master, and so may expect great things from him.
   He discovereth himself unto his people according to the greatness and
   majesty of his being: Ps. cxxvi. 2, 3, The Lord hath done great things
   for them, yea, the Lord hath done great things for us whereof we are
   glad.' Kings or princes do not give pence or brass farthings, but
   bestow gifts becoming their magnificence. The heathens were forced to
   acknowledge it, and the people of God do willingly acknowledge it. So
   Joel ii. 21, Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice, for the Lord will
   do great things.' Be the mercies never so rare, the way never so
   difficult, God is able to accomplish them.

   (5.) This should banish the fear of man, as to any danger can come from
   them to us, or to any attempts against God: Mat. x. 28, Fear not them
   which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear
   him who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell fire.' They may
   threaten great things to us, but God threateneth greater. See Exod.
   xviii. 11, Now I know that God is greater than all gods, for in the
   thing wherein they dealt proudly God was above them.' There is a
   greater being we have to depend upon.

   (6.) Because God is of such majesty and greatness, we should quarrel at
   none of his dealings, for he is too high to be questioned by the
   creature, and his counsels are carried on in such a way as we cannot
   judge of them, no more than a worm can judge of the affairs of a man;
   he is great in counsel, and wonderful in working.

   (7.) This should keep his children in an holy awe: Heb. xii. 28, 29,
   Let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
   and godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire.' When we come in the
   holy assemblies: Gen. xxviii. 17, How dreadful is this place!' In our
   general course we must not slight his frowns nor despise his favours,
   all comes from a great God; nor behave ourselves irreverently in his
   presence, but still walk as those that have to do with a great and
   glorious God.

   2. That in this present state we are not able to bear any extra
   ordinary manifestation of his greatness and majesty.

   [1.] Because of his glory, which would consume and swallow us up. This
   was a voice from the excellent glory,' 2 Pet. i. 17. Now if this
   excellent glory by the vail of the firmament were not obscured, man
   were not able to bear it: Job xxxvii. 20, If man speak, he shall be
   swallowed up:' 1 Tim. vi. 16, He dwelleth in light which no man can
   approach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can see,' till we are
   received to heaven. Thus it is, his glory would kill us, his voice
   confound us. There is a mighty disproportion between mortal creatures
   and the infinite majesty of God; the brightness of his glory soon
   burdeneth and over-burdeneth the infirmity of the best creatures.

   [2.] Because of our weakness.

   (1.) Natural. We faint when we meet with anything extraordinary, and
   therefore no wonder if we are astonished with the near approach of the
   excellent majesty of God, and made unfit for any action of body or
   mind. If we cannot look on the sun, how can we see God? our felicity in
   heaven would be our misery on earth. This wine is too strong for old
   bottles.

   (2.) Sinful infirmity, consciousness of guilt is in it also, and our
   disconformity to God through sin: Isa. vi. 5, 6, Woe is me, for I am
   undone; I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
   people of unclean lips, and mine eyes have seen the king, the Lord of
   hosts.' So Peter: Luke v. 8, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man.'
   This raiseth a fear in us upon every eminent approach or discovery of
   God's glory. Before the fall, God and Adam were friends; he would have
   endured God to speak to him; yet after the fall, the appearance of God
   became terrible. When he heareth his voice, he is afraid, and hideth
   himself; and something of this fear sticketh to the best of his people,
   and when God is eminently near it is discovered; for persons that have
   sin in them, to be near to so holy and glorious a majesty, that is a
   part of the reason of this fear and trouble. Well, then, both these
   causes go together, the representation of the majesty of God, and the
   sense of our own frailty and weakness.

   Use. Is to press us to two things:--

   1. To press us to an holy awe and reverence when we come near to God.

   2. To take heed that our fear of God do not degenerate into a slavish
   fear.

   First, To press us to an holy awe and reverence of God, when we draw
   nigh unto him. Surely we should in all our worship have such thoughts
   of God as may leave a stamp of humility and some impressions of the
   majesty and excellency of God upon us; and we should fall upon our
   faces, though not in a way of consternation, yet in a way of adoration.
   And because usually we bewray much slightness and irreverence in our
   converse with God and approaches to him, I shall press it a little.

   1. I will show how the scriptures in the general do call for this holy
   awe of the majesty of God in all our worship: Ps. cxi. 9, Holy and
   reverend is his name,' and therefore never to be used by us but in an
   awful and serious manner: Ps. xcvi. 4, The Lord is great, and greatly
   to be praised; he is to be feared above all gods.' Whether we pray, or
   whether we praise God, still the heart must be deeply possessed with a
   sense of his excellency; and we must admire him above all created or
   imaginable greatness whatsoever, and so mingle reverence with our most
   delightful addresses to him. Again, Ps. lxxxix. 17, God is greatly to
   be feared in the assembly of his saints, and to be had in reverence of
   all that are round about him.' Holy angels and sanctified men, who of
   all creatures have nearest access to God, should most adore and
   reverence him, because they are best acquainted with him, and have the
   clearest sight of him that mortal creatures are capable of. The angels
   are an assembly of holy ones, that always behold his face, therefore
   always lauding and glorifying God. So God is said to be terrible in his
   holy place, Ps. lxviii. 35, whether heaven or the church. Indeed, the
   awful carriage of his people in his worship should be one means to
   convince of the excellency and majesty of God, 1 Cor. xiv. 25. The
   apostle showeth there that an unbeliever, coming into the Christian
   assemblies when they are managed with gravity and awe, is convinced and
   judged, and will fall down on his face and worship God, and say, God is
   in you of a truth;' that is, seeing their humility, brokenness of
   heart, hearing their praises and admirations of God, and seeing their
   orderliness and composedness of spirit; whereas rudeness, slightness,
   and irreverence doth pollute and stain the glory of God in their minds.

   2. Other addresses will not become faith and love.

   [1.] Faith, for whosoever cometh to God must fix this principle in his
   mind, that God is,' Heb. xi. 6. We do not worship God aright if we do
   not worship him as believers; and if we worship him as believers, we
   will worship him with reverence and godly fear. Faith giveth us not
   only a thought of God, but some kind of sight of God, and sight will
   leave an impression upon the heart of reverence and seriousness. Surely
   a sight or believing thought of God should be able to do anything upon
   the soul. It is the great work of faith to see him that is invisible,'
   Heb. xi. 27. We should in our whole conversation live as in his sight,
   and live as those that remember God standeth by and seeth all that we
   are about: but especially in our worship--we then set ourselves as
   before the Lord. Pray as to our Father that seeth what we do: Mat. vi.
   6, Pray to thy Father, which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth
   in secret will reward thee openly.' Hear as before the Lord: Acts x.
   33, We are all here present before God, to hear all things that are
   commanded thee of God;' then the soul should turn the back upon all
   other things, that the mind may be taken up with nothing but God.

   J2.] No other worship will become love. Worship is an act of love
   delight. Now love is seen in admiring the excellencies of that glorious
   being whom we love, and ascribing all to him, as being deeply affected
   with his goodness: Rev. iv. 10, The four and twenty elders fall down
   before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever
   and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art
   worthy, Lord, to receive glory, honour, and power; for thou hast
   created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.'
   They fell down, not out of astonishment, but reverence, and cast their
   crowns before the throne. Whatever honour they have, they had it from
   God, and are content to lay it at his feet, from whom they have life,
   and being, and all things. They have such an high esteem of God that
   before him they cannot be too vile. They are unworthy to wear any crown
   in God's presence, and are content that their honour be a footstool to
   advance and extol his glory. Certainly those that are heartily affected
   to God will go about his worship, as with cheerfulness, so with
   humility and reverence.

   Secondly, To take heed that our humility and reverence do not
   degenerate into servile fear and discouragement. It is apt to do so
   even in the best of God's people. We can hardly keep the middle between
   the extremes; our faith is apt to degenerate into presumption, and our
   humility into despondency of spirit, and our fear into discouragement
   and distrust. So hard a matter is it to serve the Lord with fear, and
   to rejoice with trembling,' Ps. ii. 11, or to walk in the fear of God,
   and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost.

   Therefore, to avoid this consternation, do two things:--

   1. Consider how amiable God hath represented himself in Jesus Christ,
   and how near he is come to us; and within the reach of our commerce
   there is a new and living way through the veil of his flesh,' Heb. x.
   20. So that, though our God be a consuming fire, yet there is a screen
   between us and this fire; though if he should draw away the veil, a
   glimpse of his glory would kill us, yet this glory being veiled, we may
   have access with confidence.' Eph. iii. 12. There are naturally in our
   hearts fears, estrangedness, and backwardness from God. But now God is
   incarnate, and hath been manifested in our flesh, we may have more
   familiar thoughts of him, and they are made more sweet and acceptable
   to us.

   2. Get your own peace with God made and confirmed to you more and more:
   Rom. v. 1, 2, Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through
   Jesus Christ our Lord.' So Eph. ii. 18, he preached peace to you which
   were afar off, and to them that are nigh, for through him we both have
   an access by one Spirit to the Father.' See the breach made up between
   you and God, and be very tender of putting it to hazards any more. God,
   that is a consuming fire to guilty souls, is a Sun of righteousness to
   the upright. When we are accepted in the Beloved, those thoughts of God
   which guilt will make amazing and terrible, will be through peace
   comfortable and refreshing.

   II. Their comfortable and gracious recovery by Christ, ver. 7, And
   Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, be not afraid.' He
   relieveth and helpeth them by three things:--(1.) His approach; (2.)
   His touch; (3.) His word.

   1. His approach. He came to them, you must understand, having laid
   aside his glory which he had in the transfiguration, that he might more
   familiarly converse with them, and without prejudice. Because of their
   weakness and infirmity he layeth aside his majesty, and re-assumeth the
   habit of his humiliation; as Moses did put a veil upon his face, that
   the people might endure his sight and presence. God's appearing at
   first may be terrible; but the Issue is sweet and comfortable: a still
   calm voice followed the earthquake, wind, and fire 1 Kings xix. And God
   doth good to his people after he hath humbled them and proved them,
   Deut. viii. 16. Here, when the apostles lay, like dead men, Christ came
   and put new life and strength into them. He came out of love and pity
   to them, that nothing more grievous might happen to them, either loss
   of life or senses. He would not let them perish in these amazements.

   2. His touch He touched them. Christ's touch is powerful, and a means
   of application. Usually thus Christ conveyed and applied his power: Mat
   viii. 3 He touched the leper and cleansed him. Mat. viii. 15 He touched
   Peter's wife's mother and cured her of a fever. So Mat ix. 19 He
   touched the two blind men and they received their sight; and in many
   other places. So this touching of the apostles was to apply his power,
   and to recover them out of their trance

   3. His speech: And said, Arise, and be not afraid.' The glorious voice
   of the Father affrights them, and the gracious voice of the Son
   reviveth and refresheth them. He comforts those whom the terrors of the
   Almighty had cast down. He doth not chide them for their fear or little
   faith, as he doth at other times; he considered the greatness of the
   cause, their natural infirmity, the governing of which was not in their
   power, and the terribleness and suddenness left no time for
   deliberation; therefore he doth not chide them, but encourageth them.
   The like was done in other cases, as to Ezekiel in his trance: Ezek.
   ii. 1, Son of man, arise, stand on thy feet, and I will speak to thee.'
   So too the apostle John: Rev. i. 17, 18, When I saw him, I lay at his
   feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not; I
   am the first and the last.' So here, be not afraid We must reverence
   Christ, but not be scared at him. Such a fear as may stand with our
   duty is required, but not that which disableth us for it, or
   discourageth us in it; that is no more pleasing to God than security.

   [1.] Observe Christ's tender care over his disciples in their faintings
   and discouragements.

   (1.) That he comforteth and reviveth his disciples. Christ alone can
   help us, and confirm us against our fears; the disciples did not stir,
   but lay prostrate upon their faces, till he came and touched them and
   said, Arise, be not afraid.' In all the troubles and perplexities of
   his people, he will be owned as the causer and curer of them: Hosea vi.
   1, Come, let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will
   heal us, he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.' So Job v. 18, He
   maketh sore and bindeth up, he woundeth and his hands make whole.' As
   all our troubles and perplexities are from his hands, so must the
   healing be. If he make the wound, all the world cannot find a plaster
   to heal it; and no wound given by himself is above his own cure; and he
   woundeth not as an enemy, but as a chirurgeon, not with a sword, but a
   lancet. All other means are blasted till we come to him.

   (2.) That he is exceeding ready, and hath great pity and tenderness
   towards them. As appeareth by laying aside his glory, and coming to the
   disciples, when they came not to him; and speedily, that he might not
   leave them long in the trance, lest worse effects should follow. And is
   he not like affected to all his people in their perplexities and
   troubles? Yes, verily. See Isa. lvii. 16, I will not contend for ever,
   nor will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and
   the souls which I have made.' He speaketh as if he were afraid lest
   man's spirit should fail, being long overwhelmed with terror and
   trouble. So the apostle, 2 Cor. ii. 7, Comfort him, lest he be
   swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.' The Lord Christ is full of bowels
   and compassions, pitieth his people in their infirmities, fears, and
   troubles.

   [2.] The manner and way which he taketh is considerable also--by touch
   and speech. The touch noteth the application of his power; and in his
   speech he saith, Arise, be not afraid.' Christ doth not love to
   confound, but comfort, his servants, and therefore taketh this double
   course, by secret power enlivening and strengthening their hearts: Ps.
   cxxxviii. 3, I cried unto the Lord, and thou answeredst me, and
   strengthenedst me with strength in my soul;' that is, God did secretly
   support him and strengthen him under the trouble. He doth it also by a
   word; therefore we read of God's speaking peace to his people: Ps.
   lxxxv. 8, I will hear what God will say, for he will speak peace to his
   people and his saints.' Besides an inward strengthening, there is a
   necessity of a word from Christ's own mouth ere we can cast off our
   discouragements. Besides his touching or his laying his right hand upon
   us, there is need of his word to us.

   Use. It teacheth us what to do when we have serious thoughts of
   appearing before God. For the case in hand is about those that were
   affrighted and disquieted with divine visions, which was occasioned by
   natural frailty, and partly by a sense of sin. Now al of! us must
   shortly come into God's presence, but who can dwell with devouring
   burnings? If your thoughts be serious, you will find that it is no
   slight thing to appear before God, who is our creator and our judge,
   and who is an holy and glorious God, to whom we have carried it very
   unthankfully and undutifully. Now who can relieve you in these
   perplexed thoughts but the Lord Jesus Christ? Get a word from him that
   your iniquity is taken away, and your sin purged, Isa. vi. 7; and wait
   on him till he settleth your souls in the peace and hope of the gospel,
   Isa. lvii. 14; and then you are relieved in your agonies of conscience;
   stand up, be not afraid: the gospel is a sovereign plaster, but his
   hand must make it stick.

   III. The event and issue of all, ver. 8, And when they had lift up
   their eyes, they saw no man save Jesus only.' This intimateth two
   things:--

   1. That this testimony from heaven did only concern Jesus Christ, for
   Moses and Elias vanish out of sight, and Jesus is left alone, as the
   person in whom God is well pleased, and all the church must hear him
   When they are withdrawn, Christ remaineth as Lord and head of the
   church, and so it showeth the ceasing of Moses's law, and the
   continuance and authority of the law of Christ. The apostle telleth us,
   When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done
   away.' They only prophesied, prefigured Christ to come, but now upon
   the exhibition, the legal ordinances vanished.

   2. That God manifesteth himself, for time, measure, and degree, as he
   himself seeth fit for our good; for the vision is removed when the
   intent of it is obtained. Here the spiritual banquet doth not always
   last; heaven is a perpetual feast, but we must not look upon earth to
   be feasted always with spiritual suavities. There is no permanency but
   perpetual vicissitudes, in our enjoyments within time; we have clear
   and cloudy days in the world, a feast, a desertion: Cant. v. 1, 2, I am
   come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; I have gathered my myrrh
   with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my
   wine with my milk: Eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly, O
   beloved. I sleep, but my heart waketh; it is the voice of my beloved
   that knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
   undefiled; for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops
   of the night.' And ver. 6, I opened to my beloved; but my beloved hath
   withdrawn himself and was gone.' After the greatest manifestations of
   Christ's love, there may be a withdrawing; we cannot bear perpetual
   comforts, and God reserveth them for a better time, when we are more
   prepared for them. There must be day and night in this world, and
   winter and summer; but in heaven it is all day, there is a perpetual
   sunshine, never clouded nor overcast.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

CHRIST'S ETERNAL EXISTENCE

AND

THE DIGNITY OF HIS PERSON

ASSERTED AND PROVED,

IN OPPOSITION TO THE DOCTRINE OF THE

SOCINIANS.
     __________________________________________________________________

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.

   HERE are presented to thy view some of the further profitable and pious
   labours of that eminent divine, Dr Manton (now with God), who though,
   like a tree full of fruit, he has already yielded much fruit, yet still
   more and more falls from him. Since his much to be lamented death, two
   very large volumes (with some lesser) of his sermons have been
   published, which give a clear discovery to the world of his great
   abilities for, and great diligence in, the office and work of the minis
   try. Now this small piece succeeds, which, in comparison of the former,
   is but a poor stripling,--but as the shaking of an olive tree, as the
   gleaning grapes when the vintage is over.' Yet let it not be rejected
   or slighted upon that account; for though it is not so bulky as they,
   yet, according to its proportion, it is of equal value, and shows the
   same head and heart which they do.

   My pen (upon this opportunity) would fain be launching forth into the
   commendation of the worthy author, but I will not suffer it,
   considering how little he needs that from any, and how much he is above
   it as from me. Neither will I suffer it to run out in the commending of
   these sermons; for I hope, to impartial and judicious readers, they
   will commend themselves (the best way of commending). I only recommend
   them, as judging them worthy of the perusal of all who are desirous of
   a fuller knowledge of our Lord Jesus.

   For he is the grand subject treated of in them. His person, offices,
   works, blessings, are here described, asserted, vindicated, and
   improved. Our redemption by his blood; his being the image of the
   invisible God, the first-born of every creature; his creating and
   sustaining all things; his headship over the church, pre-existence
   before all created beings; his being the first-born from the dead, the
   union of the two natures in his person; his reconciling of sinners to
   God through the blood of his cross,--these are the heads insisted upon
   in these sermons (the author following the apostle, Col. i. 14-20).

   And are not these great points, of a very sublime nature, containing
   the very vitals of gospel revelation? Can ministers preach, print too
   much of them? Can private Christians hear, read, meditate too much of
   them? Oh, they are the ta` ba'the, the deep things of God.' in which is
   manifested the polupoi'kilos sophi'a, the manifold wisdom of God.'
   which the angels desire to look into.' which are the wonder and
   astonishment of heaven, which put such a transcendent excellency upon
   the knowledge of Christ. Should we not, therefore, thankfully receive
   and diligently peruse all discourses that may clear up our light in and
   about these profound mysteries? I hope the consideration hereof will
   make these sermons acceptable to many gracious souls. They all hanging
   upon this string, and pointing to this argument (of what Christ is, has
   done, suffered, and procured for believers), they are not unfitly put
   together, and printed by themselves, in this small volume.

   Several of the points mentioned are controversial; for a long track of
   time there has been hot disputes about them. What volumes pro and con
   have been written, both by ancient and modern divines, about them! But
   our reverend author does not so much concern himself in what is
   polemical and controversial, but chose rather in a plainer way (as best
   suiting with sermon-work) to assert and prove the truth by scriptural
   testimonies and arguments: and that he has done to the full.

   Header, whoever thou art into whose hands these sermons shall come, let
   me assure thee they are the genuine work of the person whose name they
   bear. They were copied out from, and according to, his own notes, by
   one who I am sure would be as exact therein as possibly he could. But
   how earnestly could I wish, if God had not seen it good to order it
   otherwise, that the author himself might have lived to have reviewed
   and polished them; for what hand so fit to polish the stone as that
   which cuts it? But now what is amiss must be left to the understanding
   reader to discover, and to the candid reader to pardon.

   Christian, I commit thee to God; may he bless thee, and all the labours
   of his faithful servants (whether living or dead), to the promoting of
   thy spiritual and eternal good. Which he ardently desires, who is,--

   Thine to serve thee in our Lord Jesus,

   Tho. Jacomb.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             REDEMPTION BY CHRIST.

SERMON I.

   In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
   sins.--Col. I. 14.

   THE apostle, in the former verse, had spoken of our slavery and bond
   age to Satan, from which Christ came to deliver us; now, because sin is
   the cause of it, he cometh to speak of our redemption from sin: In whom
   we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.'
   Here is--

   I. The author.

   II. The benefit.

   III. The price.

   The point is this:--

   Doct. That one principal part of our redemption by Christ is remission
   of sins. Here I shall show you:--

   1. What remission of sins is.

   2. The nature of redemption.

   3. That remission of sins is a part, and a principal part of it.

   First, What remission of sins is. Both terms must be explained--what
   sin is, and what is the forgiveness of sin.

   For the first, sin is a violation of the law of the eternal and living
   God: 1 John iii. 4, Whosoever committeth sin, transgresseth also the
   law, for sin is the transgression of the law.' God is the lawgiver, who
   hath given a righteous law to his subjects, under the dreadful penalty
   of a curse. In his law there are two things--the precept and the
   sanction. The precept is the rule of our duty, which showeth what we
   must do, or not do. The sanction or penalty showeth what God will do,
   or might justly do, if he should deal with us according to the merit of
   our actions. Accordingly, in sin, there is the fault and the guilt.

   [1.] The fault: that man, who is God's subject, and so many ways
   obliged to him by his benefits, instead of keeping this law, should
   break it upon light terms, and swerve from the rule of his duty, being
   carried away by his own ill-disposed will and base lusts. It is a great
   and heinous offence, for which he becometh obnoxious to the judgment of
   God.

   [2.] The guilt: which is a liableness to punishment, and that not
   ordinary punishment, but the vengeance of the eternal God, who every
   moment may break in upon us. Where there is sin, there will be guilt;
   and where there is guilt, there will be punishment, unless we be
   pardoned, and God looseneth the chains wherewith we be bound.

   Secondly, Forgiveness of sin is a dissolving the obligation to
   punishment, or a freedom, in God's way and method, from all the sad and
   woful consequences of sin. Understand it rightly.

   [1.] It is not a disannulling the act, as it is a natural action; such
   a fact we did, or omitted to do; factum, infactum fieri nequit--that
   which is done, cannot be undone. And, therefore, though it be said,
   Jer. l. 20, The iniquity of Jacob shall be sought after, and the sins
   of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I
   reserve;' yet that must not be understood as if God would abolish the
   action, and make it as if it had never been, for that is impossible.
   But he would pass by, and overlook it as to punishment.

   [2.] Nor is it abolished as a faulty or criminal action, contrary to
   the law of God. The sins we have committed are sins still, such actions
   as the law condemneth. Forgiveness is not the making of a fault to be
   no fault. An accused person may be vindicated as innocent, but if he be
   pardoned, he is pardoned as an offender. He is not reputed as one that
   never culpably omitted any duty, or committed any sin, but his fault is
   forgiven upon such terms as our offended governor pleaseth I will be
   merciful to their unrighteousness, and forgive all their sins,' Heb.
   viii. 12. They are pardoned as sins.

   [3.] Nor is the merit of the sinful act lessened; in itself it
   deserveth condemnation to punishment. Merito operis, it is in itself
   damnable, but quoad eventum: Rom. viii. 1, There is no condemnation to
   them that are in Christ Jesus.' &c.; because the grace of the gospel
   dischargeth us from it. We must still own ourselves deserving the wrath
   of God, which maketh for our constant humiliation and admiration of
   grace; so that he that is pardoned still deserveth punishment.

   [4.] It remaineth, therefore, that forgiveness of sin is a dissolving
   the obligation to punishment, or passing by the fault, so as it shall
   not rise up in judgment against us to our confusion or destruction: the
   fault is the sinner's act, the punishment the judge's, which he may
   forbear on certain terms stated in the law of grace. He passeth by the
   fault so far, that it shall not be a ground of punishment to us. I
   prove it:--

   (1.) From the nature of the thing; for there is such a relation between
   the fault and the guilt, the sin and the punishment, that the one
   cannot be without the other. There can be no punishment without a
   preceding fault and crime. Therefore, if the judge will not impute the
   fault, there must needs be an immunity from punishment, for the cause
   being taken away, the effect ceaseth, and the sin committed by us is
   the meritorious cause of punishment. If God will cover that, and
   overlook it, then forgiveness is a dissolving the obligation to
   punishment.

   (2.) From the common rule of speaking used among men, for surely the
   scripture speaketh intelligibly. Now in the common way of speaking, he
   cannot be said to forgive or remit a fault that exacteth the whole
   punishment of it. How can a magistrate be said to forgive an offender,
   when the offender beareth the punishment which the law determineth? And
   what do men pray for to God, when they pray for the forgiveness of
   sins, but that they may be exempted from the punishment which they have
   deserved?

   (3.) It would seem to impeach the justice and mercy of God, if he
   should exact the punishment where he hath pardoned the offence. His
   justice, to flatter men with hopes of remitting the debt, where he
   requireth the payment; his mercy, in making such fair offers of
   reconciliation, when still liable to his vindictive justice. There may
   be indeed effects of his fatherly anger, but not of his vindictive
   wrath.

   (4.) The phrases, and way of speaking in scripture, by which
   forgiveness of sin is set forth, show God doth blot out our sins: Ps.
   li. 2, Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my
   sin.' And cover them: Ps. xxxii. 1, Blessed is he whose transgression
   is forgiven, whose sin is covered.' To cast them behind his back: Isa.
   xxxviii. 17, Thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.' And cast them
   into the bottom of the sea: Micah vii. 19, Thou wilt cast all their
   sins into the depths of the sea.' To remember them no more: Jer. xxxi.
   34, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no
   more.' By such emphatical metaphors doth it express God's free and full
   forgiveness, if we seriously enter into his peace; and do clearly show,
   that if God punisheth sins, he doth remember them; if he avenge them,
   he imputeth them; if they are brought into the judgment against us,
   they are not covered; if he searcheth after them, he doth not cast them
   behind his back; if he bringeth them into light, he doth not cast them
   into the depths of the sea; much more if he punish us for them.

   Secondly, The nature of redemption.

   What is redemption by the blood of Christ?

   In opening it to you, I shall prove six things:--

   1. A captivity or bondage.

   2. That from thence we are freed by a ransom, or price paid.

   3. That none but Christ was fit to give this ransom.

   4. That nothing performed by Christ was sufficient till he laid down
   his life.

   5. That thence there is a liberty resulting to us.

   6. That we do not actually partake of the benefit of this ransom till
   we be in Christ.

   [1.] Our being redeemed supposeth a captivity and bondage. All men in
   their unrenewed estate are slaves to sin and Satan, and subject to the
   wrath of God. That we are slaves to sin appeareth by scripture and
   experience: Titus iii. 3, Serving divers lusts and pleasures;' John
   viii. 34, Whosoever committeth sin, is the servant of sin.' Men imagine
   a life spent in vanity and pleasure to be a very good life; it were so,
   if liberty were to be determined by doing what we list, rather than
   what we ought. But since it is not, experience showeth that they are
   convinced of their brutish satisfactions as mean and base, yet they
   cannot leave them, for that true and solid happiness offered by Christ.
   Now as they are under sin, so they are under Satan, who worketh in the
   children of disobedience,' Eph. ii. 2; and hath a great power over
   wicked men in the world, who fall to his share, as the executioner of
   God's curse, and are taken captive by him at his will and pleasure, 2
   Tim. ii. 26. This is the woful captivity and servitude of carnal men,
   that they fall as a ready prey into the mouth of the roaring lion. Now,
   for this they are liable to the curse and wrath of God; therefore
   called children of wrath, even as others,' Eph. ii. 3; that is,
   obnoxious to his righteous displeasure and punishment. Thus were we
   lost in ourselves under sin, Satan, and the wrath of God, from which we
   could no way free ourselves; and if grace had not opened a way for us
   to escape, what should we have done?

   [2.] To recover us, there was a price to be paid by way of ransom to
   God. We are not delivered from this bondage by prayer or entreaty, nor
   by strong hand or mere force, nor yet by the sole condescension and
   pity of the injured party, without seeking reparation of the wrong
   done, but by the payment of a sufficient price, and just satisfaction
   to provoked justice. This price was not paid indeed to Satan, who
   detaineth souls in slavery as a rigid usurping tyrant or merciless
   jailor (from him indeed we are delivered by force), but the price was
   paid to God. Man had not sinned against Satan, but against God, to whom
   it belongeth to condemn or absolve. And God being satisfied, Satan hath
   no power over us, but is put out of office, as the executioner hath
   nothing to do when the judge and law is satisfied; Now, that redemption
   implieth the paying of a price is clear, because the word importeth it,
   and the scripture often uses this metaphor: Mat. xx. 28, The Son of man
   came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
   ransom for many;' 1 Tim. ii. 6, Who gave himself a ransom for all, to
   be testified in due time.' Redemption in the general is a recovery out
   of our lost estate. God could have saved men by the grace of
   confirmation, but he chose rather by the grace of redemption. This
   recovery was not by a forcible rescue, but by a ransom. Christ, in
   recovering his people out of their lost estate, is sometimes set forth
   as a lamb, sometimes as a lion. In dealing with God, we consider him as
   the lamb slain, Rev. v. 5, 6: in dealing with Satan, and the enemies of
   our salvation, he doth as a lion recover the prey. But why was a ransom
   necessary? Because God had made a former covenant, which was not to be
   quit and wholly made void but upon valuable consideration, lest his
   justice, wisdom, holiness, veracity, authority should fall to the
   ground.

   (1.) The honour of his governing justice was to be secured and freed
   from any blemish, that the awe of God might be kept up in the world:
   Rom. iii. 5, 6, and Gen. xviii. 25, That be far from thee, to do after
   this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked; and that the
   righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: shall not the
   judge of all the earth do right?' If God should absolutely pardon
   without satisfaction equivalent for the wrong done, how should God else
   be known and reverenced as the just and holy governor of the world?
   Therefore Rom. iii. 25, 26, it is said, Whom God hath set forth to be a
   propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness.
   for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of
   God; to declare, I say, at this time his righteousness; that he might
   be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.'

   (2.) His wisdom. The law was not given by God in jest, but in the
   greatest earnest that ever law was given. Now, if the law should be
   recalled without any more ado, the lawgiver would run the hazard of
   levity, mutability, and imprudence in constituting so solemn a
   transaction to no purpose. Paul was troubled when forced to retract his
   word, 2 Cor. i. 17, 18; that his word should be yea to-day, and nay
   to-morrow. Therefore, when God had said, Thus I will govern the world,
   he was not to part with the law upon light terms.

   (3.) His holy nature would not permit it. There needed some way to be
   found out, to signify his purest holiness, his hatred and detestation
   of sin, and that it should not be pardoned without some marks of his
   displeasure. His soul hates the wicked, and the righteous God loveth
   righteousness, Ps. xi. 6.

   (4.) His authority. It would be a derogation from the authority of his
   law, if it might be broken, and there be no more ado about it. Now,
   that all the world might know that it is a dangerous thing to
   transgress his laws, and might hear and fear, and do no more
   presumptuously, God appointed this course, that the penalty of his law
   should be executed upon our surety, when he undertook our
   reconciliation with God, Gal. iv. 4.

   (5.) The veracity and truth of God. It bindeth the truth of God, which
   sinners are apt to question: Gen. iii. 5, Hath God said?' and Deut.
   xxix. 19, 20. We look upon the threatenings of the law as a vain
   scarecrow; therefore, for the terror and warning of sinners for the
   future, God would not release his wrath, nor release us from the power
   of sin and Satan, which was the consequent of it, without a price and
   valuable compensation.

   [3.] None was fit to give this ransom but Jesus Christ, who was
   God-man. He was man to undertake it in our name, and God to perform it
   in his own strength; a man that he might be made under the law, and
   humbled even to the death of the cross for our sakes; and all this was
   elevated beyond the worth of created actions and sufferings by the
   divine nature which was in him, which perfumed his humanity, and all
   done by it and in it. This put the stamp upon the metal, and made it
   current coin, imposed an infinite value upon his finite obedience and
   sufferings. By taking human nature a price was put into his hands to
   lay down for us: Heb. x. 15, and his divine nature made it sufficient
   and responsible, for it was the blood of God: Acts xx. 28, Feed the
   church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood;' and Heb.
   ix. 13, For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an
   heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the
   flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Spirit
   offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
   works to serve the living God?' It was that flesh and blood which was
   assumed into the unity of his person as a slip or branch grafted into a
   stock is the branch of the stock, and the fruit of it is the fruit of
   the stock. A naked creature without this union could not have satisfied
   the justice of God for us. This made his blood a precious blood, and
   his obedience a precious obedience. In short, God-man, the Son of God
   and the son of Adam, was he that redeemed us. So, in short, there were
   different parties to be dealt with before the fruit of redemption could
   be obtained: God, satan, man. God was an enemy that could not be
   overcome, but must be reconciled; Satan was a usurper, and was to be
   vanquished with a strong hand; man was unable and unwilling to look
   after the fruits of redemption, and our obstinacy and unbelief could
   only be overcome by the Spirit of Christ.

   [4.] Nothing performed by Christ could be a sufficient ransom for this
   end, unless he had crowned all his other actions and sufferings by
   laying down his life, and undergoing a bloody and violent death. This
   was the completing and crowning act. Partly to answer the types of the
   law, wherein no remission was represented without a bloody sacrifice;
   partly from the nature of the thing, and the fulness of the
   satisfaction required until all that was finished, John viii. 20. Death
   was that which was threatened to sin, death was that which was feared
   by the sinner. Many ignorant people will say the least drop of Christ's
   blood was enough to save a thousand worlds. If so, his circumcision had
   been enough without his death. But Christ is not glorified but lessened
   by such expressions. Surely his death was necessary, or God would never
   have appointed it; his bloody death suited with God's design. God's
   design was to carry on our recovery in such a way as might make sin
   more hateful, and obedience more acceptable to us.

   (1.) Sin more hateful by his agonies, blood, shame, death; no less
   remedy would serve the turn, to procure the pardon and destruction of
   it: Rom. viii. 3, By sin he condemned sin in the flesh;' that is, by a
   sin-offering. God showed a great example of his wrath against all sin
   by punishing sin in the flesh of Christ. His design was for ever to
   leave a brand upon it, and to furnish us with a powerful mortifying
   argument against it, by the sin-offering and ransom for souls. Surely
   it is no small matter for which the Son of God must die! At Golgotha,
   sin was seen in its own colours--there he showed how much he hateth it,
   and loveth purity.

   (2.) To commend obedience. Christ's suffering death for the sin of man
   at the command of his Father was the noblest piece of ser vice and the
   highest degree of obedience that ever could be performed to God--beyond
   anything that can be done by men or angels. There was in it so much
   love to God, pity to man, so much self-denial, so much humility and
   patience, and so much resignation of himself to God, who appointed him
   to be the redeemer and surety of man, to do this office for him, as
   cannot be paralleled. The great thing in it was obedience: Rom. v. 14,
   By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous;' so Phil. ii. 7,
   God was not delighted in mere blood, but in blood offered in obedience.
   All his former actions, together with his death and sufferings, make
   but one entire act of eminent obedience; but his painful and cursed
   death, so willingly and readily undergone, was the crowning act. The
   formal reason of the merit was that Christ came to fulfil the will of
   God, by which will we are sanctified,' Heb. x. 10, therefore his death
   was necessary.

   [5.] From this ransom and act of obedience there is a liberty resulting
   unto us, for the redeemed are let go when the ransom is paid. Now this
   liberty is a freedom from sin, that we may become the servants of God:
   Rom. vi. 22, Being made free from sin, ye became servants of
   righteousness.' Christ came not to free us from the duty of the law,
   but the penalty and curse thereof. To free us from the duty of the law
   is to promote the devil's interest. No; he freed us from the wrath of
   God that we may serve him cheerfully, to establish God's interest upon
   surer and more comfortable terms, to restore us to God's favour and
   service: to God's favour, by the pardon of sin; to his service by
   writing his laws on our hearts and minds. Sometimes our redemption from
   the curse is spoken of: Gal. iii. 13, Christ hath redeemed us from the
   curse of the law, being made a curse for us.' Sometimes our redemption
   from sin: Titus ii. 14, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem
   us from all iniquity;' and so by consequence from the power of the
   devil, which is built on the curse of the law and reign^of sin. Satan's
   power over us doth flow from the sentence of the condemnation
   pronounced by the law against sinners, and consists in that dominion
   sin hath obtained over them. If the curse of the law be disannulled,
   and the power of sin broken, he is spoiled of his power: Col. ii. 14,.
   15, Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
   which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
   cross; and having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of
   them openly, triumphing over them.'

   [6.] That we are not partakers of this liberty, nor of the benefit of
   this ransom, till we are in him, and united to him by faith, for the
   text saith, In whom we have redemption by his blood.' Certainly we must
   be turned from Satan to God before we are capable of receiving the
   forgiveness of sins, Acts xxvi. 18. We do not actually partake of the
   privileges of Christ's kingdom till we be first his subjects: Who hath
   delivered us from the power of Satan, and hath translated us into the
   kingdom of his dear Son: in whom we have redemption through his blood,
   the forgiveness of sins.' Christ and his people are an opposite state
   to the devil and his instruments. While we are under the opposite power
   we belong not to Christ, and the privileges of his kingdom belong not
   to us; but as soon as we are translated and put into another estate,
   then we have the first privilege, remission of sins.' Look, as in the
   fall there was sin before guilt, so in our reparation there must be
   conversion, renovation, or repentance before remission. We are first
   effectually called or sanctified, and then justified and glorified.
   Man's recovery to God is in the same method in which he fell from him.
   It is first brought about by a new nature, and communication of life
   from Christ. He regenerateth that he may pardon, and he pardoneth that
   he may further sanctify and make us everlastingly happy.

   Thirdly, That remission of sins is a part, and a principal part of
   redemption.

   1. How is it a part or fruit of redemption?

   I answer--Redemption is taken either for the impetration or
   application.

   [1.] The impetration or laying down the price, that was done by Christ
   upon the cross. So it is said, Heb. ix. 12, Christ by his own blood
   obtained eternal redemption for us.' Then was God propitiated, the
   deadly blow given to the kingdom and power of the devil, and the merit
   and ransom interposed, by the virtue of which we are pardoned. The
   obtained redemption and remission of sins is a fruit flowing from it,
   and depending upon it as an effect upon the cause.

   [2.] The scripture considers redemption in its application. Besides
   laying down the price, there is an actual deliverance and freedom by
   virtue of that price. This is either begun or complete. The complete
   redemption, or freedom from sin and misery, is that which the godly
   shall enjoy at the last day: Rom. viii. 23, We which have the
   first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
   waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body;' Eph. iv.
   30, Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the
   day of redemption;' Eph. i. 14, In whom also, after ye believed, ye
   were sealed with that Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our in
   heritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession.' The
   inchoate or begun deliverance is that measure of deliverance which
   believers enjoy now by faith, which consists of two
   parts--justification and sanctification. Sanctification: 1 Pet. i. 18,
   Titus ii. 14, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
   iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
   works;' when we are free from the power and weight of sin.
   Justification, so it is in the text, and Eph, i. 7; when sin is freely
   pardoned, and our debt cancelled, and we are delivered from evil and
   wrath to come.

   2. As it is a part, so it is a principal part. This will appear if you
   consider the evil we are freed from.

   [1.] The power of the devil is destroyed. All the advantage which he
   hath against us is as we are sinners, guilty sinners before God. For we
   are put into his hands when we have forfeited the protection of our
   righteous Lord, but forgiveness of sins gives us a release from him,
   Acts xxvi. 18. When Christ came to procure it he destroyed the devil's
   power; when we are converted we are interested in the privilege.

   [2.] The reign of sin is broken, or sanctifying grace is inseparable
   from pardoning grace; yea, I will venture to say, that the gift of the
   sanctifying Spirit is a part of our pardon executed and applied; for a
   part of the punishment of sin was spiritual death, or the loss of God's
   image: Col. ii. 13, He hath quickened you together with Christ, having
   forgiven all your trespasses.' When God pardoneth he sanctifieth and
   createth us anew, that we may be fit for his service, so that we are
   renewed by the Spirit, as well as recovered out of the snares of the
   devil.

   [3.] We are eased of tormenting fears in a great measure. Man can have
   no firm peace and comfort in his own soul while sin remaineth upon him.
   Our case is dangerous, whether we be sensible of it or no, because our
   condition is not to be valued by our sense and feeling, but by the
   sentence of the law of God, which we have broken and violated. If there
   be any difference in the case, the more insensible we are, the more
   miserable. The generality of men indeed are senseless and care less,
   put far away the evil day from them, and so make light work of
   reconciling themselves to God. But are they the more safe for this? No;
   if they will dance about the brink of hell, and go merrily to their
   execution, it argues not their safety, but their stupidness. The
   thought of danger is pat off when the thing itself is not put away, but
   if they be serious they cannot be without trouble: Rom. i. 32, Knowing
   the judgment of God, they conclude that they that do such things are
   worthy of death.' The very light of nature will revive many unquiet
   thoughts within them. The justice of the supreme Governor of the world
   will still be dreadful to them, whose law they have br6ken, and whose
   wrath they have justly deserved. They may lull the soul asleep by the
   stupifying potion of carnal delights, and while conscience is asleep
   please themselves with stolen waters, and bread eaten in secret, which
   is soon disturbed by a few serious and sober thoughts of the world to
   come. God is offended, and what peace can they have?

   [4.] Death is unstinged. That is the usual time when convictions grow
   to the height, and the stings of an awakened conscience begin, to be
   felt, 1 Cor. xv. 56. Then the thoughts of death and judgment to come
   are very terrible to them, and men begin to see what it is to bear
   their own sins, and how happy they are who are sure of a pardon.

   [5.] The obligation to eternal punishment ceases. Pardon is dissolving
   and loosing that obligation. Now the punishment is exceeding great;
   hell and damnation are no vain scarecrows. Eternity makes everything
   truly great, the poena damni, an everlasting separation from the
   comfortable presence of the Lord: Mat. xxv. 41, Go, ye cursed;' Luke
   xiii. 27, Depart, ye workers of iniquity.' When God turned Adam out of
   paradise his case was very sad, but God took care of him in his exile,
   made him coats of skin, gave him a day of patience, afterwards promised
   the seed of the woman, who should recover the lapsed estate of mankind,
   intimated hopes of a better paradise. That estate, therefore, is
   nothing comparable to this, for now man is stripped of all his
   comforts, sent into an endless state of misery, whence there is no
   hopes of ever changing his condition. So for the poena sensus, the
   pain: Mark ix. 44, Where their worm never dieth, and their fire is
   never quenched.' The worm is the worm of conscience reflecting on past
   folly and disobedience. See here a man may run away from the rebukes of
   conscience by many shifts--sleeping, sporting, distracting his mind
   with a clatter of business; but there not a thought free, but is always
   thinking of slighted means, abused mercies, wasted time, the offences
   done to a merciful God, and the curse wherein they have involved
   themselves; the fire is the wrath of God, or these unknown pains that
   shall be inflicted on body and soul, which must needs be great when we
   fall into the hands of the living God. If a little mitigation, a drop
   to cool your tongue be thought a great matter, oh! what a blessedness
   is it to be freed from so great an evil. Perhaps you coldly entertain
   the offer of a pardon now, but then to be freed from wrath to come--oh,
   blessed Jesus! 1 Thes. i. 10.

   II. The good depending on it: Luke i. 77, To give us the knowledge of
   salvation by the remission of sins.' Eternal life dependeth on it, for
   you are not capable of enjoying God till his wrath be appeased. As all
   evil was introduced by sin, so all happiness by pardon. This is an
   initial blessing, which maketh way for the rest.

   Use, of exhortation: To persuade you to seek after this benefit. All of
   us once needed it, and the best of us, till we are wholly freed from
   sin, still need it.

   1. We all of us once needed it; for we are not only criminal persons
   liable to condemnation, but actually condemned in the sentence of God's
   law: John iii. 18, He that believeth not is condemned already.' Now,
   should not a condemned man make means to be pardoned? and should not we
   accept of God's terms, especially when there is but the slender thread
   of a frail life between us and execution? He that securely continues in
   his sins, despiseth both the curse of the law and the grace of the
   gospel. Oh, consider! nothing but a pardon will serve the turn--not
   forbearance on God's part, nor forgetfulness on yours.

   [1.] Not forbearance of the punishment on God's part. God may be angry
   with us while he doth not actually strike, as the psalmist saith: Ps.
   vii. 11-13, God is angry with the wicked every day; if he turn not he
   will whet his sword. He hath bent his bow and will make it ready.' God,
   who is a righteous judge, will not dispense with the offences of wicked
   men, by which he is continually affronted and provoked. Though in the
   day of his patience he doth for a while spare, yet he is ready to deal
   with them comminus, hand to hand, for he is sharpening his sword;
   eminus, at a distance, for he is bending his bow. The arrow is upon the
   string, and how soon he may let it fly we can not tell. We are never
   safe till we turn to him, and enter into his peace, and so the
   obligation to punishment be dissolved.

   [2.] On our part, our senseless forgetfulness will do us no good.
   Carnal men mind not things which relate to God, or the happiness of
   their immortal souls; but they are not happy that feel least troubles,
   but they that have least cause. A benumbed conscience cannot challenge
   this blessedness. They put off the thoughts of that which God hath
   neither forgiven nor covered; and so do but skin the wound till it
   festers and rankles into a dangerous sore. Our best course is to see we
   be justified and pardoned.

   2. The best of us still need it: partly because though we be justified,
   and our state be changed, yet renewed sins need a new pardon. We are
   still sinning against God--either we are omitting good, or committing
   evil. What will we do if we be not forgiven? Renewed sins call for
   renewed repentance. We do not need another Redeemer, or another
   covenant, or another conversion; yet we do need renewed pardon, partly
   because our final sentence of pardon is not yet passed, nor shall be
   passed till the last judgment: Acts iii. 19, Repent ye, therefore, and
   be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
   refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.' We are now
   pardoned and justified constitutively by the tenor of the new covenant,
   and there by description. The sincerity of our faith and repentance is
   not presently evident; it is possible, but difficult, to know that we
   are sincere penitent believers; but at last, when our pardon is
   actually pronounced by our judge's mouth, sitting on the throne, then
   all is clear, evident, plain, and open. And partly because daily
   infirmities call for daily repentance. We do not carry ourselves with
   that gravity and watchfulness, but that we need to cry for pardon every
   day.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON II.

   Who is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of every
   creature.--Col. I. 15.

   THE apostle having mentioned our redemption, doth now fall upon a
   description of the Redeemer. He is set forth by two things:--

   First, His internal relation to God.

   Secondly, By his external relation to the creature.

   Doct. It is a great part of a believer's work to have a deep sense of
   the Redeemer's excellency imprinted upon his mind and heart.

   Here I shall show:--

   I. How it is set forth in this verse.

   II. Why this should be much upon our minds and hearts.

   I. How it is set forth in this scripture:--

   1. That he is the image of the invisible God.'

   2. The first-born of every creature.'

   For the first expression there I shall consider:--

   1. What belongs to an image.

   2. In what respects Christ is the image of God.

   3. How he differeth from other persons.

   1. What belongeth to an image, and that all this is in Christ. In an
   image there are two things--impression and representation. Both are in
   Christ. There is a divine impression upon him, and he doth represent
   God to us.

   [1.] For impression, there is:--

   (1.) Likeness; for an image must be like him whom it representeth. An
   artificial image of God, or such as may be made by us, is forbidden
   upon this account: Isa. xl. 18, To whom, then, will ye liken God? or
   what likeness will ye compare unto him?' What is there among all the
   creatures that can be like such an infinite and almighty essence? or by
   what visible shape or figure would they represent or resemble God?

   (2.) Deduction and derivation. The image is taken from him whom it is
   intended to represent. It is not some casual similitude between two men
   that have no reference or dependence one upon another; hut such as is
   between a father and his only-begotten son; as it is said of Adam, Gen.
   v. 1, He begat a son in his own image;' and so it is verified in Christ
   because of his eternal generation. Like him, because begotten of him.

   (3.) There is not a likeness in a few things, but a complete and exact
   likeness; so Christ, as the second person, is called, Heb. i. 3, The
   express image of his person.' There is not only likeness, but equality.
   God cannot make a creature equal to himself, nor beget a son unequal to
   himself.

   [2.] Representation; for an image it serveth to make known and declare
   that thing whose image it is. If light produce light, the light
   produced doth represent the light and glory producing; and the more
   perfect and immediate the production is, the more perfect is the
   resemblance; a lively expression of the pattern and exemplar. And this
   is the reason why the word invisible is added, because God, who in his
   own nature is invisible, and incomprehensible to man, revealeth himself
   so far as is necessary to salvation to us by Christ. Visible things are
   known by their visible images, with more delight, but not with more
   accuracy. The image is not necessary to know the thing; but here it is
   otherwise. We cannot know God but by Christ: John i. 18, No man hath
   seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
   the Father, he hath declared him.' God is invisible, and
   incomprehensible by any but Jesus Christ, who being his only Son, and
   one in essence with the Father, he doth perfectly know him, and reveal
   unto mankind all that they know of him. Thus you see what belongs to an
   image.

   2. In what respects Christ is the image of God.

   [1.] In respect of his eternal generation. So Christ is the express
   image of his person'--not substance, but subsistence. We do not say
   that milk is like milk, nor one egg like another, because they are of
   the same substance; so Christ is not said to be of the same substance,
   but of the same subsistence. He is, indeed, of the same substance with
   him whom he doth resemble, but the image is with respect to the
   subsistence; so he resembleth the Father fully and perfectly. There is
   no perfection in the Father but the same is in the Son also. He is
   eternal, omnipotent, infinite in wisdom, goodness, and power.

   [2.] As God incarnate, or manifested in our flesh; so the perfections
   of the Godhead shine forth in the man Christ Jesus, in his person,
   word, and works.

   (1.) In his person. They that had a discerning eye might see something
   divine in Christ: John i. 14, We beheld his glory, as the glory of the
   only-begotten of the Father.' There is the as of similitude, and the as
   of congruity; as if a mean man taketh state upon him, we say he
   behaveth himself as a king, but if we say the same of a king indeed, we
   mean he behaveth himself king-like, that is, becoming the majesty of
   his high calling. So we beheld his glory as, &c., that is, such a glory
   as was suitable and becoming God's only Son. So Christ was angry with
   his disciples because they were too importunate to see the Father,
   though they saw him ordinarily, conversing with him: John xiv. 7, If ye
   had known me ye should have known my Father also, and from henceforth
   ye know him and have seen him.' The Father is no otherwise to be known
   but as he hath revealed himself in Christ; and having seen and known
   Christ, who was his image, they might both see and know him; and when
   Philip saith Show us the Father and it sufficeth us'--this will
   convince us all without further argument--Christ answereth, ver. 9, He
   that hath seen me hath seen the Father.' They might see the Father's
   infinite power acting in him, his wisdom teaching by him, his goodness
   in the whole strain of his life; so that in Christ becoming man, God
   doth in and by him represent all his own attributes and properties, his
   wisdom, goodness, and power.

   (2.) In his word; where God is revealed to us savingly, so as we may be
   brought into communion with him, so it is said, lest the light of the
   glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto
   them,' 2 Cor. iv. 4. As God shineth forth in Christ, so doth Christ
   shine forth in the gospel. There we have the record of his doctrine,
   miracles, and the end for which he came into the world; and this is the
   great instrument by which the virtue and power of God is conveyed to
   us, for the changing of our hearts and lives: 2 Cor. iii. 18, Beholding
   the glory of the Lord as in a glass, we are changed into his image and
   likeness, from glory to glory.' Some sight of God we must have, or else
   we cannot be like him: the knowledge or sight of God with mortal or
   bodily eyes is impossible; the external manifestations and
   representations in the creature is imperfect, and sufficeth rather for
   conviction than conversion, or to leave us without excuse, than to save
   the soul, Rom. xii. 1 (they have not the excuse of fault less
   ignorance). To know him in the law, or covenant of works, doth but work
   wrath, Rom. iv. 15, or revive in us a stinging sense of our hopeless
   condition. To know him in person, or to see his glorious works, or hear
   his glorious words, was a privilege vouchsafed but to few, and to many
   that made no good use of it; therefore there is only reserved his word
   to bring us into communion with God, or the glass of the gospel to
   represent the glory of the Lord, that we may be changed into his
   likeness from glory to glory; there the knowledge of God is held out
   powerfully in order to our salvation.

   (3.) His works--all which in their whole tenure and contexture showed
   him to be God-man. If at any time there appeared any evidence of human
   weakness, lest the world should be offended and stumble thereat, he did
   at the same time give out some notable demonstrations of his divine
   power. When he lay in a manger at his birth, a star appeared, and
   angels proclaimed his birth to the shepherds; when he was swaddled as
   an infant, the wise men came and worshipped him; when he was in danger
   of suffering shipwreck, he commanded the winds and the waves, and they
   obeyed him; when he was tempted by Satan, he was ministered unto by the
   angels, Mat. iv. 11; when they demanded tribute for the temple, a fish
   brought it to him, Mat. xvii. 26; when he was deceived in the fig-tree
   (which, was an infirmity of human ignorance), he suddenly blasted it,
   discovering the glory of a divine power; when he hung dying on the
   cross, the rocks were rent, the graves opened, the sun darkened, and
   all nature put into a rout. Though he humbled himself to purchase our
   mercies, yet he assured our faith by some emissions and breakings forth
   of his divine power. Well, then, though it be our duty to seek and find
   out God's track and foot-print in the whole creation, and to observe
   the impressions of his wisdom, goodness, and power, in all the saints;
   especially this is our duty to admire his image in Jesus Christ, for in
   his humanity the perfections of the Godhead shine forth in the highest
   lustre. Whatever perfection we conceive to be in his person, word, or
   works, the same may we conclude to be in the Father also. Did the winds
   and seas obey Christ? the whole creation is at the beck of God. Did
   Christ show himself to be the wisdom, goodness and power of God? surely
   God is infinitely wise. Was Christ holy and undefiled? surely so is
   God--light in whom is no darkness at all. Was Christ loving, pitiful,
   and compassionate, not abhorring the most vile and miserable, whether
   in soul or body, that came to him for relief? surely God is love, and
   he will not be strange to those that seek him in Christ.

   3. How he differeth from other persons; for the saints also are made
   after the image of God: Col. iii. 10, And have put on the new man,
   which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him;'
   Eph. iv. 24, And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created
   in righteousness and true holiness.' I answer, There is a great
   difference between the image of God in man and the image of God in
   Christ.

   [1.] Man resembleth God hut imperfectly. Man was made, and is now made,
   after the image of God, but with much abatement of this high perfection
   which is in Christ, for he hath all the substantial perfection which
   his Father hath. In other creatures there is some resemblance, but no
   equality: other creatures are made like God, but he is begotten like
   God.

   [2.] It is derivative from Christ. God would recover man out of his
   lapsed estate by setting up a pattern of holiness in our nature: Rom.
   viii. 29, Whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed
   to the image of his Son, that he might be the first-born among many
   brethren.' None was fit to restore this image of God that was lost, but
   God incarnate, for thereby the glory of God was again visible in our
   nature. God is a pure spirit, and we are creatures, that have indeed an
   immortal soul, but it dwelleth in flesh; therefore to make us like God,
   the Word was made flesh,' that he might represent the perfections of
   God to us, and commend holiness by his own example.

   Secondly, The next thing ascribed to Christ is that he is the first
   born of every creature:' that is, born of God before any creature had a
   being, or begotten of the Father of his own proper essence, and equal
   with him before anything was created and brought forth out of nothing.
   But here the adversaries of the eternal Godhead of Christ triumph, and
   say, The first-born of the creatures is a creature, one of the same
   kind. I answer--If we grant this that they allege, they gain nothing,
   for Christ had two natures--he was God-man. As God, he is the Creator,
   and not a creature; for the apostle proveth that by him all things were
   made:' but as man, so he is indeed a creature. This double
   consideration must not be forgotten: Rom. i. 3, 4. Our Lord Jesus
   Christ was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, but
   declared to be the Son of God, with power according to the Spirit;'
   therefore we must distinguish between Christ and Christ, what he is
   according to the Spirit, and what he is according to the flesh.

   2. I answer--That metaphors must be taken in the sense in which they
   are intended. Now what is the apostle's intention in giving Christ the
   appellation of the first-born?

   Four things are implied by this metaphor:--

   [1.] Identity of nature.

   [2.] Likeness of original.

   [3.] Antiquity.

   [4.] Dignity.

   Nothing else can be insinuated into the mind of man by such a form of
   speech but identity and sameness of nature between the brethren, which
   is true as to Christ's humanity: Heb. ii. 14, Forasmuch then as the
   children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part of the
   same;' or else sameness of stock, which is true also, for the same
   reason: Heb. ii. 11, For both he that sanctifieth and they who are
   sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call
   them brethren;' or priority of time, for the first-born is before all
   the rest; or else dignity, authority, and pre-eminence. Now, which of
   these doth the apostle intend? The two last the pre-existence of Christ
   before anything was made, as appeareth by this reason, ver. 16, For by
   him all things were made, whether they be in heaven or in earth;' and
   also his dignity and authority above them, as appeareth by the frequent
   use of the word. For the first-born in families had authority over the
   rest. When Jacob had got the birthright, this was a part of Isaac's
   blessing: Gen. xxvii. 29, Let people serve thee, and nations bow down
   to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down
   to thee.' Sovereignty was implied in the birthright, so David is called
   the first-born of the kings of the earth,' Ps. lxxxix. 27, as the most
   glorious amongst them. So here nothing else is intended but that Christ
   is in time and dignity before all creatures.

   Thirdly, Though Christ be called the first-born of every creature, it
   doth not imply that he is to be reckoned as one of them, or accounted a
   creature. It is true, when it is said, Rom. viii. 29, that he is the
   first-born among many brethren,' it implieth that he is head of the
   renewed estate, that he and all new creatures are of the same
   kind--allowing him the dignity of his rank and degree; for God is his
   God, and their God his Father and their Father. But here it is not the
   first-born amongst the creatures, but the first-born of every creature.
   And for further confirmation, here is not identity of nature, for he is
   not at all of the same nature with the angels--those principalities and
   thrones, dominions and powers, spoken of in the next verse--nor issued
   of the same stock with any of them. Mark, he is called the first-born,
   not first created, which must be understood of his divine nature and
   eternal generation of the Father before all creatures. The creatures
   are not begotten and born of God, but made by him. So Christ is
   primogenitus--that is, unigenitus, the first-born, that only-begotten.
   In the following verse he is brought in, not as a creature, but the
   creator of all things. The first-born is not the cause of the rest of
   the children. Peter was the first-born, yet may be a brother to James
   and John, but not a father to them. Now all the rest of the creatures
   are created and produced by him; he is not reckoned among them as one
   of them--he is the image of the invisible God.

   II. Why this excellency of our Redeemer should be so deeply impressed
   upon our minds and hearts? For many reasons.

   1. This is needful to show his sufficiency to redeem the world. The
   party offended is God, who is of infinite majesty; the favour to be
   purchased is the everlasting fruition of God; and the sentence to be
   reversed is the sentence of everlasting punishment. Therefore there
   needed some valuable satisfaction to be given to reconcile these things
   to our thoughts; that we may be confident that we shall have redemption
   by his blood, even the remission of sins. There are three things that
   commend the value of Christ's sacrifice--the dignity of his person, the
   greatness of his sufferings, and the merit of his obedience. But the
   two latter without the former will little quiet the heart of scrupulous
   men. His sufferings were great, but temporary and finite--the merit of
   his obedience much; but how shall the virtue of it reach all the world?
   And if he be but a mere creature, he hath done what he ought to do. I
   confess a fourth thing may be added--God's institution, which availeth
   to the end for which God hath appointed it; but the scripture insists
   most on the first--the dignity of his person--which putteth a value on
   his sacrifice: Acts xx. 18; Heb. ix. 13, 14; at least there is an
   intrinsic worth. This answers all objections. His sufferings were
   temporary and finite; but it is the blood of God,--he hath offered up
   himself through the eternal Spirit.

   2. To work upon our love, that Christ may have the chief room in our
   hearts. There is no such argument to work upon our love as that God
   over all, blessed for ever, should come to relieve man in such a
   condescending way: 1 John iii. 16, Hereby we perceive the love which
   God hath to us, in that he laid down his life for us: that very person
   that died for us was God. There was power discovered in the creation,
   when God made us like himself out of the dust of the ground; but love
   in our redemption, when he made himself like us. The person that was to
   work out our deliverance was the eternal Son of God. That God that owes
   nothing to man, and was so much offended by man, and that stood in no
   need of man, having infinite happiness and contentment in himself, that
   he should come and die for us! Hereby perceive we the love of God. When
   we consider what Christ is, we shall most admire what he hath done for
   us.

   Thirdly, That we may give Christ his due honour; for God will have all
   men to honour the Son as they honour the Father, John v. 23, he being
   equal in power and glory. The setting forth of his glory is a rent due
   to him from all creatures. We are to praise him both in word and deed,
   in mind, and heart, and practice, which we can never do unless we
   understand the dignity of his person. We are apt to have low thoughts
   of Christ, therefore we should often revive the considerations that may
   represent his worth and excellency.

   Fourthly, That we may place all hope of salvation in him, and may make
   use of him to the ends which he came to accomplish. We can hardly
   consider the work of redemption but some base thoughts arise in our
   minds, nor entertain this mystery, with due respect to the truth, and
   greatness, and admirableness of it, without raising our thoughts to the
   consideration of the dignity of the person who is to accomplish it:
   Heb. iii. 1, Therefore, brethren, consider the Lord Jesus, the great
   high priest and apostle of our profession.'

   Fifthly, That we may the better understand two things:--

   1. The humiliation of the Son of God.

   2. The way how we may recover the lost image of God.

   1. The humiliation of the Son of God. Certainly, he that came to redeem
   us was the brightness of his Father's glory and the express image of
   his person. Now, how did he humble himself? Was he not still the image
   of God in our nature? Yes, but the divine glory and majesty was hidden
   under the veil of our flesh: little of it did appear, and that only to
   those who narrowly did observe him; the brightness of his glory did not
   conspicuously shine forth. Was this all? No; his dignity was lessened;
   there was capitis diminutio, the lessening of a man's estate or
   condition,--as of a man degraded from the senatorian order to the
   degree of knight, thence to the plebeian. Thus was the eternal Son of
   God lessened, less than God, as mediator: John xiv. 28, My Father is
   greater than I.' As God incarnate he took an office designed to him by
   God, and obeyed him in all things. They were one in essence, John x.
   30; yet with respect to his office to save souls, he was lessened. Nay,
   not only less than God, but lesser than the angels: Heb. ii. 7, He was
   made a little lower than the angels.' Not born so, but made so. Man is
   inferior to an angel as a man in the rank and order of beings; the
   angels die not: therefore his incarnation and liableness to death is a
   great lessening of his dignity; so not in respect of office only, but
   human nature assumed.

   2. It showeth us how the image of God may be recovered; if we be
   changed into the likeness of Christ, for he is the image of God. His
   merit should not only be precious to us, but his example. It is a great
   advantage not only to have a rule but an example; because man is so
   prone to imitate, that an example in our nature maketh it the more
   operative. His excuse is ready at hand: we are flesh and blood--what
   would you have us do? Therefore Christ came incarnate to be an example
   of holiness. He had the interests of flesh and blood to mind as well as
   we; and so would show that a holy life is possible to those that are
   renewed by his grace. He obeyed God in our nature; therefore in the
   same nature we may obey, please, and glorify God, though still in a
   self-denying manner. The foundation of it is laid in the new birth. The
   Spirit that formed Christ out of the substance of the Virgin, the same
   Spirit is ready to form Christ in you. He maketh new creatures; so that
   there is not only Christ's example, but Christ's power.

   Use 1. Then let the excellency and dignity of Christ's person be more
   upon your minds and hearts; think often of those two notions in the
   text--that he is the image of the invisible God, that therein you may
   be like him. You cannot be the image of God so as he was, but you must
   be in your measure. The fulness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily,'
   but you must be partakers of the divine nature.' He showed himself to
   be the Son of God by his works, when the Jews said he blasphemed when
   he said he was the Son of God: John x. 27, If I do not the works of my
   Father, believe me not.' He allowed them to doubt of them, if he did
   not those works which were proper to one sent from God. Certainly this
   is the glory of man, to be the image of God; there is no greater
   perfection than to live in the nearest resemblance to his Creator.
   Christ is more excellent, because he hath more of the image of God upon
   him.

   2. Consider, again, that he is Lord of the whole creation, and
   therefore called the first-born of every creature.' Well, then, we
   should be subject to him, and with greater diligence apply ourselves to
   the obedience of his holy laws, and use the means appointed by him to
   obtain the blessedness offered to us. There is in us a natural
   sentiment of the authority of God, and we have a dread upon our hearts
   if we do what he hath forbidden; but we have not so deep a sense of the
   authority of Christ, and play fast and loose with religion, as fancy
   and humour and interest lead us. Now, from this argument, you see we
   should honour the Son as we honour the Father, and be as tender of his
   institutions as we are of the commandments evident by natural light;
   for he is not only the messenger of God, but his express image, and the
   first-born of every creature. Not to believe him, and obey him, and
   love him, is to sin, not only against our duty, but our remedy and the
   law of our recovery.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON III.

   For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in
   earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
   principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for
   him.--Col. I. 16.

   THE apostle had told us in the former verse that Jesus Christ is the
   first-born of every creature. The Arians thence concluded that he
   himself was created out of nothing in order of time before the world.
   But it is not the first created of any creature.' but the first-born.'
   which noteth a precedency, not only in point of antiquity, but dignity;
   and is as much as to say, Lord of every creature. For the first-born
   was the lord of the rest, and the title may be given either relatively
   or comparatively.

   1. Relatively; when the rest are of the same stock, or have the
   relation of brethren to him that hath the pre-eminence. So it is given
   to Christ with respect to new creatures: Rom. viii. 29, That he might
   be the first-born among many brethren.'

   2. Comparatively only; when several persons or things be compared,
   though there be no relation between them. So David is called the
   first-born of the kings of the earth.' Ps. lxxxix. 27--that is,
   superior in dignity and honour. So here it is taken not relatively, for
   so Christ is primogenitus, the first-born, that he is also unigenitus,
   the only-begotten. None went before, or come after him, that are so
   begotten of God. What he asserteth in that verse, he now proveth by the
   creation of all things, in ver. 16, and the conservation of all things,
   ver. 17. We are now upon the first proof. Surely he that created all
   things is supreme lord of all things, or hath the right of the
   first-born over them. Two ways is Christ said to have a right to the
   creatures: as God, and as mediator. His right as God is natural and
   perpetual; his right as mediator is by grant and donation. It is a
   power acquired and obtained. His natural right is antecedent to his
   actual susception of the office of mediator; for it comes to him by
   creation. He made all, and it is fit that he should be sovereign and
   lord of all. But the other power and sovereignty is granted to him as a
   part of his reward and recompense for the sorrows of his humiliation:
   Phil. ii. 9, 10, Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given
   him a name above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee
   should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under
   the earth.' The apostle speaks not of this latter now, but of the
   former--his right as the only-begotten Son of God: he is the
   first-born, that is, Lord of the whole creation. And good reason, for
   by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in
   earth,' &c. In the words, the creation of the world is ascribed to
   Christ. Take notice--

   1. Of the object of this creation.

   2. Christ's efficiency about it.

   1. The object of creation is spoken collectively and distributively.

   [1.] Collectively: By him were all things created.'

   [2.] Distributively: They are many ways distinguished.

   (1.) By their place: Things in heaven, and things in earth.'

   (2.) By their nature: Things visible and invisible.'

   (3.) By their dignity and office: Thrones, dominions, principalities,
   and powers'--words often used in scripture to signify the angels,
   whether good or bad. The good angels: Eph. i. 21, Far above all
   principality and power, and might and dominion;' Eph. iii. 10, That
   unto principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the
   church the manifold wisdom of God.' Sometimes this term is given to the
   bad angels: We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
   principalities and powers,' Eph. vi. 12; and Rom. viii. 38, Nor angels,
   nor principalities, nor powers.' So that the meaning is, the angelical
   creatures, together with their degree and dignity, as well among
   themselves as over the lower world; of what rank and degree soever they
   are, they are all created by him. He insisteth more on them than on the
   other branches, because some cried up the dignity of the angels, to the
   lessening of the honour and office of Christ, and because they were the
   noblest and most powerful creatures. And if the most glorious creatures
   were created by him, surely all others had their being and life from
   him. Well, then, there is a gradation notable in setting forth the
   object of the creation. Christ made not only things in earth but things
   in heaven; not only the visible things of heaven, the sun, moon, and
   stars, but the invisible, the angels--not the lower sort of angels
   only, but the most noble and the most potent--thrones, dominions,
   principalities, and powers.

   2. Christ's efficiency about them; in these words, they were c created
   by him, and for him.'

   [1.] By him; as an equal. co-operating cause, or co-worker with God the
   Father: John v. 19, Whatsoever things the Father doeth, those doeth the
   Son likewise.' To bring a thing out of nothing belongeth unto God. The
   distance of the terms is infinite; so must the agent be. Creation is an
   act of divine power.

   [2.] They are for him: they are by him as their first cause; they are
   for him as their last end. God is often represented in scripture as
   first and last: Isa. xli. 4, I the Lord, the first and the last, I am
   he;' Isa. xliv. 6, I am the first and the last; there is no God besides
   me;' so Isa. xlviii. 2, I am the first; I am also the last.' Now all
   this is repeated and applied to Christ: Rev. i. 17, He said unto me,
   Fear not; I am the first and the last; I have the keys of death and
   hell;' Rev. ii. 8, These things saith the first and the last, which was
   dead, and is alive;' Rev. xxii. 13, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
   and the end, the first and the last.' Now these expressions do imply
   his eternal power and Godhead. He hath been before all things were
   made, and shall be when all things in the world are ended. He is the
   first being from whom all things are, and the last end to whom all
   things are to be referred. He is the efficient and final cause of all
   the creatures.

   Doct. That all creatures, angels not excepted, owe their very being to
   Christ, the Son of God, our blessed and glorious Redeemer.

   I shall take the method offered in the text, and show you:--

   First, That all things were created by him.

   Secondly, Why the creation of angels is so particularly mentioned and
   insisted upon.

   Thirdly, That all things were created for him.

   First, For creation by him. This is often asserted in scripture: John
   i. 3, All things were made by him, and without him was not anything
   made that was made.' John begins his Gospel with the dignity of
   Christ's person; and how doth he set it forth? By the creation of the
   world by the eternal Word. And what he saith is an answer to these
   questions--When was the Word? In the beginning;' Where was the Word?
   With God;' What was the Word? He was God;' What did he then do? All
   things were made by him;' What! all without exception? Yes, Without him
   nothing was made that was made.' be it never so small, never so great.
   From the highest angel to the smallest worm, they had all their being
   from him. Two things are to be explained:--

   1. How he made all things.

   2. When he made the angels.

   1. How he made all things. Freely, and of his own will: Rev. iv. 11,
   Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honour, and glory, and power: for
   thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
   created.' They use three words to set forth the honour that is due to
   Christ for creating the world: glory, because of his excellencies
   discovered; honour, which is the ascription or acknowledgment of those,
   excellencies; and power, because the invisible things of his Godhead
   and power are seen by the things that are made,' Rom. i. 20. For in the
   creating of the world he exercised his omnipotency. And this they do,
   not to express their affection, but his own due desert: Thou art
   worthy, O Lord.' The reason they give is, because he hath created all
   things for his own pleasure, or according to his own will--not out of
   necessity. There was no tie upon him to make them, but only he of his
   good pleasure thought fit to do so. He might have done it in another
   manner, or at another time, or in another order. There is nothing in
   the world that hath a necessary connexion with the divine essence, so
   as, if God be, that must be; nothing external cometh from God by
   necessity of nature, but all is done according to the counsel of his
   own will. Some thought all created things did come forth from the
   Creator by way of emanation, as rivers flow out of their fountain; but
   there is no stream floweth out of any fountain but it was before a part
   of that fountain while it was in it. But that cannot be said of any
   creature in respect of God, that it was any part of God before it came
   out from him. Others say the creatures came out from God by way of
   representation, as an image in the glass from him that passeth by or
   looketh on it; but before the world was made there was no such glass to
   represent God. Others would express it thus--that the world cometh out
   from God as a shadow from the body. But yet this will not fit the turn
   neither: for the shadow doth not come out from the body, but follows
   it, because of the deprivation of light from the interposition of
   another body. Others say--all cometh from God as a footprint, or track
   in clay or sand, from one that passeth over it; but there was nothing
   on which God, by passing, might make such an impression. Whatever good
   intention they might have by setting forth the creation by these
   expressions, yet you see they are not proper and accurate. These
   expressions may have their use to raise man's understanding to
   contemplate the excellency and majesty of the Creator; for they all
   show his incomparable excellency and perfection, together with the
   vanity, nothingness, or smallness of the creature if compared with him,
   as great a bulk as it beareth in our eye. They are but as a ray from
   the sun, a stream from the fountain, or a drop to the ocean; an image
   in the glass, or a shadow to the substance; or like a footprint of a
   man in the clay or sand; and so are but certain signs leading up to the
   thing signified, or letters and syllables out of which we may spell
   God--as the streams lead us to the fountain, the image to the man, the
   shadow to the body, or the track to the foot that made it. But the
   scripture, leaving those comparisons, showeth us that the world came
   out from the Creator as .the workmanship from the artificer, the
   building from the architect, Heb. xi. 10. Now every artificer and
   builder worketh merely out of the counsel of his own will. And herein
   they resemble God; but only what they do with great labour, God doth
   with the beck of his own will and word: Ps. xxxiii. 6, By the word of
   the Lord the heavens were made, and all the host of them by the breath
   of his mouth.' A bare word of his immediately created all the world,
   the heavens and earth, and all that is in them.

   2. When did he make the angels? for in the history of Moses there
   seemeth to be a great silence of it.

   I answer--We read, Gen. i. 1, that in the beginning--that is, when God
   did first set himself to create--that then he created the heaven and
   the earth; but we read again in the 20th verse, That in six days the
   Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is.' I
   argue, that if within that compass of time, the Lord made heaven and
   earth, and all things that are in them, angels are included in that
   number, being the inhabitants of heaven, as men and beasts are of the
   earth, and fishes of the sea; as here, by things in heaven, the apostle
   principally understands the angels, and by things on earth, men.
   Therefore, as things on earth were not made but after the earth, so
   things in heaven were not created but after the heavens were created.
   The heavens were not created till the second day, nor perfected and
   fitted till the fourth. Therefore, as God did furnish the earth with
   plants and beasts before men, so did he adorn the heaven with stars
   before he filled it with angels; for he first framed the house and
   adorned it before he brought in the inhabitants. Therefore, probably
   they were made the fourth day. If this seemeth too short a time before
   the fall of the apostate angels, you must remember how soon man
   degenerated. Some think he did not sleep in innocency, quoting that Ps.
   xlix. 12, Man being in honour abides not, but is like the beasts that
   perish.' The word signifies a night's lodging in an inn--shall not
   lodge or stay a night. Others make his fall on the next day, the
   Sabbath, for at the end of the sixth day all was good, very good. The
   angels fell from their first state as soon as they were created--so
   short and uncertain is all created glory.

   Secondly, All things were created for him--that is, for the honour of
   the Son, as well as for the honour of the Father and the Holy Ghost.
   Now this is necessary to be thought of by us, because there is a
   justice in the case that we should return and employ all in his service
   from whom we have received all, even though it be with the denial of
   our nearest and dearest interest. He is worthy of this glory and honour
   from us, and that we should trust upon him as a faithful Creator in the
   midst of all dangers.

   1. I will prove that the greatest glory the creature is capable of is
   to serve the will and set forth the praise of its Creator, for
   everything that attaineth not its end is vain. What matter is it
   whether I be a dog, or a man, a beast, or an angel, if I serve not the
   end for which I was made? And that is not the personal and particular
   benefit of any creature, but the glory of the Creator, for God made all
   things for himself, Prov. xvi. 4; whether he made beasts, or man, or
   angels, it was still with a respect to his own glory and service. God
   is independent and self-sufficient of himself and for himself.
   Self-seeking in the creature is monstrous and incongruous. It is as
   absurd and un beseeming to seek its own glory as to attribute to itself
   its own being: Rom. xi. 36, Of him, and through him, and to him are all
   things.' God's glory is the end of our being and doing, for being and
   doing are both from him, and therefore for him alone. Above all, it
   concerneth man to consider this: who can glorify God not only
   objectively by the impressions of God upon him, and passively, as God
   will over rule all his actions to his own glory, but actively, as he is
   the mouth of the creation--not only to honour God himself, but to give
   him the praise which resulteth from all his works. It was well said of
   a heathen, Si essem luscinia--if I were a nightingale I would sing as a
   nightingale; Si alauda--if I were a lark I would pere as a lark. When I
   am a man what should I do but know, love, and praise God without
   ceasing, and glorify my Creator? Things are unprofitable or misplaced
   when they do not seek or serve their end; therefore for what use are we
   meet, who are so unmeet for our proper end? Like the wood of the vine
   that is good for nothing, not so much as to make a pin whereon to hang
   anything, Ezek. xv. 2--good for nothing but to be cast into the fire
   unless it be fruitful. What are we good for if we be not serviceable to
   the ends for which we were created?

   2. The design of God was that the whole creation should be put in
   subjection to the Word incarnate--not only this lower world, wherein
   man is concerned, but the upper world also. Our Redeemer, who hath
   bought us, hath an interest in all things that may concern us, that
   they may be disposed of to his own glory and our good and advantage.
   All are at the making and at the disposal of our Lord Jesus Christ.
   Therefore it is said, Heb. ii. 10, For whom are all things, and by whom
   are all things.' God that frameth all things ordereth all things to
   their proper end. His works are many, and some are more excel lent and
   glorious than others; and one of the chief of them is the salvation of
   man by Jesus Christ. Therefore all things are subordinated thereunto,
   to the glory of the Mediator by whom this is accomplished: 1 Cor. viii.
   6, But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
   and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
   we by him.'

   Secondly, Why the creation of angels is so particularly and expressly
   mentioned? I answer--For three reasons:--

   1. To show the glory and majesty of the Redeemer. The angels are said
   to excel in strength,' Ps. ciii. 20, and elsewhere they are called
   mighty angels.' This potency they have from their Creator, who giveth
   power and strength to all his creatures as it pleases him. Their
   strength may be conceived by that instance, that one angel in a night
   slew one hundred and eighty-five thousand in Sennacherib's camp. Now,
   these potent creatures are infinitely inferior to our Redeemer, by whom
   and for whom they were made. Though they are the most excellent of all
   the creatures, yet they are his subjects and ministers, at his beck and
   command, both by the law of their creation, as Christ is God, and also
   by the Father's donation, as he is Mediator and God incarnate: 1 Pet.
   iii. 25, He is set down on the right hand of God; angels, authorities,
   and powers being made subject to him.' And again, Eph. i. 21, He hath
   set him far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion,
   and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which
   is to come.' They have a great name, but Christ hath a more excellent
   name than they,' Heb. i. 4, for they are all bound to worship him, ver.
   6, and serve him, for he employeth them for the defence and comfort of
   the meanest of his people. They are subject not only to God, but to
   Christ, or God incarnate. Look, as it is the glory of earthly kings to
   command mighty and powerful subjects--(Are not my princes altogether
   kings?' Isa. x. 8, that so many princes held under him as their
   sovereign and served him as their commander; and when God speaks of the
   Assyrian he calleth him a king of princes,' Hosea viii. 10, namely, as
   he had many kings subject and tributary to him)--so is this the majesty
   of our Redeemer, that he hath these powerful creatures, the mighty
   angels, in his train and retinue. These heavenly hosts make up a part
   of that army which is commanded by the Captain of our salvation.

   2. This is mentioned to obviate the errors of that age. Both the Jews
   and the Gentiles had a high opinion of spirits and angels, as God's
   ministers and messengers: for he doth not always immediately administer
   the affairs of mankind. Now, as they were right in the main as to their
   service, so they added much of curiosity and superstition to the
   doctrine of angels, and by their vain speculations infected the minds
   of many in the Christian church, who were but newly come out from among
   them, insomuch that they fell to the worshipping of angels as mediators
   to God; as the apostle intimateth, Col. ii. 18. Now, because this was
   to the disparagement of Christ, the apostles did set themselves to
   check this curiosity of dogmatising about angels, and the superstition
   or idolatry of angel-worship thence growing apace. Now this they did by
   asserting the dignity of Christ's person and office. As Paul, Col. ii.,
   and the author to the Hebrews, chapters i., ii., iii., Hath in these
   last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all
   things, by whom also he made the worlds, who being the brightness of
   his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all
   things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our
   sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.' It is true,
   Christ was sent from heaven as the angels are, and he came in a
   despicable way of appearance to promote our salvation and recovery, as
   they assumed bodies suitable to their message; yet his superiority and
   pre-eminence above the angels is clear and manifest. He was not only
   equal to them, but far above them, Heb. i. 3. Seven things are
   observable in that verse:--

   (1.) Christ came as the eternal Son of God: He hath spoken unto us by
   his Son.' When he cometh to the angels, he saith, they are servants and
   ministering spirits. For a short while he ministered in the form of a
   servant in the days of his flesh--they continue to be so from the
   beginning to the end of the world.

   (2.) He was heir of all things--that is, Lord of the whole
   creation--they only principalities and powers, for certain ends, to
   such persons and places, over which Christ sets them.

   (3.) He was the Creator of the world. By whom also he made the worlds,'
   saith the apostle. They are noble and divine creatures indeed, but the
   work of Christ's hands.

   (4.) He is the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image
   of his person'--that is, the essential image of God; they only have
   some strictures of the divine majesty.

   (5.) The upholding all things by the word of his power'--that is, the
   conserving cause of all that life and being that is in the creature.
   The angels live in a continual dependence upon Christ as their creator,
   and without his supporting influence, would be soon annihilated.

   (6.) By himself he purged our sins.' He was sent into the world for
   that great and glorious work of mediation, which none of them was
   worthy to undertake, none able to go through withal, but himself alone.
   They are sent about the ordinary concernments of the saints, or the
   particular affairs of the world: he is the author of the whole work of
   redemption and salvation, and they but subordinate assistants in the
   particular promotion of it.'

   (7.) He sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;' they are
   spirits near the throne of God, ever in his presence, attending on him
   like princes. God never made any of them universal and eternal king,
   for he set Christ at his right hand, not the angels. To sit at God's
   right hand, is not only to be blessed and happy in enjoying those
   pleasures which are there for evermore, not only to be advanced to the
   highest place of dignity and honour next to God, but to be invested
   with a supreme and universal power above all men and angels. Take
   these, or any one of these, and he is above the angels, though they be
   the most noble and excellent creatures that ever God made.

   3. Because Christ hath a ministry and service to do by them. He makes
   use of them partly to exercise their obedience, without which they
   forsake the law of their creation and swerve from the end for which
   they were made: Ps. ciii. 20, They do his commandments, hearkening to
   the voice of his word.' They do whatsoever he commandeth them, with all
   readiness and speed imaginable, and therein they are^an example to us:
   Mat. vi. 10, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.' They are
   our fellow-servants now in the work, hereafter in the recompense, when
   we are admitted into one society, under one common head and Lord, Heb.
   xii. 27, who shall for ever rejoice in the contemplation of God's
   infinite excellencies. Well, then, if these excellent creatures, so
   great in power, be always so ready and watchful to do the will of God,
   and count it their honour to assist in so glorious a work as the saving
   of souls, or do any other business he sendeth them about, how should
   we, that hope to be like the angels in happiness, be like them in
   obedience also!

   2. Because the church's safety dependeth upon it. We stand in need of
   this ministry of angels. The service of the angels is protection to the
   people of God--vengeance on their enemies.

   (1.) For protection. Christ hath the heavenly host at his command, and
   sendeth them forth for the good of his people: Ps. lxviii. 17, The
   chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the
   Lord is among them in Sinai in the holy place.' Mark, that thousands of
   angels are his chariots, conveying him from heaven to earth, and from
   earth to heaven; and mark, the Lord is among them--that is, God
   incarnate--for he presently speaketh of his ascending up on high. Thou
   hast ascended up on high, and led captivity captive; thou hast received
   gifts for men,' ver. 18. Among them in his holy place that is, in
   heaven. It is added, as in Mount Sinai--that is, as at the giving of
   the law. They were then there, and still attend on the propagation of
   the gospel. For more particular cases, see Heb. i. 14, Are they not all
   ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs
   of salvation?' So Ps. xxxiv. 7, The angel of the Lord eucampeth round
   about them that fear him, and delivereth them.' All that obediently
   serve and wait on God have the promise of this protection.

   (2.) The other part of this ministry and service is to restrain and
   destroy the devil and his instruments. The scripture often speaks of
   God's executing judgments by the angels. Their influence doth not
   always personally appear, yet it is great and powerful. Though the
   powers and authorities on earth, and their messengers and forces, be
   often employed against the saints, yet the Captain of our salvation is
   in heaven, and all the mighty angels are subject to him, and at his
   disposal. By this means the prophet Elisha confirmed himself and his
   servant, when the king of Syria sent chariots and horses, a great host,
   to attack him in Dothan: 2 King vi. 14, 15, And when his servant saw it
   early in the morning, he said, Alas, my master! what shall we do?' The
   prophet answered, ver. 16, They that be with us are more than they that
   be against us.' And then, ver. 17, he prayed, Lord, open his eyes that
   he may see; and the Lord opened .his eyes, and behold the mountain was
   full of chariots and horses of fire, round about Elisha.' These fiery
   horses and chariots were nothing else but the angels of God. Here is
   force against force, chariots against chariots, horse against horse, if
   we could open the eye of faith and shut that of sense. We read, Acts
   xii. 23, that an angel smote Herod in the midst of his pride and
   persecution: the angel of the Lord smote him.

   Use 1. Let us more deeply be possessed with the majesty of our
   Redeemer. He is the Creator of all things, of angels as well as men,
   and so more excellent than all the men in the world, whether they excel
   in power or holiness, which the psalmist expresseth thus: Fairer than
   the children of men,' Ps. xlv. 29. But also, then, the most excellent
   and glorious angels; he is their creator as well as ours, head of
   principalities and powers, as well as of poor worms here upon earth.
   Surely the representing and apprehending of Christ in his glorious
   majesty is a point of great consequence.

   1. Partly to give us matter for praise and admiration, that we may not
   have mean thoughts of his person and office. He is a most glorious Lord
   and King, that holdeth the most powerful creatures in subjection to
   himself. If Christians did know and consider how much of true religion
   consists in admiring and praising their Redeemer, they would more busy
   their minds in this work.

   2. Partly to strengthen our trust, and to fortify us against all fears
   and discouragements in our service. When we think of the great Creator
   of heaven and earth, and all things visible and invisible, angels, men,
   principalities, &c., surely the brightness of all creature glory should
   wax dim in our eyes: Our God is able to deliver us,' Dan. iii. 18, and
   will, as he did by his angel. This was that which fortified Stephen:
   Acts v. 55, 56, He saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God.' It is
   easy for him who made all things out of nothing to help us. See Ps.
   cxxi. 2, My help standeth in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
   earth.' The Almighty Creator, ruler, and governor of the world, what
   cannot he do? As long as I see those glorious monuments of his power
   standing, I will not distrust he can afford me seasonable help by his
   holy angels, through the intercession of his Son, who hath assumed my
   nature.

   3. Partly to bind our duty. All creatures were made by him and for him;
   therefore we should give up ourselves to him, and say with Paul, Acts
   xxvii. 23, His I am, and him I serve.' His by creation and redemption,
   therefore everything we have and do ought to have a respect to his
   glory and service. There is a variety of creatures in the world, of
   different kinds and different excellencies. In the whole and every kind
   there is somewhat of the glory of God and Christ set forth. Now this
   should strike our hearts--Shall we only, who are the persons most
   obliged, be a disgrace to our Lord, both Creator and Redeemer, when the
   good angels are so ready to attend him at his beck and command, and
   that in the meanest services and ministries? Shall poor worms make bold
   with his laws, slight his doctrine, despise his benefits? Heb. ii. 2,
   3, If the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression
   and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall we
   escape if we neglect so great salvation?'

   4. And lastly, to make us more reverent in our approaches to him; for
   he sits in the assembly of the gods, the holy angels are round about
   him: Ps. cxxxviii. 1, Before the gods will I sing praise to thee'--that
   is, in the presence of the holy angels: 1 Cor. x. 10; Eccles. v. 6,
   Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before
   the angel that it was an error.' The angels in heaven observe our
   behaviour in God's worship--what vows we make to God, what promises of
   obedience. But, above all, there is our glorious Redeemer himself: Heb.
   xii. 28, 29, with what reverence and godly fear should we approach his
   holy presence!

   Use 2. Is to quicken us to thankfulness for our redemption; that our
   creator is our Redeemer. None of the angels did humble himself as
   Christ did do, to do so great a piece of service, and yet he is far
   above them. There is a congruity in it, that we should be restored by
   him by whom we were made; but he made the angels as well as men, but he
   did not restore them. No; they were not so much as in a condition of
   forbearance and respite; he assumed not their nature, he created all
   things, but he redeemed mankind. His delights were with the sons of
   men; he assumed our nature, and for a while was made a little lower
   than the angels,' Heb. ii. 9. We cannot sufficiently bless God for the
   honour done to our nature in the person of Christ, for it is God
   incarnate that is made head of angels, principalities, and powers--God
   in our nature, whom all the angels are called upon to adore and
   worship. The devil sought to dishonour God, as if he were envious of
   man's happiness: Gen. iii. 5, God doth know that in the day ye eat
   thereof ye shall be as gods.' And he sought to depress the nature of
   man, which in innocency stood so near to God. Now, that his human
   nature should be set so far above the angelical, in the person of
   Christ, and be admitted to dwell with God in a personal union, this
   calleth for our highest love and thankfulness.

   Use 3. Is an encouragement to come to Christ for sanctifying and
   renewing grace. I have three arguments:--

   1. The person to whom we come. To whom should we come but to our
   Creator, God infinitely good, wise, and powerful? The creation showeth
   him good, and whatever is good in the creatures is wholly derived from
   his goodness. It is but like the odour of the sweet ointments, or the
   perfume that he leaveth behind him where he hath been, James i. 19. He
   is infinitely wise. When he created and settled the world, he did not
   jumble things in a chaos and confusion, but settled them in a most
   perfect order and proportion, which may be seen, not only in the fabric
   of the world, but in the disposition of the parts of man's body, yea,
   or in any gnat or fly. Now cannot he put our disordered souls in frame
   again? If the fear of God be true wisdom, to whom should we seek for it
   but from the wise God? His infinite power is seen also in the creation,
   in raising all things out of nothing. And if a divine power be
   necessary to our conversion, to whom should we go but to him who
   calleth the things that are not as though they were? Rom. iv. 17;
   According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that
   pertain unto life and godliness,' 2 Pet. i. 7.

   2. From the work itself, which is a new creation, which carrieth much
   resemblance with the old: Eph. ii. 10, For we are his workmanship,
   created in Christ Jesus unto good works;' 2 Cor. iv. 6, For God, who
   commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into our
   hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
   face of Jesus Christ.' It is such an effect as comes from a being of
   infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, that man may be in a capacity to
   love, please, and serve God. What was lost in Adam can only be
   recovered by Christ.

   3. From the relation of the party that seeketh it: Ps. cxix. 73, Thine
   hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding, that I may
   learn thy commandments.' We go to him as his own creatures. This plea
   hath great force because of God's goodness to all his creatures. (1.)
   Not only the angels, but every worm and fly had their being from
   Christ; there is a great variety of living things in the world, but
   they are all fed from the common fountain; therefore we may comfortably
   come to him for life and quickening, John i. 4. We need not be
   discouraged by our baseness and vileness, for the basest worm had what
   it hath from him. (2.) That Christ, as Creator, beareth such affection
   to man as the work of his hands: Is it good unto thee that thou
   shouldst despise the work of thy hands?' Job x. 3. Artificers, when
   they have made an excellent work, are very chary of it, and will not
   destroy it and break it in pieces: Job xiv. 15, Thou wilt have a desire
   to the work of thine hands.' As creatures beg relief and help; if you
   cannot plead the covenant of Abraham, plead the covenant of Noah. (3.)
   God forsakes none of the fallen creatures but those that forsake him
   first: 2 Chron. xv. 2, The Lord is with you while you be with him, and
   if ye seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him he will
   forsake you;' 1 Chron. xxviii. 9, If thou seek him he will be found of
   thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever.' (4.)
   Especially will Christ be good to man seeking after him for grace, that
   we may serve and obey him. For he is no Pharaoh, to require brick and
   give no straw. Creating grace laid the debt upon us, and his redeeming
   grace provideth the power and help, that we may discharge it. Now, when
   we acknowledge the debt and confess our impotency to pay it, and our
   willingness to return to our duty, will Christ fail us? A conscience of
   our duty is a great matter, but a desire of grace to perform it is
   more. Therefore, come as creatures earnestly desiring to do their
   Creator's will, and to promote his glory. God will not refuse the soul
   that lieth so submissively at his feet.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON IV.

   And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.--Col. I.
   17.

   THE apostle had asserted the dignity of Christ's person by ascribing
   the work of creation to him: now the work of conservation and
   providence. By the same divine power by which Christ made all things he
   doth preserve and sustain all things.

   In this verse two things are ascribed to Christ:--

   First, His precedency in point of time, or his antiquity before all
   creatures: and he is before all things--that is, he had an eternal
   being before anything that now is created.

   Secondly, His sustaining all things by his almighty power: and by him
   all things do consist. All creatures owe their continuance and
   preservation to him.

   The first point is his precedency and pre-existence before all
   creatures whatsoever.

   Doct. That Jesus Christ had a being before any of the creatures were
   made.

   1. That he had a being long before he was born of the Virgin, for he
   was in the time of the patriarchs, as John viii. 48, Before Abraham
   was, I am;' to say nothing of that godlike way of speaking--I am; not I
   was, but I am; that which I now plead for is, that he was before
   Abraham. The words are occasioned by Christ saying that Abraham saw his
   day and was glad, which the Jews understood not of a prophetical but of
   a real vision, and therefore objected the impossibility that he was not
   yet fifty years old, and how could he see Abraham, or Abraham see him?
   Christ doth not answer to their ill interpretation, but showeth that
   their very objection contained no absurdity if taken in their own
   sense, for he was not only in the time of Abraham, but long before, and
   so affirmeth more than that objection required. The Jews thought it
   absurd that Christ should be in the time of Abraham, but Christ
   affirmeth more, and that with a strong asseveration. He was not only by
   the constitution of God, but really existing before Abraham, for the
   predestination not only of Christ but of Abraham, and all the elect,
   was before the foundation of the world. If, in respect of special
   prediction, mark then what must follow. Then Cyrus must be in the time
   of Isaiah, Josiah must be in the time of Jeroboam, the calling of the
   Gentiles must be in the time of Moses, for they prophesied of these
   things.

   2. That he had a being at the time of the creation, that is also clear;
   for it is said, In the beginning was the Word.' John i. 1--that is,
   when Christ set himself to create all things. The word beginning,
   signifies many things, but chiefly the beginning of all time,
   especially when it is put absolutely, without any limitation to the
   matter in hand. So John viii. 44, The devil was a murderer from the
   beginning that is, almost as soon as created; Mat. xix. 4, He that made
   them at the beginning, made them male and female.' So Heb. i. 10, And
   thou in the beginning hast laid the foundations of the earth;' and in
   many other places. Therefore Christ had a being when the world and all
   creatures were made, visible and invisible. So Prov. viii. 22-31, The
   Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
   I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth
   was. When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no
   fountains abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled,
   before the hills was I brought forth: while as yet he had not made the
   earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.
   When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon
   the face of the depth: when he established the clouds above: when he
   strengthened the fountains of the deep: when he gave to the sea his
   decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he
   appointed the foundations of the earth: then I was by him, as one
   brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always
   before him; rejoicing in the habit able parts of his earth; and my
   delights were with the sons of men.' There the Wisdom of God, or the
   eternal Word, describeth the antiquity of his person. All the question
   is, what this Wisdom is that is there spoken of?

   (1.) It is not human, but divine; for the Wisdom there spoken of was
   before the world was.

   (2.) Whatever it be, it is not a divine attribute, but a divine person;
   for those things which are there ascribed to Wisdom cannot properly
   belong to an attribute, to be begotten, brought forth, ver. 23, 24. to
   have the affections of love, ver. 27, delight, ver. 31. All along the
   expressions agree only to a person. That Wisdom which inviteth sinners,
   promises the Spirit, threatens eternal destruction to those which
   hearken not to him, commendeth not the laws of Moses, but requireth
   obedience to his own laws--what can this Wisdom be but a person? If the
   intent were only to express that God is wise, what strange expressions
   would these be! To what purpose were it to give us notice that he was
   wise from the beginning, if there were no other mystery in it?

   (3.) This person was Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. i. 24;
   And in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,' Col.
   ii. 3.

   3. Thirdly, That Christ was before the world was, from all eternity:
   Micah v. 2, His goings forth are from everlasting.' The prophet there
   speaketh of his birth at Bethlehem, and his eternal generation, and
   distinguishes the one from the other: But thou, Bethlehem Ephrata,
   though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
   shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings
   forth have been from of old, from everlasting;' or from the days of
   eternity. This last clause is added lest any should look upon this
   ruler as only man, and beginning to be at his incarnation. He that was
   born at Bethlehem was also true God, begotten of the Father from all
   eternity.

   4. Fourthly, That Christ was God subsisting in the divine nature. I
   shall bring two places to prove that. The first, Phil. ii. 6, Who being
   in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but
   emptied himself, and made himself of no reputation.' He was first in
   the form of God, before he appeared in the form of a servant. The form
   of God is his divine glory and blessedness, every way equal to God; the
   form of a servant is either his coming in the similitude of sinful
   flesh, or his subjecting himself to the curse of the law, or his humble
   and mean condition while he lived among men. It consists in one of
   these, or in all three. Now before he submitted to this, he existed in
   the form of God that is, was clothed with divine majesty, and in all
   things equal with God the Father: his being and existence which he then
   had was truly divine. The form of God--is the very divine essence, as
   clothed with glory and majesty; this did justly and naturally belong to
   him, and was not usurped by him. The other place is Christ's prayer:
   John xvii. 5, And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thy own self,
   with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.' God is said
   to glorify any person when he giveth him glorious qualities and powers;
   or by revealing and manifesting those glorious qualities which he hath;
   or when he doth receive him and treat him agreeably to his glory. The
   meaning of Christ's prayer, then, must be of one or other of all these
   senses. When he prayeth that the Father would glorify him with that
   glory that he had with him before the world was, if you take it in the
   first sense, he desireth that God would bestow upon him as Mediator, or
   God incarnate, a glory suitable to that glory be had with him from all
   eternity; if in the second sense, he desireth his glory may be
   revealed, or become conspicuous in his human nature; if in the third,
   that God would receive him honourably and agreeably to that glory:
   which sense is the chiefest, for it containeth the other two. The
   meaning, then, in short, is, that he might be received to the full
   enjoyment of that glory which he had before the world was. Christ was
   from all eternity the glorious God. This glory of his Godhead, by his
   humiliation was not diminished and lessened, but obscured and hidden;
   and therefore prayeth that he may be received by the Father, and openly
   declared to the world to be the Son of God; or that the glory of his
   Godhead might shine forth in the person of Christ, God-man. Well, then,
   before any creature was, Christ had a divine glory. How had it he? The
   enemies of this truth say, By decree or designation, not by possession.
   But that can not be: he that is not, hath nothing. If he had not a
   divine being, how could he have divine glory before the world? None can
   say Paul was an apostle of Christ before the world was, because he was
   appointed or designed to this work; yea, none can say he had faith and
   brotherly love when he was yet an unbeliever and persecutor; yet it
   pleased God to separate him from his mother's womb, and predestinated
   him to have these things. Again, then, all true believers may thus pray
   to God, Glorify me with,' &c., for they are thereunto appointed. But
   this is absurd. Besides, if he had it then, how could he want it now?
   The decree is the same. It remaineth, then, that Christ had a being and
   substance in the Godhead before any of the creatures were made.

   Use 1. This serveth for the confutation of those atheists, that say,
   Christ took upon him the appellation of a god to make his doctrine more
   authentic and effectual. They confess the morals of Christianity are
   most excellent for the establishment of piety and honesty, but, men's
   inclination carrying them more powerfully to vice than virtue, this
   doctrine would not be received with any reverence if it came
   recommended to them by a mere man, and therefore Christ assumed the
   glorious appellation of the Son of God, or pretended to be God--a
   blasphemy very derogatory both to the honour of Christ and
   Christianity, and quite contrary to the drift of the scriptures, both
   of the Old and New Testament. The Messiah promised in the Old Testament
   was to be God, all the prophets agree in that. Jesus Christ proved
   himself to be God by his word and works, and the apostles still assert
   it. Could they that lived in so many several ages as the prophets and
   apostles did, lay their heads together and have intelligence one with
   another to convey this imposture to the world? Surely, if Christ be the
   Messiah promised in the Old Testament, as clearly he is, then he is
   God, for that describeth him to be such; and if Christ usurped this
   honour, how did God so highly favour him with such extra ordinary
   graces, by inspiring him with the knowledge of the best religion in the
   world, to authorise him with miracles, to raise him from the dead? And
   must this religion, that condemneth all frauds, and doing evil that
   good may come of it, be supported by a lie? Or cannot God govern the
   world without countenancing such a deceit? Or is it possible that such
   holy persons as our Lord Jesus and his apostles were, could be guilty
   of such an imposture? Did they do this by command of God? No, surely;
   for God, which is the God of truth, would not command them to teach a
   lie, or to make use of one. He hath power enough to cause the truth to
   be embraced by some other means; and a greater injury cannot be done
   him than to go about to gratify him with what he hateth; much less
   would God have commanded a mere man to call himself his eternal Son,
   and God equal to him, which is a blasphemy and sacrilege as well as a
   lie--the greatest of the kind, for mortal man to take upon himself to
   be the eternal God. If it were not by his express commandment, would he
   suffer such an attempt to go unpunished? Would he witness from heaven,
   This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased'? Would he have raised
   him from the dead, and so engaged the world to believe in him and adore
   him? Acts xvii. 31.

   2. If Christ were before all things, let us prefer him above all
   things. This consideration is of great use to draw off our hearts from
   all created things, and to lessen our respects to worldly vanities,
   that they may be more earnestly fixed on what is eternal and glorious.
   He that was before the world was will be when the world shall be no
   more. Christ is from everlasting to everlasting, Ps. xc. 2. To him
   should we look, after him should we seek: he is first and last, the
   beginning and ending. It is for an everlasting blessedness, for the
   enjoyment of an eternal God, that our souls were made. He that was from
   the beginning, and will be when all things shall have an end, it is he
   that should take up our minds and thoughts. How can we have room for so
   many thoughts about fading glories, when we have an eternal God and
   Christ to think of? What light can we see in a candle when the sun
   shineth in his full strength? All things in the world serve only for a
   season, and then wither; and that season is but a short one. You glory
   in your riches and pre-eminence now, but how long will you do so?
   To-day that house and lands is thine, but thou canst not say it will be
   thine to-morrow. But a believer can say, My God, my Christ, is mine
   to-day, and will be mine to all eternity.' Death taketh all from
   us--honours and riches, and strength, and life; but it cannot take God
   and Christ from us. They are ours, and ever lastingly ours.

   Secondly, We come now to the second point--his sustaining all things by
   his almighty power: and by him all things consist.'

   Doct. 2. That as Christ made all things, so he doth sustain them in
   being and working.

   Let me explain this, how the creatures are preserved by Christ.

   1. This is to be understood not only meritoriously as a moral cause,
   but efficiently as a natural cause of the creature's sustentation: for
   the apostle doth not consider here so much what Christ doth as a
   Mediator, as what he doth as God. It is true Christ, as Mediator, hath
   reprieved the world from that ruin which might come upon it for man's
   sin; but here his merit is not considered, but his power: Heb. i. 3, He
   upholdeth all things by the word of his power.' The weight of the whole
   creation lieth upon his hands. As Daniel telleth Belshazzar, that his
   breath and his ways were in the hand of God, Dan. v. 23, so is the
   being, life, and operation of all the creatures. If he should withdraw
   his withholding hand, they would quickly return to their first nothing;
   which showeth the great power of our Redeemer. Moses complaineth, Num.
   xi. 11, 12, Thou hast laid the burden of all this people upon me. Have
   I conceived this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldst say
   unto me, Carry them in thy bosom?' But Christ hath the care and charge
   of all the world, not to rule them only, but to sustain them. A king or
   a governor hath a moral rule over his subjects, but Christ giveth them
   being and existence, and doth preserve and keep them in their present
   state and condition from dissolution.

   2. Not only indirectly, but directly. Indirectly, Christ may be said to
   sustain and preserve the creatures, as he keepeth off evil, or removeth
   those things that may be destructive to them: as he preserveth a town
   that repelleth their enemies. But directly, he preserveth them as he
   continueth his providential influence: Acts xvii. 28, For in him we
   live, and move, and have our being;' as the root feedeth the fruit, or
   the breath of the musician maintains the sound: Ps. civ. 29, Thou
   takest away thy breath, and they die, and return to their dust.' Life,
   and all the joys and comforts of it, every minute depend upon God. It
   is by his providential influence and supportation we subsist. The
   greatest creature cannot preserve itself by its power and greatness,
   and the least is not neglected; both would sink into nothing without
   this continued influence.

   3. He doth this not only mediately, by means appointed, but
   immediately, as his efficacy pierceth through all. God preserveth the
   creatures by means, for he giveth them those supplies which are proper
   for them: as to man, food and raiment; for other creatures, what may
   relieve them; and the wise dispensing these supplies, without any care
   and solicitude of the creatures, is a notable part of his providence.
   But here we consider his intimate presence with all things, by which he
   upholdeth their beings; which all the means of the world cannot do
   without him. God doth as it were hold the creatures in his own hand,
   that it may not sink into its old nothing, as a man holdeth a weighty
   thing. This is supposed to be alluded unto, Job vi. 9, Let him loose
   his hand and cut me off.' If he doth but loose his almighty grasp, all
   the creatures fall down.

   4. Christ doth this so as that he doth not overturn their nature; he
   worketh by natural and necessary causes necessarily, with voluntary
   causes voluntarily. He that enlighteneth the world by the sun, causes
   man to discourse and reason; the sun would not shine if Christ were not
   the light of it, nor man discourse if he did not continue the faculty:
   John i. 4, In him was life, and this life was the light of man.' It is
   man seeth, man heareth, man talketh, man acteth, but yet the seeing
   eye, and hearing ear, is of the Lord,' Prov. xx. 12. As God hath made
   both, so he sustaineth both in their operation and exercise. All that
   we do naturally and spiritually we have from Christ.

   5. He is not the bare instrument of God in sustaining the creature, but
   as a co-equal agent. As he made the world, and with the Father created
   all things, so he doth support and order all things. It is as well the
   work of the Son as of the Father, for he is God, equal with him in
   glory and power: John v. 17, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.'
   And he hath a command of all the creatures, that they can do nothing
   without him, how much* soever they attempt to do against him.

   Secondly, Let me give you the reasons of this, why all things must
   subsist by him.

   1. Because preservation is but a kind of continued creation, or a
   continuance of the being which God hath caused. God's will in creation
   maketh a thing to be, his will in preservation maketh it continue to
   be. The same omnipotency and efficacy of God is necessary to sustain
   our beings as at first to create them. Therefore, it is said, Ps. civ.
   2, Thou stretchest out the heavens like a curtain,' which noteth a
   continued act. God erected them at first, and still sustaineth them by
   his secret power in this posture; so that, with respect to God, it is
   the same action to conserve as to create. That the creature may have a
   being, the influence of God is necessary to produce it; that the
   creature may continue its being, it is necessary that God should not
   break off that influence, or forsake the creature so made; for the
   being of the creature doth so wholly depend on the will of God, that it
   can not subsist without him. Nothing can be without the will of God,
   which is the cause both of the being and existence of all creatures.
   Therefore their being cannot be continued unless God will; therefore it
   belongeth to the same power to make anything out of nothing, and to
   keep anything that is made from returning to its first nothing.

   2. It is impossible to cut off the dependence of the creature upon the
   first cause, for no creature hath a self-sufficiency to maintain and
   support itself. Things of art may subsist without the artificer, as a
   carpenter maketh a house, and then leaveth it to stand of itself, the
   shipwright maketh a ship, and then leaveth it to the pilot to guide it;
   but all things of nature depend upon God that made them, because they
   have their whole being from him, matter, and form, which he continueth
   no longer than he pleaseth, whether they be things in earth, or things
   in heaven, visible or invisible. No impression of the agent remaineth
   in the effect when his action ceaseth; when the effect wholly dependeth
   on the cause, as when the air is enlightened which receiveth light from
   the sun, but when the sun is gone the light ceases: so when God
   withdraws the creature vanishes, for they have no other being than God
   is pleased to bestow upon them.

   3. If it were not so, many absurdities would follow; as, for instance--

   [1.] If things do subsist by themselves, then they would always be; for
   nothing would destroy itself.

   [2.] Then the creature would be independent, and whether God will or no
   they would conserve their being; and then how should God govern the
   world? Therefore it undeniably followeth, Thou hast made all things,
   and thou preservest them all.'

   4. It would destroy all worship, and our piety and respect to God would
   be cold and languid. The service we owe to God is reducible to these
   four heads:--

   [1.] Adoration of his excellent nature above all other things.

   [2.] Affiance in his goodness, with expectation of relief from him.

   [3.] Thankfulness for his benefits.

   [4.] Obedience to his precepts and commands.

   Now, unless we acknowledge his intimate presence with and preservation
   of all things, these necessary duties will either be quite abolished,
   or degenerate into a vain and needless superstition.

   [1.] The adoration we owe to his excellent nature, above all other
   things in the universe. Alas! we see how little reverence and respect
   we have for the great potentates of the earth, whose fame we hear of
   indeed, but are not concerned in their favour or frowns, or have no
   dependence on them at all. The least justice of peace or constable in
   our neighbourhood is more to us than all these mighty foreign princes,
   with whom we have nothing to do but only to hear and read the reports
   of their greatness, when we have no other business to divert us. So
   cold and careless would be our respect to God if we did not depend on
   him every moment, and were neither concerned in his wrath nor love.
   Those practical atheists that were settled on their lees, and lived in
   a secure neglect of God, they fostered it by this presumption Tush! he
   will neither do good nor evil,' Zeph. i. 13. Fine things may be told us
   of the excellency of his nature, but what is that to us? He hath so
   shut up himself within the curtain of the heavens, that he takes no
   notice or care of things here below. How soon would such a conceit
   dispirit all religion, and take away the life and vigour of it! But if
   you would plant a reverence and due veneration of God, you must do it
   by this principle, In his hands is the soul of every living thing^ and
   the breath of all mankind.' No creature can subsist without him for a
   moment. Now this respect is due not only to God the Father, but our
   Lord Jesus Christ.

   [2.] As to. trust and dependence on his goodness for relief in all our
   straits and necessities. This is the grand principle that keepeth up an
   acknowledgment of God in the world, by prayers and supplications: Ps.
   lxii. 8, Trust in the Lord at all times; ye people, pour out your heart
   before him.' When you retire your souls from all secular Confidences,
   and repose all your trust in him, you will be instant in prayer, and
   earnestly beg his relief; you see all things subsist by him, and it is
   in vain to expect any real assistance from the creature, but what God
   will communicate to us by it. Now, if it be not so, but the creatures
   could stand of themselves, and live of them selves, this would blast
   all devotion, and prayer be withered and dried up at the root; humbling
   ourselves to God in our straits and necessities would look like
   dejection or poorness of spirit, whining to no purpose.

   [3.] For thankfulness for benefits received, which is the great means
   to knit the hearts of men to God, and the bellows which bloweth up the
   fire of love and religion in our hearts. How can we ascribe our
   deliverances to God, if he hath not a hand in all things? But when we
   acknowledge his sustaining and governing power, we see God in the face
   of the creature, and every benefit we receive representeth his goodness
   to us. But, alas! they have no thought or care of praise and
   thanksgiving that think not themselves obliged to God for the least
   hair of their heads. God is banished out of their sight, because they
   look for all from the creature. But they cannot enough praise and bless
   God, who is the strength of their lives, and the length of their days.
   They acknowledge that every good gift cometh from him, that he heareth
   their prayers, relieveth their necessities, continues their lives to
   them every moment; therefore God is all in all with them, but to others
   he is a shadow or nothing. His memory is kept up in the world by his
   benefits, Acts xiv. 17.

   [4.] For obedience and service to him. Certainly dependence begets
   allegiance and observance. We are obsequious to those from whom we
   expect our dole and portion: Ps. cxxxi. 2, As the eyes of servants look
   to the hand of their masters, and the eyes of a maiden unto the hands
   of her mistress, so do our eyes wait on the Lord our God.' The masters
   gave the men-servants their portion and allowance; and the mistress to
   the maid-servants: they looked for all from their hands, and therefore
   to them they performed their service; so do the people of God. What
   reverence do we owe to him who is our Creator and preserver, as well as
   Redeemer! As he made all things, so he supporteth all things. Did we
   see God in us and in all things round about us, these thoughts would be
   more frequent in us, and we will still be considering what we shall
   render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards us. But obedience
   soon languisheth where men think they subsist of themselves without
   God: Ps. lv. 19, Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not
   God.' They are not interrupted in their sinful course, and therefore
   have no reverence and respect to God.

   Use 1. This doth strengthen our dependence and reliance on our blessed
   Redeemer. By him all things do subsist, therefore he can hear all
   prayers, relieve us in all our straits, supply us in all wants,
   preserve us in all dangers. All nations are in his hands, our whole
   life is in his keeping, and upheld by his intimate presence with us;
   our days cannot be longer nor shorter than he pleaseth. If he were
   absent from us, he might forget us or neglect us; but he is within us,
   and round about us in the effects of his power and goodness. Since he
   is so near us, why should we doubt of his particular care and
   providence? All nations are in his hands, the lives and hearts of
   friends and enemies, therefore our eyes should be upon him: Ps. xvi. 8,
   I have set the Lord always before me, he is at my right hand, I shall
   not be moved.' We set the Lord before us both in point of reverence and
   dependence--for fear and trust agree in their common nature--and so it
   may note our care to please him, or our trust and quietness in him. All
   means are nothing to us, can do nothing for us without him.

   2. It teaches us a lesson of humility. We depend on him every moment,
   can do nothing without him, either in a way of nature or grace; not in
   a way of nature, for God hath not left us to stand by ourselves on the
   first foundation of our creation. The creatures are not capable of
   subsistence without dependence on the first cause, but merely live and
   act by his power: In him we live and move and have our being:' Ps. civ.
   29, Thou takest away their breath and they die, and return to their
   dust.' The withdrawing his concurrence and supportation is the cause of
   all our misery. When he sees fit, all the creatures soon return to the
   elements of which they are compounded; all the strokes and judgments
   which light upon them are dispensed according to his pleasure. In a way
   of grace we are nothing, can do nothing without him, John xv. 5. He
   must have all the praise, Luke xvi. 14, 1 Cor. xv. 10, Gal. ii. 20. The
   more perfections we have, the more prone we are to fall if he sustain
   us not: witness the fallen angels, and Adam in innocency.

   3. It teaches us a lesson of reverence and obedience. If God be so
   near, let us observe him, and take notice of his presence. He knoweth
   what he doth when he sustaineth such a creature as thou art. This
   thought should continually affect us--that God is with us, still by us,
   not only without us, but within us, preserving our life, upholding our
   being. It should be a check to our sluggishness, and mispense of
   time--Doth God now continue me? to what end and purpose? If God were
   absent or gone, it were more justifiable to loiter or indulge the ease
   of the flesh; but to spend my time vainly and foolishly, which he
   continueth for service, what have we to say?
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON V.

   And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the
   first-born from the dead; that in all things he might have the
   preeminence.--Col. I. 18.

   THE context is spent in representing the dignity and excellency of
   Christ. He is set forth by three things:--

   1. By the excellency of the benefits we have by him--the greatest the
   fallen creature is capable of for the present, ver. 14.

   2. By the excellency of his person; so he is set forth as the eternal
   and only-begotten Son of God, ver. 15, and proved by his being the
   Creator and preserver of all things. The Creator, ver. 16; the
   preserver, ver. 17. Now the apostle cometh to the third thing.

   3. The excellency of his office. This is done in the text; where,
   observe, that next after the Son of God there is nothing more venerable
   and august than Christ's being head of the church. And again, that
   Christ hath another title to us than that of Creator: he is Redeemer
   also. The same God that created us by his power hath redeemed us by his
   mercy. By the one he drew us out of no thing, by the other he recovered
   us out of sin. Therefore, after he had declared what Christ is to the
   world and the church too, he showeth what Christ is particularly to the
   church. He hath a superiority over angels and all creatures, but he is
   our head: Eph. i. 22, He hath put all things under his feet, and gave
   him to be head over all things to the church.' Christ is the sovereign
   of the world, but, by a special relation to his people, he is the head
   of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the first-born from the
   dead,' &c.

   In which words observe:--

   1. The titles which are given to Christ with respect to the church: he
   is the head, the beginning, the first-born from the dead.

   2. The consequence of it: that in all things he might have the
   preeminence.

   1. The titles ascribed to Christ. They are three:--

   [1.] The first is the head of the body, the church'--where observe two
   correlatives, the head and the body; the head is Christ, the body is
   the church. The head is the most eminent part of the body, the noblest
   both as to nature, and place, or situation. As to nature, the head is
   the most illustrious throne of the soul, as being the seat not only of
   the nerves and senses, but of the memory and understanding. In place,
   as nearest heaven, the very situation doth in a manner oblige the other
   parts to respect it. These things agree to Christ, who, as to his
   essence, is infinitely of much more worth than the church, as being the
   only-begotten Son of God. As to office, in him there is a fulness of
   perfection to perform the office of a head to such a crazy and
   necessitous body as the church is. All the treasures of wisdom and
   knowledge are in our head for the use of the body, Col. ii. 3; and he
   is also the fountain of life and grace to every particular member, John
   i. 16. And, for place, he reigneth in heaven with his Father, and from
   thence he vieweth all the necessities of the body, and sendeth forth
   such influences of grace as are needful to every particular member.

   For the other correlative--the church is the body. By the church is
   meant the church mystical, or all such as are called out of the world
   to be a peculiar people unto God. Now, these considered collectively or
   together, they are a body; but singly and separately, every believer is
   a member of that body: 1 Cor. xii. 29, Now ye are the body of Christ,
   and members in particular.' All the parts and members joined together
   are a spiritual body, but the several persons are members of that body.
   Yea, though there be many particular churches, yet they are not many
   bodies, but one body, so it is said, 1 Cor. xii. 12, As the body is
   one, and hath many members, and all the members of that body, being
   many, are one body, so also is Christ.' He is the head, and the many
   and divers members of the universal Christian church are but one body.
   The universal invisible church of real believers is one mystical body
   knit by faith to Christ, their head, and by love among themselves. And
   the visible universal church is one politic body, conjoined with Christ
   their head, and among themselves, by an external entering into covenant
   with God, and the serious profession of all saving truths. They have
   all the same king and head, the same laws--the word of God--the same
   sacraments of admission and nutrition, which visibly, at least, they
   subject themselves unto, and have a grant of the same common privileges
   in the gospel. But of this more anon.

   [2.] The next title is arche`, the beginning. I understand it that he
   is the root and the beginning of the renewed estate. The same degree
   which Christ hath in the order of nature, he hath in the order of grace
   also: he is the beginning both of creation, so also of redemption: he
   is origo mundi melioris, still the beginning and ending of the new
   creature as well as the old, Rev. i. 8. He is called, in short, the
   beginning, with respect to the life of grace; as in the next title, the
   first born from the dead,' with respect to the life of glory.

   [3.] The third title is, the first-born from the dead. He had before
   called him the first-born of every creature, now the first-born from
   the dead: Rev. i. 5, The first-begotten from the dead,' because those
   that arise from the dead are, as it were, new-born; whence also the
   resurrection from the dead is called a regeneration, Mat. xix. 20: and
   St Paul referreth that prophecy, Ps. ii. 7, Thou art my Son; this day
   have I begotten thee,' in Acts xiii. 33, to the resurrection of Christ.
   Things are said to be when they are manifested to be: compare Rom. i.
   4, Declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of
   holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.' He was declared to be the
   true, and everlasting Son of, God, and head of the church: so the
   adoption of believers shall appear by their resurrection: Rom. viii.
   19, The earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the
   manifestation of the sons of God;' ver. 23, We ourselves groan within
   ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of the
   body.'

   2. The sequel and consequent of these things: that in all things he
   might have the pre-eminence--that is, as well in the spiritual estate
   of the church as in the creation and natural estate of the world: Rom.
   viii. 29, That he might be the first-born among many brethren.'

   I begin with the first.

   Doct. 1. That this is the honour appropriate and peculiar to Jesus
   Christ, to be head of the church.

   1. Here I shall show what the church is to which Christ is an head.

   2. How is he an head to this body.

   3. The reasons why this body must have such an head.

   1. What the church is. A society of men called out of the world by
   God's effectual grace, according to the purpose of his election, and
   united to Christ by faith and the participation of his Spirit, and to
   one another by the band of charity that after remission of sins
   obtained in this world, together with regenerating grace, they may at
   length be brought to eternal life. Let us a little open this
   description. By effectual calling God worketh faith, which uniteth us
   to Christ, and that effectual calling is the fruit of election; and the
   effect of this union is remission of sins, and the necessary
   consequence of this communion is salvation or eternal life. This
   society of men is called a church in the text. The word church is taken
   in divers acceptations.

   First, and most properly, it signifies those whom I have now described,
   the universal collection of all and every one of those who, according
   to the good pleasure of God, are, or may be, called out of a state of
   sin into a state of grace, to obtain eternal glory by our Lord Jesus
   Christ. This is the church of the first-born whose names are written in
   heaven, Heb. xii. 22--that chosen generation, that royal priesthood,
   that holy nation, that peculiar people, whom to show forth his praises
   God hath called out of darkness into his marvellous light, 1 Pet. ii.
   9. This church, most generally and properly taken, is the kingdom of
   God, the body and spouse of Christ: Cant. vi. 9, My dove, my undefiled
   one, is but one.' This is that one fold under one shepherd, John x. 16.
   And it was prophesied of Christ that he should die to gather together
   in one the children of God that were scattered abroad, John xi. 52.

   Secondly, Of this universal church there are two parts--one of
   travellers, the other of comprehensors, or the church militant and
   triumphant; they both belong to God's family: Eph. iii. 15, Of whom the
   whole family, whether in heaven or earth, is named;' so Col. i. 10.
   That part of the family which is in heaven triumpheth with God
   there--that which is in earth is yet warring against sin, Satan, and
   the world.

   Thirdly, This part, which is the military, comes in the second place to
   be called by the name of the universal church, because, being scattered
   and dispersed throughout the whole world, it comprehendeth all and
   every one that belongeth to Christ's flock, which are found in several
   folds: known to God they are, and to themselves, and do indeed belong
   to Christ's body and his kingdom. This is often and not un deservedly
   called the invisible church, because, so far as it is the church of
   God, their reality and sincerity is rather believed by faith than seen
   by the eyes of the body. This church, this kingdom of God, though it be
   yet in this world, yet it is not of the world, neither doth it come
   with observation, for the faithful have this kingdom of God within
   them, Luke xvii. 20. The world knows them not, other believers know
   them not, but God knoweth those that are his, 2 Tim. ii. 19.

   Fourthly, The universal visible church. While they are in the way, and
   in the midst of their conflicts, it is possible many hypocrites may
   take up the profession, as in the great house are many vessels, some to
   honour, some to dishonour. From these ariseth an external promiscuous
   multitude, who also are called the catholic church, for the sake and
   with respect to those holy ones among them who truly belong to Christ's
   mystical body. We read often the kingdom is like to a net wherein are
   good and bad fishes, Mat. xiii.; to a thrashing-floor wherein is chaff
   and wheat; to a field wherein groweth good corn and also tares, Mat.
   xiii. 24, 25. Now all these ways is the universal church taken.

   Fifthly, There are particular churches wherein the ordinances and means
   of grace are dispensed, as the church of Corinth, Cenchrea, Galatia,
   Greek, Roman. None of these particular churches contain all believers
   or the elect of God, that out of them or any of them there should be no
   salvation. Again, the universal church may remain in the world total
   and entire, though these particular churches, one or other of them, may
   successively be destroyed, as it hath often fallen out. And it is a
   great sin so to cry up a particular church as to exclude all the rest
   from saving communion with Christ; and for any one particular church to
   arrogate power over the others, they being but members.

   This church is called a body in two respects:--

   (1.) In regard of the union of all the parts.

   (2.) Dependence upon one and the same head.

   (1.) With respect to union, as in man all the members make but one
   body, quickened by the same soul, so in the mystical body of Christ all
   the parts makeup but one body, animated by the same vital principle,
   which is the Spirit of Christ, and are joined together by certain bonds
   and ligaments--faith and love; and all is covered with the same
   skin--the profession of the faith of Christ. Look, what the soul is in
   man, the form in the subject, life in the body, and proportion in the
   building; that in the universal church of God is the union and
   communion of the several and single parts, with the head among
   themselves. Take away the soul from man, the form from the subject,
   life from the body, proportion and conjunction from the parts of the
   building, and what will man be but a carcase, and the building but ruin
   and confusion? So take away union and communion from the universal
   church, then Jerusalem will become a Babel, and Bethel a Bethaven, and
   for life there will be death, and for salvation eternal destruction.
   How else shall all that come out from one, return again to one, and all
   and every one have all things in one, that at length they may acquiesce
   in the enjoyment of one--that is God--as their chiefest good? Alas!
   without this union with the head, and among themselves in necessary
   things, what can they expect but wrath and the curse, and everlasting
   destruction?

   (2.) With respect to dependence on one head: Rom. xii. 5, We, being
   many, are one body in Christ, and every one members of one
   another'--that is, all things make up one body, of which Christ is the
   head, and are fellow-members in respect of one another. As necessary
   and as desirable as it is to be united to God, to life and glory ever
   lasting, so necessary and desirable it is to depend upon Christ, the
   head; for no man, after the entrance of sin, can return to God, or
   enjoy God, without Christ the mediator: John xiv. 6, I am the way, the
   truth, and the life; no man cometh to the Father but by me.' Acts iv.
   12; There is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved, but
   only Jesus Christ.' 1 Cor. iii. 11; Other foundation can no man lay,
   but that which is laid, Jesus Christ.' 1 John v. 12; He that hath the
   Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life.' God
   proclaimed from heaven, Mat. iii. 17, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
   am well pleased.' He being one God with the Father and the Spirit, of
   the same substance and essence, he only can procure merit, and effect
   our union with God. He first assumed our nature, and united it to his
   own person, and so became one flesh with us: but then all those that
   belong to that nature, if they believe in him, and enter into his
   covenant, are not only literally one flesh, but mystically one body,
   and so also one Spirit, 1 Cor. vi. 17--that is, by the bond of the
   Spirit he hath brought them into the state and relation of a body to
   himself. To gather up all: Man's return to God is necessary to his
   blessedness, that he may be inseparably conjoined to him as his
   chiefest good. To this purpose the Son of God assumed our nature in the
   unity of his person, and there by bringeth about the union of the
   church with himself as our head, and our communion with one another in
   faith and charity, if we desire to be blessed, and so is according to
   Christ's prayer: John xvii. 21, That they may be all one, as thou,
   Father, art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us;' ver.
   23, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.' So
   that as there is one God, and one mediator between God and man,' and
   one church united to Christ as his body, to this church we must every
   one of us be united if we mean to be saved, and in the church with
   Christ, and by Christ with God; therefore out of this mystical body
   there is no salvation.

   2. How is Christ a head to this body? This must be explained by
   answering two questions:--

   [1.] What are the parts of his headship?

   [2.] According to what nature doth this office belong to him--divine or
   human?

   [1.] The parts and branches of this headship. He is our head with
   respect to government and sovereignty; and in regard of causality and
   influence; he governeth, he quickeneth.

   (1.) It implies his authority to govern, as is manifest by Eph. v. 22,
   23, Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands as unto the Lord, for
   the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the
   church.' So that to be the church's head implies superiority or right
   to govern.

   (2.) For the other notion, in regard of influence, that is evident in
   scripture also: Col. ii. 19, Not holding the head, from which all the
   body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit
   together, increases with the increase of God.' The head is the root
   from whence the vital faculty is diffused to all the members. We use to
   say Homo est arbor inversa, a tree turned upside down; if this be so,
   the head is the root of this tree. So doth life flow from Christ to the
   church; the Spirit is from him either to begin the union or to continue
   the influence. But let us speak of these branches apart.

   (1st.) His authority and power to govern. His excellency gives him
   fitness, but his office right to rule and govern the church. When he
   sent abroad his officers and ambassadors to proselyte the world in his
   name, he pleadeth his right: Mat. xxviii. 18, All power is given to me
   both in heaven and in earth.' Now the acts which belong to Christ as a
   governor may be reduced to these heads:--

   First, To make laws that shall universally bind all his people.

   Secondly, To institute ordinances for worship.

   Thirdly, To appoint officers.

   Fourthly, To maintain them in the exercise of these things.

   First, The first power that belongeth to a governing head is
   legislation or making laws. Now Christ's headship and empire being
   novum jus imperii, a new right which he hath as mediator for the
   recovery of lapsed mankind, his law is accordingly. It is lex
   remedians, a law of grace, which is given us in the gospel of our
   salvation. The sum of his own proper remedial laws are faith in our
   Lord Jesus Christ, and repentance towards God, Acts xx. 21. Without
   repentance our case is not compassionable, without faith we do not own
   our Redeemer, by whom we have so great a benefit: yet because this new
   right of empire is accumulative, not privative, beneficial to us,
   indeed, but not destructive of our duty to God; therefore the whole law
   of God, as purely moral, hath still a binding force upon the
   conscience, as it is explained in the word of God. Now to these laws of
   Christ none can add, none diminish, and therefore Christ will take an
   account of our fidelity at the last day, 2 Thes. i. 8.

   Secondly, He hath instituted ordinances .for the continual exercise and
   regulation of our worship and the government of his people, that they
   may be kept in the due acknowledgment and obedience to him, such as the
   preaching of the word, sacraments, and the exercise of some government.
   Now all the rules and statutes which Christ hath made for the ordering
   of his people must be kept pure until his coming. His institutions do
   best preserve his honour in the world. Great charges are left: 1 Tim.
   v. 21, I charge thee before God and our Lord Jesus Christ, and his
   elect angels, that thou observe these things;' where he speaketh of
   ecclesiastical censures and disciplines; he conjureth him by all that
   is sacred and holy, that it be rightly used: 1 Tim. vi. 14, Keep this
   commandment without spot and unrebukable unto the appearing of Jesus
   Christ.' The doctrines are so deter mined by Christ that they cannot be
   changed, the worship not corrupted, the discipline not abused, to serve
   partial humours and private or worldly interests.

   Thirdly, God hath appointed officers, who have all their ministries and
   services under Christ and for Christ: Eph. iv. 11, He gave some
   apostles, some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and
   teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
   ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.' Mark there, he doth
   not describe all the officers, for the deacon is not mentioned, but
   only such as labour in the word and sacraments; and observe, he
   mentioneth ordinary and extraordinary--apostles to write scripture,
   prophets to attest it, pastors and teachers to explain and apply it.
   And mark, Christ gave some; it is his prerogative, as head of the
   church, to appoint the several sorts of offices and officers. He gave
   them at first, and will raise up some still, according as the exigence
   of the times requireth it. The end why, to perfect the saints'--that
   is, to help them on to their final perfection--and for the work of the
   ministry.' All offices under Christ are a ministry, not a power; and
   imply service, not lordship or domination over the flock of Christ.
   Lastly, the great end is to prepare and fit men more and more to become
   true members of Christ's mystical body.

   Fourthly, To maintain and defend his people in the exercise of these
   things, to preserve the verity of doctrine and purity of worship. Alas!
   many times, where neither worship nor government is corrupted, yet the
   church may be in danger to be dissipated by the violence of
   persecutions. Now, therefore, it is a part of Christ's office, as head
   of the church, to maintain verity of doctrine, purity of worship, and a
   lawful order of government, for all which he hath plenty of spirit. The
   papists think this cannot be without some universal visible head to
   supply Christ's office in his absence; and so are like the Israelites:
   Exod. xxxi. 1, Make us gods that shall go before us.' They would have a
   visible head that should supply Christ's room in his absence--an
   external, infallible head. But that is a vain conceit; for since the
   pope hath his residence in Home, and cannot perform these functions but
   by the intervention of ordaining pastors, why should it be more
   difficult for Christ in heaven to govern the church than for the pope
   in Rome--when he sitteth at the right hand of God till he hath made his
   foes his footstool? Is he less powerful to govern the church, and to
   preserve and defend his people against the violence of those that would
   root out the memorial of religion in the world? Who is more powerful
   than Jesus Christ, who hath all judgment put into his hands? John v.
   22.

   (2d.) In regard of influence: So Christ is an head to the church as he
   giveth us his Spirit. That Spirit which gives life to believers is
   often called Christ's Spirit: Gal. iv. 6, God hath sent forth the
   Spirit of his Son into your hearts.' It is purchased by his merit,
   Titus iii. 6; conveyed to us by his power: John xv. 26, I will send the
   Comforter from the Father.' The communication is by his ordinances. The
   word: 2 Cor. iii. 18, Beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we
   are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
   Spirit of the Lord.' Sacraments: 1 Cor. xii. 13, For by one Spirit are
   we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether
   we be bond or free: and have all been made to drink into one Spirit.'
   To promote the religion which he hath established: John xvi. 13, 14,
   When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for
   he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that he
   shall speak: and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me:
   for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.' He comes to
   us as his members, and by influence from him, as in the natural body
   the animal spirits are from the head, are by the members conveyed to
   all the parts of the body. So Christ in this spiritual union worketh in
   us a quickening Spirit: Eph. iv. 15, 16, We grow up to him in all
   things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the whole body joined
   together maketh increase,' &c. The Spirit is not given to any one
   believer, but derivatively from Christ to us. First, it is given to
   Christ, as mediator, and to us only by virtue of our union with him. He
   is in Christ as radically inherent, but in us operatively, to
   accomplish certain effects; or he dwelleth in our head by way of
   radiation, in us by way of influence and operation.

   _ [2.] According to what nature doth this office belong to
   Christ--divine or human?

   I answer--Both; for it belongeth to him as God incarnate.

   (1.) He must be man, that there may be a conformity of nature between
   the head and the rest of the members; therefore Christ and the church
   have one common nature between them: he was man as we are men--bone of
   our bone, and flesh of our flesh,' Eph. v. 30. We read of a monstrous
   image that was represented to Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, where the head
   was gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass,
   and the legs and feet part of iron and part of clay, Dan. ii.; all the
   parts of a different nature. In every regular body there is a
   proportion and conformity. So it is in the mystical body of
   Christ'--because the brethren took part of flesh and blood, he also
   took part of the same.' The Godhead, which was at such a distance from
   us, is brought down in the person of Christ in our nature, that it
   might be nearer at hand, and within the reach of our commerce; and we
   might have more encouragement to expect pity and relief from him.

   (2.) God he also must be. None was fit to be head of the church but
   God, whether you respect government or influence.

   First, For government: to attend all cases, to hear all prayers, to
   supply all wants, defend us against all enemies, to require an absolute
   and total submission to his laws, ordinances, and institutions, so as
   we may venture our eternal interests upon his word: Ps. xlv. 11, He is
   thy God, worship thou him.'

   Secondly, For influence: none else hath power to convey the Spirit, and
   to become a vital principle to us, for that is proper to God to have
   life in himself, and to communicate it to others: 1 Tim. vi. 13, I
   charge thee in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things.' &c.
   Whatever men may think of the life of grace, yet surely as to the life
   of glory he is the only life-making Spirit, 1 Cor. xv. 45. Now this
   honour is not given to the angels, much less is it due to any man, nor
   can it be imagined by him, for none can influence the heart of man but
   God.

   3. The reasons why this body must have such a head.

   [1.] Every society must be under some government, without which they
   would soon dissolve and come to nothing. Much more the church, which,
   because of its manifold necessities, and the high ends unto which it is
   designed, more needs it than any other society.

   [2.] The privileges are so great, which are these: pardon of sins and
   sanctifying grace, and at length eternal glory.

   (1.) Pardon of sins. By this union with him, he is made sin for us,
   that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.' 2 Cor v. 21. A
   sacrifice for sin, that we might be justified and accepted with God.

   (2.) Sanctifying grace by the communication of his Spirit. We not only
   agree with him in the same common human nature, but the same holy
   nature may be in us that was in Christ, Heb. ii. 11. We are doubly
   akin, ratione incarnationis suae, et regenerationis nostrae.

   (3.) At length eternal glory followeth. For what is the condition of
   the head, that is also the condition of the members. First Christ then
   they that are Christ's. And also Christ is set up as a pattern, to
   which the church must be conformed, Rom. viii. 29. Bating the
   preeminence due to the head, we are to be glorious as he is glorious.

   [3.] The duties are far above bare human power and strength therefore
   we need the influence of our head, John xv. 5. To obey God' to believe
   in his name, to deny ourselves in what is most dear and precious to us
   in the world, to be fortified against all temptations are duties not so
   easily done as said.

   [4.] We have so foully miscarried already that he will no more trust
   his honour in our hands, but hath put the whole treasure of grace into
   the hands of Christ for our use, John i. 16. So John iii. 35, 36, The
   Father hath put all things into his hands. He that believes on the Son
   hath everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son hath not seen
   life.' God would not leave us to ourselves to live apart from him, but
   hath put all things that belong to our happiness into his hands, that,
   being united to him, virtue might be communicated to us, even all the
   gifts and graces of the Spirit. They are not intrusted with us, but
   with him; and we shall have no more of pardon, grace, and glory, but
   what we have in and from the Son of God.

   Use 1. Is information, to show how much we are bound to God for putting
   this honour upon us, that Christ should be our head. Christ is over the
   angels in point of superiority and government, but not properly said to
   be an head to them, in that strict notion which implies relation to the
   church. As to influence, he is not a head to them. You will say they
   are confirmed by him; but the mediation of Christ presupposes the fall
   of Adam, for Christ had not been mediator if Adam had never fallen.
   Now, if Christ should come to confirm angels, if this had not been, is
   groundless; besides, Christ merited for those that have benefit by him,
   and the consummate act of his merit is his death. But where is it said
   that he died for angels?

   Use 2. It informs us of the shameless usurpation abetted by the
   papists, who call the pope head of the church. None can be a head of
   the church to whom the church is not a body; but it would be strange to
   say the church is the pope's body. None can be a governing head of the
   church but he who is a mediatorial head of vital influence. The
   papists, indeed, distinguish these things--ascribe the one to the pope,
   the other to Christ; but the scripture allows not this writ of
   partition. None can be the one but he must also be the other. But they
   say he is a ministerial head; but a ministerial universal head that
   shall give law to other churches and Christian societies, and if they
   depend not on him, shall be excluded from the privileges of a Christian
   church. This is, as to matter of right, sacrilege; for this honour is
   too great for any man, and Christ hath appointed no such head, and
   therefore it is a manifest usurpation of his royal prerogative without
   his leave and consent. And, as to matter of fact, it is impossible--the
   church being scattered throughout all parts of the world, which can
   have no commerce with such an head in matters essential to its
   government and edification. They that first instituted such an
   universal head, besides that they had no authority or commission so to
   do, were extremely imprudent, and perverters of Christianity. Therefore
   let us consider how it came up at first, and how it hath been
   exercised. It came up at first for the prevention of schisms and
   divisions among Christians. They thought fit the church should be
   divided into certain dioceses, according to the secular divisions of
   the empire, which at first were thirteen in number, under the names of
   patriarchs and bishops of the first see, who should join in common care
   and counsel for the good of the Christian commonwealth. Among these,
   some who, in regard of the cities wherein they resided, were more
   eminent than the rest, and began to encroach upon the others'
   jurisdiction, till at length they were reduced to four. The bishop of
   Home, being the imperial city, had the precedency, not of authority
   super reliquos, but of place and order inter reliquos. It was potestas
   honoraria, a difference or authority by courtesy, afterwards ordinaria,
   an ordinary power; then what was de facto given was afterwards
   challenged de jure.

   2. Let us consider how this power hath been exercised to the
   introduction of idolatry, and divers corruptions and superstitions, to
   the destruction of kingdoms, the blood of the martyrs, and tumults and
   confusions too long to relate.

   Use 3. To persuade you to accept Christ as your head. We are to preach
   him as Lord, 2 Cor. iv. 5; you are to receive him as Lord, Col. ii. 6;
   our consent is necessary. God hath appointed him, and the church
   appointeth him--God by authority, the church by consent. We voluntarily
   acknowledge his dignity, and submit unto him, both with a consent of
   dependence and subjection. Some God draweth to Christ and ^ gives them
   to him, and him to them, John vi. 44. All that live within hearing have
   means to seek this grace, and if they so do, they shall not lose their
   labour. God sets not men about unprofitable work: mind but the duties
   of the baptismal covenant, and the business is at an end, Acts ii. 39.

   Use 4. To put us upon self-reflection. If Christ be your head--

   1. You must stand under a correspondent relation to Christ; be members
   of his mystical body, which is done by faith and repentance.

   2. None can be a true member of Christ's body who doth not receive
   vital influence from him, Rom. viii. 9. It is not enough to be members
   of some visible church; they that are united to him have life, there is
   an influence of common gifts according to the part we sustain in the
   body. A common Christian hath common graces, those gifts of the Spirit
   which God gives not to the heathen world; as know ledge of the
   mysteries of godliness, ability of utterance about heavenly things,
   Heb. vi. 4.

   3. If Christ be our head, we must make conscience of the duties which
   this relation bindeth us unto; as obedience and self-denial.

   [1.] Obedience to his laws and the motions of his Spirit. His laws Luke
   vi. 46, Why call you me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?'
   The motions of his Spirit: Rom. viii. 14, As many as are led by the
   Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.'

   [2.] Self-denial. Christ spared not his natural body to promote the
   good of his mystical body; he exposed his life for our salvation, we
   should hazard all for his glory. Nature teaches us to lift up the hands
   to save the head.

   4. There must be suitableness and imitation: 1 John ii. 6, He that
   abideth in him, ought to walk as he walketh.'

   5. If you be planted into this mystical body, you will make conscience
   of love and tenderness.

   Use 5. Let us triumph in this head, depend on him. There are two
   arguments--his ability and his sympathy.

   1. His ability. He can give us life, strength, health: Eph. iii. 16,
   That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory to be
   strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man:' Col. i. 11,
   Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all
   patience and long-suffering with joyfulness.'

   2. His sympathy. He is touched with the feeling of our infirmities:
   Heb. iv. 15, We have not an high-priest, which cannot be touched with
   the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as
   we are, yet without sin.' The head is concerned for the members.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VI.

   Who is the beginning, the first-born from the dead.--Col. I. 18.

   I COME now to consider the first particular title which is given to
   Christ.

   There are two other titles given to Christ--the one respects the state
   of grace, the other .the state of glory. And,

   First, With respect to the state of grace, he is called arche`, the
   beginning--that is, Origo mundi melioris, the beginning of the new
   creature as well as the old; for the same place and dignity which
   Christ hath in the order of nature he hath in the order of grace also.
   Therefore he is called the beginning of the creation of God.' Rev. iii.
   14. The word arche` is not taken there passively, as if it were the
   first thing that was created, but actively, that he giveth a being and
   beginning to all things that are created, and by the creation of God is
   meant the new creation. So that the point is--

   Doct. That Jesus Christ is the author and beginning of the new
   creation.

   I shall briefly explain this, and pass to the next branch. Christ is
   the beginning two ways:--

   I. In a way of order and dignity.

   II. In a way of causality.

   I. In a way of order, as first and chief of the renewed state. This is
   many ways set forth in scripture. Two things I shall take notice of:--

   1. That he is the builder of the church.

   2. The lord and governor of it.

   1. As founder and builder of the church: Mat. xvi. 18, Thou art Peter,
   and upon this rock will I build my church.' Christ challenges it to
   himself as his own peculiar prerogative to build the church. More
   fully, the apostle, Heb. iii. 3-5, For this man was counted worthy of
   more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he that builded the house hath more
   honour than the house; for every house is built by some man, but he
   that buildeth all things is God. And again, Moses was faithful in all
   his house as a servant, but Christ as a Son over his own house.' The
   scope of the apostle is to prove that Christ must have the pre-eminence
   above all others that have been employed in and about God's house.
   Moses was one of the chief of that sort, that had greater familiarity
   with God than others, and intrusted by him in very great and weighty
   matters; yet Christ was not only equal to Moses, but far above him. He
   proveth it by a comparison taken from a builder and an house, and from
   a lord of the house and a servant in the house; but Christ is the
   builder of the house, and Moses but a part of the house. Christ is the
   Lord, and Moses but the servant, therefore Christ is more excellent and
   worthy of greater honour. One of the noblest works of God is the church
   of the first-born; none could build, frame, and constitute this but the
   Son of God coming down in our flesh, and so recovering the lost world
   into an holy society which might be dedicated to God. For the materials
   of this house are men sinful and guilty. Neither men nor angels could
   raise them up into an holy temple to God; none but the eternal Word or
   the Son of God incarnate: he that buildeth all things is God'--ta
   pa`nta, all these things, the things treated of; he doth not speak of
   the first creation, but the second, the restoring of the lapsed world
   to God.

   2. The other honour is that Christ is Lord of the new creation, as well
   as the founder and builder of it; for the world to come is put in
   subjection to him, not to the angels, Heb. ii. 7. By the world to come
   is not meant the state of glory, but the state of the church under the
   times of the gospel. It is made subject to God the Redeemer; it is
   solely and immediately in his power, and under his authority, and cast
   into a dependence upon him.

   II. In a way of causality. So he is the beginning, either as a moral or
   efficient cause.

   1. As a moral meritorious cause. We are renewed by God's creating
   power, but through the intervening mediation of Christ, or God's
   creating power is put forth with respect to his merit. The life of
   grace is purchased by his death: 1 John iv. 9, God sent his
   only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live by him.' Here
   spiritually, hereafter eternally. For life is opposite to death
   incurred by sin. We were dead legally, as sentenced to death by the
   law; and spiritually, as disabled for the service of our Creator. And
   how by him? That he speaketh of ver. 10--by his being a propitiation.
   We were in the state of death when the doors of mercy were first opened
   to us, under the guilt and power of sin; but we live when the guilt of
   sin is pardoned, and the power of sin broken. But this life we have not
   without Christ being a propitiation for our sins, or doing that which
   was necessary, whereby God without impeachment of honour might show
   himself placable and propitious to mankind.

   2. As an efficient cause; by the efficacy of his Spirit, who worketh in
   us as members of Christ's mystical body. Wherefore it is said, 2 Cor.
   v. 17, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature;' and Eph. ii. 10,
   We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works.'
   Whatever grace we have cometh from God through Christ as Mediator, and
   from him we have it by virtue of our union with him. It is first
   applied by the converting grace, and then continually supplied by the
   confirming grace of the Spirit. The influence we have from him as our
   head is life and likeness.

   [1.] Life: Gal. ii. 20, I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I
   live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live
   in the flesh,' &c. Christ is the beginning of the new life, therefore
   he is called the prince, or author of life. All life is derived from
   the head to the body, so we derive life from Christ: John vi. 57, As I
   live by the Father, so he that eateth me shall live by me.' We derive
   life from Christ, as he from the Father.

   [2.] Likeness: Gal. iv. 19, My little children, of whom I travail in
   birth till Christ be formed in you,' and 2 Cor. iii. 18. It is for the
   honour of Christ that his image and superscription should be upon his
   members, to distinguish them from others. In short, as to life, he is
   the root: John xv. 1, 2, I am the true vine, and.' &c. As to likeness,
   he is the pattern: Rom. viii. 29, Whom he did foreknow, he also did
   predestinate, to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be
   the first-born among many brethren.'

   Secondly, The reasons of this.

   1. It is for the honour of the Son of God that he should be head of the
   new world. In the kingdom of Christ all things are new. There is a new
   covenant, which is the gospel; a new paradise, not that where Adam
   enjoyed God among the beasts and trees of the garden, but where the
   blessed enjoy God amongst the angels. A new ministry, not the family of
   Aaron, or tribe of Levi, but the ministry of reconciliation, whom God
   hath qualified and fitted to be dispensers of these holy mysteries. New
   ordinances; we serve God not in the oldness of the letter, but the
   newness of the Spirit; new members, or new creatures, that are made
   partakers of the benefits, therefore also a new head, or a second Adam,
   that must be the beginning of this new creation, and that is the Lord
   Jesus Christ, who is made a quickening spirit to all his members: 1
   Cor. xv. 45, The first Adam was made a living soul, the second a
   quickening spirit.' Adam communicated natural life to his posterity,
   but from Christ we have the Spirit.

   2. It is suited to our lost estate. We were in a state of apostasy and
   defection from God, averse from all good, prone to all evil. Now that
   we might have a new being and life, the Son of God came in our nature
   to rectify the disordered creation. The scripture representeth man as
   blind in his mind, perverse in his will, rebellious in his affections,
   having no sound part left in him to mend the rest; therefore we must be
   changed. But by whom? who shall make us of unclean to become pure and
   holy? Not one amongst all the bare natural sons of men, Job xiv. 4. Of
   carnal to become spiritual? We must be new made and new born: John iii.
   6, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of
   the Spirit is Spirit;' that we may mind the things of the Spirit, and
   not of the flesh. Of worldly to become heavenly? He that formeth us for
   this very thing is God.' 2 Cor. v. 5. He that is the framer and maker
   of all things; a God of infinite wisdom, power, and love, he frameth
   and createth us anew.

   Use 1. To show us the necessity of regeneration.

   Use 2. The excellence of it.

   1. The necessity. We must have another beginning than we had as bare
   creatures: it is one thing to make us men, another to make us saints or
   Christians. We have understanding, will, affections, and senses as men,
   but we have these sanctified as Christians. The world thinketh
   Christianity puts strange names upon ordinary things; but is it an
   ordinary thing to row against the stream of flesh and blood, and to
   raise men to those inclinations and affections to which nature is an
   utter stranger--to have a divine nature put into us? 2 Pet. i. 4. The
   necessity is more bound upon us if we look upon ourselves not only as
   men but Christians; for whosoever is in Christ is a new creature. Some
   are in Christ by external profession, de jure; they are bound to be new
   creatures, that they may not dishonour their head. Others by real
   internal union. They not only ought to be, but de facto are, new
   creatures, because they are made partakers of his Spirit, and by that
   Spirit are renewed and sanctified. Little can they make out their
   recovery to God, and interest in Christ, who are not sensible of any
   change wrought in them, who have the old thoughts, the old discourses,
   the old passions, and the old affections, and their old conversations
   still; the same deadness to holy things, the same proneness to please
   the flesh, the same carelessness to please or honour God; and the drift
   and bent of their lives is as much for the world, and as little for God
   and heaven as before.

   2. The excellency of regeneration or renewing grace. What a benefit it
   is, it appeareth in two things:--

   1. That it is the fruit of reconciling grace: 2 Cor. v. 18, All things
   are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath
   given to us the ministry of reconciliation.' God gives grace only as
   the God of peace, as pacified by the death of Christ. The Holy Spirit
   is the gift of his love, and the fruit of this peace and reconciliation
   which Christ made for us. Our Lord Jesus Christ merited this grace by
   the value of his sacrifice and bloody sufferings, Titus iii. 5, 6.

   2. It is applied to us by the almighty power of his Spirit. Christ is
   first the ransom for, then the fountain of life to, our souls; and so
   the honour of our entire and whole recovery is to be ascribed only to
   our Redeemer, who, as he satisfied the justice of God for our sins, so
   he also purchased a power to change our hearts; and he purchased this
   power into his own hands, not into another's, and therefore doth
   accomplish it by his Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 18. We should often think what
   a foundation God hath laid for the dispensation of his grace, and how
   he would demonstrate his infinite love in giving us his Son to be a
   propitiation for us, and at the same time showeth forth his infinite
   power in renewing and changing the heart of man, and all to bring us
   back to him, to make us capable of serving and pleasing him.

   I come now to the other title, which respects the life of glory: The
   first-born from the dead.' The same appellation almost is given to
   Christ when he is called, Rev. i. 5, The first-begotten from the dead.'
   The reason of both is, because those that arise from the dead are, as
   it were, new born, and, therefore, the resurrection from the dead is
   called a regeneration, Mat. xix. 28. And as to Christ in particular,
   the grave, when he was in it, is represented as being under the pains
   and throes of a woman in travail: Acts ii. 24, lusas tas odinas tou
   thanatou, God having loosed the pains of death, for it was not possible
   that he should be holden of it;' but which is not only a metaphor, but
   a higher mystery. St Paul referreth that prophecy, Ps. ii. 7, Thou art
   my Son, this day have I begotten thee,' in Acts xiii. 33, to the
   resurrection of Christ: God hath raised up Jesus from the dead; as it
   is also written, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.'
   Things are said to be done when they are manifested to be done. Compare
   Rom. i. 4, Declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the
   spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.' So the adoption
   of believers shall appear by their resurrection: Rom. viii. 19, The
   earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of
   the sons of God;' ver. 23, And not only they, but ourselves also, which
   have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within
   ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
   body;' 1 John iii. 2, It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we
   know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see
   him as he is.' This for the title of First-born from the dead.'

   Doct. That Christ's rising from the dead is the evidence and assurance
   of a Christian's happy resurrection.

   1. Let me open the terms.

   2. Vindicate the notion.

   3. Show you how this is an evidence and assurance to all good
   Christians of their happy and joyful resurrection.

   1. For the terms. He is here called The first-born from the dead.' If
   the grave was as the womb to him, and his resurrection as a birth, then
   Christ was in a manner born when he rose again. Only he hath the
   precedency--he is the first-born, he rises first, and surely others
   will follow after him. So we read, Acts xxvi. 23, That he should be the
   first-born that should rise from the dead;' as he saith elsewhere,
   First Christ, then they that are Christ's.' Christ hath the primacy of
   order and the principality of influence. So again he is said to be the
   first-fruits of them that slept,' 1 Cor. xv. 20. As in the consecrating
   of the first-fruits the whole harvest is also consecrated, so Christ by
   rising himself raises all others with him to eternal glory and
   happiness. And so his resurrection is a certain proof that others shall
   have a resurrection also.

   2. Let us vindicate the notion here used by the apostle. How was he the
   first-born, the first-fruits, the first raised from the dead? Two
   objections lie against it:--

   [1.] That many were raised from the dead before Christ.

   [2.] Concerning the resurrection of the wicked. They are not parts of
   his mystical body, and in respect of them how could Christ rise as the
   first-born and the first-fruits?

   I. For the first objection, how was Christ the first, since many were
   raised before him? As the widow of Sarepta's son, who was raised to
   life by Elijah, 1 Kings xvii.; the Shunammite's son by Elisha, 2 Kings
   iv.; a dead man by the touch of Elisha's bones, 2 Kings xiii. 21. Our
   Saviour in his lifetime raised the widow of Nam's only son, Luke vii.
   15; Jairus's daughter, Luke viii. 55; Lazarus, John xi. 44; some others
   at his death, Mat. xxvii. 52. How was he then the first? I answer--

   [1.] We must distinguish of a proper and an improper resurrection.
   Christ was the first-born from the dead, because he arose from the dead
   by a proper resurrection, which is to arise again to a life immortal;
   others were raised again to a mortal estate, and so the great disease
   was rather removed than cured. Christ's resurrection is a resurrection
   to immortality, not to die any more; as the apostle saith, Death hath
   no more power over him.' They only returned to their natural life, they
   were raised from the dead, but still mortal; but he whom God raised
   again shall see no corruption,' Acts xiii. 34.

   [2.] Others are raised by the power and virtue of his resurrection, but
   he hath risen again by his own power, John x. 18, I have power to lay
   down my life, and power to take it up again.' Raising the dead is a
   work of divine power, for it belongs to him to restore life who gave it
   at first. Therefore Christ is said not only to be raised again, but to
   rise from the dead: Rom. iv. 25, He died for our offences, and rose
   again for our justification.' as the sun sets and rises by his own
   motion.

   [3.] All those that rose again before Christ, arose only by special
   dispensation, to lay down their bodies once more when God should see
   fit, and rose only as private and single persons; but Christ rose as a
   public person. His resurrection is the cause and pattern of ours, for
   head and members do not rise by a different power; he rose again to
   show the virtue that should quicken our mortal bodies, and raise them
   at length.

   2. The second objection is concerning the raising of the wicked. Christ
   cannot be the first-born or the first-fruits to them, they belong not
   to his mystical body. The first-born implieth a relation to the rest of
   the family; and offering of the first-fruits did not sanctify the
   tares, the cockle, or the darnel, or the weeds that grow amongst the
   corn, but only the corn itself. I answer--

   [1.] Certain it is that the wicked shall rise again, there is no
   question of that, Acts xxiv. 15. I believe a resurrection of the dead,
   both of the just and the unjust, all that have lived, whether they have
   done good or evil: Mat. v. 45, He makes his sun to rise on the evil and
   the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust;' and it is
   said, John v. 28, 29, All that are in their graves shall hear his
   voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the
   resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection
   of damnation.' Both must rise, that both may receive a full recompense
   according to their several ways; and though it be said, Ps. i. 5, The
   ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
   congregation of the righteous.' it doth not infringe this truth. The
   sense is, those unhappy miscreants shall not be able to abide the
   trial, as being self-condemned. To stand in the judgment is to make a
   bold defence. And whereas it is said, also, they shall not stand in the
   congregation of the righteous, you must know that at the day of doom
   there is a congregation or a gathering together of all men, then a
   segregation, a separating the sheep from the goats, then an
   aggregation--He shall set the sheep on his right hand and the goats on
   his left'--so that they make up two distinct bodies, one of the good,
   which is there called the congregation of the righteous, the other of
   the wicked, who are to be judged by Christ as a just and righteous
   judge, assisted with his holy angels, and the great assembly and
   council of saints. Not one of the sinners shall remain in the company
   of the righteous, nor appear in their society.

   [2.] The wicked are raised ex officio judicis, not beneficio
   mediatoris; they are raised by Christ as a judge, but not by him as a
   Redeemer. The .one sort are raised by the power of his vindicative
   justice, the other by the Holy Ghost by virtue of his covenant: Rom.
   viii. 11, He shall quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that
   dwelleth in you.' The one by Christ's power from without, put forth by
   him as judge of dead and living; the other by an inward quickening
   influence that flows from him as their proper head. When the reaper
   gathers the wheat into his barn, the tares are bound in bundles and
   cast into unquenchable fire, Mat. xiii. 30.

   [3.] The wicked are forced to appear, and cannot shift that dreadful
   tribunal, the other go joyfully forth to meet the bridegroom; and when
   the sentence of condemnation shall be executed upon the one, the other
   by virtue of Christ's life and resurrection shall enter into the
   possession of a blessed and eternal life, wherein they shall enjoy God
   and Christ, and the company of saints and angels, and sing hallelujahs
   for ever and ever.

   Thirdly, How is this an evidence and assurance to all good Christians
   of their happy and glorious resurrection?

   1. The resurrection of Christ doth prove that there shall be a
   resurrection.

   2. That to the faithful it shall be a blessed and glorious
   resurrection.

   1. There shall be a resurrection: it is necessary to prove that; partly
   because it is the foundation of all godliness. If there were not
   another life after this, there were some ground for that saying of the
   atheists, Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die,' 2 Cor. xv.
   32. If there be no future estate nor being after this life, let us
   enjoy the good things of the world whilst we can, for within a little
   while death cometh, and then there is an end of all. These atheistical
   discourses and temptations to sensuality were more justifiable if men
   were annihilated by death. No! the soul is immortal, and the body shall
   rise again, and come into the judgment; and unless we live holily, a
   terrible judgment it will be to us. Partly because we cannot easily
   believe that the same body shall be placed in heaven which we see
   committed to the grave to rot there. Of all articles of religion this
   is most difficultly assented unto. Now there is relief for us in this
   business in hand: Christ is the first-born from the dead.' There were
   many praeludia resurrectionis, foretokens and pledges of the
   resurrection given to the old world, in the translation of Enoch, the
   rapture of Elijah, the reviving of these few dead ones which I spake of
   before; but the great and public evidence that is given for the
   assurance of the world is Christ's rising from the grave. This makes
   our resurrection:--

   [1.] Possible.

   [2.] Easy.

   [3.] Certain and necessary.

   [1.] Possible. The least that we can gather from it is this, that it is
   not impossible for dead men to rise; for that which hath been may be.
   We have the proof and instance of it in Christ; see how the apostle
   reasoneth: 1 Cor. xv. 13, If there be no resurrection from the dead,
   then Christ is not risen, and then our whole faith falleth to the
   ground.' For all religion is bottomed on the resurrection of Christ; if
   therefore Christ be risen, why should it seem an incredible thing to us
   that others should be raised also?

   [2.] It is easy. For by rising from the dead he hath conquered death
   and gotten the victory of it, 1 Cor. xv. 57. A separation there will be
   of the soul from the body, but it is not such as shall last for ever.
   The victory over sin is the victory over death, and the conquest of sin
   makes death an entrance into immortality. The scriptures often speak of
   Christ destroying the power of death: Heb. ii. 14, That through death
   he might destroy him that had the power of death.' The devil's design
   was, by tempting men to sin, to keep them for ever under the power of
   death, but Christ came to rescue men from that power by a resurrection
   from death to life. Again it is said, He hath abolished death, and
   brought life and immortality to light in the gospel.' He hath voided
   the power of death by taking a course for the destruction of sin, and
   made a clear revelation of that life and immortality which was not so
   certainly known before. We look to the natural impossibilities, how
   what is turned to dust may be raised again, because we do not consider
   the power of God; but the moral impossibility is the greater, for the
   sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law;' that which
   makes sin able to do us hurt is the guilt of sin, otherwise it would be
   but as a calm sleep; and this guilt is bound upon us by the law of the
   righteous God, which threateneth eternal death to the sinner. Now get
   free from sin, and it is easy to believe the conquest of death. I will
   prove two things--that Christ's resurrection shows both his victory
   over sin, and his victory over death.

   [1.] His victory over sin. That he hath perfectly satisfied for sin,
   and appeased the wrath of God, who is willing to be reconciled with all
   those that come to the faith and obedience of the gospel, which could
   not be if Christ had remained under the power of death; for the apostle
   saith, 1 Cor. xv. 17, If Christ had not risen, ye are yet in your
   sins'--that is, God is not pacified, there is no sufficient means of
   atonement or foundation laid for our reconciliation with him. But his
   resurrection declareth that he is fully satisfied with the ransom paid
   for sinners by Jesus Christ, for it was in effect the releasing of our
   surety out of prison; so it is said, Rom. iv. 15, He was delivered for
   our offences, and raised up for our justification.' He died to expiate
   and do away sin, and his resurrection showeth it was a sufficient
   ransom, and therefore he can apply the virtue of it to us.

   [2.] His victory over death. For he got out of it, which not only shows
   there is a possibility for a man by the power of God to be raised from
   death to life, but a facility; as a second Adam he brought resurrection
   into the world--there were two Adams, the one man brought death, and
   another brought resurrection into the world. The sentence of death is
   gone out against all the children of Adam as such, and the regenerate
   believers that are recovered by Christ shall be raised to immortal
   life: he hath gotten out of the power of death, so shall we.

   [3.] Certain and necessary. For several reasons.

   First, Our relation to Christ, he is the head of the body. Now the head
   will not live gloriously in heaven and leave his members behind him
   under the power of death. Believers are called the fulness of him that
   filleth all things, Eph. i. 23. Head and members make up one perfect
   man, or mystical body, which is called the fulness of Christ, Eph. iv.
   13. Otherwise it would be a maimed Christ, or a head without a body,
   and therefore we should not doubt but he will raise us up with him.

   Secondly, The charge and office of Christ, which he will attend upon
   and see that it be carefully performed: John vi. 39, This is the
   Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I
   should lose nothing, but raise it up again at the last day;' as none so
   nothing; in the prophet's expression concerning the good shepherd, not
   so much as a leg or a piece of an ear, that he should be careful to
   preserve every one who belongs to his charge, and what ever befalls
   them here, he is to see them forthcoming at the last day, and to give a
   particular account of them to God. Now certainly Christ will be very
   careful to fulfil his charge and make good his office.

   Thirdly, There is the mercy of God through the merits of Christ towards
   his faithful ones who have hazarded their bodies and their bodily
   interests for his sake: 1 Thes. iv. 14, If we believe that Jesus died
   and rose again, even those also which sleep in Jesus will God bring
   with him.' Upon the belief of Christ's death and resurrection depends
   also the raising of their bodies that die for the testimony of Christ,
   or by occasion of faith in Christ, and that so certainly and speedily,
   that they that die not at all shall at the day of judgment have no
   advantage of those that have lain in the grave so many years, the
   raising of the one being in the same twinkling of an eye with the
   change of the other, for the apostle saith, they that are alive shall
   not prevent them that are asleep. So 2 Cor. iv. 14, Knowing that he
   that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also with Jesus, and
   present us with you.' He gives it as the reason why he had the same
   spirit of faith with David, who in his sore afflictions professed his
   confidence in God, because he believed he spake. So they do profess the
   faith of Christ, though imminent death and danger is always represented
   to them as before their eyes. Because they steadfastly believed that
   God would raise them to a glorious estate through Christ, therefore did
   they openly proclaim what they did believe concerning him. To the same
   purpose to confirm Timothy against all danger of death: 1 Tim. vi, 13,
   I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all
   things'--that is, as thou believest that God is able and will raise
   thee from the dead, that thou hold out constantly unto the death, and
   do not shrink for persecution.

   2. It proveth that to the faithful it shall be a blessed and a glorious
   resurrection.

   [1.] Because Christ's resurrection is not only a cause but a pattern of
   ours; there is not only a communion between the head and members in the
   mystical body, but a conformity. The members were appointed to be
   conformed to their head, as in obedience and sufferings, so in
   happiness and glory; here in the one, hereafter in the other: Rom.
   viii. 29, He hath predestinated us to be conformed to the image of his
   Son.' As Christ was raised from the dead, so we shall be raised from
   the dead. God raised him from the dead, and gave him glory and honour,
   that your faith and hope might be in God,' 1 Pet. i. 21. So God will
   raise us from the dead and put glory and honour upon us. There is
   indeed a glory put upon Christ far surpassing the glory of all created
   things; but our glory is like his for quality and kind, though not for
   quantity, degree, and measure, as to those prerogatives and privileges
   which his body in his exaltation is endowed withal. Such a glory it is
   that Christ shall be admired in his saints; the world shall stand
   gazing at what he means to do.

   [2.] By the grant of God. They have a right and title to this glorious
   estate; being admitted into his family, they may hereafter expect to be
   admitted into his presence. The Holy Spirit abideth in them as an
   earnest, till it be accomplished: Eph. i. 14, Ye were sealed with that
   holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our in heritance, until
   the redemption of the purchased possession.' The Spirit of holiness
   marketh and distinguished them as heirs of promise from all others. The
   mark or seal is the impression of Christ's image on the soul; this seal
   becomes an earnest or part of payment, which is a security or assurance
   to us that more will follow, a fuller conformity to Christ in the
   glorious estate; and this earnest doth continue till the redemption of
   the purchased possession; the purchased possession is the church, and
   their redemption is their final deliverance, Eph. iv. 30, when their
   bodies are redeemed from the bands of the grave. See Rom. viii. 28.

   Use 1. Is to persuade you to the belief of two grand articles of
   faith--the resurrection of Christ, and your own resurrection.

   1. The resurrection of Christ. The raising of Christ from the dead is
   the great prop and foundation of our faith: 1 Cor. xv. 14, If Christ be
   not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith also is vain.'
   All the apostles' preaching was built upon this supposition, that
   Christ died and rose again. Partly because this is the great evidence
   of the truth of the Christian religion; for hereby Christ was evidenced
   to be what he gave out himself to be, the eternal Son of God, and the
   Saviour of the world, whereof he hath given assurance to all men, in
   that he raised him from the dead,' Acts xxiii. 31, that is the ground
   of faith and assurance. So Acts xiii. 33, God hath raised Jesus from
   the dead, for it is written, Thou art my Son,' &c. Partly to show that
   he is in a capacity to convey life to others, both spiritual and
   eternal; which, if he had remained under the state of death, could not
   be. The life of believers is derived from the life of Christ: John xiv.
   19, Because I live.' &c. If he had been holden of death, he had neither
   been a fountain of grace nor glory to us: 1 Pet. i. 3, He hath begotten
   us unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ from the dead.'
   Partly because the raising of Christ is the pledge of God's
   omnipotency, which is our relief in all difficult cases; the power
   which raised Christ exceedeth all contrary powers, Eph. i. 20, 21. Now
   the resurrection of Christ, besides the veritableness of the report
   manifested by the circumstances, when a great stone was rolled at the
   mouth of the sepulchre, a guard of soldiers set to watch against all
   fraud and impostures, yet he brake through; his frequent apparitions to
   the apostles, yea, to five hundred disciples at once, 1 Cor. xv. 6, a
   great part of which were alive to testify the truth of it for some
   competent space of time; his pouring out of the Spirit; the apostles
   witnessing the truth of it in the teeth of opposition; his appearing
   from heaven to Paul; the prophecies of the Old Testament foretelling of
   it; the miracles wrought to confirm it; the holiness of the persons who
   were employed as chosen witnesses; their unconcernedness in all
   temporal interests; their hazarding of all; their success. It would
   make a volume to give you the evidences.

   2. Your own resurrection, what may facilitate our belief and hope of
   it?

   [1.] Consider it is a work of omnipotency. We are apt to say, How can
   it be, that when our bodies are turned into dust, and that dust mingled
   with other dust, and hath undergone many transmutations, that every one
   shall have his own body and flesh again? Why, consider the infinite and
   absolute power of God, and this will make it more reconcilable to your
   thoughts, and this hard point will be of easier digestion to your
   faith. To an infinite power there is no difficulty at all: Phil. iii.
   21, According to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to
   himself.' He appeals to God's power, how much God's power outworks our
   thoughts; for he were not infinite if he might be comprehended. We are
   not fit judges of the extent of his power; many things are marvellous
   in our eyes which are not so to his, Zech. viii. 6. Therefore we must
   not confine God to the limits of created beings or our finite
   understandings. Alas! our cockleshell cannot empty an ocean: we do no
   more know what God can do than a worm knoweth a man. He that made the
   world out of nothing, cannot he raise the dead? He that brought such
   multitudes of creatures out of the dark chaos, hath he forgotten what
   is become of our dust? He that gave life and being to that which before
   was not, cannot he raise the dead? He that turned Moses' rod into a
   serpent, and from a serpent into a rod again, cannot he raise us out of
   dust into men, and turn us from men into dust, and from the same dust
   raise us up into the same men and women again?

   [2.] We have a relief from the justice of God. All will grant that God
   is, and that God is a rewarder of good and bad. Now in this life he
   doth not dispense these rewards. Many times here instruments of public
   good are made a sacrifice to public hatred, and wicked men have the
   world at will; therefore there is a judgment when this life is ended;
   and if there be a judgment, men must be capable to receive reward and
   punishment. You will say, so they are by having an immortal soul; ay!
   but the soul is not all of a man, the body is a part: it hath had its
   share in the work, and therefore it is most equal to conceive it shall
   have its share in the reward and punishment. It is the body which is
   gratified by the pleasure of sin for a season, the body which hath
   endured the trouble and pain of faithful obedience unto Christ,
   therefore there shall be a resurrection of just and unjust, that men
   may receive according to what they have done in the body. God made the
   whole man, therefore glorifies and punishes the whole man. The apostle
   urgeth this as to the godly, 1 Cor. xv. 29,

   [3.] God's unchangeable covenant love, which inclines him to seek the
   dust of his confederates. God hath taken a believer into covenant with
   himself, body and soul; therefore Christ proveth the resurrection from
   God's covenant title, Mat. xxii. 31. To be a God is certainly to be a
   benefactor, Gen. xxv. 26; not Blessed be Shem,' but Blessed be the Lord
   God of Shem.' And to be a benefactor, becoming an infinite eternal
   power. If he had not eternal glory to bestow upon us, he would not
   justify his covenant title, Heb. xi. 16. To whom God is a benefactor,
   he is a benefactor not to one part only, but to their whole persons.
   Their bodies had the mark of his covenant upon them, their dust is in
   covenant with him, and wherever it is dispersed, he will look after it.
   Their death and rotting in the grave doth not make void his interest,
   nor cause his care and affection towards them to cease.

   [4.] We have relief also from the redemption of Christ, which extendeth
   to the bodies of the saints, as it is often interpreted in scripture;
   as where Christ speaks of his Father's charge--this was a special
   article in the eternal covenant: John vi. 39, 40. This is the will of
   my Father, that of all that he hath given me I should lose nothing, but
   raise it up at the last day.' Christ hath engaged himself to this; he
   is the guardian of the grave, as Rispah kept the dead bodies of Saul's
   sons, 2 Sam. xxi. 10. Christ hath the keys of death and hell; he hath a
   charge of the elect to the very day of their resurrection that he may
   make a good account of them, and may not lose so much as their dust,
   but gather it up again. What shall I say? When the intention of his
   death is spoken of: 1 Thes. v. 10, That whether we wake or sleep, we
   should live together with him;' that is, whether dead or alive; for
   they that are dead in the Lord, are said to be fallen asleep. Whether
   we live or die, we should live a spiritual life here, and eternal life
   in glory hereafter. So where the obligation: 1 Cor. vi. 20, Ye are
   bought with a price.' There would be no consequence if Christ had not
   purchased the body as well as the soul, and Christ will not lose one
   jot of his purchase; if he expect duty from the body, you may expect
   glory for the body; so redemption is particularly applied to the body:
   Rom. viii. 23, Waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our bodies.'
   Then is Christ's redemption full, when the body is exempted from all
   the penalties induced by sin.

   [5.] The honour which is put upon the bodies of the saints.

   (1.) They are members of Christ: 1 Cor. vi. 15, Know ye not that your
   bodies are members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ
   and make them members of an harlot? God forbid.' No members of Christ
   can for ever remain under death, but shall certainly be raised up
   again. When a godly man dieth, the union between soul and body is
   dissolved, but not the union between him and Christ, as Christ's own
   natural body in the grave was not separated from his person, and the
   hypostatical union was not dissolved;--it was the Lord of glory which
   was crucified, and the Lord of glory which was laid in the grave,--so
   the mystical union is not dissolved between Christ and his people, who
   are his mystical body, when they are dead.

   (2.) They are temples of the Holy Ghost; therefore if they be destroyed
   they shall be built up again: 1 Cor. vi. 19, Know ye not that your
   bodies are temples of the Holy Ghost?' As Christ redeemed not the soul
   only, but the whole man, so the Spirit in Christ's name takes
   possession both of body and soul; the body is cleansed and sanctified
   by the Spirit, as well as the soul; and therefore it is quickened by
   the Spirit: Rom. viii. 11, If the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from
   the dead dwell in you, he shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
   Spirit which dwelleth in you.' The Holy Ghost will not leave his
   mansion or dwelling-place; the dust of believers belongs to them who
   were once his temple. So it is a pledge of the resurrection. Now
   therefore labour with yourselves, think often of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VII.

   For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell.--Col.
   I. 19; with,

   For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.--Chap. II.
   9.

   THESE words are produced to prove that there is no defect in the
   evangelical doctrine, and therefore there needeth no addition to it
   from the rudiments of men. That there is no defect, he proveth from the
   author of it, Jesus Christ, who was not only man, but God; and beyond
   the will of God we need not look. If God will come from heaven to teach
   us the way thither, surely his teaching is sufficient, his doctrine
   containeth all things necessary to salvation. This is the argument of
   these words, For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
   bodily.'

   In which words, observe three things:--

   First, The house: in Him.

   Secondly, The inhabitant: all the fulness of the Godhead.

   Thirdly, The manner of dwelling: in the word bodily.

   First, the house, or place of residence: in Him.' In the man Christ
   Jesus, or in that human nature in which he carried on the business of
   our salvation; as despicable and abject as it was in the eyes of men,
   yet it was the temple and seat of the Godhead.

   Secondly, The inhabitant: the fulness of the Godhead;' not a portion of
   God only, or his gifts and graces (as we are made partakers of the
   divine nature, 1 Pet. i. 4.), but the whole Godhead.

   Thirdly, The manner, sumbolikos, bodily.' The word may relate--

   1. To the shadows and figures of the law, and so it signifieth
   essentially, substantially. God dwelt in the tabernacle, temple, or ark
   of the covenant, sumbolikos, because of the figures of his presence. In
   Christ, somatikos, bodily, as his human nature was the true tabernacle
   or temple in which he resideth. Christ calls his human nature a temple,
   John ii. 19. Or else,

   2. With respect to the intimacy and closeness of the union. So
   somatikos may be rendered personally; for body is often put for a
   person. The two natures were so united in him, that he is one Christ.

   Doct. That Jesus Christ is true God and true man in one person.

   I shall prove the point:--

   1. By testimonies of scripture.

   2. By types.

   3. By reasons taken from Christ's office.

   1. By testimonies of scripture. I shall pass by those that speak of the
   reality of either nature apart, and only allege those that speak of
   both together. Now these do either belong to the Old Testament or the
   New. I begin with the former, the testimonies of the Old Testament,
   because this union of the two natures in the person of Christ is indeed
   a mystery, but such as was foretold long before it came to pass; and
   many of the places wherein it was foretold were so understood by the
   ancient Jews. The controversy between them and Christians was not
   whether the Messiah were to be both God and man--they agreed in
   that--but whether this was fulfilled, or might be applied to Jesus of
   Nazareth. But the latter Jews, finding themselves not able to stand to
   the issue of that plea, say that we attribute many things to Jesus of
   Nazareth which were not foretold of the Messiah to come, as namely,
   that he should be God-man in one person; therefore it is necessary that
   this should be proved, that the Old Testament aboundeth with
   predictions of this kind. Let us begin with the first promise touching
   the Messiah, which was made to Adam after his fall, for the restoring
   of mankind: Gen. iii. 15, The seed of the woman shall bruise the
   serpent's head.' That is to say, one of her seed, to be born in time,
   should conquer the devil, death, and sin. Now, when he is called the
   seed of the woman it is apparent he must be man, and made of a woman.
   And when it is said that he shall break the serpent's head,' who can do
   this but only God? It is a work of divine omnipotency, for Satan hath
   much more power than any bare man. Therefore it is said, Rom. xvi. 20,
   The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.' Come we
   next to the promise made to Abraham, Gen. xii. 3, In thee shall all the
   families of the earth be blessed.' In thee, that is, in thy seed, as it
   is often explained: Gen. xxii. 18, In thy seed shall all the nations of
   the earth be blessed.' This seed was Christ, the Messiah to come. Now
   he was to be God-man: he was to be man, for he is the seed of Abraham;
   God, because that blessedness is remission of sins, or justification.
   For it is said, Gal. iii. 8, The scripture, foreseeing that God would
   justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto
   Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations of the earth be blessed.'
   Regeneration and the renovation of our natures is also included in it,
   as a part of this blessing: Acts iii. 25, 26, Ye are children of the
   prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying
   unto Abraham, In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
   blessed. Therefore unto you first God, having raised up his Son Jesus,
   sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his
   iniquities.' There is also redemption from the curse of the law, and
   the gift of eternal life included in it. Now all these are works proper
   to God alone. Let us come to the promise made to David: 2 Sam. vii. 12,
   13, I will set up thy seed after thee, and I will establish the throne
   of thy kingdom for ever.' It is spoken in the type of Solomon, but in
   the mystery of Christ, who is true man as David's seed, and true God,
   for his kingdom is everlasting. And so David interpreteth it: Ps. xlv.
   6, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever.' The kingdom of the Messiah
   is never to have an end. And the apostle affirmeth expressly that those
   words are spoken to Christ the Son of God, Heb. i. 7. Let me next
   allege Job's confession of faith, which was very ancient: Job xix. 25,
   26, I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the
   latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this
   body, yet in my flesh I shall see God.' His Redeemer was true man, as
   appeareth by his title Goel; and because he shall stand on the earth,
   and be seen by his bodily eyes; true God, for he calleth him so: I
   shall see God.' Go we on in the scriptures: Isa. iv. 2, Christ is
   prophesied of: In that day the branch of the Lord shall be beautiful ,
   and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and
   comely.' When he is called the branch of the Lord,' his Godhead is
   signified; when he is called the fruit of the earth,' his manhood. So
   again, Isa. vii. 14, A virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou
   shall call his name Immanuel--that is to say, God with us;' which can
   agree to none but to him that is God and man. So that this mystery of
   God incarnate was not hid from the church of the Old Testament, for his
   very name did import God with us, or God in our nature reconciling us
   to himself. So Isa. ix. 6, To us a child is born, to us a son is given,
   and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be
   called The Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the ever lasting
   Father, the Prince of Peace.' Who can interpret these speeches and
   attributes but of one who is God-man? How could he else be a child and
   yet the everlasting Father--born of a virgin, and yet the mighty God?
   So Isa. xi. 1, with the 4th verse, A rod out of the stem of Jesse, and
   a branch out of his roots: therefore man; and ver. 4, He shall smite
   the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
   shall he slay the wicked: therefore God. So Isa. liii. 8, He shall be
   taken from prison and judgment:' therefore man; yet who shall declare
   his generation?' therefore God. So Jer. xxiii. 5, 6, A branch raised
   unto David from his dead stock: therefore man: yet the Lord, or Jehovah
   our righteousness;' therefore God. Shall I urge that speech whereby
   Jesus did silence divers of the learned pharisees? Ps. ex. 1, The Lord
   said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy
   footstool.' He was born in the mean estate of human flesh and King
   David's seed, and yet David's Lord; which he could not be if he were
   not God himself, the King of kings, and Lord of lords. Well, then, he
   was David's son as man, but David's Lord as he was God. And so do many
   of the ancient Jewish rabbins interpret this place. So again, Micah v.
   2, Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands
   of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be
   ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from old, from
   everlasting.' He is born in Bethlehem, yet his goings forth are from
   everlasting. He came out of Bethlehem, and therefore man; his goings
   forth are from everlasting, and therefore God. So Zech. xii. 10, I will
   pour out the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon
   me whom they have pierced.' He is God, because he giveth the Spirit of
   grace; man, because he is pierced or crucified. So Zech. xiii. 7,
   Against the man, my fellow.' A man he was, but God's companion, his
   only-begotten Son, and co-essential with himself, and so God.

   Secondly, Come we now to the New Testament, in which this mystery is
   more plainly and fully demonstrated. There often the Son of Man is
   plainly asserted to be also the Son of God. Thomas calleth him his
   Lord, his God, John xx. 28. We are told that the Word was made flesh,
   John i. 14; that God purchased the church with his own blood, Acts xx.
   28, which can be understood of no other but Christ, by whose blood we
   are redeemed, and who, being incarnate, hath blood to shed for us. But
   God, as a pure spirit, hath not flesh and blood and bones as we have:
   so Rom. i. 3, 4, Jesus Christ was made of the seed of David, according
   to the flesh, but declared to be the Son of God with power, according
   to the spirit of holiness,' &c. In respect of his divine subsistence,
   he was begotten, not made; in regard of his human nature, made, not
   begotten. True man, as David was, and true God, as the Spirit and
   divine nature is. Again, Rom. ix. 5, Whose are the Father's, and of
   whom as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
   for ever.' Than which nothing can be said more express as to that
   nature which is most apt to be questioned; for surely he that is God
   over all cannot be said to be a mere creature. The Jews confessed him
   to be man, and one of their blood, and Paul asserteth him to be God
   over all; they accounted him to be accursed, and Paul asserteth him to
   be blessed for ever; they thought him inferior to the patriarchs of
   whom he descended; and Paul over all. So that no word is used in vain;
   and when he saith according to the flesh,' he insinuateth another
   nature in him to be considered by us. The next place is 1 Cor. ii. 8,
   They crucified the Lord of glory.' He was crucified--there his human
   nature is acknowledged; but in respect of the divine nature he is
   called the Lord of glory:' as in the 24th Psalm, the Lord or King of
   glory is Jehovah Sabaoth, the Lord of hosts.' Go we further: Phil. ii.
   6, 7, Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
   with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
   of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.' By the form of God
   is meant not only the divine majesty and glory, but also the divine
   essence itself--for without it there can be no true divine majesty and
   glory. Now this he kept hidden under his human nature, letting only
   some small rays sometimes to shine forth in his miracles. But that
   which was most sensible and conspicuous in him was a true human nature
   in a low and contemptible estate. Again, 1 Tim. iii. 16, Great is the
   mystery of godliness, God manifested in our flesh'--that is, the
   eternal Son of God became man, and assumed the human nature into the
   unity of his person. Once more: 1 Pet. iii. 18, He was put to death in
   the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit'--that is, died according to his
   human nature, but by his divine nature raised from the dead. It is not
   meant of his soul. Quickened signifies not one remaining alive, but
   made alive--that power belongeth to God.

   Secondly, By types. Those that come to hand are these:--

   1. Melchisedec: Gen. xiv. 18, Melchisedec, King of Salem, brought forth
   bread and wine to Abraham.' Which type is interpreted by the apostle,
   Heb. vii. 2, 3, First being by interpretation King of righteousness,
   and after that also King of peace; without father and without mother;
   having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto
   the Son of God, abideth a priest continually.' What Melchisedec was is
   needless to dispute. The apostle considereth him only as he is
   represented in the story of Moses, who maketh no mention of his father
   or mother, birth or death. Certainly he was a very man; but as he
   standeth in scripture there is no mention of father or mother,
   beginning or end, what he was, or of whom he came. So is Christ as God
   without mother, as man without father; as God without beginning, as
   God-man without ending of life.

   2. Another type of him was Jacob's ladder, the top of which reached
   heaven, and the bottom reached earth, Gen. xxviii. 12; and the angels
   of God were ascending and descending upon it. This ladder represented
   Christ the Son of man, upon whom the angels of God ascend and descend,
   John i. 51. The bottom, which reached the earth, represented Christ's
   human nature and conversing with men; the top, which reached heaven,
   his heavenly and divine nature; and in both his mediation with God for
   men. Ascende per hominem, et pervenies ad Deum. Christ reaches to
   heaven in his divine original; to earth in his manhood, and him the
   angels serve. By his dwelling in our nature, this commerce between
   earth and heaven is brought about.

   The third type is the fiery cloudy pillar: Exod. xiii. 21, And the Lord
   went before them in the day in a pillar of a cloud; and by night in a
   pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night.' This
   figured Christ's guidance and protection of his church travelling
   through this world to his heavenly rest. The cloud signified his
   humanity, the fire his divinity. There were two different substances,
   the fire and the cloud, yet but one pillar. So there are two different
   natures in Christ, his divinity shining as fire, his humanity darkening
   as a cloud, yet but one person. That pillar departed not from them all
   the while they travelled in the wilderness; so, while the church's
   pilgrimage lasteth, Christ will conduct us, and comfort and shelter us
   by his presence. His mediatory conduct ceaseth not.

   The fourth type is the tabernacle, wherein God dwelt symbolically, as
   in Christ bodily. There God sat on the mercy-seat, which is called
   ilaste'rion, Heb. ix. 5. So Christ: Rom. iii. 25, A propitiation.' He
   there dwelt between the cherubim s, and did exhibit himself graciously
   to his people, as now he doth to us by Christ. The next shall be of the
   scape-goat on the day of expiation, Lev. xvi. 10. One goat was to be
   slain, the other kept alive. The slain goat signified te`n sa'rka, to`
   patheto'n, his flesh, or human nature suffering; the live goat, to`
   anathe`s t8es Theo'tetos, his immortal deity, or as the apostle
   expresseth it, 2 Cor. xiii. 4, That Christ was to be crucified through
   weakness,' yet to live by the power of God;' or as we heard before, 1
   Pet. iii. 18, Put to death in the flesh, and quickened by the Spirit.'
   Because these two things could not be shadowed by any one beast, which
   the priest having killed, could not make alive again; and it was not
   fit that God should work miracles about types, therefore he appointed
   two, that in the slain beast his death might be represented, in the
   live beast his immortality. The like mystery was represented also in
   the two birds for the cleansing of the leper, Lev. xiv. 6, 7.

   Thirdly, I prove it by reasons taken from his office, which may be
   considered in the general; and so it is expressed by one word,
   Mediator; or in particular, according to the several functions of it,
   expressed by the terms of King, Priest, and Prophet; or with respect to
   the persons that are to be considered and concerned in Christ's
   mediation.

   1. His office considered in the general: so he is called, Jesus the
   mediator of the New Testament,' Heb. xii. 24. It was agreeable that
   mesi'tes, a mediator, should be mese, a middle person, of the same
   essence with both parties, and that his operative mediation should
   presuppose his substantial mediation; that, being God-man in the same
   person, he should make an atonement between God and man. Sin hath made
   such a breach and distance between us and God, that it raiseth our
   fears, and causeth backwardness to draw nigh unto him, and so hindereth
   our love and confidence in him. How can we depend upon one so far above
   us, and out of the reach of our commerce? Therefore a mediator is
   necessary, one that will pity us, and is more near and dear to God than
   we are. One in whom God doth condescend to man, and by whom man may be
   encouraged to ascend to God. Now, who is so fit for this as Jesus
   Christ, God manifested in our flesh'? The two natures met together in
   his person, and so God is nearer to man than he was before in the pure
   deity; for he is come down to us in our flesh, and hath assumed it into
   the unity of his person; and man is nearer to God, for our nature
   dwelleth with him so closely united, that we may have more familiar
   thoughts of God, and a confidence that he will look after us, and
   concern himself in our affairs, and show us his grace and favour, for
   surely he will not hide himself from his own flesh, Isa. lviii. 7. This
   wonderfully reconcileth the heart of man to God, and maketh our
   thoughts of him more comfortable, and doth encourage us to free access
   to God.

   2. Come we now to the particular offices by which he performeth the
   work of a mediator, and they all show the necessity of both natures:
   these offices and functions are those of prophet, priest, and king.

   [1.] Our mediator hath a prophetical office belonging to his
   administration, that he may be made wisdom to us, and therefore he must
   be both God and man. God, that he may not only teach us outwardly, as
   an ordinary messenger or minister, but inwardly, putting his law into
   our minds, and writing it upon our hearts: Heb. viii. 10, and 2 Cor.
   iii. 3, Ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ
   ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
   living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the
   heart.' Men may be the instruments, but Christ is the author of this
   grace, and therefore he must be God. To convince men's understandings
   of their duty, and to incline their hearts to perform it, requireth no
   less than a divine power. If such an infinite virtue be necessary to
   cure the blindness of the body; how much more to cure the natural
   blindness and darkness of the mind! A man he must also be; for the
   great prophet of the church was to be raised up among his brethren like
   unto Moses, Deut. xviii. 15. Till such an one came into the world, they
   were to hear Moses; but then they were to hearken to him. He that was
   to come was to be a lawgiver as Moses was, but of a far more absolute
   and perfect law--a lawgiver that must match and overmatch Moses every
   way. He was to be a man as Moses was in respect of our infirmities,
   such an one as Moses was whom the Lord had known face to face; but of a
   far more divine nature, and approved to the world by miracles, signs,
   and wonders, as Moses was. Again, it was prophesied of him that, as the
   great prophet of the world, he should be anointed, that he might come
   and preach the gospel to the poor, Isa. lxii. 1; which could not be if
   he had spoken from heaven in thunder, and not as a man conversed with
   men. Again, he was to approve himself as one who had grace poured into
   his lips, Ps. xlv. 2; that all might wonder at the gracious speeches
   that came from his mouth, as they did at Christ's. In short, that
   Wisdom of the Father, which was wont to assume some visible shape for a
   time, when he would instruct the patriarchs concerning his will, that
   he might hide his majesty and put a veil upon his glory, was now to
   assume our nature into the unity of his person, not a temporary and
   vanishing appearance; that God who at sundry times and in divers
   manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, might in
   these last days speak to us by his Son,' Heb. i. 1, 2. Then God
   delivered his will by parcels, now by him he would settle the whole
   frame of the gospel.

   [2.] Jesus Christ, as he is the apostle of our profession, so also he
   is the high priest, Heb. iii. 1, and so must be both God and man. Man,
   that he might be made sin for us; God, that we might be made the
   righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. v. 21. Man, to undertake our
   redemption; God, to perform it. Man, that he might suffer; God, that he
   might satisfy by suffering and make our atonement full--we are
   purchased by the blood of God. Man, that he might have a sacrifice to
   offer; God, that the offering might be of an infinite price and value,
   Heb. ix. 14. Man, that he might have a life to lay down for us; God,
   that the power of laying it down and taking it up again might be in his
   own hands: John x. 17, 18, I lay down my life, that I may take it
   again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have
   power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.' This was fit
   that his suffering should be a pure voluntary act, required, indeed, by
   God, but not enforced by man. He had a liberty, at his own pleasure, as
   to anything men could do, and thereby commendeth his love to sinners.
   What shall I say? He was man that he might die; he was God that by
   death he might destroy him that had the power of death. He was man,
   that by his death he might ratify the new covenant; God, that he might
   convey to the heirs of promise these precious legacies of pardon and
   life. Man, that he might be a merciful high priest, touched with the
   feeling of our infirmities; God, that we, coming boldly to the throne
   of grace, might find mercy and grace to help in every time of need,
   Heb. iv. 15, 16.

   [3.] His kingly office. He that was to be King of kings and Lord of
   lords needed to be both God and man. God, that he might cast out the
   prince of this world, and having rescued his church from the power of
   darkness, might govern it by his word and Spirit, and finally present
   it to himself a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
   thing. Man he needed to be for his own glory, that he might be the
   first-born among many brethren.'--and head and members might suit, and
   be all of a piece,--and for our consolation, that we might be heirs of
   God and joint-heirs with Christ, Rom. viii. 17,--and for the greater
   terror and ignominy of Satan, that the seed of the woman might break
   the serpent's head. In short, God, that he might govern and influence a
   people so scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, and raise them
   up at the last day; man, that our nature (the dignity of which was so
   envied by Satan) might be exalted at the right hand of Majesty, and
   placed so near God, far above the angelical.

   Thirdly, With respect to the persons who are to be considered and
   concerned in Christ's mediation: God, to whom we are redeemed; Satan,
   from whom we are redeemed; and we ourselves who are the redeemed of the
   Lord. And you shall see, with respect to God, with respect to Satan,
   with respect to ourselves, our Mediator ought to be both God and man.

   1. God he need to be. With respect to God, that he may be appeased by a
   valuable compensation given to his justice. No mere man could satisfy
   the justice of God, appease his wrath, procure his favour; therefore
   our surety needed to be God to do this. And with respect to Satan, that
   he might be overcome. Now none can bind the strong one and take away
   his goods but he that is stronger than he, Luke xi. 21. Now no mere man
   is a match for Satan; the conqueror of the devil must be God, that by
   strong hand he may deliver us from his tyranny. And with respect to
   man, that he may be saved. Not only because of the two former respects
   must he be God, but also there is a special reason in the cause--the
   two former respects evince it; for unless God be appeased, man cannot
   be reconciled, and unless the devil be overcome, man cannot be
   delivered. If a God be needful for that, man cannot be saved unless our
   Redeemer be God; but there is a special reason, because of our own
   obstinacy and rebellion, which is only overcome by the divine power. It
   is necessary man should be converted and changed, as well as God
   satisfied and Satan overcome. Now who can convert himself or change his
   own heart? That work would cease for ever unless God did undertake it
   by his all-conquering Spirit. Therefore our Mediator must be God, to
   renew and cleanse our hearts, and by his divine power to give us a
   divine nature.

   2. Man also he ought to be with respect to these three parties: With
   respect to God, that the satisfaction might be tendered in the nature
   which had sinned, that as by man came death, by man also might come the
   resurrection from the dead,' 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22; that as in Adam all
   die, so by Christ shall all be made alive.' So with respect to the
   devil, that he might be overcome in the nature that was foiled by his
   temptations. And with respect to us, that he that sanctifieth and they
   that are sanctified, might be of one,' Heb. ii. 11. The priest that
   wrought the expiation, and the people for whom it was wrought, were of
   one stock; the right of redeeming belonged to the next kinsman. Christ
   is our Goel who redeemed us, not only jure proprietatis, as his
   creatures--to God as God--but jure propinquitatis, as his kinsmen. So
   as man we are of kin to him, as he came in our nature, and as he
   sanctifieth; doubly akin, not only by virtue of his incarnation but our
   regeneration, as he was made of a woman, and we born of God. These are
   the reasons.

   Use. Let me press you to admire this mystery of godliness. The man
   Christ Jesus in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily. The life
   and strength of our faith depends upon it, for as he is true man, flesh
   of our flesh, and bone of our bone, he will not be strange to us, and
   as he is God, he is able to help us.

   Two things I will press you to:--

   1. Consider what a fit object he is for your faith to close with.

   2. Own him as your Lord and your God.

   First, To raise your trust and confidence, consider what a fit object
   he is for your faith, how he is qualified for all his offices of
   prophet, priest, and king.

   1. As your prophet, consider how necessary it was that God dwelling in
   man's nature should set afoot the gospel. Partly because when ever you
   come seriously to consider this matter, this thought will arise in you,
   that this blessed gospel could not be without repealing the law of
   Moses, given with such solemnity by God himself, and it was not fit it
   should be abrogated by any but him who was far above Moses, to wit, by
   the Son of God himself, not any fellow-servant equal to Moses. The
   apostle telleth us that Moses was faithful in God's house as a servant,
   but Christ as a Son over his own house, Heb. iii. 5, 6. The servant
   must give place when the Son and Lord himself cometh. But rather take
   it from what Moses foretold himself: Deut. xviii. 18, 19, I will raise
   them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and I will
   put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
   command him; and it shall come to pass, that he that will not hearken
   to my word which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.'
   Now these words cannot be verified in any other prophet after Moses
   until Christ, for that of these prophets there arose none in Israel
   like unto Moses, Deut. xxxiv. 10. They had no authority to be lawgivers
   as Moses had, but were all bound to the observation of his law till
   Christ should come, whom Moses calleth a prophet like unto himself,
   that is a law-maker, exhorting all men to hear and obey him. None of
   the prophets did take upon them that privilege; they must let that
   alone till the Messiah should come, whose office it is to change the
   law given upon Mount Sinai, and instead thereof to propagate or
   promulgate a new law to begin at Zion: Isa. ii. 3, The law shall go
   forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.' And in another
   place, The isles shall wait for his law,' Isa. xlii. 4. Well, now, this
   is a mighty confirmation of our religion, and bindeth both our faith
   and obedience to consider Christ's authority, that a greater than Moses
   is here. Partly because it concerneth us to receive the gospel as an
   eternal doctrine that shall never be changed, for it is called an
   everlasting covenant; and nothing conduceth to that so much as to
   consider that it is promulgated by the eternal God himself, by him in
   whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelleth bodily.' Partly because the
   gospel, if we would profit by it, is to be received by all believers,
   not only as an everlasting covenant, but as certain, perfect, and
   saving. Now if the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in him who gave this
   covenant, we cannot deny either the certainty or the perfection, or the
   savingness of it; for if we receive it from him who is truth itself, we
   cannot be deceived. It is certain if he taught us in person; surely all
   his works are perfect. Subordinate ministers may mingle their
   weaknesses with their doctrine; if we have it from a Saviour, surely it
   is a doctrine that bringeth salvation.

   2. Consider what a fit object here is for your faith. As Christ is a
   priest, so his great business is to reconcile us to God in the body of
   his flesh through death, who once were strangers and enemies, Col. i.
   21. Consider how fit he was for this; God and man were first united in
   his person, before they were united in one covenant. If you consider
   the fruits of his redemption and reconciliation; the evil from whence
   we were to be delivered, the good that was to be procured, Christ is
   every way a commodious Mediator for us as God-man. If you consider the
   evil from whence we are delivered, he was man, that the chastisement of
   our peace might be put upon his shoulders; God, that by his stripes we
   might be healed, Isa. liii. 5. Or, if you consider the good to be
   procured, he doth it as God-man. He was a man, that as by the
   disobedience of one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
   many might be made righteous; God, that as sin reigned unto death, so
   grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus
   Christ our Lord, Rom. v. 19, 21. As he is God, his merit is full; as he
   is man, we are partakers of the benefit of it.

   3. Consider how fit an object he is for our faith as king. For as the
   fulness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, he is the greatest and most
   glorious person that ever was in the world, infinitely superior above
   all power that is named in this world, or in the world to come. The man
   who is our shepherd is fellow to the Lord of hosts. The thought of
   Immanuel maketh the prophet startle, and break out into a triumph when
   Sennacherib brake in with his forces like a deluge in the land of
   Judah: They fill thy land, O Immanuel,' Isa. viii. 8. Then ver. 9, 10,
   Associate yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird
   yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel together, it
   shall come to nought; speak the word, it shall not stand: for God is
   with us.' Or because of Immanuel. Surely Christ is the foundation of
   the church's happiness, and may afford us comfort in the most
   calamitous condition; we are in his hands, under his pastoral care and
   protection: John x. 28, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
   never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.' Neither man
   nor devil can break off totally and finally their union with him. In
   short, he that assumed our nature to himself, will communicate himself
   to us. All union is in order to communion--here is a commodious and a
   blessed Saviour represented unto you.

   Secondly, Own him as your Lord and your God. This was the profession of
   Thomas's faith: John xx. 28, My Lord and my God.' I shall insist on
   that scripture. In the history there are these remarkables:--

   1. Thomas, his absence from an assembly of the disciples, when Christ
   had manifested himself to them, ver. 24. Being absent, he not only
   missed the good news which many [32] brought, but also the comfortable
   sight of Christ, and was thereby left in doubts and snares.

   2. When these things were told him he betrays his incredulity, ver. 25.
   When they told him, he said unto them, Except I see in his hands the
   print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
   thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.' This un belief was
   overruled by God's providence for the honour of Christ. His incredulity
   was an occasion to manifest the certainty of Christ's resurrection. If
   credulous men, or those hasty of belief, had only seen Christ, their
   report had been liable to suspicion. Solomon maketh it one of his
   proverbs, The simple believeth every word.' Here is one that had sturdy
   and pertinacious doubts, yet brought at last to yield. However, this is
   an instance of the proneness of our hearts to unbelief, especially if
   we have not the objects of faith under the view of the senses, and how
   apt we are to give laws to heaven, and require our terms of God.

   3. Christ's condescension in two things:--

   [1.] In appearing again, ver. 26, on the first day of the next week, to
   show how ready he is to honour and bless his own day, and to give
   satisfaction to poor doubting souls by coming again to them; and it was
   well Thomas was there at this time.

   [2.] In giving Thomas the satisfaction of sense: ver. 27, Reach hither
   thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust
   it into my side.' With what mildness doth our Lord treat him, though
   under such a distemper. Unbelief is so hateful to Christ, that he is
   very careful to have it removed, and in condescension grants what was
   his fault to seek.

   4. The next thing is Thomas his faith: ver. 28, And he answered and
   said, My Lord, and my God.' He presumeth not to touch Christ, but
   contents himself only to see him, and having seen him, makes a good
   confession, ho kurios mou, ho Theo`s mou.

   [1.] Observe the two titles given to Christ: God and Lord. He is God,
   the fountain of all our happiness, and Lord, as he hath a dominion over
   us, to guide and dispose of us at his own pleasure.

   [2.] Observe the appropriation or personal application to himself. my
   God and my Lord.

   Hence we may observe:--

   1. That God leaveth some to themselves for a while, that them selves
   and others may be more confirmed afterwards. Thomas his faith was as it
   were dead and buried in his heart, and now, upon the sight of Christ,
   quickened and revived. We must not judge of men by a fit of temptation,
   but stay till they come to themselves again. Who would have thought
   that out of an obstinate incredulity so great a faith should spring up
   suddenly?

   2. We may observe Thomas, that is with much ado awakened, makes a
   fairer confession than all the rest. They call him their Lord, but he
   his Lord and God.

   3. We may observe, again, that true believing with the heart is joined
   with confession of the mouth: Ps. cxvi. 10, I believed, therefore have
   I spoken.'

   4. Hence you may take notice of the reality of the two natures in the
   unity of Christ's person, for he is both Deus and Dominus. But how
   cometh he to acknowledge Christ's Godhead? He did not feel the divinity
   of Christ in hands, or side, or feet. Videbat tangebatque hominem, et
   confitebatur Deum, quem non videbat neque tangebat, saith Austin.
   Herein his faith was beyond sense, he felt the manhood and acknowledged
   the deity.

   5. Hence we may observe, that those that are rightly conversant about
   Christ and the mysteries of his death and resurrection, should take
   Christ for their Lord and their God. Thomas saith, My Lord and my God.'
   and his confession should be the common confession of all the faithful.
   I shall quit the three first, and insist only on the two last. I
   therefore begin with the fourth observation.

   Fourthly, Hence you see the reality of the two natures in the unity of
   Christ's person. The name of God is joined with the title of Lord;
   therefore the name of God belongeth to him no less than the title of
   Lord. Thomas, when he saith my Lord, he seemeth not to have satisfied
   himself till he had added this other name and title, my God: now this
   importeth the reality of his divine nature, for these three reasons:--

   1. Those things which are proper to God cannot, ought not, to be
   transferred to a mere creature; but this title of my God is a covenant
   title, and so often used in scripture, and therefore Christ was God.

   2. To whom truly and properly the names and titles of things do belong,
   to him that which is signified by those names and titles doth belong
   also; for otherwise this would destroy all certainty of speech. You
   cannot speak or write, unless words signify what in vulgar use they are
   applied unto; there could be no reasoning a signo ad rem significatam,
   from the sign to the thing signified. If I should call a brute a man,
   or a creature God, how can we understand what is spoken or written? The
   argument is the more cogent, because a name is an implicit contracted
   definition, as a definition is a name explained and dilated. As when I
   say a man is a reasonable creature, so a God is one that hath power
   over all, blessed for ever.

   3. The greater any person is, the more danger there is of giving him
   titles that do not belong to him; for that is to place him in an honour
   to which he hath greater pretensions than others, but no right;
   especially doth this hold good in religion--it is true in civils. To
   give one next the king, the title of king, would awaken the jealousy of
   princes, and breed much inconvenience. But especially doth this hold
   good in religion, where God is so jealous of giving his glory to
   another, Isa. xlii. 8. Therefore the greater the dignity of Christ was
   above all other creatures, the more caution was necessary that the name
   of God might not be ascribed to him, if he were only mere man, and it
   did not properly agree to him; for the more dangerous the error, the
   more cautiously should we abstain from it.

   4. Consider the person by whom this title was given; by a godly man. No
   godly man would call an idol, or a magistrate, or a teacher, or a king,
   or an angel, or any created thing above an angel, his Lord and his God.
   But this was done by Thomas, one bred up in the religion taught by
   Moses and the prophets; and the chief point of that religion was, that
   God is but one: Deut. vi. 4, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one
   Lord.' This was one of the sentences written on the fringes of their
   garments, and it is quoted by Christ, whose disciple Thomas also was,
   Mark xii. 29, and explained by a learned scribe which came to him: Mark
   xii. 32, Well, master, thou hast said the truth, for there is but one
   God, and there is none other but him.' Now, Thomas knowing this, and
   the first commandment, Thou shalt have no other gods before me,' if he
   were not persuaded of it, would he say to Christ, My Lord and my God'?

   5. The person to whom he spake it: He said to him;' not to the Father,
   but to Jesus of Nazareth: My Lord and my God.' Surely as the saints
   would not derogate from God, so Christ would not arrogate what was
   proper to his Father. Therefore as his disciples would have been tender
   of giving it to him, so he would have refused this honour, being so
   holy, if it had not been his due. But Christ reproved not, but rather
   approved this confession of faith; therefore it was right and sound.
   Christ had said to him, Be not faithless, but believing,' and then
   Thomas saith, My Lord and my God.' And Jesus saith to him, Thomas,
   because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed; blessed are they that
   have not seen, and yet have believed.' There is no rebuke for ascribing
   too much to him.

   6. The conjunction of the divine and human nature is so necessary to
   all Christ's functions and offices, that less would not have been
   sufficient than to say, My Lord, my God.' The functions and offices of
   Christ are three--to be a prophet, priest, and king.

   [1.] To be a prophet, Mat. xxiii. 10, One is your master, even Christ.'
   Now to be our master and teacher, it is necessary that he should have
   the human nature and divine conjoined. The human nature, that he might
   teach men by word of mouth, familiarly and sweetly conversing with men;
   and also by his example, for he perfectly teacheth that teacheth both
   ways, by word and deed. And it is a mighty condescension, that God
   would come down, and submit to the same laws we are to live by. His
   divine nature was also necessary, that he might be the best of
   teachers; for who is such a teacher as God? and that he might teach us
   in the best way, and that is, when God, taking the nature of man, doth
   vouchsafe to men his familiar converse, ea ting and drinking and
   walking with them, offering himself to be seen and heard by them; as he
   of old taught Abraham, Gen. xviii., accepting his entertainment;
   nothing more profitable, or honourable to men can be thought of. In
   Christ's prophetical office, four things are to be considered:--

   (1.) What he taught.

   (2.) How he taught.

   (3.) By what arguments he confirmed his doctrine.

   (4.) How he received it from the Father.

   (1.) What he taught. Christ preached, but chiefly himself; he revealed
   and showed forth God, but by revealing and showing forth himself, John
   xiv. 9; he called men, but to himself; he commanded men to believe, but
   in himself, John xiv. 1; he promised eternal life, which he would give,
   but to men believing in himself; he offered salvation to miserable
   sinners, but to be had by himself; he wrought a fear of judgment to
   come, but to be exercised by himself; he offered remission of sins, but
   to those that believed in himself; he promised the resurrection of the
   dead, which he by his own power and authority would bring to pass. Now
   who could do all this but God? A mere man, if faithful and holy, would
   have turned off men from himself to God: 2 Cor. iv. 5, For we preach
   not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and ourselves your servants
   for Jesus' sake.' They designed no honour to themselves, but only to
   Christ; they were loth to transfer any part of this glory to
   themselves; so would Christ if he had not been God. Therefore what
   should his disciples say, but My Lord, my God'?

   (2.) How he taught. There is a twofold way of teaching--one human, by
   the mouth, and sound of words striking the ear; the other divine,
   opening and affecting the heart. Christ used both ways. As the human
   nature was necessary to the one, so the divine to the other. As the
   organs of speaking cannot be without the human nature, so the other way
   of teaching cannot be without a divine power. When the disciples came
   to Christ, Lord, increase our faith,' Luke xvii. 5, he did not answer,
   as Jacob did to Rachel (when she said, Give me children or I die'), Am
   I in the place of God?' Christ after his resurrection did not only open
   the scriptures, as was said before, but, Luke xxiv. 45, He opened their
   understandings, that they might understand the scriptures.' And he
   opened the heart of Lydia, Acts xvi. 14; and poured the Holy Spirit on
   the apostles on the day of Pentecost, Acts ii.; and by the same
   efficacy teacheth the church, wherever it is scattered.

   (3.) If you consider by what arguments he confirmed his doctrine. By
   many, and the greatest miracles, not done by the power of another, but
   his own; and he required men to believe it: Mat. ix. 28, Believe ye
   that I am able to do this?' Whence had he the power to know the
   thoughts of men, to cure all sorts of diseases in a moment, to open the
   eyes of the blind, to raise the dead, to dispossess devils, but from
   that divine nature which was in him? Was it in his body and flesh? then
   it was finite, and in some sort material. Was it in his soul,
   understanding, will, or phantasy, or sensitive appetite? How could it
   work on other men's bodies? Therefore it was from his divine nature: My
   Lord, my God.'

   (4.) How he received this doctrine from the Father. Did God ever speak
   to him, or appear to him? Is there any time, or manner, or speech noted
   by the evangelists when God made this revelation? None at all. If he
   were a mere creature, or nothing but a man, surely that should have
   been done. He revealed the most intimate counsels and decrees of God,
   as perfectly knowing them; but when or how they were revealed to him by
   his Father is not said, which, if he had been mere man, would have
   conduced to the authority of his message and revelation. But all this
   needed not, he being a divine person, of the same essence with his
   Father. Therefore, My Lord, my God.'

   [2.] His priestly office. The human nature was necessary for that, for
   the reasons alleged by the apostle, Heb. ii. 14, 17. And also the
   divine nature, that there might be a priest as well as a sacrifice.
   There had been no sacrifice if he had not been man, and no priest, if
   he had not been God, to offer up himself through the eternal Spirit,
   Heb. ix. 14. The sacrifice must suffer, the priest act; and besides, he
   could not enter into the heavenly sanctuary to present himself before
   God for us, Heb. ix. 24. Then the heavenly sanctuary and tabernacle
   need first to be made before he entered. For as the earthly priest made
   the earthly tabernacle before he ministered in it, so the true priest
   was to make the heavenly tabernacle, as the author to the Hebrews saith
   in many places. But to leave that; the priest was to expiate sins by
   the offering of a sacrifice instead of the sinner. So Christ was to
   satisfy the justice of God for sinners by his mediatory sacrifice. Now
   this he could not do unless he had been God as well as man. The dignity
   of his person did put a value upon his sufferings. Without this, how
   shall we pacify conscience, representing to us the evil of sin, and the
   dreadfulness of God's wrath, and the exact justice of the judge of all
   the world, Rom. iii. 25, 26; especially when these apprehensions are
   awakened in us by the curse of the law and the stinging sense of God's
   threatenings, which are so absolute, universal, and every way true and
   evident, unless we know a sufficient satisfaction hath been made for
   us? If you think the promises of the gospel are enough, alas! when the
   threatenings of the law are so just, and built upon such evident
   reason, the soul is exposed to doubtfulness. And if the threatenings of
   the law seem altogether in vain, the promises of the gospel will seem
   less firm and valid. The truth and honour of God's government must one
   way or other be kept up, and that will not be unless there be a fair
   passage from covenant to covenant, and that the former be not repealed
   or relaxed but upon valuable consideration, as it is when our mediator
   and surety beareth our sorrows and griefs, and satisfieth for us. But
   now, if he were mere man, it would not have that esteem and value as to
   be sufficient for so many men, and so many sins as are committed
   against an holy God. Therefore he needeth to be God also.

   [3.] His kingly office. How can that be exercised without an infinite
   power? Because by our king and judge, all our enemies are to be
   overcome; the world, sin, death, and the devil. And what is necessary
   to do this every man may soon understand. And as an infinite power is
   necessary, so an infinite knowledge; that all things in heaven and
   earth may be naked and open to him, and that he search the heart, and
   try the reins: and then, that he may subject all things to himself,
   raise all the dead to life, govern and protect the faithful in all the
   parts of the world; that he may be present with them, in every age and
   place, to help and relieve them. In short, to do all things both in
   heaven and in earth, that fall within the compass of his office. Now
   what is a divine and infinite power, if this be not? What can the
   Father do which the Son cannot do also? yea, what doth the Father do
   which the Son doth not likewise? John v. 19. Is there any work which
   the one doth that the other cannot do? Besides, there needeth infinite
   authority and majesty, therefore the king of the church must be in
   finite. But how is he infinite, if he hath only a finite nature, such
   as a mere creature hath? Or how could his finite nature, without change
   and conversion into another nature, be made infinite? For without doubt
   that nature is infinite which hath an infinite power of under standing,
   willing, and acting. Well, then, Christ cannot be truly owned, unless
   he be owned as Lord and God.

   Fifthly, Those that are rightly conversant about Christ, and the
   mysteries of his death and resurrection, should take Christ for their
   Lord and their God. Every one of them should say, My God, on whom I
   depend; my Lord, to whose use I resign myself. I shall--

   1. Explain in what sense these words may and ought to be used.

   2. Give you the reasons why it becomes Christians to be able to say, My
   Lord, my God.'

   1. In what sense these words may and ought to be used, My Lord, and my
   God.' There are two things considerable in those words:--

   [1.] An appropriation or a claim, and challenge of interest in him.

   [2.] A resignation or dedication of ourselves to his use and service.

   Both are implied in these titles, My Lord, my God.' Christ was his God
   or benefactor, and also his Lord and Master. However that be in the
   mutual stipulation of the covenant, it is evident: Cant. ii. 16, I am
   my beloved's, and my beloved is mine.' There is the appropriation of
   faith, and the resignation of obedience: Ezek. xxxvi. 28, Ye shall be
   my people, and I will be your God;' Zech. xiii. 9, I will say, It is my
   people, and they shall say, The Lord is my God.'

   (1.) The one is the fruit and effect of the other. God saith, I am thy
   God;' and the soul answereth, I am thy servant.' As when Christ said,
   Mary,' she presently said, Rabboni.' God awakeneth us by the offer of
   himself and all his grace to do us good, and then we devote ourselves
   to his service, and profess subjection to him. If he will be our God,
   we may well allow him a dominion and lordship over us, to rule us at
   his pleasure. We choose him, because he chooseth us, for all God's
   works leave their impression upon our hearts--he cometh with terms of
   peace, and we with profession of duty. God loveth first, and most, and
   purest, and therefore his love is the cause of all.

   (2.) The one is the evidence of the other. If God be yours, you are
   his. He is yours by gift of himself to you, and you are his by gift of
   yourselves to him. The covenant bindeth mutually. Many will be ready to
   apply, and call God their God, that do not dedicate and devote
   themselves to God. If you be not the Lord's, the Lord is not yours. He
   refuseth their claim that say, Hosea viii. 2, Israel shall cry unto me,
   My God, we know thee. Israel hath cast off the thing that is good.' In
   their distress they pleaded their interest in the covenant, but God
   would not allow the claim, because they denied obedience.

   (3.) The one is more sensible and known to us than the other. A
   believer cannot always say God is mine, but he will always say, I am
   his: Ps. cxix. 94, I am thine, save me.' I am thine, and will be thine,
   only thine, wholly thine, and always thine. Appropriation hath more of
   a privilege in it, resignation is only a duty. We have leave and
   allowance to say God is my God, but we cannot always say it without
   doubt and hesitancy, because our interest is not always alike evident
   and clear. When you cannot say, My God, yet be sure to say, My Lord. We
   know God to be ours by giving up ourselves to be his. His choice and
   election of us is a secret till it be evidenced by our choice of him
   for our God and portion our act is more sensible to the conscience. Be
   more full and serious in the resignation of your selves to him, and in
   time that will show you your interest in God.

   (4.) God's propriety in us by contract and resignation speaketh
   comfort, as well as our propriety and interest in God. You are his own,
   and therefore he will provide for you and care for you: 1 Tim. v. 8, If
   any provide not for his own, he hath denied the faith, and is worse
   than an infidel.' Interest doth strangely endear things to us. The
   world will love its own,' John v. 19; and will not God love his own,
   and Christ love his own? John xiii. 1. You may trust him, and depend
   upon him, and serve him cheerfully, for you are his own. So that if we
   had no interest in God established by the covenant, if God had not said
   to us, I am yours, yet our becoming his would make it comfortable. For
   every one taketh himself to be bound to love his own, provide for his
   own, and to defend his own, and do good to his own. Indeed, God is
   ours, as well as we are his; but our being his draweth along with it
   much comfort and blessing. But to speak of these apart:--

   (1st.) The appropriation or claim of interest is a sweet thing. If God
   be your God, why should you be troubled? Ps. xvi. 5, 6, The Lord is the
   portion of my inheritance, and of my cup. Thou maintainest my lot. The
   lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly
   heritage.' You have a right to God himself, and may lay claim to all
   that he hath for your comfort and use. His attributes yours, his
   providences yours, his promises yours, what may not you promise
   yourselves from him? Support under all troubles, relief in all
   necessities. You may take hold of his covenant, Isa. lvi. 4, and lay
   claim to all the privileges of it. It is all yours.

   (2nd.) This dedication, this resignation of ourselves to God's use, to
   be at his disposing without reservation or power of revocation, is
   often spoken of in scripture: Isa. xliv. 5, One shall say, I am the
   Lord's, another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another
   shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and surname himself by the
   name of Israel.' The meaning is, to give up their names to God, to be
   entered into his muster-roll, and to be listed in his service: Rom. vi.
   13, Yield up yourselves to God, as those that are alive from the dead.'
   It is the immediate fruit of grace and new life infused in us. A
   natural man liveth to himself, to please himself, and give satisfaction
   to his own lusts. Grace is a new being and life, that inclines us to
   live and act for God. As soon as this life is begotten in us by the
   power of his Spirit, our hearts are inclined towards God, and you
   devote yourselves to serve and please him. As your work and business
   was before to serve the devil, the world, and the flesh, so now to
   please, serve, and glorify God.

   Secondly, The reasons why it becometh Christians to be able to say, My
   Lord, my God.'

   1. Because our interest in him is the ground of our comfort and
   confidence. It is not comfortable to us that there is a God, and that
   there is a Lord, that may be terrible to us. The devils believe, and
   the damned spirits feel there is a God and there is a Lord; but their
   thoughts of God is a part of their misery and torment, James ii. 19.
   The more they think of God, the more their horror is increased; to own
   a God, and not to see him as ours, the remembrance of it will be
   troublesome to us: 1 Sam. xxx. 6, David comforted himself in the Lord
   his God.' There was the comfort, that he had a God to go to when all
   was lost, and that God was his God. So Hab. iii. 18, I will rejoice in
   the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.' If God be our God, we
   have more in him than trouble can take from us. So Luke i. 47, My
   spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.' When you make particular
   application to yourselves, it breeds strong comfort.

   2. Because nothing strikes upon the heart with such an efficacy, as
   what nearly concerns us affects us most. The love of Christ to sinners
   in general doth not affect us so much as when it is shed abroad in our
   own hearts by the Spirit: Gal. ii. 20, He loved me, and gave himself
   for me;' that draws out our hearts to God again, and is a quickening
   motive to stir us up to the life of love and faith. So Eph. i. 13, In
   whom ye trusted, after ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your
   salvation.' It is not sufficient to know that the gospel is a doctrine
   of salvation to others only, but to find it a doctrine of salvation to
   themselves in particular, that they may apply the promises to their own
   heart. A Christian is affected most with things according as he is
   concerned in them himself. It bindeth our obedience the more firmly
   when we know that we are particularly engaged to God, and have chosen
   him for our God and our Lord.

   3. Because without a real personal entering into covenant, the covenant
   doth us no good; unless every one of us do choose God for our God and
   Lord, and particularly own him. Every man must give his hand to the
   Lord, and personally engage for himself. It is not enough that Christ
   engage for us in being our surety, but we must take a bond upon
   ourselves. Something Christ did for us and in our name, he interposed
   as the surety of a better testament, Heb. vii. 22. Something must be
   done personally by us before we can have benefit by it. You must give
   up yourselves to the Lord. It is not enough that the church engage for
   us, but every man must engage his own heart to draw nigh to God: Jer.
   xxx. 21, Who is he that engageth his heart to draw nigh to me?' It is
   not enough that our parents did engage for us, Deut. xxix. 10-12. They
   did in the name of their little ones avouch God to be their God, as we
   devote, dedicate, and engage our children to God in baptism; but no man
   can savingly transact this work for another. We ratify the covenant in
   our own persons, 2 Cor. ix. 13, by a professed subjection to the gospel
   of Christ. This is a work cannot be done by a proxy, or assignees;
   unless we personally enter into covenant with God for ourselves, our
   dedication by our parents will not profit us, we shall be as children
   of the thiopians unto God, Amos ix. 7; though children of the
   covenant, all this will not serve--these are visible external
   privileges. But there is something required of our persons, every one
   must say for himself, My Lord, and my God.' And this must not only be
   done in words, and by some visible external rites that may signify so
   much. As for instance, coming to the Lord's Supper, that is the new
   testament in Christ's blood, Luke xxii. 20. It is interpretativ--a
   sealing the new covenant between Christ and us. God giveth, and you
   take the elements as a pledge and token that God and you are agreed.
   That he will give you himself, his Christ, and all his benefits; and
   you will walk before him in newness of life. Now to rest in the
   ceremony, and neglect the substance, is but a mockery of God. As many
   rend the bond yet prize the seal, care much for the sacrament, that
   never care for the duty it bindeth them unto. If your hearts be hearty
   and well with God, you come now personally to enter into covenant with
   him; but this business must not be done only externally, but internally
   also. It is a business done between God and our souls, though no
   outward witnesses be conscious to it. God cometh speaking to us by his
   Spirit in this transaction: Ps. xxxv. 3, Say unto my soul, I am thy
   salvation.' And we speak to God, Lam. in. 24, The Lord is my portion,
   saith my soul.' There is verbum mentis, as well as verbum oris. This
   covenant is carried on in soul language: Ps. xvi. 21 , O my soul, thou
   hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord.' So Ps. xxvii. 8, When thou
   saidst, Seek ye my face, my heart said, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.'
   The Lord offereth or representeth himself as our Lord, and we profess
   ourselves to be the Lord's. No eye seeth, or ear heareth what passeth
   between God and the soul. Now, without this personal inward
   covenanting, all the privileges of the covenant will do us no good. And
   this personal inward covenanting amounts to full as much as My Lord, my
   God.' Therefore it concerneth every one of us to see whether we have
   thus particularly owned Christ; if there have been any treaty between
   God and our souls; and whether it came to any conclusion, and
   particular soul engagement; that you could thus own Christ, not only as
   God and Lord, but as your God and your Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [32] Query, Mary'?--ED.
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VIII.

   And having made peace by the blood of his cross, to reconcile all
   things to himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or
   things in heaven.--Col. I. 20.

   IN these words observe:--

   First, What Christ was to do.

   Secondly, The manner how he did it; or,

   First, The end for which he was appointed. To be our Mediator and
   Redeemer, and accordingly promised and sent into the world to reconcile
   all things to God, Whether they be things in heaven, or things in
   earth.'

   Secondly, The means by which he accomplished it: Having made peace by
   the blood of his cross;' that is, by his bloody sacrifice on the cross,
   thereby answering the sacrifices of atonement under the law. In the
   first branch take notice of:--

   1. The benefit: reconciliation with God.

   2. The person procuring it: by him; and it is repeated again, I say, by
   him.

   3. The persons to whom this benefit is intended, expressed--

   [1.] Collectively, pa'nta, all things.

   [2.] Distributively: whether they be things in earth or things in
   heaven.

   As they are collectively expressed, it teaches us that grace is
   revealed and offered in the most comprehensive expressions, that none
   may be excluded, or have just cause to exclude themselves. As it is
   distributively expressed, the latter clause is of a dubious
   interpretation. Some by things on earth,' understand men, but by things
   in heaven' the angels. Surely not the fallen angels, for they are not
   in heaven, neither was Christ sent to reconcile them, nor relieve them
   in their misery and reduce them to God, Heb. ii. 16, ouk epilambanetai
   ton angelon. What then shall we understand by things in heaven'? Some
   think the holy angels, others the glorified saints. (1.) Those that
   assert the first argue thus: that the angels are properly inhabitants
   of heaven, and so fitly called things in heaven; and they are enemies
   to men whilst they are ungodly, idolatrous, and rebels to God (as good
   subjects hold with their prince, and have common friends and enemies
   with him), but are reconciled to them as soon as they partake of the
   benefits of Christ's death, as we are told of joy in heaven among the
   angels of God, at the conversion of one sinner.' Luke xv. 10. Now if
   there be so much joy over one sinner repenting, how much more when many
   sinners are snatched out of the jaws of hell? They make the sense to be
   thus: before, for the sins of men, they were alienated from them, but
   then reconciled. But this scripture speaks not of the reconciliation of
   angels and men, but the reconciliation of all things to God; for so it
   is expressly in the text, to reconcile all things to himself. Now the
   good angels cannot be said to be reconciled to God, for there was never
   a breach between them, Se nunquam cum matre in gratiam rediisse. (2.)
   Therefore, I interpret it of the glorified saints. See the like
   expression, Eph. i. 10, To gather together in one all things to Christ
   which are in heaven and in earth.' And more clearly, Eph. iii. 15, Of
   whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.' Meaning thereby
   the faithful who are already in heaven, and those who are now remaining
   upon earth. This is a comfortable note, and teaches us:--

   1. That the apostle Paul knew no purgatory, or third place for souls
   after death.

   2. That the saints departed are now in heaven as to their souls, and
   gathered to the rest of the spirits of just men made perfect.

   3. The souls now in heaven once needed the merit of Christ, even as we
   do. None come thither but they were first reconciled to God. By him
   their peace was made, and they obtained remission of sins by the blood
   of his cross, as ye do. In short, all that go to heaven go thither by
   the mediation, sacrifice, and meritorious righteousness of the same
   Redeemer.

   Doct. One great benefit we have by Christ is peace and reconciliation
   with God. Here I shall show:--

   1. What this reconciliation is.

   2. How it was obtained.

   3. What assurance we have that it is obtained.

   4. How and upon what terms it is applied to us.

   1. What this reconciliation is.

   I answer: It is not an original peace, but a returning to amity after
   some foregoing breach. Now the breach by sin consisted in two
   things--an aversion of the creature from God, and an aversion of God
   from the creature. So before peace and reconciliation can be made, two
   things must be removed--God's wrath, and our sinful nature: God must be
   pacified, and man converted. God's wrath is appeased by the blood of
   Christ, and our natures are changed and healed by the Spirit of grace.
   First, God's wrath is appeased, and then the Spirit is bestowed upon
   us; for while God is angry and offended, no saving benefit can be
   expected from him. This text speaks not how he took away our enmity,
   but how he appeased God for us, not so much of the application as the
   impetration of this benefit. The application is spoken of ver. 21, how
   it is applied to us, but here the apostle more directly speaks of the
   impetration, how it was procured and obtained for us namely, by
   Christ's satisfying God's justice for that wrong which caused the
   breach, or the dying of the Son of God for a sinful world. Now this
   hath an influence on God's pardon and our conversion, for by virtue of
   this reconciliation we are justified and pardoned. Therefore, we are
   said to be justified by his blood, Rom. viii. 9, that is, the price is
   paid by Christ and accepted by God. There needeth nothing more to be
   done on the Mediator's part. By virtue of the same peace made we are
   also sanctified and converted unto God, 2 Cor. v. 18. The gift of the
   sanctifying Spirit is given us as the fruit of Christ's death.

   2. How it was obtained--by the blood of his cross he made peace. This
   implieth death, and such a death as in appearance was accursed; for the
   death of the cross is the vilest and most cruel death: Gal. iii. 13,
   Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made accursed
   for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.'
   Now we must see the reasons of this course or way of reconciling the
   world, that we may not mistake God's design, nor be possessed with any
   imaginations which are derogatory to God's honour--as, suppose, if we
   should hence conceit that God is all wrath and justice, unwilling of
   himself to be reconciled to man, or that he delighteth in blood, and is
   hardly drawn to give out grace. Oh, no! these^are false misprisions and
   misrepresentations of God. Therefore let us a little inquire into the
   reasons why God took this way to reconcile all things to himself, and
   ordained Christ to bear the chastisement of our peace. I answer: That
   the justice of God might be eminently demonstrated, the law giver
   vindicated, and the breach that was made in the frame of government
   repaired; and God manifested to be a hater of sin, and yet the sinner
   saved from destruction; and that the love of God might be eminently and
   conspicuously discerned; and our peace the better secured. As let us a
   little see these things more particularly. I begin--

   [1.] With the holiness of God's nature, who is of purer eyes than to
   behold iniquity, Hab. i. 13,--that is, so as to approve of it, or
   altogether connive at it, so as to let it go without punishment or mark
   of his displeasure; therefore some way must be found out to signify his
   purest holiness, and his hatred and detestation of sin, and that it
   should not be pardoned without some testimony of his displeasure
   against it. We are told God hateth the workers of iniquity, Ps. v. 5,
   and the righteous Lord loveth righteousness, Ps. xi. 7; and, therefore,
   when God was to grant his universal pardon he would not do it without
   this propitiatory atonement.

   [2.] The honour of his governing justice was to be secured, and freed
   from any blemish, that the awe of God might be kept up in the world. In
   the mystery of our redemption we must not look upon God only as pars
   laesa, the wronged party; but as rector mundi. God was to carry himself
   as the governor of the world. Now there is a difference between a
   private person and a governor--private persons may pass by offences as
   they please, but a governor must do right, and what conduces to the
   public good. There is a twofold notion that we have of public right,
   justum est quod fieri debet, and justum est quod fieri potest. That
   which ought to be done, or we are unjust; as for instance, to punish
   the righteous equally with the wicked, that Abraham pleadeth, Gen.
   xviii. 25, That be far from thee, to do after this manner, to slay the
   righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the
   wicked, that be far from thee. Shall not the judge of all the earth do
   right?' Not that Abraham mindeth God of his office, but he was
   confidently assured of the nature of God that he could not do
   otherwise. But now there is justum quod fieri potest, which if it be
   done, or if it be not done, the party is not unjust. The first part of
   justice is paying of debts; the second, exacting or requiring of debts.
   Now the Judge of the world doth all things wisely and righteously. The
   question is, therefore, whether God, passing by the offences of the
   world without any satisfaction required, doth deal justly? As a free
   Lord he may make what laws he pleases; but as a just Judge, with
   respect to the ends of government, he doth that which is for public
   good. The right of passing by a wrong, and the right of releasing a
   punishment, are different things; because punishment is a common
   interest, and is referred to a common good to preserve order and
   government, and for example to the future. The government of the world
   required it that God should stand on the satisfaction of Christ, and
   the submission of the sinner, that he may be owned and reverenced as
   the just and holy governor of the world. A valuable compensation is
   insisted on for this end: Rom. ii. 25, 26, Whom God hath set forth to
   be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
   righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
   forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness,
   that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in
   Jesus.'

   [3.] To keep up the authority of his law. God had made a former
   covenant, which was not to be quitted and wholly made void but upon
   valuable consideration; therefore if it be broken, and no more ado made
   about it, all respect and obedience to God would fall to the ground.
   The law may be considered either as to the precept or sanction. The
   authority of the precept is kept up by Christ's submission to the law,
   and living by the same rules we are bound to live by, and performing
   all manner of obedience to God; for it behoved him to fulfil all
   righteousness, Mat. iii. 15, being set up as a pattern of holiness in
   our nature, to which we are to be conformed. But that which is most
   considerable in this case is the sanction or penalty. If this should be
   relaxed, and no satisfaction required, it might leave upon God the
   blemish of levity, mutability, and inconstancy. The law was not given
   in jest, but in the greatest earnest that ever law was given; and so
   solemn a transaction was not constituted to no purpose, therefore God
   will not part with the law upon light terms: Gal. iv. 4, 5, When the
   fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made
   under the law, to redeem them that were under the law.' That men may
   know that it is a dangerous thing to transgress his law, and that they
   may fear and do no more presumptuously; partly that it might not foster
   in us hopes of impunity, which are very natural to us, Gen. iii. 5. The
   devil seeks to weaken the truth of God's threatenings, Deut. xxix. 19,
   20. We are apt to look upon the threatenings of the law as a vain
   scarecrow; therefore, for the terror and warning of sinners for the
   future, God would not release us from the punishment till our surety
   undertook our reconciliation with God by bearing the chastisement of
   our peace.

   [4.] Christ's death was necessary to make sin odious, and obedience
   more acceptable to us.

   (1.) Sin more odious or hateful--no other remedy would serve the turn
   to procure the pardon and destruction of it than the bloody death of
   the cross, Rom. viii. 3. Surely it is no small thing for which the Son
   of God must die. When you read or hear of Christ's sufferings, you
   should never think an extenuating and favourable thought of it more.

   (2.) To commend obedience: for Christ's suffering death at the command
   of his Father was the noblest piece of service, and highest act of
   obedience that ever could or can be performed unto God. It is beyond
   anything that can be done by men or angels. There was in it so much
   love to man, so much self-denial, humility, and patience, so much
   resignation of himself to God, who had appointed him to be our
   Redeemer, that it cannot be paralleled. The great and most remarkable
   thing in Christ's death was obedience: Rom. v. 18; Phil. ii. 7, 8. God
   delighteth not in mere blood, but blood offered in obedience as the
   best way to impress upon man a sense of his duty, and to teach him to
   serve and please God at the dearest rate.

   [5.] This death commendeth the love of God to us, for it is the great
   demonstration of it. Many draw a quite contrary conclusion, as if he
   were with much ado brought to have mercy on us; but they forget that he
   is first and chief in the design: 2 Cor. v. 19, God was in Christ
   reconciling the world unto himself.' Christ came from heaven to declare
   to us the greatness of God's love. God thought nothing too dear for
   us--not the Son of his love, nor his death, ignominy, and shame: Rom.
   v. 8, God commendeth his love in that while we were yet sinners Christ
   died for us. When we had alienated our hearts from God, refused his
   service, and could expect nothing but the rigour of his law and
   vindictive justice, then he spared not his own Son to bring about this
   reconciliation for us.

   [6.] As God is pacified, so it gives us hopes our business lieth not
   with a God offended, but with a God reconciled. If we had not to do
   with a pacified God, who could lift up his face to him, or think a
   comfortable thought of him? But this gives us hope: Rom. v. 10, For if
   when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
   much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.' We were
   enemies by sin in us, which God hateth, and declareth his wrath against
   it in the law. Then by the satisfaction wrought by Christ we were
   restored to his favour, so far that free and easy conditions were
   procured in the gospel, and his Spirit is offered to prepare and fit us
   for a life of glory. We have heard what Christ hath done.

   Thirdly, What assurance have we that this peace is obtained?
   Consciences are not easily settled, therefore some visible evidences
   are necessary that God is pacified. I shall name three or four:--

   1. Christ's resurrection and ascension into glory. This shows that God
   was propitiated, and hath accepted the ransom that was given for souls.
   We read, Rom. iv. 25, that he died for our offences, and rose again for
   our justification. His dying noteth his satisfaction, his rising again
   the acceptance of it. God by raising him up from the dead showed that
   he had received the death of his Son as a sufficient ransom for our
   sins--for he died in the quality of a surety, and in that quality was
   raised up again. By his death he made the payment; by his resurrection
   the satisfaction of it was witnessed to the world--for then our surety
   was let out of prison: Isa. liii. 8, He shall be taken from prison and
   from judgment.' In his death he was in effect a prisoner, under the
   arrest of divine vengeance; but when he rose again he was discharged.
   Therefore there is great weight laid upon it as to our acquittance:
   Rom. viii. 34, Yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the
   right hand of God.' There is some special thing in his resurrection
   comparatively above his death which hath influence on our
   justification--that is, it was a visible evidence given to the world
   that enough was done for the expiation of sins, and to assure us of our
   deliverance if we be capable; and his ascension into glory doth further
   witness it. He being exalted to the greatest dignity, is able to defend
   and protect his people, and hath the advantage of interceding with his
   Father for the supply of all our wants.

   2. The grant of the new covenant--which is therefore called the
   covenant of his peace: Isa. liv. 10, The covenant of my peace shall not
   be removed;' Ezek. xxxvii. 26, I will make a covenant of peace with
   them.' It is so called not only because thereby this peace and
   reconciliation is offered to us, but the terms are stated, and the
   conditions required are far more equitable, gracious, and commodious
   for us than the terms of the law covenant. Man, as a sinful creature,
   is obnoxious to God's wrath for the violation of the law of nature, and
   so might perish without remedy, and no impeachment to God's goodness
   can happen thereby. But when God will give bounds to his sovereignty
   over him, and enter into terms of covenant with him, and give him a
   bottom to stand upon, whereon to expect good things from him, upon the
   account of his faithfulness and righteousness--this is a condescension;
   and so far condescended in the first covenant, that after that man hath
   cast away the mercies of his creation, and his capacity to fulfil that
   covenant, this was mere mercy and grace. That God would enter into a
   second covenant, it is not from any mutableness in God, but from the
   merit and satisfaction of a Redeemer. Surely there must be some great
   and important cause to change, alter, and abrogate a covenant so
   solemnly made and established--to lay aside one covenant, and to enter
   into another, especially since the former was so holy, righteous, and
   equal, fit for God to give, and us, in the state we then were in, to
   receive. Now, what was the important reason? Christ came to salve God's
   honour in the first covenant, and to secure the ends of his government.
   Though a second covenant should be set up, the blood of his cross hath
   made this covenant everlasting, Heb. xiii. 20, and upon gracious terms
   doth convey great and precious privileges to us.

   Thirdly, The pouring out of the Spirit, which certainly was the fruit
   and effect of Christ's death, and also an evidence of the worth and
   value of it. The apostle telleth us that Christ was made a curse for
   us, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles by faith
   in Jesus Christ.' And what blessing was that? The gift of the Spirit,
   Gal. v. 13, 14. And in another place, when he interpreteth the types of
   the law, he telleth us that the fathers did all eat of the same
   spiritual meat that we do, and did all drink of the same spiritual
   drink, for they drank of the rock that followed them, and that rock was
   Christ.' If the rock was Christ, the water that gushed out of the rock
   was the Spirit, often compared to waters in scripture, John iv. 14,
   vii. 38, 39; and the rock yielded not this water till it was smitten
   with the rod of Moses--a figure of the curses of the law. Christ was
   stricken and smitten of God, and so procured the Spirit for us: John
   vii. 39, The Holy Ghost was not yet given, for Jesus was not yet
   glorified; that is, had not finished his passion, and the acceptance of
   it was not yet attested to the world, till he was advanced at the right
   hand of God, and then this effect declared it. The Spirit was given
   before, but more sparingly, because it was given upon trust, and with
   respect to the satisfaction that was afterwards to be made and
   accepted. And then it was witnessed to the world by a more copious and
   plentiful effusion of the Spirit. Therefore it is said: Acts ii. 33,
   Therefore Jesus being by the right hand of God exalted, and having
   received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed
   forth this, which ye now see and hear.' The merit and value of the
   sacrifice is thus visibly attested, therefore this is one of the
   witnesses: Acts v. 30-32, The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom
   ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand
   to be a prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and
   remission of sins. And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is
   also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him.' And
   what was the evidence given to the church in general, is the evidence
   given also to every particular believer.

   Fourthly, Some have obtained the effects and fruits of Christ's death;
   this peace begun here hath been perfected in heaven. The text saith, He
   hath reconciled all things to himself, whether they be things in
   heaven, or things in earth.' Here many are pardoned and accepted with
   God, and have the comfort of it in their own souls. Others are gone
   home to God, and have the full of this peace. All were by nature
   children of wrath, under the curse as well as others. Now, if some in
   all generations have enjoyed the love, favour, and friendship of God in
   this world, and upon their departure out of it have entered into glory
   upon this account, it is evident that Christ is accepted to the ends
   for which God sent him--thus Abraham, the father of the faithful, and
   all the blessed souls who are gathered into his bosom, and are alive
   with God in heaven. Certain it is they were all sinners by nature, for
   there is no difference between any of the children of men, and yet God
   admits them into his peace. Was it a personal privilege peculiar to
   them only? No; the apostle tells us, Rom. iv. 23, It was not written
   for his sake alone;' and Paul obtained mercy for them that should
   hereafter believe on Christ for life everlasting,' 1 Tim. i. 16.
   Therefore all penitent believers may be assured that this sacrifice is
   sufficient, and will avail for their acceptance with God. We take it
   for a good token of a healing water when we see the crutches of
   cripples that had been cured. All the blessed saints in heaven are
   witness to a sincere soul--they all obtained this blessed condition
   through the blood of his cross reconciling them to God. There is none
   in glory but had his pardon sealed through the blood of Christ.

   4. How and upon what terms is it applied to us? for we have considered
   hitherto only how Christ hath made peace or made the atonement. Yet if
   we receive not the atonement we may perish for ever for all that;
   besides the work done on the cross by Christ alone, there is a work to
   be done in our hearts; the work of making peace is sufficiently done by
   Christ, there needeth nothing to be added to it, no other ransom, nor
   sacrifice, nor propitiation. Christ hath so fully satisfied divine
   justice, that he hath obtained the new covenant; but we are not
   actually admitted into this peace till we have personally accepted the
   covenant. Now here it sticketh. God hath been in Christ reconciling the
   world unto himself, there was the foundation laid; but, therefore, we
   pray you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. v. 20. There is our title, claim,
   actual right, security. But how do we receive this atonement? or how
   are we interested in it? The conditions and terms are gracious, such as
   the nature of the business calleth for. As to our entrance into this
   peace, no more is required but faith and repentance. The gospel is
   offered to all; but the penitent believer, as being only capable, is
   possessed of it.

   1. Faith is required; that we believe what the Son of God hath done and
   purchased for us: Rom. v. 1, Being justified by faith, we have peace
   with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.' If we sincerely embrace the
   gospel, we are reconciled to God and accepted with him. The faith that
   justifieth is partly an assent to the truth of the Christian religion,
   especially the fundamental truth that Jesus is the Son of God and
   Saviour of the world; and partly an acceptance of Christ as God offers
   him, a serious, thankful, broken-hearted acceptance of Christ as your
   Lord and Saviour: serious, because of the weight of the business;
   broken-hearted, because of the condition of the person accepting, a
   self-condemning sinner, or one that hath an awakening sense of his sin
   and misery. Thankful, because reconciliation with God and fruition of
   them in glory is so great a benefit: and you take him as Lord; for
   every knee must bow to Christ, he is a Saviour by merit and efficacy.
   By his meritorious righteousness you obtain all benefits; by the
   efficacy of his Spirit you perform all duties. The last thing is trust
   and dependence, Eph. i. 13. Trust is such an expectation of the
   benefits offered by Christ, that forsaking all other things you
   entirely give up yourselves to the conduct of his word and Spirit.

   2. The next thing is repentance, which is a turning from sin to God. We
   turn from sin by hatred, and we turn to God by love. We turn from sin
   by hatred; hatred of sin is the ground of all mortification. There is a
   twofold hatred--of abomination and of enmity. We turn to God by love,
   which is the great principle to incline us to God, and is the bottom of
   vivification or living to God. Now all this is necessary to actual
   peace, for our refreshing begins in conversion, Acts iii. 19. There is
   no peace allowed to the wicked; we must take Christ's yoke, or we shall
   find no rest for our souls, Mat. xi. 29. We are not reconciled to God
   till our enmity be broken and overcome: then, of enemies, we become
   friends; of strangers, intimates--then we are reconciled. This, then,
   is required of you; only let me add this caution, what is at first vows
   and purposes must be afterwards deeds and practices; and having engaged
   yourselves to God, to live to him, to keep your selves from sin, and to
   follow after holiness, this must be your business all the days of your
   lives, for so you continue your peace and interest in God: Gal. vi. 16,
   And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
   mercy, and on the Israel of God.'

   Use 1. To exhort you to enter into this peace, that you may be
   partakers of the fruit of Christ's blood, and the virtue of his cross
   may be effectual in you.

   [1.] Let me reason, a periculo, from the danger. Consider what it is to
   be at odds with God, and how soon and how easily be can revenge his
   quarrel against you, and how miserable they will be for ever that are
   not found of him in a state of peace: Ps. vii. 11-13, God is angry with
   the wicked every day. If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he hath
   bent his bow, and will make his arrows ready.' There the psalmist
   representeth God and man as in a state of hostility against each other.
   The wicked man affronts his holiness, questions his justice, slights
   his wrath, breaks his laws, wrongeth his people, and saith, Tush! I
   shall have peace though I add drunkenness to thirst. God for a while
   giveth time and warning; but every moment can break in upon us, for he
   is able easily to deal with us, comminus, hand to hand, for he hath his
   sword; eminus, at a distance, for he hath his bow. He is not only able
   to deal with them, but ready, for he is whetting his sword and hath
   bent his bow, the arrow is upon the string, though not as yet sent or
   shot out. What remedy, then, is there? There is but one exception: if
   he turn not.' If he be not reduced and brought home to God by a timely
   repentance, he falleth into the hands of the living God. Now, no
   persons are in so dangerous an estate as those that have peace offered
   and despise it: Isa. xxvii. 4, Let him take hold of my strength;' when
   God is ready to strike. A man that is fallen into the power of his
   enemy will take hold of his arm. We are always in God's power, his
   vengeance may surprise us before we are aware. What is our business,
   but to be found of him in peace?

   [2.] Ab utili, from the happiness of being at peace with God. Your
   great work is over, and you have a world of benefit by it--you stop all
   danger at the fountain-head. When you are at peace with God, you are at
   peace with the creatures: Ezek. xxxiv. 25, I will make with them a
   covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the
   land. Danger might waylay us at every turn. Then for men: Prov. x. 17,
   When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace
   with him.' Then peace in your own consciences: Rom. xv. 13, Now the God
   of hope fill you with joy and peace in believing.' To have a man's
   conscience settled on sound terms is a great mercy. Peace with the holy
   angels; instead of being instruments of vengeance, they are ministering
   spirits.' Heb. i. 14. Lastly, Communion with God himself: Rom. v. 1, 2,
   Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our
   Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith,' &c.; Eph. ii.
   17, 18, Preaching peace, by whom also we have access by one Spirit unto
   the Father.'

   [3.] I reason from the confidence we may have of this benefit' if we
   submit to godly terms.

   1. God is willing to give it: ver. 19, It pleased the Father that in
   him all fulness should dwell.' There is God's authority and good
   pleasure in it. The first motive came from God, who received the wrong,
   not from him that gave it. God was in Christ, 2 Cor. v. 14. Among men,
   the inferior should seek to the superior, the party off ending to the
   party offended, the weaker to the stronger, they that need the
   reconciliation, to him that needeth it not; but here all is contrary.

   2. You may be confident of it upon another ground, the sufficiency of
   Christ to procure all fulness. The whole divine nature did inhabit and
   reside in the man Christ Jesus, and so he is completely fitted and
   furnished for this work. He hath paid a full price for this peace when
   he bare our sins and carried our sorrows; and by his Spirit he changes
   our hearts as well as pacifies the wrath of God. And then he preserveth
   this peace by his constant intercession, Heb. ii. 17, 18. Now, shall we
   doubt of it but that we may get it?

   [1.] Let us take the way of entrance by faith and repentance. It
   concerns us much to see whether we be in peace or trouble: if in
   trouble, you see the cure; if in peace, the next question is, is it
   God's peace? That is had by the blood of Christ, the merit of which we
   must depend upon, and devote ourselves to God, break off our old league
   with sin, and bind ourselves with a bond to live unto God, to be the
   Lord's for evermore.

   [2.] When this peace is made, be very tender of it, that no breach fall
   out between you and God: Ps. lxxxv. 8, He will speak peace to his
   people, and to his saints: but let not them turn again to folly.'

   [3.] Let us be thankful to God for this fruit of Christ's death; it is
   an act of free and undeserved mercy, and to be imputed to nothing but
   his mere grace that God hath appointed such a way: It pleased the
   Father to bruise him,' Isa. liii. 9. That he sendeth ambassadors to
   publish it: Acts x. 36, The word which God sent unto the children of
   Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all):' and that
   he appointeth a ministry. It is a great privilege in itself; for by
   this peace we have not only the beginnings but the increase of grace
   till all be perfected in heaven: Heb. xiii. 20, 21, Now the God of
   peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, make you
   perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is
   well pleasing in his sight.' 1 Thes. i. 23, The God of peace sanctify
   you, that you may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
   Jesus Christ.' This peace doth encourage us in all temptations from the
   devil: Rom. xvi. 20, The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
   feet shortly.' From the world: Eph. vi. 15, Shod with the preparation
   of the gospel of peace.' Fears of the wrath of God, and doubts about
   our eternal condition: Rom. xiv. 17, The kingdom of God is not meat and
   drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.' Here are
   three words--comfort, peace, and joy. These succeed one another as so
   many degrees: comfort is support under trouble, peace a ceasing from
   trouble, joy a lively sense of the love of God.

    THE END OF VOL. I.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY
    EDINBURGH AND LONDON
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:1   [2]1:20   [3]3:1-3   [4]3:3   [5]3:5   [6]3:5   [7]3:5
   [8]3:5   [9]3:5   [10]3:6   [11]3:8   [12]3:15   [13]3:15   [14]4:4
   [15]4:7   [16]4:21   [17]5:1   [18]6:5   [19]6:5   [20]6:6   [21]7:11
   [22]7:17   [23]9:27   [24]11:4   [25]12:3   [26]14:18   [27]14:19
   [28]15:12   [29]17:1   [30]17:1   [31]18   [32]18:2   [33]18:25
   [34]18:25   [35]18:25   [36]18:27   [37]18:27   [38]18:31   [39]19:1
   [40]19:30   [41]19:31   [42]21:17   [43]22:1   [44]22:1   [45]22:14
   [46]22:18   [47]24:7   [48]24:63   [49]25:26   [50]27:29   [51]28:12
   [52]28:17   [53]30:1   [54]32:10   [55]32:10   [56]32:24   [57]32:24
   [58]32:31   [59]34:2   [60]37:35   [61]39:7   [62]39:9   [63]39:10
   [64]39:10   [65]39:21   [66]39:22   [67]47:12   [68]49:15   [69]50:17

   Exodus

   [70]5:2   [71]5:17   [72]8:28   [73]12:35   [74]12:36   [75]13:21
   [76]13:21   [77]14:13   [78]14:17   [79]15:11   [80]16:20   [81]17:7
   [82]17:7   [83]17:7   [84]18:11   [85]19   [86]20:5   [87]20:18
   [88]20:19   [89]22:21   [90]23:9   [91]23:20-23   [92]28   [93]30
   [94]31:1   [95]31:17   [96]32:7   [97]32:11   [98]32:14   [99]32:19
   [100]33:11   [101]33:14   [102]33:18   [103]34   [104]34:6
   [105]34:7   [106]34:8   [107]34:14   [108]34:28   [109]34:29
   [110]34:29   [111]34:30   [112]34:30

   Leviticus

   [113]10:3   [114]10:3   [115]12   [116]14:6   [117]14:7   [118]16:10
   [119]19:17   [120]25:9   [121]25:10   [122]25:25   [123]25:47
   [124]26   [125]26:41

   Numbers

   [126]11:11   [127]11:12   [128]11:29   [129]11:33   [130]12:13
   [131]14:15   [132]14:16   [133]14:22   [134]14:34   [135]14:40
   [136]16:22   [137]16:46   [138]16:48   [139]20:5   [140]20:12
   [141]20:12   [142]21:8   [143]22:8   [144]22:12   [145]22:12
   [146]22:17   [147]22:18   [148]22:19   [149]22:20   [150]22:22
   [151]22:35   [152]23:10   [153]23:10   [154]27:16

   Deuteronomy

   [155]4:12   [156]4:15   [157]4:15-17   [158]5:23   [159]5:27
   [160]5:27   [161]5:29   [162]6:4   [163]6:5   [164]6:13   [165]6:13
   [166]6:14   [167]6:16   [168]7:21   [169]8:2   [170]8:3
   [171]8:14-18   [172]8:16   [173]8:16   [174]8:16   [175]10:20
   [176]13:1-3   [177]17:6   [178]17:6   [179]18:15   [180]18:15
   [181]18:15   [182]18:18   [183]18:18   [184]18:19   [185]18:19
   [186]19:20   [187]26:15   [188]28:5   [189]29:10-12   [190]29:19
   [191]29:19   [192]29:20   [193]29:20   [194]30:6   [195]32:6
   [196]32:51   [197]33:4   [198]33:5   [199]34:1   [200]34:5
   [201]34:6   [202]34:10   [203]34:10   [204]34:11

   Joshua

   [205]7:9   [206]7:9   [207]7:21   [208]7:21   [209]24:19   [210]24:19

   Judges

   [211]6:13   [212]6:39   [213]9:9   [214]9:9   [215]16:1

   1 Samuel

   [216]1:13   [217]1:18   [218]1:27   [219]1:28   [220]2:9   [221]2:30
   [222]6:20   [223]6:20   [224]7:3   [225]7:5   [226]7:9-10   [227]10:1
   [228]15:22   [229]16:14   [230]17:33-39   [231]18:1   [232]18:23
   [233]23:16   [234]23:17   [235]24:17   [236]25:11   [237]27:1
   [238]28:7   [239]28:18   [240]30:6

   2 Samuel

   [241]2:21   [242]2:22   [243]3:16   [244]6:22   [245]7:12   [246]7:13
   [247]11:2   [248]11:2-4   [249]11:4   [250]12:9   [251]12:12
   [252]12:14   [253]12:14   [254]12:28   [255]13:3   [256]13:4
   [257]16:9   [258]19:23   [259]21:10   [260]24:1   [261]24:1
   [262]24:23

   1 Kings

   [263]1:21   [264]1:49   [265]2:28   [266]8:10   [267]8:27   [268]8:38
   [269]8:39   [270]10:8   [271]10:18   [272]10:19   [273]13:3   [274]17
   [275]17:14   [276]18:26   [277]18:36   [278]18:42   [279]18:45
   [280]19   [281]19   [282]19:5   [283]19:5   [284]19:5   [285]19:6
   [286]19:6   [287]19:8   [288]19:13   [289]19:18   [290]20:11
   [291]21:1   [292]21:2

   2 Kings

   [293]4   [294]4:1   [295]4:19   [296]5:26   [297]6:14   [298]6:15
   [299]6:16   [300]6:16   [301]6:17   [302]6:17   [303]6:17   [304]6:17
   [305]6:22   [306]6:27   [307]6:32   [308]7:19   [309]8:13
   [310]10:32   [311]13:21   [312]17:35   [313]19:35   [314]20:8
   [315]20:9

   1 Chronicles

   [316]21:1   [317]21:1   [318]21:1   [319]21:1   [320]28:9
   [321]29:10-13   [322]29:11   [323]29:11   [324]29:14   [325]29:14
   [326]29:16

   2 Chronicles

   [327]2:6   [328]12:8   [329]15:2   [330]16:9   [331]19:2   [332]20:12
   [333]31:4   [334]32:25   [335]32:31   [336]32:31   [337]35:20

   Nehemiah

   [338]1:11   [339]6:11   [340]9:5   [341]9:5

   Esther

   [342]2:9   [343]4:16   [344]4:16

   Job

   [345]1   [346]1:10   [347]1:11   [348]1:12   [349]1:12   [350]1:12
   [351]1:23   [352]2:4   [353]2:5   [354]2:6   [355]2:6-7   [356]5:18
   [357]6:9   [358]6:9   [359]6:12   [360]6:15   [361]6:16   [362]6:21
   [363]7:1   [364]9:12   [365]9:12   [366]9:14   [367]10:3   [368]12:10
   [369]12:16   [370]13:15   [371]13:15   [372]13:26   [373]14:4
   [374]14:15   [375]14:17   [376]15:16   [377]16:20   [378]17:14
   [379]19:25   [380]19:26   [381]19:26   [382]19:27   [383]21:23
   [384]22:2   [385]22:12-14   [386]22:17   [387]22:21   [388]22:21
   [389]23:10   [390]26:9   [391]27:8   [392]27:10   [393]27:10
   [394]27:10   [395]27:10   [396]31:14   [397]31:20   [398]33:24
   [399]33:24   [400]33:27   [401]34:31   [402]34:32   [403]35:7
   [404]35:11   [405]36:21   [406]36:26   [407]37:20   [408]37:22
   [409]38:7   [410]42:5   [411]42:6   [412]42:8   [413]42:10   [414]42:11

   Psalms

   [415]1   [416]1   [417]1   [418]1:2   [419]1:5   [420]1:5   [421]2:3
   [422]2:4   [423]2:6   [424]2:7   [425]2:7   [426]2:7   [427]2:7
   [428]2:8   [429]2:8   [430]2:8   [431]2:11   [432]2:11   [433]2:11
   [434]2:12   [435]4:3   [436]5:2   [437]5:3   [438]5:3   [439]5:5
   [440]7:11-13   [441]7:11-13   [442]8:1   [443]8:3   [444]8:3
   [445]8:4   [446]9:10   [447]10:17   [448]10:17   [449]11:4
   [450]11:6   [451]11:6   [452]11:7   [453]12:4   [454]12:4   [455]14:1
   [456]14:1   [457]14:1   [458]14:2   [459]14:3   [460]14:4   [461]14:4
   [462]16:5   [463]16:5   [464]16:6   [465]16:8   [466]16:8   [467]16:8
   [468]16:8   [469]16:11   [470]16:11   [471]16:21   [472]17:14
   [473]17:15   [474]18:11   [475]18:23   [476]18:23   [477]18:30
   [478]19:1   [479]19:1-3   [480]19:12   [481]19:13   [482]20:1
   [483]21:3   [484]22:3   [485]22:3   [486]22:9   [487]22:10
   [488]23:1   [489]24:1   [490]24:1   [491]24:6   [492]24:6   [493]25:1
   [494]25:5   [495]25:6   [496]25:7   [497]27:8   [498]27:8   [499]27:8
   [500]27:10   [501]28:4   [502]31:22   [503]31:22   [504]32:1
   [505]32:1   [506]32:1   [507]32:1-2   [508]32:2   [509]32:3
   [510]32:4   [511]32:5   [512]32:5   [513]32:5   [514]33:6   [515]34:5
   [516]34:6   [517]34:7   [518]34:7   [519]34:7   [520]34:7   [521]34:7
   [522]34:9   [523]34:10   [524]34:15   [525]34:19   [526]34:19
   [527]35:3   [528]35:3   [529]35:27   [530]36:9   [531]37:1
   [532]37:16   [533]37:34   [534]39:5   [535]39:5   [536]39:6
   [537]39:9   [538]40:1   [539]40:8   [540]40:17   [541]41:9
   [542]42:8   [543]42:11   [544]44:4   [545]44:4   [546]44:5
   [547]44:20   [548]45:1   [549]45:1   [550]45:2   [551]45:6
   [552]45:6   [553]45:11   [554]45:11   [555]45:29   [556]48:1
   [557]49:12   [558]49:12   [559]49:20   [560]49:32   [561]50:1-5
   [562]50:5   [563]50:15   [564]50:15   [565]50:21   [566]51:2
   [567]51:2   [568]51:3   [569]51:4   [570]51:5   [571]51:6   [572]51:8
   [573]51:12   [574]51:15   [575]51:15   [576]51:18   [577]51:18
   [578]54:2   [579]55:12-15   [580]55:17   [581]55:19   [582]56:3
   [583]56:8   [584]57:2   [585]58:3   [586]58:11   [587]62:8
   [588]62:8   [589]62:8   [590]63:4   [591]63:8   [592]65:1   [593]65:5
   [594]66:18   [595]67:2   [596]67:5   [597]68:16   [598]68:17
   [599]68:17   [600]68:18   [601]68:19   [602]68:35   [603]69:4
   [604]69:9   [605]69:22   [606]69:22   [607]69:22   [608]73:1
   [609]73:2   [610]73:24   [611]73:25   [612]73:25   [613]73:27
   [614]73:28   [615]74:12   [616]76:10   [617]78:18   [618]78:18
   [619]78:18   [620]78:18   [621]78:19   [622]78:19   [623]78:19
   [624]78:20   [625]78:22   [626]78:22-24   [627]78:32   [628]78:38
   [629]78:41   [630]78:41   [631]78:49   [632]78:56   [633]79:9
   [634]80:19   [635]81:11   [636]81:12   [637]81:12   [638]82:6
   [639]82:7   [640]84:2   [641]84:11   [642]85:8   [643]85:8
   [644]85:8   [645]86:4   [646]86:8   [647]88:8   [648]88:9   [649]89:7
   [650]89:17   [651]89:27   [652]89:27   [653]89:27   [654]89:32
   [655]89:33   [656]90:2   [657]90:2   [658]91:3   [659]91:11
   [660]91:11   [661]91:12   [662]91:12   [663]94:18   [664]95:9
   [665]95:9   [666]95:9   [667]95:10   [668]96:4   [669]96:8
   [670]98:4   [671]99:6-8   [672]100:1   [673]100:2   [674]101:2
   [675]102:14   [676]102:23   [677]102:28   [678]103:1   [679]103:1
   [680]103:3   [681]103:9   [682]103:12   [683]103:13   [684]103:14
   [685]103:19   [686]103:19   [687]103:19   [688]103:20   [689]103:20
   [690]103:20   [691]103:20   [692]103:21   [693]103:21   [694]103:22
   [695]104:2   [696]104:3   [697]104:29   [698]104:29   [699]104:31
   [700]105:19   [701]105:19   [702]106:5   [703]106:13   [704]106:14
   [705]106:14   [706]106:15   [707]106:24   [708]106:45   [709]107:20
   [710]110:2   [711]111:9   [712]111:9   [713]112:1   [714]113:6
   [715]113:7   [716]115:1   [717]115:1   [718]115:1   [719]115:3
   [720]115:8   [721]115:16   [722]116:1   [723]116:1   [724]116:10
   [725]116:11   [726]119   [727]119   [728]119:7   [729]119:11
   [730]119:37   [731]119:37   [732]119:37   [733]119:50   [734]119:50
   [735]119:56   [736]119:60   [737]119:63   [738]119:68   [739]119:73
   [740]119:73   [741]119:86   [742]119:91   [743]119:92   [744]119:93
   [745]119:94   [746]119:94   [747]119:94   [748]119:97   [749]119:111
   [750]119:115   [751]119:120   [752]119:133   [753]119:133
   [754]119:136   [755]119:164   [756]121:2   [757]121:2   [758]123:1
   [759]124:8   [760]125:2   [761]125:3   [762]126:2   [763]126:3
   [764]130:3   [765]130:4   [766]131:2   [767]136   [768]136:25
   [769]138:1   [770]138:2   [771]138:3   [772]139   [773]139:2
   [774]139:7   [775]139:14   [776]142:4-5   [777]143:2   [778]143:8
   [779]143:10   [780]143:10   [781]143:10   [782]144   [783]145:3
   [784]145:9   [785]145:10   [786]145:15   [787]145:15-20   [788]145:16
   [789]147:9   [790]147:15   [791]147:18   [792]147:19   [793]147:20
   [794]148:6   [795]148:8   [796]149:4

   Proverbs

   [797]1:14   [798]1:17   [799]1:17   [800]2:3-5   [801]3:9   [802]4:14
   [803]4:18   [804]5:22   [805]6:3-5   [806]7:22   [807]7:22   [808]8:6
   [809]8:22   [810]8:22-31   [811]8:23   [812]8:23-24   [813]8:27
   [814]8:30   [815]8:31   [816]8:31   [817]8:31   [818]9:17   [819]9:18
   [820]10:4   [821]10:4   [822]10:17   [823]10:19   [824]10:22
   [825]11:15   [826]11:31   [827]13:13   [828]13:13   [829]13:20
   [830]13:20   [831]13:20   [832]14:20   [833]14:27   [834]14:28
   [835]15:3   [836]15:6   [837]16:2   [838]16:2   [839]16:4   [840]16:4
   [841]16:8   [842]16:14   [843]16:32   [844]18:24   [845]19:6
   [846]20:12   [847]21:1   [848]21:27   [849]22:2   [850]22:2
   [851]22:9   [852]22:24   [853]22:24   [854]22:25   [855]22:25
   [856]23:5   [857]23:5   [858]23:31   [859]24:29   [860]25:11
   [861]25:19   [862]26:26   [863]27:6   [864]27:17   [865]28:9
   [866]28:13   [867]28:21   [868]28:21   [869]28:23   [870]29:27
   [871]30:8   [872]30:8   [873]30:9   [874]30:9   [875]30:9   [876]30:9
   [877]30:9   [878]33:26

   Ecclesiastes

   [879]3:13   [880]4:9-12   [881]5:1   [882]5:2   [883]5:2   [884]5:2
   [885]5:2   [886]5:6   [887]7:20   [888]8:1   [889]10:14   [890]12:7

   Song of Solomon

   [891]1   [892]1   [893]1:4   [894]2   [895]2   [896]2   [897]2
   [898]2:16   [899]3:4   [900]5:1   [901]5:2   [902]5:6   [903]6:9
   [904]8:6   [905]8:7   [906]8:14

   Isaiah

   [907]1:2   [908]1:18   [909]2:3   [910]2:3   [911]4:2   [912]4:2
   [913]5:16   [914]5:18   [915]6:2   [916]6:3   [917]6:5   [918]6:5
   [919]6:5   [920]6:6   [921]6:7   [922]7:12   [923]7:14   [924]7:14
   [925]8:8   [926]8:9-10   [927]8:12   [928]8:13   [929]8:13   [930]9:6
   [931]9:6   [932]9:6   [933]10:8   [934]10:8   [935]11:1   [936]11:4
   [937]11:4   [938]25:9   [939]26:9   [940]26:10   [941]26:12
   [942]26:12   [943]26:13   [944]26:16   [945]26:16   [946]26:16
   [947]27:4   [948]28:16   [949]28:16   [950]28:21   [951]28:29
   [952]29:13   [953]29:23   [954]34:12   [955]38:17   [956]38:17
   [957]38:17   [958]40:15   [959]40:17   [960]40:18   [961]40:29
   [962]41:2   [963]41:4   [964]42:1   [965]42:4   [966]42:4   [967]42:8
   [968]42:8   [969]43:22   [970]43:24   [971]43:24   [972]43:25
   [973]43:25   [974]43:25   [975]44:5   [976]44:6   [977]44:17
   [978]44:22   [979]45:9   [980]45:9   [981]46:3   [982]46:4
   [983]46:11   [984]48:2   [985]48:9   [986]49:15   [987]49:16
   [988]49:23   [989]51:9   [990]52:1   [991]53   [992]53   [993]53:3
   [994]53:4   [995]53:4   [996]53:4   [997]53:5   [998]53:5   [999]53:8
   [1000]53:8   [1001]53:8   [1002]53:9   [1003]53:10   [1004]53:10
   [1005]53:10   [1006]54:9   [1007]54:10   [1008]55:4   [1009]55:7
   [1010]55:7   [1011]55:8   [1012]55:9   [1013]55:9   [1014]55:9
   [1015]56:4   [1016]57:2   [1017]57:14   [1018]57:15   [1019]57:15
   [1020]57:16   [1021]57:19   [1022]58:2   [1023]58:7   [1024]58:9
   [1025]59:1   [1026]59:2   [1027]59:2   [1028]59:17   [1029]59:20
   [1030]61:7   [1031]62:1   [1032]63:9   [1033]63:16   [1034]63:16
   [1035]64:7   [1036]64:8   [1037]64:8   [1038]65:19   [1039]65:24
   [1040]65:24   [1041]66:1   [1042]66:2   [1043]66:8   [1044]66:10

   Jeremiah

   [1045]2:8   [1046]2:19   [1047]2:27   [1048]2:32   [1049]2:32
   [1050]3:5   [1051]3:6   [1052]3:12   [1053]3:19   [1054]5:5
   [1055]5:22   [1056]5:25   [1057]6:21   [1058]10:23   [1059]12:2
   [1060]13:17   [1061]13:17   [1062]13:23   [1063]13:23   [1064]14:7
   [1065]17:9   [1066]17:9   [1067]17:11   [1068]17:13   [1069]17:13
   [1070]18:6   [1071]18:12   [1072]18:15   [1073]23:5   [1074]23:6
   [1075]23:23   [1076]23:24   [1077]23:24   [1078]28:6   [1079]28:6
   [1080]29:10-12   [1081]29:11   [1082]30:21   [1083]31:20
   [1084]31:34   [1085]32:17-19   [1086]35:5   [1087]35:6   [1088]35:14
   [1089]36:12   [1090]44:17   [1091]50:20

   Lamentations

   [1092]1:18   [1093]3:24   [1094]3:41   [1095]3:41

   Ezekiel

   [1096]1:4   [1097]1:28   [1098]2:1   [1099]2:6   [1100]2:15
   [1101]3:22   [1102]11:19   [1103]13:19   [1104]14:4   [1105]15:2
   [1106]16:33   [1107]16:34   [1108]20:9   [1109]22:14   [1110]33:11
   [1111]33:11   [1112]33:12   [1113]34:25   [1114]36   [1115]36:20
   [1116]36:22   [1117]36:26   [1118]36:26   [1119]36:27   [1120]36:28
   [1121]36:37   [1122]36:37   [1123]37:26   [1124]38:23   [1125]46:9

   Daniel

   [1126]1:15   [1127]2   [1128]2:21   [1129]2:37   [1130]3:17
   [1131]3:17   [1132]3:18   [1133]3:18   [1134]3:28   [1135]4:13
   [1136]4:17   [1137]4:30   [1138]5:23   [1139]6:10   [1140]6:10
   [1141]7:12   [1142]8:18   [1143]9:2   [1144]9:3   [1145]9:4
   [1146]9:8   [1147]9:9   [1148]9:9   [1149]9:17-19   [1150]9:20
   [1151]9:21   [1152]9:21   [1153]9:21   [1154]9:22   [1155]9:26
   [1156]10:8   [1157]10:9   [1158]10:9   [1159]11:3

   Hosea

   [1160]1:11   [1161]2:8   [1162]2:9   [1163]2:14   [1164]2:14
   [1165]2:18   [1166]2:19   [1167]3:3   [1168]3:5   [1169]4:12
   [1170]5:16   [1171]6:1   [1172]7:8   [1173]7:14   [1174]7:14
   [1175]8:2   [1176]8:10   [1177]8:12   [1178]8:14   [1179]10:1
   [1180]11:2   [1181]11:9   [1182]11:9   [1183]12:11   [1184]13:2
   [1185]13:6   [1186]13:18   [1187]14:2   [1188]14:3   [1189]14:3

   Joel

   [1190]2:19   [1191]2:19   [1192]2:21

   Amos

   [1193]2:6   [1194]2:6   [1195]5:18   [1196]5:26   [1197]6:3
   [1198]6:3   [1199]6:6   [1200]9:7

   Jonah

   [1201]1:5   [1202]3:4   [1203]4:3   [1204]4:9

   Micah

   [1205]2:10   [1206]5:2   [1207]5:2   [1208]5:2   [1209]6:6
   [1210]6:6   [1211]6:7   [1212]6:7   [1213]7:9   [1214]7:18
   [1215]7:18   [1216]7:19   [1217]7:19   [1218]7:19   [1219]7:19

   Nahum

   [1220]1:5

   Habakkuk

   [1221]1:13   [1222]3:2   [1223]3:18

   Zephaniah

   [1224]1:13   [1225]3:10   [1226]3:17

   Haggai

   [1227]1:6   [1228]2:8

   Zechariah

   [1229]1:15   [1230]2:5   [1231]3:1   [1232]3:1   [1233]3:2
   [1234]4:1   [1235]4:11   [1236]4:12   [1237]7:5   [1238]7:5
   [1239]7:6   [1240]7:6   [1241]8:6   [1242]12   [1243]12:10
   [1244]12:10   [1245]12:10   [1246]12:11-14   [1247]13:1   [1248]13:7
   [1249]13:7   [1250]13:9   [1251]14:10

   Malachi

   [1252]1:6   [1253]1:6   [1254]1:6   [1255]1:6   [1256]1:8
   [1257]1:14   [1258]1:14   [1259]1:14   [1260]1:14   [1261]2:2
   [1262]3:1   [1263]3:1   [1264]3:2   [1265]3:3   [1266]3:10
   [1267]3:10   [1268]3:15   [1269]3:16   [1270]3:17

   Matthew

   [1271]1:21   [1272]3:2   [1273]3:15   [1274]3:17   [1275]3:17
   [1276]3:17   [1277]4   [1278]4:1   [1279]4:1   [1280]4:1   [1281]4:1
   [1282]4:2-4   [1283]4:2-4   [1284]4:3   [1285]4:3   [1286]4:3
   [1287]4:4   [1288]4:5   [1289]4:5-6   [1290]4:6   [1291]4:6
   [1292]4:7   [1293]4:7   [1294]4:8   [1295]4:8   [1296]4:8-9
   [1297]4:9   [1298]4:9   [1299]4:10   [1300]4:10   [1301]4:10
   [1302]4:10   [1303]4:10   [1304]4:11   [1305]4:11   [1306]4:11
   [1307]4:11   [1308]4:11   [1309]4:11   [1310]4:17   [1311]5:7
   [1312]5:16   [1313]5:16   [1314]5:16   [1315]5:19   [1316]5:28
   [1317]5:29   [1318]5:37   [1319]5:39   [1320]5:44   [1321]5:45
   [1322]5:45   [1323]6:2   [1324]6:6   [1325]6:6   [1326]6:6-8
   [1327]6:7-8   [1328]6:8   [1329]6:8   [1330]6:10   [1331]6:10
   [1332]6:11   [1333]6:12   [1334]6:14   [1335]6:14   [1336]6:15
   [1337]6:22   [1338]6:23   [1339]6:24   [1340]6:24   [1341]6:25
   [1342]6:25   [1343]6:26   [1344]6:27   [1345]6:32   [1346]6:32
   [1347]6:33   [1348]6:33   [1349]6:33   [1350]6:33   [1351]6:33
   [1352]6:33   [1353]6:33   [1354]6:34   [1355]6:34   [1356]7:7
   [1357]7:11   [1358]7:11   [1359]7:11   [1360]7:11   [1361]7:18
   [1362]7:21   [1363]7:21   [1364]8   [1365]8   [1366]8:2   [1367]8:3
   [1368]8:8   [1369]8:11   [1370]8:11   [1371]8:14   [1372]8:15
   [1373]8:15   [1374]8:29   [1375]8:31   [1376]9:6   [1377]9:19
   [1378]9:28   [1379]9:38   [1380]10:7   [1381]10:28   [1382]10:28
   [1383]10:28   [1384]10:30   [1385]11:13   [1386]11:27   [1387]11:27
   [1388]11:28   [1389]11:28   [1390]11:29   [1391]12:24   [1392]12:26
   [1393]12:28   [1394]12:32   [1395]12:34   [1396]12:43-45
   [1397]12:45   [1398]12:50   [1399]13   [1400]13:19   [1401]13:19
   [1402]13:19   [1403]13:22   [1404]13:24   [1405]13:25   [1406]13:25
   [1407]13:30   [1408]13:39   [1409]13:39   [1410]13:41   [1411]14:21
   [1412]14:23   [1413]14:23   [1414]14:23   [1415]14:23   [1416]14:28
   [1417]14:28   [1418]15:7   [1419]15:8   [1420]15:8   [1421]15:8
   [1422]15:9   [1423]15:19   [1424]15:22   [1425]15:25-28   [1426]15:28
   [1427]15:28   [1428]15:36   [1429]16:1   [1430]16:1   [1431]16:8
   [1432]16:8   [1433]16:9   [1434]16:16   [1435]16:16-18   [1436]16:18
   [1437]16:18   [1438]16:19   [1439]16:22   [1440]16:22   [1441]16:22
   [1442]16:22   [1443]16:22   [1444]16:23   [1445]16:23   [1446]16:23
   [1447]16:23   [1448]16:23   [1449]16:23   [1450]16:24   [1451]16:24
   [1452]16:26   [1453]16:26   [1454]16:27   [1455]17:1   [1456]17:1
   [1457]17:2   [1458]17:2   [1459]17:3   [1460]17:3   [1461]17:4
   [1462]17:4   [1463]17:5   [1464]17:5   [1465]17:5   [1466]17:5
   [1467]17:5   [1468]17:6   [1469]17:6-8   [1470]17:6-8   [1471]17:7
   [1472]17:7   [1473]17:8   [1474]17:8   [1475]17:9   [1476]17:15
   [1477]17:26   [1478]18   [1479]18:10   [1480]18:10   [1481]18:10
   [1482]18:10   [1483]18:10   [1484]18:18   [1485]18:19   [1486]18:24
   [1487]18:24   [1488]18:26   [1489]18:27   [1490]18:28   [1491]18:28
   [1492]18:32-33   [1493]19:4   [1494]19:20   [1495]19:24   [1496]19:28
   [1497]19:29   [1498]20:13-15   [1499]20:15   [1500]20:15
   [1501]20:22   [1502]20:22   [1503]20:28   [1504]20:28   [1505]20:28
   [1506]21:19   [1507]21:29   [1508]21:30   [1509]21:43   [1510]22:18
   [1511]22:30   [1512]22:31   [1513]22:32   [1514]23:10   [1515]23:12
   [1516]23:14   [1517]24:31   [1518]24:46   [1519]25:15   [1520]25:21
   [1521]25:34   [1522]25:34   [1523]25:34   [1524]25:34-36
   [1525]25:41   [1526]25:41   [1527]25:44   [1528]26:15   [1529]26:27
   [1530]26:29   [1531]26:33   [1532]26:39   [1533]26:40   [1534]26:41
   [1535]26:44   [1536]26:70   [1537]26:75   [1538]27:40   [1539]27:52
   [1540]27:53   [1541]27:63   [1542]28:2   [1543]28:18   [1544]28:18
   [1545]28:18-20   [1546]28:20   [1547]28:20

   Mark

   [1548]1:12   [1549]1:13   [1550]1:13   [1551]1:35   [1552]1:35
   [1553]3:16   [1554]3:17   [1555]4:24   [1556]5:8   [1557]6:14-16
   [1558]7:11   [1559]9   [1560]9:3   [1561]9:6   [1562]9:44
   [1563]10:29   [1564]10:30   [1565]12:29   [1566]12:32   [1567]13:6
   [1568]13:25   [1569]13:43   [1570]16:16   [1571]23:8   [1572]25:9
   [1573]26:41   [1574]28:3

   Luke

   [1575]1:4   [1576]1:46   [1577]1:47   [1578]1:74   [1579]1:75
   [1580]1:77   [1581]2:13   [1582]2:13   [1583]2:14   [1584]2:14
   [1585]2:14   [1586]2:14   [1587]2:42   [1588]2:49   [1589]3:38
   [1590]4:1   [1591]4:1   [1592]4:2   [1593]4:4   [1594]4:5   [1595]4:5
   [1596]4:6   [1597]4:9   [1598]4:13   [1599]4:14   [1600]4:19
   [1601]4:36   [1602]5:8   [1603]5:8   [1604]5:9   [1605]6:12
   [1606]6:12   [1607]6:27   [1608]6:36   [1609]6:46   [1610]6:46
   [1611]7:15   [1612]7:29   [1613]7:41   [1614]7:42   [1615]8:14
   [1616]8:51   [1617]8:55   [1618]9:28   [1619]9:28   [1620]9:29
   [1621]9:29   [1622]9:29   [1623]9:30   [1624]9:30-31   [1625]9:31
   [1626]9:32   [1627]9:32-33   [1628]9:33   [1629]9:34   [1630]9:54
   [1631]9:54   [1632]10:16   [1633]10:18   [1634]10:25   [1635]10:40
   [1636]10:42   [1637]11:3   [1638]11:4   [1639]11:4   [1640]11:4
   [1641]11:4   [1642]11:8   [1643]11:12   [1644]11:13   [1645]11:13
   [1646]11:13   [1647]11:21   [1648]11:21   [1649]11:21   [1650]11:21
   [1651]11:21   [1652]11:22   [1653]11:28   [1654]12:13   [1655]12:15
   [1656]12:15   [1657]12:15   [1658]12:19   [1659]12:19   [1660]12:20
   [1661]12:29   [1662]12:32   [1663]12:32   [1664]12:50   [1665]13:24
   [1666]13:27   [1667]14:10   [1668]14:14   [1669]14:26   [1670]15
   [1671]15:7   [1672]15:7   [1673]15:7   [1674]15:10   [1675]15:18
   [1676]15:18   [1677]15:19   [1678]15:20   [1679]16:2   [1680]16:9
   [1681]16:9   [1682]16:14   [1683]16:22   [1684]16:24   [1685]16:25
   [1686]16:25   [1687]16:29   [1688]16:30   [1689]17:3   [1690]17:4
   [1691]17:5   [1692]17:5   [1693]17:8   [1694]17:10   [1695]17:20
   [1696]17:20   [1697]17:21   [1698]17:21   [1699]18:11   [1700]18:12
   [1701]19:14   [1702]19:15   [1703]19:16   [1704]19:16   [1705]19:23
   [1706]19:27   [1707]20:38   [1708]21:34   [1709]22:20   [1710]22:27
   [1711]22:31   [1712]22:31   [1713]22:31   [1714]22:31   [1715]22:32
   [1716]22:32   [1717]22:32   [1718]22:38   [1719]22:41   [1720]22:42
   [1721]22:43   [1722]22:43   [1723]22:44   [1724]22:44   [1725]22:53
   [1726]22:53   [1727]23:34   [1728]23:43   [1729]24:25   [1730]24:25
   [1731]24:26   [1732]24:44   [1733]24:44   [1734]24:44-46
   [1735]24:45   [1736]24:46   [1737]24:47

   John

   [1738]1:1   [1739]1:1   [1740]1:3   [1741]1:4   [1742]1:4   [1743]1:4
   [1744]1:12   [1745]1:12   [1746]1:12   [1747]1:12   [1748]1:12
   [1749]1:12   [1750]1:14   [1751]1:14   [1752]1:14   [1753]1:14
   [1754]1:14   [1755]1:16   [1756]1:16   [1757]1:18   [1758]1:18
   [1759]1:32   [1760]1:40   [1761]1:51   [1762]1:51   [1763]2:19
   [1764]3:3   [1765]3:6   [1766]3:13   [1767]3:14   [1768]3:15
   [1769]3:16   [1770]3:16   [1771]3:18   [1772]3:19   [1773]3:20
   [1774]3:20   [1775]3:20   [1776]3:20   [1777]3:20   [1778]3:34
   [1779]3:34   [1780]3:35   [1781]3:35   [1782]3:35   [1783]3:35
   [1784]3:36   [1785]3:36   [1786]3:36   [1787]4:8   [1788]4:14
   [1789]4:24   [1790]4:24   [1791]4:24   [1792]4:34   [1793]5:4
   [1794]5:17   [1795]5:18   [1796]5:19   [1797]5:19   [1798]5:19
   [1799]5:22   [1800]5:23   [1801]5:28   [1802]5:29   [1803]5:30
   [1804]5:30   [1805]5:39   [1806]5:40   [1807]5:40   [1808]5:44
   [1809]5:44   [1810]5:45-47   [1811]6:5   [1812]6:5   [1813]6:6
   [1814]6:6   [1815]6:11   [1816]6:23   [1817]6:27   [1818]6:29
   [1819]6:34   [1820]6:39   [1821]6:39   [1822]6:40   [1823]6:44
   [1824]6:44   [1825]6:44   [1826]6:45   [1827]6:47   [1828]6:57
   [1829]6:60   [1830]6:63   [1831]6:69   [1832]7:17   [1833]7:38-39
   [1834]7:39   [1835]7:39   [1836]8:20   [1837]8:24   [1838]8:29
   [1839]8:29   [1840]8:31   [1841]8:32   [1842]8:34   [1843]8:34
   [1844]8:36   [1845]8:36   [1846]8:44   [1847]8:44   [1848]8:44
   [1849]8:44   [1850]8:47   [1851]8:48   [1852]8:56   [1853]9:29
   [1854]9:31   [1855]9:31   [1856]9:39   [1857]10:3   [1858]10:3
   [1859]10:16   [1860]10:16   [1861]10:17   [1862]10:17   [1863]10:17
   [1864]10:18   [1865]10:18   [1866]10:18   [1867]10:27   [1868]10:27
   [1869]10:28   [1870]10:28   [1871]10:29   [1872]10:30   [1873]11:5
   [1874]11:5   [1875]11:5   [1876]11:6   [1877]11:6   [1878]11:6
   [1879]11:44   [1880]11:52   [1881]12:2   [1882]12:27   [1883]12:27
   [1884]12:27   [1885]12:27   [1886]12:28   [1887]12:28   [1888]12:28
   [1889]12:30   [1890]12:31   [1891]12:39   [1892]12:39   [1893]12:40
   [1894]12:42   [1895]13:1   [1896]13:1   [1897]13:2   [1898]13:8
   [1899]13:8   [1900]13:9   [1901]14:1   [1902]14:2   [1903]14:3
   [1904]14:3   [1905]14:6   [1906]14:6   [1907]14:7   [1908]14:9
   [1909]14:9   [1910]14:19   [1911]14:21   [1912]14:23   [1913]14:24
   [1914]14:26   [1915]14:28   [1916]14:28   [1917]14:30   [1918]14:30
   [1919]14:30   [1920]14:30   [1921]15:1   [1922]15:2   [1923]15:2
   [1924]15:5   [1925]15:5   [1926]15:15   [1927]15:26   [1928]16:6
   [1929]16:7   [1930]16:11   [1931]16:13   [1932]16:14   [1933]16:27
   [1934]16:32   [1935]16:32   [1936]16:32   [1937]16:33   [1938]16:33
   [1939]17:2   [1940]17:2   [1941]17:4   [1942]17:4   [1943]17:4
   [1944]17:5   [1945]17:6   [1946]17:10   [1947]17:11   [1948]17:15
   [1949]17:21   [1950]17:21-22   [1951]17:23   [1952]17:23
   [1953]17:24   [1954]17:24   [1955]17:24   [1956]17:24   [1957]17:26
   [1958]18:6   [1959]18:11   [1960]18:15   [1961]18:28   [1962]19:11
   [1963]19:30   [1964]19:30   [1965]20:2-4   [1966]20:17   [1967]20:17
   [1968]20:23   [1969]20:24   [1970]20:25   [1971]20:25   [1972]20:25
   [1973]20:26   [1974]20:27   [1975]20:27   [1976]20:27   [1977]20:27
   [1978]20:28   [1979]20:28   [1980]20:28   [1981]20:28   [1982]20:31
   [1983]21:7   [1984]21:15   [1985]21:21   [1986]21:22

   Acts

   [1987]1:3   [1988]1:9   [1989]1:10   [1990]1:11   [1991]1:15
   [1992]2   [1993]2:24   [1994]2:24   [1995]2:33   [1996]2:37
   [1997]2:39   [1998]2:47   [1999]3:1   [2000]3:19   [2001]3:19
   [2002]3:19   [2003]3:19   [2004]3:19   [2005]3:22   [2006]3:23
   [2007]3:25   [2008]3:26   [2009]3:26   [2010]3:26   [2011]4
   [2012]4:7-13   [2013]4:12   [2014]4:12   [2015]4:28   [2016]4:28
   [2017]4:31   [2018]5:3   [2019]5:4   [2020]5:4   [2021]5:4
   [2022]5:9   [2023]5:9   [2024]5:19   [2025]5:30   [2026]5:30-32
   [2027]5:31   [2028]5:31   [2029]5:31   [2030]5:31   [2031]5:31
   [2032]5:32   [2033]5:41   [2034]5:55   [2035]5:56   [2036]6:2
   [2037]6:15   [2038]7:51   [2039]7:56   [2040]7:60   [2041]8:14
   [2042]8:37   [2043]9:4   [2044]9:6   [2045]9:9   [2046]9:11
   [2047]9:11   [2048]9:11   [2049]9:11   [2050]9:16   [2051]9:31
   [2052]10:2   [2053]10:2   [2054]10:3   [2055]10:3-9   [2056]10:4
   [2057]10:9   [2058]10:25   [2059]10:26   [2060]10:33   [2061]10:36
   [2062]10:38   [2063]10:43   [2064]10:44   [2065]12:2   [2066]12:7
   [2067]12:7   [2068]12:11   [2069]12:12   [2070]12:13   [2071]12:15
   [2072]12:20   [2073]12:21-23   [2074]12:23   [2075]13:10
   [2076]13:10   [2077]13:11   [2078]13:22   [2079]13:22   [2080]13:22
   [2081]13:33   [2082]13:33   [2083]13:33   [2084]13:34   [2085]14:14
   [2086]14:14   [2087]14:15   [2088]14:17   [2089]14:17   [2090]14:17
   [2091]15:10   [2092]16:14   [2093]16:14   [2094]16:14   [2095]17:11
   [2096]17:26   [2097]17:28   [2098]17:31   [2099]19:16   [2100]19:34
   [2101]20:9   [2102]20:18   [2103]20:21   [2104]20:24   [2105]20:28
   [2106]20:28   [2107]20:38   [2108]21:14   [2109]23:31   [2110]24:14
   [2111]24:15   [2112]26:7   [2113]26:7   [2114]26:7   [2115]26:18
   [2116]26:18   [2117]26:18   [2118]26:18   [2119]26:22   [2120]26:23
   [2121]27:23   [2122]27:23   [2123]27:24   [2124]27:33

   Romans

   [2125]1:3   [2126]1:3   [2127]1:4   [2128]1:4   [2129]1:4   [2130]1:4
   [2131]1:11   [2132]1:12   [2133]1:18   [2134]1:18   [2135]1:20
   [2136]1:21   [2137]1:21   [2138]1:32   [2139]1:32   [2140]2:7
   [2141]2:15   [2142]2:18   [2143]2:25   [2144]2:26   [2145]3:5
   [2146]3:6   [2147]3:8   [2148]3:10   [2149]3:11   [2150]3:19
   [2151]3:21   [2152]3:24   [2153]3:25   [2154]3:25   [2155]3:25
   [2156]3:25   [2157]3:25   [2158]3:25   [2159]3:25   [2160]3:25
   [2161]3:26   [2162]3:26   [2163]3:26   [2164]3:26   [2165]4:15
   [2166]4:15   [2167]4:17   [2168]4:18   [2169]4:19   [2170]4:20
   [2171]4:23   [2172]4:25   [2173]4:25   [2174]5   [2175]5:1
   [2176]5:1   [2177]5:1   [2178]5:1   [2179]5:1   [2180]5:1   [2181]5:2
   [2182]5:2   [2183]5:2   [2184]5:3   [2185]5:3-5   [2186]5:5
   [2187]5:5   [2188]5:8   [2189]5:9   [2190]5:9   [2191]5:10
   [2192]5:10   [2193]5:12   [2194]5:14   [2195]5:14   [2196]5:16
   [2197]5:18   [2198]5:19   [2199]5:19   [2200]5:21   [2201]6:5
   [2202]6:13   [2203]6:13   [2204]6:14   [2205]6:14   [2206]6:17
   [2207]6:21   [2208]6:22   [2209]6:23   [2210]7:8   [2211]7:9
   [2212]7:9   [2213]7:12   [2214]7:15   [2215]7:18   [2216]7:23
   [2217]7:23   [2218]7:23   [2219]7:23   [2220]7:24   [2221]7:24
   [2222]7:24   [2223]7:24   [2224]7:24   [2225]7:25   [2226]8:1
   [2227]8:1   [2228]8:2   [2229]8:3   [2230]8:3   [2231]8:7   [2232]8:7
   [2233]8:7   [2234]8:7   [2235]8:7   [2236]8:8   [2237]8:9   [2238]8:9
   [2239]8:11   [2240]8:11   [2241]8:12   [2242]8:12   [2243]8:14
   [2244]8:14   [2245]8:14   [2246]8:15   [2247]8:15   [2248]8:15
   [2249]8:15   [2250]8:16   [2251]8:17   [2252]8:17   [2253]8:17
   [2254]8:17   [2255]8:17   [2256]8:18   [2257]8:19   [2258]8:19
   [2259]8:19   [2260]8:23   [2261]8:23   [2262]8:23   [2263]8:23
   [2264]8:23   [2265]8:23   [2266]8:23   [2267]8:26   [2268]8:26
   [2269]8:26   [2270]8:26   [2271]8:27   [2272]8:27   [2273]8:28
   [2274]8:28   [2275]8:29   [2276]8:29   [2277]8:29   [2278]8:29
   [2279]8:29   [2280]8:29   [2281]8:29   [2282]8:32   [2283]8:32
   [2284]8:33   [2285]8:33   [2286]8:34   [2287]8:34   [2288]8:38
   [2289]9:1   [2290]9:1   [2291]9:3   [2292]9:3   [2293]9:5
   [2294]9:19   [2295]9:23   [2296]10:9   [2297]10:10   [2298]10:13
   [2299]10:14   [2300]10:14   [2301]11:4   [2302]11:26   [2303]11:36
   [2304]11:36   [2305]12:1   [2306]12:1   [2307]12:2   [2308]12:2
   [2309]12:5   [2310]12:12   [2311]12:18   [2312]12:21   [2313]13:4
   [2314]13:12   [2315]13:14   [2316]14:9   [2317]14:9   [2318]14:13
   [2319]14:17   [2320]14:17   [2321]14:17   [2322]15:13   [2323]16:2
   [2324]16:20   [2325]16:20   [2326]16:20   [2327]16:20   [2328]16:20
   [2329]16:26

   1 Corinthians

   [2330]1:23   [2331]1:24   [2332]1:27-31   [2333]1:30   [2334]2:8
   [2335]2:14   [2336]2:14   [2337]3:6   [2338]3:11   [2339]3:21
   [2340]3:22   [2341]3:23   [2342]3:23   [2343]4:3   [2344]4:4
   [2345]4:5   [2346]4:7   [2347]4:9   [2348]4:20   [2349]5:5
   [2350]6:5   [2351]6:7   [2352]6:11   [2353]6:15   [2354]6:17
   [2355]6:19   [2356]6:20   [2357]6:20   [2358]6:20   [2359]7:5
   [2360]7:31   [2361]8:6   [2362]10:9   [2363]10:9   [2364]10:10
   [2365]10:13   [2366]10:13   [2367]10:13   [2368]10:18   [2369]10:21
   [2370]10:22   [2371]10:31   [2372]11:10   [2373]11:10   [2374]11:10
   [2375]11:19   [2376]11:26   [2377]11:31   [2378]11:32   [2379]12:12
   [2380]12:13   [2381]12:29   [2382]13:4   [2383]13:12   [2384]14:25
   [2385]15   [2386]15:6   [2387]15:10   [2388]15:10   [2389]15:13
   [2390]15:14   [2391]15:17   [2392]15:20   [2393]15:21   [2394]15:22
   [2395]15:24   [2396]15:29   [2397]15:45   [2398]15:45   [2399]15:50
   [2400]15:53   [2401]15:56   [2402]15:56   [2403]15:57   [2404]16:14

   2 Corinthians

   [2405]1:6   [2406]1:17   [2407]1:18   [2408]1:20   [2409]1:22
   [2410]2:7   [2411]2:11   [2412]2:11   [2413]2:17   [2414]3:3
   [2415]3:5   [2416]3:18   [2417]3:18   [2418]3:18   [2419]3:18
   [2420]3:18   [2421]3:18   [2422]3:18   [2423]4:3   [2424]4:4
   [2425]4:4   [2426]4:4   [2427]4:4   [2428]4:4   [2429]4:4   [2430]4:5
   [2431]4:5   [2432]4:6   [2433]4:6   [2434]4:7   [2435]4:16
   [2436]4:16   [2437]4:17   [2438]4:18   [2439]4:18   [2440]5:1
   [2441]5:1   [2442]5:2   [2443]5:5   [2444]5:14   [2445]5:16
   [2446]5:17   [2447]5:18   [2448]5:18   [2449]5:19   [2450]5:19
   [2451]5:20   [2452]5:20   [2453]5:21   [2454]5:21   [2455]6:7
   [2456]6:14   [2457]6:18   [2458]7:1   [2459]8:21   [2460]9:10
   [2461]9:13   [2462]10:5   [2463]10:5   [2464]10:5   [2465]10:5
   [2466]10:5   [2467]11:3   [2468]11:12   [2469]11:14   [2470]11:14
   [2471]12:2   [2472]12:7   [2473]12:7   [2474]12:7   [2475]12:7
   [2476]12:7   [2477]12:7   [2478]12:7   [2479]12:7   [2480]12:8
   [2481]12:9   [2482]12:9   [2483]12:9   [2484]12:9   [2485]12:9
   [2486]12:10   [2487]12:14   [2488]13:4   [2489]13:4   [2490]15:32

   Galatians

   [2491]1:4   [2492]2:12   [2493]2:13   [2494]2:19   [2495]2:20
   [2496]2:20   [2497]2:20   [2498]2:20   [2499]2:20   [2500]3:8
   [2501]3:13   [2502]3:13   [2503]3:20   [2504]4:4   [2505]4:4
   [2506]4:4   [2507]4:5   [2508]4:5   [2509]4:6   [2510]4:6   [2511]4:6
   [2512]4:6   [2513]4:8   [2514]4:16   [2515]4:19   [2516]5:3
   [2517]5:13   [2518]5:13   [2519]5:13   [2520]5:13   [2521]5:14
   [2522]5:17   [2523]5:17   [2524]5:24   [2525]6:1   [2526]6:1
   [2527]6:1   [2528]6:12   [2529]6:14   [2530]6:14   [2531]6:16

   Ephesians

   [2532]1:3   [2533]1:3   [2534]1:3   [2535]1:5   [2536]1:6   [2537]1:6
   [2538]1:6   [2539]1:10   [2540]1:10   [2541]1:13   [2542]1:13
   [2543]1:13   [2544]1:14   [2545]1:14   [2546]1:14   [2547]1:14
   [2548]1:17   [2549]1:17   [2550]1:18   [2551]1:18   [2552]1:20
   [2553]1:20   [2554]1:21   [2555]1:21   [2556]1:21   [2557]1:21
   [2558]1:22   [2559]1:22   [2560]1:23   [2561]2:2   [2562]2:2
   [2563]2:2   [2564]2:2   [2565]2:2   [2566]2:3   [2567]2:3   [2568]2:3
   [2569]2:3   [2570]2:3   [2571]2:5   [2572]2:5   [2573]2:10
   [2574]2:10   [2575]2:10   [2576]2:12   [2577]2:12   [2578]2:17
   [2579]2:18   [2580]2:18   [2581]2:18   [2582]3:10   [2583]3:10
   [2584]3:11   [2585]3:12   [2586]3:12   [2587]3:12   [2588]3:14
   [2589]3:14   [2590]3:14   [2591]3:15   [2592]3:15   [2593]3:16
   [2594]3:16   [2595]3:17   [2596]3:20   [2597]4:3   [2598]4:6
   [2599]4:8   [2600]4:11   [2601]4:13   [2602]4:15   [2603]4:16
   [2604]4:18   [2605]4:19   [2606]4:24   [2607]4:24   [2608]4:27
   [2609]4:28   [2610]4:30   [2611]4:30   [2612]4:30   [2613]4:32
   [2614]5:2   [2615]5:2   [2616]5:17   [2617]5:21   [2618]5:22
   [2619]5:22   [2620]5:23   [2621]5:27   [2622]5:27   [2623]5:30
   [2624]6:11   [2625]6:11   [2626]6:11   [2627]6:11   [2628]6:11
   [2629]6:12   [2630]6:12   [2631]6:12   [2632]6:12   [2633]6:12
   [2634]6:12   [2635]6:13   [2636]6:13   [2637]6:13   [2638]6:15
   [2639]6:16   [2640]6:16   [2641]6:16   [2642]6:16   [2643]6:16
   [2644]6:17   [2645]6:17   [2646]6:18   [2647]6:18   [2648]6:18

   Philippians

   [2649]1:20   [2650]1:20   [2651]1:21   [2652]1:23   [2653]1:23
   [2654]1:23   [2655]1:23   [2656]1:23   [2657]1:24   [2658]2:6
   [2659]2:6   [2660]2:6   [2661]2:7   [2662]2:7   [2663]2:7-8
   [2664]2:8   [2665]2:9   [2666]2:10   [2667]2:10   [2668]2:10
   [2669]2:10   [2670]2:11   [2671]2:13   [2672]2:13   [2673]2:13
   [2674]2:15   [2675]2:21   [2676]3:11   [2677]3:11   [2678]3:19
   [2679]3:20   [2680]3:20   [2681]3:21   [2682]3:21   [2683]3:21
   [2684]4:6   [2685]4:6   [2686]4:6   [2687]4:6   [2688]4:6   [2689]4:7
   [2690]4:7   [2691]4:7   [2692]4:12   [2693]4:13

   Colossians

   [2694]1:10   [2695]1:11   [2696]1:12   [2697]1:13   [2698]1:13
   [2699]1:13   [2700]1:13   [2701]1:14   [2702]1:14   [2703]1:14
   [2704]1:14-20   [2705]1:15   [2706]1:15   [2707]1:15   [2708]1:16
   [2709]1:16   [2710]1:16   [2711]1:16   [2712]1:16   [2713]1:17
   [2714]1:17   [2715]1:17   [2716]1:17   [2717]1:18   [2718]1:18
   [2719]1:18   [2720]1:18   [2721]1:19   [2722]1:19   [2723]1:19
   [2724]1:19   [2725]1:20   [2726]1:20   [2727]1:20   [2728]1:21
   [2729]1:21   [2730]1:21   [2731]2   [2732]2:3   [2733]2:3   [2734]2:3
   [2735]2:5   [2736]2:6   [2737]2:6   [2738]2:9   [2739]2:9   [2740]2:9
   [2741]2:13   [2742]2:14   [2743]2:14   [2744]2:15   [2745]2:18
   [2746]2:19   [2747]2:19   [2748]3:1   [2749]3:3   [2750]3:4
   [2751]3:5   [2752]3:10   [2753]3:13   [2754]3:14   [2755]3:17
   [2756]4:2   [2757]4:2   [2758]4:42

   1 Thessalonians

   [2759]1:5   [2760]1:10   [2761]1:10   [2762]1:23   [2763]2:11
   [2764]2:12   [2765]2:13   [2766]2:19   [2767]4:3   [2768]4:3
   [2769]4:4   [2770]4:9   [2771]4:14   [2772]4:16   [2773]5:8
   [2774]5:8   [2775]5:10   [2776]5:13   [2777]5:17   [2778]5:17
   [2779]5:17   [2780]5:18   [2781]5:18

   2 Thessalonians

   [2782]1:7   [2783]1:8   [2784]1:8   [2785]1:8   [2786]1:10
   [2787]1:11   [2788]1:11   [2789]1:11   [2790]1:12   [2791]1:12
   [2792]2:13   [2793]3:3   [2794]3:5   [2795]3:5   [2796]3:10

   1 Timothy

   [2797]1:15   [2798]1:16   [2799]2:2   [2800]2:2   [2801]2:6
   [2802]2:6   [2803]2:8   [2804]3:6   [2805]3:16   [2806]3:16
   [2807]4:3   [2808]4:4   [2809]4:4   [2810]4:4   [2811]4:5   [2812]4:5
   [2813]4:8   [2814]4:15   [2815]5:8   [2816]5:21   [2817]5:21
   [2818]5:21   [2819]6:8   [2820]6:9   [2821]6:9   [2822]6:11
   [2823]6:13   [2824]6:14   [2825]6:14   [2826]6:15   [2827]6:16
   [2828]6:16   [2829]6:17

   2 Timothy

   [2830]1:3   [2831]1:10   [2832]1:10   [2833]1:12   [2834]1:16
   [2835]1:18   [2836]2:12   [2837]2:19   [2838]2:22   [2839]2:22
   [2840]2:26   [2841]2:26   [2842]2:26   [2843]2:26   [2844]2:26
   [2845]2:26   [2846]3:4   [2847]4:7   [2848]4:8   [2849]4:8
   [2850]4:8   [2851]4:8   [2852]4:10   [2853]4:17   [2854]4:17
   [2855]4:18   [2856]4:18   [2857]4:18   [2858]4:18   [2859]4:18
   [2860]4:18

   Titus

   [2861]2:12   [2862]2:12   [2863]2:14   [2864]2:14   [2865]3:2
   [2866]3:3   [2867]3:3   [2868]3:3   [2869]3:3   [2870]3:5   [2871]3:5
   [2872]3:6   [2873]3:6   [2874]3:7

   Philemon

   [2875]1:18

   Hebrews

   [2876]1:1   [2877]1:1   [2878]1:2   [2879]1:2   [2880]1:2   [2881]1:2
   [2882]1:2   [2883]1:2   [2884]1:3   [2885]1:3   [2886]1:3   [2887]1:3
   [2888]1:3   [2889]1:3   [2890]1:3   [2891]1:4   [2892]1:6   [2893]1:7
   [2894]1:10   [2895]1:14   [2896]1:14   [2897]1:14   [2898]1:14
   [2899]1:14   [2900]1:14   [2901]2:2   [2902]2:2-4   [2903]2:3
   [2904]2:3   [2905]2:4   [2906]2:7   [2907]2:7   [2908]2:7   [2909]2:9
   [2910]2:10   [2911]2:10   [2912]2:11   [2913]2:11   [2914]2:11
   [2915]2:11   [2916]2:14   [2917]2:14   [2918]2:14   [2919]2:14
   [2920]2:14   [2921]2:14   [2922]2:14   [2923]2:15   [2924]2:16
   [2925]2:17   [2926]2:17   [2927]2:18   [2928]2:18   [2929]2:18
   [2930]3:1   [2931]3:1   [2932]3:1   [2933]3:1   [2934]3:3-5
   [2935]3:5   [2936]3:5   [2937]3:5   [2938]3:6   [2939]3:6   [2940]3:6
   [2941]3:6   [2942]3:7   [2943]3:12   [2944]3:12   [2945]4:1
   [2946]4:2   [2947]4:12   [2948]4:15   [2949]4:15   [2950]4:15
   [2951]4:16   [2952]4:16   [2953]4:16   [2954]4:16   [2955]5:8
   [2956]6:4   [2957]6:18   [2958]6:18   [2959]6:18   [2960]6:18
   [2961]7:2   [2962]7:3   [2963]7:22   [2964]7:22   [2965]7:25
   [2966]7:25   [2967]7:27   [2968]8:1   [2969]8:10   [2970]8:10
   [2971]8:12   [2972]9:4   [2973]9:5   [2974]9:12   [2975]9:13
   [2976]9:13-14   [2977]9:14   [2978]9:14   [2979]9:14   [2980]9:14
   [2981]9:22   [2982]9:23-24   [2983]9:24   [2984]9:24   [2985]9:24
   [2986]9:28   [2987]10:6   [2988]10:7   [2989]10:10   [2990]10:10
   [2991]10:14   [2992]10:14   [2993]10:15   [2994]10:19   [2995]10:19
   [2996]10:20   [2997]10:22   [2998]10:22   [2999]10:31   [3000]10:32
   [3001]11:1   [3002]11:1   [3003]11:6   [3004]11:6   [3005]11:6
   [3006]11:10   [3007]11:16   [3008]11:17   [3009]11:25   [3010]11:25
   [3011]11:26   [3012]11:26   [3013]11:27   [3014]11:27   [3015]11:27
   [3016]11:35   [3017]12:1-6   [3018]12:2   [3019]12:2   [3020]12:2
   [3021]12:3   [3022]12:5   [3023]12:5   [3024]12:6   [3025]12:9
   [3026]12:10   [3027]12:10   [3028]12:10   [3029]12:11   [3030]12:11
   [3031]12:11   [3032]12:11   [3033]12:11   [3034]12:12   [3035]12:16
   [3036]12:22   [3037]12:22   [3038]12:23   [3039]12:23   [3040]12:24
   [3041]12:24   [3042]12:25   [3043]12:27   [3044]12:28   [3045]12:28
   [3046]12:28   [3047]12:28   [3048]12:29   [3049]12:29   [3050]13:5
   [3051]13:5   [3052]13:5   [3053]13:13   [3054]13:16   [3055]13:20
   [3056]13:20   [3057]13:20   [3058]13:21   [3059]13:21

   James

   [3060]1:2   [3061]1:4   [3062]1:5   [3063]1:6   [3064]1:8
   [3065]1:12   [3066]1:12   [3067]1:13   [3068]1:14   [3069]1:14
   [3070]1:14   [3071]1:14   [3072]1:17   [3073]1:17   [3074]1:19
   [3075]1:21   [3076]1:27   [3077]1:27   [3078]2:5   [3079]2:8
   [3080]2:19   [3081]3:2   [3082]3:15   [3083]4:3   [3084]4:3
   [3085]4:4   [3086]4:6   [3087]4:7   [3088]4:7   [3089]4:7
   [3090]4:12   [3091]4:13   [3092]4:15   [3093]4:17   [3094]5:5
   [3095]5:11   [3096]5:16   [3097]5:16   [3098]5:16   [3099]5:17
   [3100]5:18   [3101]5:18   [3102]9:19

   1 Peter

   [3103]1:3   [3104]1:3   [3105]1:3   [3106]1:4   [3107]1:4   [3108]1:6
   [3109]1:8   [3110]1:8   [3111]1:8   [3112]1:8   [3113]1:8
   [3114]1:12   [3115]1:12   [3116]1:15   [3117]1:15   [3118]1:17
   [3119]1:17   [3120]1:18   [3121]1:18   [3122]1:19   [3123]1:19
   [3124]1:21   [3125]1:23   [3126]1:24   [3127]2:3   [3128]2:9
   [3129]2:9   [3130]2:11   [3131]2:15   [3132]2:15   [3133]3
   [3134]3:7   [3135]3:7   [3136]3:15   [3137]3:18   [3138]3:18
   [3139]3:19   [3140]3:19   [3141]3:21   [3142]3:25   [3143]4:1
   [3144]4:2   [3145]4:2   [3146]4:2   [3147]4:5   [3148]4:19
   [3149]4:19   [3150]5:4   [3151]5:6   [3152]5:7   [3153]5:7
   [3154]5:8   [3155]5:8   [3156]5:8   [3157]5:8   [3158]5:8   [3159]5:9
   [3160]5:9   [3161]5:9   [3162]5:9   [3163]5:9   [3164]5:9   [3165]5:9
   [3166]5:9   [3167]5:10   [3168]5:10   [3169]5:11   [3170]5:13
   [3171]15

   1 John

   [3172]1:9   [3173]1:9   [3174]1:9   [3175]2:1   [3176]2:1   [3177]2:1
   [3178]2:1   [3179]2:2   [3180]2:6   [3181]2:13   [3182]2:13
   [3183]2:14   [3184]2:15   [3185]2:16   [3186]2:16   [3187]2:16
   [3188]2:17   [3189]2:17   [3190]2:25   [3191]3:1   [3192]3:1
   [3193]3:2   [3194]3:2   [3195]3:2   [3196]3:2   [3197]3:2   [3198]3:4
   [3199]3:8   [3200]3:8   [3201]3:8   [3202]3:8   [3203]3:8
   [3204]3:10   [3205]3:16   [3206]3:20   [3207]3:20   [3208]3:21
   [3209]3:23   [3210]4:4   [3211]4:8   [3212]4:9   [3213]4:9
   [3214]4:10   [3215]4:10   [3216]4:13   [3217]4:18   [3218]4:19
   [3219]4:19   [3220]4:19   [3221]5:1   [3222]5:1   [3223]5:3
   [3224]5:5   [3225]5:7   [3226]5:8   [3227]5:10   [3228]5:10
   [3229]5:10   [3230]5:12   [3231]5:12   [3232]5:16   [3233]5:18
   [3234]5:18

   3 John

   [3235]1:11

   Jude

   [3236]1:9   [3237]1:20   [3238]1:20   [3239]1:20-21

   Revelation

   [3240]1:5   [3241]1:5   [3242]1:5   [3243]1:5   [3244]1:5   [3245]1:8
   [3246]1:17   [3247]1:17   [3248]1:17   [3249]1:18   [3250]2:3
   [3251]2:8   [3252]2:10   [3253]2:24   [3254]3:4   [3255]3:10
   [3256]3:10   [3257]3:14   [3258]3:14   [3259]3:14   [3260]3:14
   [3261]3:20   [3262]4:10   [3263]4:10   [3264]4:11   [3265]4:11
   [3266]5:5   [3267]5:5   [3268]5:6   [3269]5:8   [3270]5:8   [3271]5:9
   [3272]5:12   [3273]11:10   [3274]12:7   [3275]12:12   [3276]15:3
   [3277]16:14   [3278]17:4   [3279]18:8   [3280]19:10   [3281]19:10
   [3282]20:12   [3283]21:4   [3284]22:8   [3285]22:9   [3286]22:12
   [3287]22:13   [3288]22:17   [3289]22:17   [3290]22:20   [3291]22:20
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * eudokese: [3292]1
     * tou ponerou: [3293]1
     * antilutron: [3294]1
     * en ho eudokesa: [3295]1
     * en stigme chronou: [3296]1
     * en tois dialogismois: [3297]1
     * exodon: [3298]1
     * hina luse: [3299]1
     * ho kurios mou, ho Theo`s mou: [3300]1
     * ho peirazon: [3301]1
     * Hos errusato: [3302]1
     * hupo tes idias epithumias: [3303]1
     * hupodikos to Theo: [3304]1
     * hupage, Satana: [3305]1
     * Aga'pe: [3306]1
     * Diakonein: [3307]1
     * Doulei'a: [3308]1 [3309]2
     * Latrei'a: [3310]1 [3311]2
     * Mo'no: [3312]1
     * Touto to` phtharto`n: [3313]1
     * Philadelphi'a: [3314]1
     * a'chri kairou: [3315]1
     * analusai: [3316]1
     * anthro'pinos: [3317]1
     * ape'chousi: [3318]1
     * apo` tou ponerou: [3319]1
     * arche`: [3320]1 [3321]2 [3322]3
     * auto: [3323]1
     * auto'ptes: [3324]1
     * agiastheto: [3325]1 [3326]2
     * battologia: [3327]1 [3328]2 [3329]3
     * deesis energoumene: [3330]1 [3331]2
     * diakanein: [3332]1
     * dokei: [3333]1
     * e'kbasin: [3334]1
     * e'xodon: [3335]1
     * e'xodos: [3336]1 [3337]2
     * e'chousi: [3338]1
     * eidolochare`s: [3339]1
     * ek tou ponerou: [3340]1
     * ekle'kton eklekto'teroi: [3341]1
     * ektene'steron: [3342]1
     * elthe'to: [3343]1
     * en ektenei'a: [3344]1
     * enepu'risen: [3345]1
     * energou'menoi: [3346]1
     * zoon politiko`n: [3347]1
     * e'gagen auton: [3348]1
     * eme'ra kuri'ou: [3349]1
     * isa'ngeloi: [3350]1
     * ilaste'rion: [3351]1
     * kako`n: [3352]1
     * krei'ttona tes thne'tes phu'seos: [3353]1
     * lego'menoi theo`i: [3354]1
     * leitourgika pneumata: [3355]1
     * lusas tas odinas tou thanatou: [3356]1
     * lutron anti pollon: [3357]1
     * me antistenai to ponero: [3358]1
     * mese: [3359]1
     * mesi'tes: [3360]1
     * mimesis: [3361]1
     * mo'no: [3362]1
     * o e'chthros: [3363]1
     * o ponero`s: [3364]1 [3365]2 [3366]3
     * o uio`s agapeto`s: [3367]1
     * opos: [3368]1 [3369]2 [3370]3
     * opla: [3371]1
     * ouk epilambanetai ton angelon: [3372]1
     * pa'nta: [3373]1
     * patera idion elege ton Theon: [3374]1
     * peirasmo`s: [3375]1
     * plerein: [3376]1 [3377]2
     * polulogi'a: [3378]1
     * polulogia: [3379]1 [3380]2
     * polupoi'kilos sophi'a: [3381]1
     * ponero`n: [3382]1
     * pro`s to` paro`n: [3383]1
     * prolemphthe: [3384]1
     * proselthon auto ho peirazon: [3385]1
     * proskune'sai: [3386]1
     * prostethesetai: [3387]1
     * pteru'gion tou ierou: [3388]1
     * se'meron: [3389]1 [3390]2 [3391]3
     * sumbolikos: [3392]1 [3393]2
     * schema: [3394]1
     * somatikos: [3395]1 [3396]2
     * sundesmos tes teleiotetos: [3397]1
     * ta bathe tou Satana: [3398]1
     * ta pa`nta: [3399]1
     * ta` ba'the: [3400]1
     * ta` lu'pera phobera`: [3401]1
     * te`n sa'rka, to` patheto'n: [3402]1
     * to` anathe`s t8es Theo'tetos: [3403]1
     * touto to` soma tes tapeino'seos: [3404]1
     * ton ponero`n: [3405]1
     * tupos tou mellontos: [3406]1
     * u'pselos li`an: [3407]1
     * os tu'poi: [3408]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Et me mihi perfide prodis?: [3409]1
     *  dispari: [3410]1
     *  minori ad majus: [3411]1
     * Ab utili: [3412]1
     * Abrenuncias?: [3413]1
     * Abrenuncio: [3414]1
     * Ascende per hominem, et pervenies ad Deum.: [3415]1
     * At noli modo, timebam enim ne me exaudiret Deus: [3416]1
     * Ave Maria: [3417]1
     * Creatio fit ex nihilo: [3418]1
     * Credis?: [3419]1
     * Credo: [3420]1
     * Deus: [3421]1
     * Domine, Deus, fac me in iis consequendis operam collocare, pro
       quibus obtinendis te orare soleo: [3422]1
     * Dominium evangelicum fundatur in gratia: [3423]1
     * Dominium politicum fundatur in providentia: [3424]1
     * Dominus: [3425]1
     * Ecce duo gladii!: [3426]1
     * Ex antiquis sacerdotum libris: [3427]1
     * Felix illa domus, ubi Martha queritur de Maria: [3428]1
     * Gloria Patri: [3429]1
     * Homo est arbor inversa: [3430]1
     * Ille dolet ver qui sine teste dolet.: [3431]1
     * In colloquio: [3432]1 [3433]2
     * In compendio: [3434]1 [3435]2
     * In speculo: [3436]1 [3437]2
     * Magnificetur nomen tuum: [3438]1
     * Merito operis: [3439]1
     * Montibus, inquit, erant, et eraut sub montibus illis.: [3440]1
     * Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso: [3441]1 [3442]2
     * Nomen quasi notamen.: [3443]1
     * Non aeque glorietur accinctus, ac discinctus: [3444]1
     * Non pugna sublata est, scd victoria: [3445]1
     * Optando, si non affirmando: [3446]1
     * Origo mundi melioris: [3447]1
     * Paucis verbis rem divinam facito: [3448]1
     * Qui comminus arceat et eminus terreat.: [3449]1
     * Quibus arteriis opus est, si pro sono audiamur!: [3450]1
     * Rex regum: [3451]1
     * Se nunquam cum matre in gratiam rediisse.: [3452]1
     * Si alauda: [3453]1
     * Si essem luscinia: [3454]1 [3455]2
     * Sicut se habet simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis, ad magis:
       [3456]1
     * Ut nihil Dei displiceat nobis: [3457]1
     * Ut nihil nostrum displiceat Deo: [3458]1
     * Vetus et constans fama: [3459]1
     * Videbat tangebatque hominem, et confitebatur Deum, quem non videbat
       neque tangebat: [3460]1
     * Voluntas de nobis: [3461]1
     * Voluntas in nobis: [3462]1
     * a periculo: [3463]1
     * a signo ad rem significatam: [3464]1
     * actus desiderii: [3465]1
     * ad edificationem: [3466]1
     * ad ostentationem: [3467]1
     * amicitia per accidens: [3468]1
     * amicitia per se: [3469]1
     * benedicere: [3470]1
     * benefacere: [3471]1
     * beneficio mediatoris: [3472]1
     * capitis diminutio: [3473]1
     * captivantes omnem intellectum in obsequium Christi: [3474]1
     * clara cum laude notitia: [3475]1
     * comminus: [3476]1 [3477]2
     * con: [3478]1
     * consortium factionis: [3479]1
     * cura animarum: [3480]1
     * custodia corporis: [3481]1
     * custos: [3482]1
     * de facto: [3483]1 [3484]2
     * de jure: [3485]1 [3486]2
     * dictum factum: [3487]1
     * disticha longa facit: [3488]1
     * dominium jurisdictionis: [3489]1
     * dominium proprietatis: [3490]1
     * dominus vitae: [3491]1
     * eadem velle et nolle: [3492]1
     * eminus: [3493]1 [3494]2
     * esse bonum facile est, ubi quod vetat esse remotum est: [3495]1
     * ex officio judicis: [3496]1
     * factum, infactum fieri nequit: [3497]1
     * fictio personae: [3498]1
     * glorificetur: [3499]1
     * hoc est: [3500]1
     * in bello: [3501]1
     * in fieri: [3502]1
     * in proelio: [3503]1
     * in viis, non in praecipitiis: [3504]1
     * inferioris hemisphrii: [3505]1
     * inter binos et bonos: [3506]1
     * inter reliquos: [3507]1
     * jure propinquitatis: [3508]1 [3509]2
     * jure proprietatis: [3510]1
     * justum est quod fieri debet: [3511]1
     * justum est quod fieri potest: [3512]1
     * justum quod fieri potest: [3513]1
     * lacinia praependens: [3514]1
     * lex remedians: [3515]1
     * malum culpae: [3516]1 [3517]2
     * malum poenae: [3518]1 [3519]2
     * ministerium externi auxilii: [3520]1
     * novum jus imperii: [3521]1
     * obiter: [3522]1
     * optando, si non affirmando: [3523]1
     * ordinaria: [3524]1
     * origo mundi melioris: [3525]1
     * pars laesa: [3526]1
     * per blanda et aspera: [3527]1
     * placabilis: [3528]1
     * placandus antequam placendus: [3529]1
     * placatus: [3530]1
     * poena damni: [3531]1
     * poena sensus: [3532]1
     * potestas honoraria: [3533]1
     * praeludia resurrectionis: [3534]1
     * primogenitus: [3535]1 [3536]2
     * primum in unoquoque genere: [3537]1
     * pro: [3538]1
     * pro mora finis: [3539]1
     * quantus quantus est: [3540]1
     * quid: [3541]1
     * quoad eventum: [3542]1
     * quomodo: [3543]1
     * ratio formalis: [3544]1
     * ratio motiva: [3545]1
     * ratione incarnationis suae, et regenerationis nostrae: [3546]1
     * rector mundi: [3547]1
     * sacramentum militare: [3548]1
     * sancta sanctis: [3549]1
     * sanctificemus: [3550]1
     * sanctificetur: [3551]1 [3552]2
     * sanctum sanctorum: [3553]1
     * semper instaurat pugnam: [3554]1
     * signaculum fidei: [3555]1
     * spreta conscientia: [3556]1
     * sui juris: [3557]1 [3558]2 [3559]3
     * super reliquos: [3560]1
     * tanquam aliquem magnum: [3561]1
     * termini diminuentes: [3562]1
     * ubi supra: [3563]1
     * unigenitus: [3564]1 [3565]2
     * unitas contra unitatem: [3566]1
     * verbum mentis: [3567]1
     * verbum oris: [3568]1
     * viaticum: [3569]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [3570]i  [3571]ii  [3572]iii  [3573]iv  [3574]v  [3575]vi  [3576]vii
   [3577]viii  [3578]ix  [3579]x  [3580]xi  [3581]xii  [3582]xiii
   [3583]xiv  [3584]xv  [3585]xvi  [3586]xvii  [3587]xviii  [3588]xix
   [3589]xx  [3590]xxi  [3591]xxii  [3592]xxiii  [3593]xxiv  [3594]xxv
   [3595]xxvi  [3596]xxvii  [3597]xxviii  [3598]xxix  [3599]xxx
   [3600]xxxi  [3601]xxxii  [3602]1  [3603]2  [3604]3  [3605]4  [3606]5
   [3607]6  [3608]7  [3609]8  [3610]9  [3611]10  [3612]11  [3613]12
   [3614]13  [3615]14  [3616]15  [3617]16  [3618]17  [3619]18  [3620]19
   [3621]20  [3622]21  [3623]22  [3624]23  [3625]24  [3626]25  [3627]26
   [3628]27  [3629]28  [3630]29  [3631]30  [3632]31  [3633]32  [3634]33
   [3635]34  [3636]35  [3637]36  [3638]37  [3639]38  [3640]39  [3641]40
   [3642]41  [3643]42  [3644]43  [3645]44  [3646]45  [3647]46  [3648]47
   [3649]48  [3650]49  [3651]50  [3652]51  [3653]52  [3654]53  [3655]54
   [3656]55  [3657]56  [3658]57  [3659]58  [3660]59  [3661]60  [3662]61
   [3663]62  [3664]63  [3665]64  [3666]65  [3667]66  [3668]67  [3669]68
   [3670]69  [3671]70  [3672]71  [3673]72  [3674]73  [3675]74  [3676]75
   [3677]76  [3678]77  [3679]78  [3680]79  [3681]80  [3682]81  [3683]82
   [3684]83  [3685]84  [3686]85  [3687]86  [3688]87  [3689]88  [3690]89
   [3691]90  [3692]91  [3693]92  [3694]93  [3695]94  [3696]95  [3697]96
   [3698]97  [3699]98  [3700]99  [3701]100  [3702]101  [3703]102
   [3704]103  [3705]104  [3706]105  [3707]106  [3708]107  [3709]108
   [3710]109  [3711]110  [3712]111  [3713]112  [3714]113  [3715]114
   [3716]115  [3717]116  [3718]117  [3719]118  [3720]119  [3721]120
   [3722]121  [3723]122  [3724]123  [3725]124  [3726]125  [3727]126
   [3728]127  [3729]128  [3730]129  [3731]130  [3732]131  [3733]132
   [3734]133  [3735]134  [3736]135  [3737]136  [3738]137  [3739]138
   [3740]139  [3741]140  [3742]141  [3743]142  [3744]143  [3745]144
   [3746]145  [3747]146  [3748]147  [3749]148  [3750]119  [3751]150
   [3752]151  [3753]152  [3754]153  [3755]154  [3756]155  [3757]156
   [3758]157  [3759]158  [3760]159  [3761]160  [3762]161  [3763]162
   [3764]163  [3765]164  [3766]165  [3767]166  [3768]167  [3769]168
   [3770]169  [3771]170  [3772]171  [3773]172  [3774]173  [3775]174
   [3776]175  [3777]176  [3778]177  [3779]178  [3780]179  [3781]180
   [3782]181  [3783]182  [3784]183  [3785]184  [3786]185  [3787]186
   [3788]187  [3789]188  [3790]189  [3791]190  [3792]191  [3793]192
   [3794]193  [3795]194  [3796]195  [3797]196  [3798]197  [3799]198
   [3800]199  [3801]200  [3802]201  [3803]202  [3804]203  [3805]204
   [3806]205  [3807]206  [3808]207  [3809]208  [3810]209  [3811]210
   [3812]211  [3813]212  [3814]213  [3815]214  [3816]215  [3817]216
   [3818]217  [3819]218  [3820]219  [3821]220  [3822]221  [3823]222
   [3824]223  [3825]224  [3826]225  [3827]226  [3828]227  [3829]228
   [3830]229  [3831]230  [3832]231  [3833]232  [3834]233  [3835]234
   [3836]235  [3837]236  [3838]237  [3839]238  [3840]239  [3841]240
   [3842]241  [3843]242  [3844]243  [3845]244  [3846]245  [3847]246
   [3848]247  [3849]248  [3850]249  [3851]250  [3852]251  [3853]252
   [3854]253  [3855]254  [3856]255  [3857]256  [3858]257  [3859]258
   [3860]259  [3861]260  [3862]261  [3863]262  [3864]263  [3865]264
   [3866]265  [3867]266  [3868]267  [3869]268  [3870]269  [3871]270
   [3872]271  [3873]272  [3874]273  [3875]274  [3876]275  [3877]276
   [3878]277  [3879]278  [3880]279  [3881]280  [3882]281  [3883]282
   [3884]283  [3885]284  [3886]285  [3887]286  [3888]287  [3889]288
   [3890]289  [3891]290  [3892]291  [3893]292  [3894]293  [3895]294
   [3896]295  [3897]296  [3898]297  [3899]298  [3900]299  [3901]300
   [3902]301  [3903]302  [3904]303  [3905]304  [3906]305  [3907]306
   [3908]307  [3909]308  [3910]309  [3911]310  [3912]311  [3913]312
   [3914]313  [3915]314  [3916]315  [3917]316  [3918]217  [3919]318
   [3920]319  [3921]320  [3922]321  [3923]322  [3924]323  [3925]324
   [3926]325  [3927]326  [3928]327  [3929]328  [3930]329  [3931]330
   [3932]331  [3933]332  [3934]333  [3935]334  [3936]335  [3937]336
   [3938]337  [3939]338  [3940]339  [3941]340  [3942]341  [3943]342
   [3944]343  [3945]344  [3946]345  [3947]346  [3948]347  [3949]348
   [3950]349  [3951]350  [3952]351  [3953]352  [3954]353  [3955]354
   [3956]355  [3957]356  [3958]357  [3959]358  [3960]359  [3961]360
   [3962]361  [3963]362  [3964]363  [3965]364  [3966]365  [3967]366
   [3968]367  [3969]368  [3970]369  [3971]370  [3972]371  [3973]372
   [3974]373  [3975]374  [3976]375  [3977]376  [3978]377  [3979]378
   [3980]379  [3981]380  [3982]381  [3983]382  [3984]383  [3985]384
   [3986]386  [3987]387  [3988]388  [3989]389  [3990]390  [3991]391
   [3992]392  [3993]393  [3994]394  [3995]395  [3996]396  [3997]397
   [3998]398  [3999]399  [4000]400  [4001]401  [4002]402  [4003]403
   [4004]404  [4005]405  [4006]406  [4007]407  [4008]408  [4009]409
   [4010]410  [4011]411  [4012]412  [4013]413  [4014]414  [4015]415
   [4016]416  [4017]417  [4018]418  [4019]419  [4020]420  [4021]421
   [4022]422  [4023]423  [4024]424  [4025]425  [4026]426  [4027]427
   [4028]428  [4029]429  [4030]430  [4031]431  [4032]432  [4033]433
   [4034]434  [4035]435  [4036]436  [4037]437  [4038]438  [4039]439
   [4040]440  [4041]441  [4042]442  [4043]443  [4044]444  [4045]445
   [4046]446  [4047]447  [4048]448  [4049]449  [4050]450  [4051]451
   [4052]452  [4053]453  [4054]454  [4055]455  [4056]456  [4057]457
   [4058]458  [4059]459  [4060]460  [4061]461  [4062]462  [4063]463
   [4064]464  [4065]465  [4066]466  [4067]467  [4068]468  [4069]469
   [4070]470  [4071]471  [4072]472  [4073]473  [4074]474  [4075]475
   [4076]476  [4077]477  [4078]478  [4079]479  [4080]480  [4081]481
   [4082]482  [4083]483  [4084]484  [4085]485  [4086]486  [4087]487
   [4088]488  [4089]489  [4090]490  [4091]491  [4092]492  [4093]493
   [4094]494  [4095]495  [4096]496  [4097]497  [4098]498  [4099]499
   [4100]500  [4101]501  [4102]502  [4103]503  [4104]504
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.iv-p26.1
   2. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.iv-p26.2
   3. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii-p104.4
   4. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=3#viii_1-p47.3
   5. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.iii-p45.1
   6. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi_1-p62.1
   7. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.ii-p39.1
   8. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.iv-p49.2
   9. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#ix_1-p26.4
  10. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi_1-p28.2
  11. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.ii-p40.4
  12. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii-p14.1
  13. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#viii_2-p18.1
  14. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi.ii-p37.2
  15. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi-p39.2
  16. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=21#viii-p6.4
  17. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii.iii-p19.1
  18. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p111.3
  19. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii-p59.2
  20. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi.v-p43.3
  21. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=11#i_3-p111.3
  22. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=17#v.iii-p12.4
  23. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iv.iii.iv-p131.2
  24. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=4#iv.iii.ii-p90.4
  25. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=3#viii_2-p18.3
  26. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=18#viii_2-p21.1
  27. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=19#v-p22.5
  28. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=12#vii_2-p6.5
  29. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v.iii-p48.1
  30. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vi_1-p64.1
  31. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=0#viii_2-p65.2
  32. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vii_1-p23.2
  33. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=25#vi-p154.1
  34. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=25#vii.ii-p35.3
  35. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=25#ix_1-p25.5
  36. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=27#i_3-p120.2
  37. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=27#vii_2-p23.3
  38. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=31#iv.ii-p163.2
  39. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vii_1-p23.3
  40. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=30#v.ii-p30.2
  41. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=31#v.ii-p30.3
  42. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=17#v.v-p52.6
  43. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=1#vii-p29.1
  44. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=1#v.ii-p24.3
  45. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=14#v.v-p52.2
  46. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#viii_2-p18.4
  47. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=7#v.iv-p39.6
  48. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=63#iv.ii-p30.2
  49. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=26#vii.vii-p68.2
  50. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=29#vii.iii-p38.4
  51. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#viii_2-p22.1
  52. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=17#vii_2-p28.3
  53. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=1#vii-p114.1
  54. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=10#v-p37.3
  55. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=10#vi-p16.1
  56. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#iv.ii-p48.4
  57. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#i_5-p25.5
  58. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=31#vii_2-p9.1
  59. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=34&scrV=2#vi_1-p28.4
  60. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=35#v.v-p61.5
  61. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=7#vii-p47.1
  62. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#vii-p143.2
  63. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=10#vii-p106.2
  64. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=10#viii_1-p49.1
  65. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=21#iii-p31.1
  66. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=22#iii-p31.2
  67. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=47&scrV=12#i_3-p2.6
  68. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=15#vi.iv-p56.1
  69. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=50&scrV=17#vi-p125.1
  70. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vi.iv-p59.2
  71. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iv.iii.iii-p61.2
  72. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iv.iii.iii-p61.4
  73. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=35#viii_1-p63.1
  74. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=36#viii_1-p63.2
  75. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=21#v.v-p27.7
  76. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=21#viii_2-p23.1
  77. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.v-p52.3
  78. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.ii-p154.2
  79. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iv.iii.ii-p109.2
  80. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.v-p52.1
  81. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=7#v.v-p10.2
  82. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=7#v.v-p23.3
  83. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=7#v.v-p35.1
  84. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vii_2-p26.2
  85. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v.v-p57.1
  86. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#vii_1-p11.15
  87. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=18#vi.ii-p69.2
  88. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=19#vi.ii-p69.3
  89. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=21#v.ii-p34.2
  90. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=9#v.ii-p34.3
  91. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=20#v.v-p27.4
  92. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=28&scrV=0#i_3-p45.5
  93. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=0#i_3-p99.3
  94. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=1#vii.vi-p45.1
  95. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=17#vi.v-p43.1
  96. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=7#i_3-p34.3
  97. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=11#vi.ii-p38.2
  98. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=14#vi.ii-p38.3
  99. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=19#vii_1-p5.3
 100. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=11#vi.iii-p12.1
 101. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=14#v.v-p27.5
 102. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=18#vi-p174.1
 103. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iv.ii-p169.3
 104. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=6#vi-p174.2
 105. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=7#vi-p174.3
 106. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=8#vii_1-p25.2
 107. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=14#vii_1-p31.2
 108. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=28#v.iii-p12.1
 109. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=29#i_5-p48.1
 110. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=29#vi.ii-p11.1
 111. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=30#i_5-p48.2
 112. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=30#vi.ii-p11.2
 113. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.iii.ii-p25.3
 114. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.iii.ii-p104.1
 115. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.iii-p46.4
 116. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=6#viii_2-p24.9
 117. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=7#viii_2-p24.10
 118. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=10#viii_2-p24.4
 119. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=17#i_5-p42.3
 120. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=9#vi-p48.2
 121. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=10#vi-p48.3
 122. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=25#i_3-p38.5
 123. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=47#i_3-p38.6
 124. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=0#v-p26.3
 125. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=41#vii-p153.1
 126. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vii.v-p20.3
 127. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=12#vii.v-p20.4
 128. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iv.iii.ii-p61.3
 129. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v-p24.2
 130. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vi-p127.3
 131. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p63.2
 132. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iv.iii.ii-p63.3
 133. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=22#v.v-p33.1
 134. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=34#viii_1-p31.3
 135. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=40#v.v-p34.1
 136. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iv.iii.ii-p60.2
 137. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=46#vi.ii-p38.4
 138. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=48#vi.ii-p38.5
 139. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=5#v.v-p53.3
 140. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=12#iv.iii.ii-p101.4
 141. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=12#iv.iii.ii-p113.1
 142. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=8#vi-p77.7
 143. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iv.iii.iv-p84.1
 144. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p84.2
 145. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=12#v.v-p46.2
 146. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=17#vi_1-p43.3
 147. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p84.3
 148. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iv.iii.iv-p84.4
 149. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=20#v.v-p46.3
 150. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=22#v.v-p46.3
 151. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=35#iv.iii.iv-p65.3
 152. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=10#v.v-p43.3
 153. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=10#vi.iv-p62.2
 154. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=27&scrV=16#iv.iii.ii-p60.1
 155. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vi.v-p7.1
 156. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vi.v-p7.2
 157. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii_1-p20.1
 158. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=23#i_3-p113.1
 159. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=27#i_3-p114.1
 160. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.iii.iv-p83.1
 161. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=29#iv.iii.iv-p22.1
 162. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#viii_2-p62.1
 163. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii_1-p35.1
 164. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii_1-p10.1
 165. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii_1-p10.6
 166. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii_1-p10.7
 167. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.v-p10.1
 168. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vii_2-p16.2
 169. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=2#vii-p29.2
 170. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.iii-p32.2
 171. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v-p19.5
 172. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vii-p32.3
 173. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vii-p71.2
 174. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vii_2-p47.2
 175. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vii_1-p10.2
 176. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii-p34.5
 177. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=6#i_3-p72.2
 178. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=6#i_5-p17.1
 179. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vi.iii-p46.5
 180. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vi.vi-p13.1
 181. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#viii_2-p28.3
 182. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vi.iii-p46.1
 183. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=18#viii_2-p39.3
 184. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=19#vi.vi-p36.1
 185. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=19#viii_2-p39.4
 186. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=19&scrV=20#vi-p142.2
 187. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=26&scrV=15#i_3-p109.2
 188. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=5#v.iii-p35.1
 189. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=10#viii_2-p92.3
 190. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=19#vii.ii-p39.2
 191. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=19#ix_1-p26.5
 192. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=20#vii.ii-p39.3
 193. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=20#ix_1-p26.6
 194. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=6#iv.iii.iv-p24.3
 195. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=6#i_3-p54.1
 196. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=51#iv.iii.ii-p113.2
 197. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=4#iii-p9.2
 198. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=5#iii-p9.3
 199. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=1#vi_1-p10.2
 200. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=5#vi.iii-p16.1
 201. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=6#vi.iii-p16.2
 202. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=10#vi.iii-p46.2
 203. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=10#viii_2-p39.5
 204. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=11#vi.iii-p46.3
 205. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p36.1
 206. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p63.1
 207. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vii-p46.2
 208. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vi_1-p28.3
 209. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=19#iv.iii.iv-p81.1
 210. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=19#iv.iii.ii-p106.1
 211. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii-p120.1
 212. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=39#v.v-p31.1
 213. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=9#iv.iii.iii-p40.1
 214. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi_1-p62.5
 215. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=16&scrV=1#vi_1-p28.5
 216. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p51.2
 217. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=18#i_5-p47.3
 218. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iv.ii-p148.6
 219. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iv.ii-p148.7
 220. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii-p24.2
 221. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#iv.ii-p34.2
 222. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p97.1
 223. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p118.1
 224. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vii_1-p10.8
 225. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.ii-p38.6
 226. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vi.ii-p38.7
 227. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vi.v-p54.6
 228. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vi.vi-p19.1
 229. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=14#viii_1-p15.1
 230. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=33#v-p66.1
 231. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=1#i_5-p38.4
 232. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=23#i_3-p35.2
 233. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=16#i_5-p41.2
 234. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=17#i_5-p41.3
 235. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=17#vi-p123.5
 236. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=11#iv.iii.iii-p34.13
 237. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=27&scrV=1#vii-p119.1
 238. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=7#vii-p118.1
 239. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=18#v.iv-p12.2
 240. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=30&scrV=6#viii_2-p90.2
 241. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.v-p61.2
 242. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.v-p61.3
 243. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.iii.iv-p50.2
 244. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=22#vi.ii-p76.4
 245. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=12#viii_2-p18.8
 246. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=13#viii_2-p18.9
 247. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vi_1-p28.6
 248. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.ii-p30.1
 249. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=4#viii-p20.2
 250. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iv.iii.iv-p17.1
 251. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi-p167.2
 252. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=14#viii-p20.3
 253. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.ii-p46.4
 254. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.iii.ii-p57.4
 255. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=3#i_5-p41.4
 256. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=4#i_5-p41.5
 257. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vii-p116.1
 258. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=19&scrV=23#vi-p126.2
 259. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=10#vii.vii-p69.3
 260. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=1#vii-p34.3
 261. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=1#vii-p129.2
 262. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p37.4
 263. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ix-p52.5
 264. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=49#iv.iii.iii-p37.3
 265. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=28#viii-p26.5
 266. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi.v-p5.1
 267. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=27#i_3-p106.1
 268. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=38#iv.ii-p46.1
 269. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=39#vii_1-p29.1
 270. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vi.iii-p69.1
 271. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p34.6
 272. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p34.7
 273. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii-p111.1
 274. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=0#vii.vii-p37.1
 275. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=14#v.iii-p48.3
 276. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=26#iv.ii-p137.1
 277. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=36#iv.iii.ii-p85.1
 278. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=42#vi.ii-p39.3
 279. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=45#vi.ii-p39.4
 280. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=0#vi.iii-p12.2
 281. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=0#vii_2-p47.1
 282. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=5#v.iv-p39.4
 283. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=5#v.v-p52.4
 284. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=5#viii_1-p20.1
 285. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=6#v.v-p52.5
 286. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=6#viii_1-p20.2
 287. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=8#v.iii-p12.2
 288. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=13#vi.ii-p69.4
 289. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=18#vii_1-p11.16
 290. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=11#vii-p90.2
 291. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi_1-p28.7
 292. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=2#vi_1-p28.8
 293. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii.vii-p37.2
 294. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi-p144.4
 295. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=19#i_3-p33.2
 296. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iv.iii.iv-p69.3
 297. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.iv-p43.1
 298. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vii.iv-p43.2
 299. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.iv-p48.1
 300. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii.iv-p43.3
 301. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.iv-p37.2
 302. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.iv-p48.2
 303. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.v-p42.1
 304. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii.iv-p43.4
 305. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=22#vi-p123.6
 306. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=27#ix-p49.1
 307. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=32#v.v-p42.2
 308. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v-p24.3
 309. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vii-p57.3
 310. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iii-p42.1
 311. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vii.vii-p37.3
 312. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=35#vii_1-p11.5
 313. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=35#v.iv-p39.8
 314. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=8#v.v-p31.5
 315. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=9#v.v-p31.6
 316. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vii-p34.4
 317. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vii-p48.1
 318. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vii-p129.3
 319. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.ii-p47.3
 320. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=9#vii.iv-p53.6
 321. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=10#ix-p24.1
 322. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=11#iv.iii.ii-p67.1
 323. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=11#iv.iii.iii-p12.1
 324. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=14#iv.iii.ii-p30.1
 325. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=14#v-p55.2
 326. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=16#v-p55.3
 327. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii_2-p24.3
 328. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p40.2
 329. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vii.iv-p53.5
 330. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iv.ii-p143.1
 331. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=2#i_5-p36.3
 332. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=12#vii-p149.1
 333. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=31&scrV=4#v-p54.2
 334. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=25#iv.iii.iii-p88.1
 335. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=31#iv.iii.iv-p142.2
 336. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=31#vii-p33.1
 337. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=35&scrV=20#v.iv-p20.5
 338. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=1&scrV=11#ix-p48.4
 339. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii-p109.2
 340. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=5#ix-p13.2
 341. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=5#ix-p24.3
 342. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii-p8.2
 343. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii-p8.1
 344. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.ii-p125.3
 345. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.ii-p91.1
 346. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=10#viii-p21.2
 347. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.ii-p47.5
 348. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v-p21.1
 349. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v-p21.6
 350. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p18.1
 351. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p153.3
 352. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.iv-p20.1
 353. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.iv-p20.2
 354. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.iv-p26.1
 355. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.iv-p21.1
 356. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vii_2-p51.2
 357. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v-p21.4
 358. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.v-p22.1
 359. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=12#viii_1-p28.3
 360. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=15#i_5-p39.3
 361. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=16#i_5-p39.4
 362. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=21#v.iii-p49.2
 363. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.iv-p20.4
 364. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vii-p131.1
 365. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=12#ix-p46.1
 366. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=14#iv.ii-p164.1
 367. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vii.iv-p53.3
 368. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v-p21.3
 369. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=12&scrV=16#vii-p34.1
 370. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=13&scrV=15#iv.ii-p180.1
 371. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v.v-p67.1
 372. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=13&scrV=26#vi-p78.4
 373. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vii.vii-p21.1
 374. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vii.iv-p53.4
 375. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=17#vi-p34.2
 376. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=16#iv.iii.iv-p111.2
 377. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=16&scrV=20#iv.ii-p51.1
 378. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=17&scrV=14#i_3-p34.1
 379. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#viii_2-p18.12
 380. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=26#vi.ii-p74.2
 381. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=26#viii_2-p18.13
 382. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=27#vi.ii-p74.3
 383. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=23#v-p24.4
 384. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=22&scrV=2#v-p37.1
 385. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=22&scrV=12#i_3-p114.4
 386. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iv.iii.iii-p148.2
 387. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=22&scrV=21#iv.ii-p53.1
 388. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=22&scrV=21#vi.ii-p15.5
 389. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=23&scrV=10#vii-p42.1
 390. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=26&scrV=9#vii_2-p19.1
 391. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=8#vi_1-p51.2
 392. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#iv.ii-p148.2
 393. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#iv.ii-p52.2
 394. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#vii_1-p35.3
 395. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#vi.ii-p18.1
 396. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=14#vi-p167.1
 397. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p58.3
 398. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=24#vi-p46.1
 399. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=24#vi.iii-p53.5
 400. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=27#vi-p135.1
 401. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=34&scrV=31#vii-p154.2
 402. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=34&scrV=32#vii-p154.3
 403. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=35&scrV=7#v-p37.2
 404. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=35&scrV=11#i_3-p104.1
 405. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=36&scrV=21#viii-p58.1
 406. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=36&scrV=26#vii_2-p18.1
 407. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=37&scrV=20#vii_2-p30.1
 408. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=37&scrV=22#vii_2-p16.4
 409. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=7#i_3-p26.2
 410. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=5#vii_2-p23.1
 411. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=6#vii_2-p23.2
 412. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p38.4
 413. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=10#viii_1-p63.4
 414. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=11#viii_1-p63.5
 415. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.iii.ii-p111.1
 416. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i_5-p34.3
 417. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ix-p15.2
 418. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.vi-p39.1
 419. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p139.2
 420. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.vii-p42.5
 421. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.iv-p57.2
 422. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=4#i_3-p123.1
 423. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.iii.iii-p33.1
 424. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#i_3-p21.1
 425. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.v-p56.3
 426. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.vi-p13.3
 427. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.vii-p28.5
 428. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi-p77.1
 429. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi_1-p19.1
 430. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi_1-p21.2
 431. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p189.1
 432. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii_1-p26.3
 433. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii_2-p42.1
 434. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.v-p54.4
 435. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i_3-p94.2
 436. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=2#ix-p48.1
 437. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.ii-p148.4
 438. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=3#i_3-p132.2
 439. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#ix_1-p24.2
 440. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vii.ii-p60.1
 441. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=11#ix_1-p41.2
 442. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p83.2
 443. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=3#i_3-p131.1
 444. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii_2-p22.1
 445. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=4#vii_2-p22.2
 446. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=10#iv.iii.ii-p117.1
 447. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iv.ii-p154.3
 448. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.ii-p31.1
 449. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=4#i_3-p109.1
 450. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=6#v-p62.3
 451. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=6#vii.ii-p37.1
 452. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=7#ix_1-p24.3
 453. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iv.iii.iii-p34.12
 454. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vi.iv-p59.1
 455. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.ii-p60.2
 456. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#i_3-p62.1
 457. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vii_1-p25.5
 458. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=2#vi.v-p43.4
 459. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.v-p43.5
 460. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iv.ii-p67.1
 461. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vii_1-p25.6
 462. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#i_3-p89.7
 463. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#viii_2-p87.1
 464. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=6#viii_2-p87.2
 465. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii-p87.4
 466. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii-p149.4
 467. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vi.ii-p17.2
 468. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii.v-p41.1
 469. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#i_3-p111.2
 470. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vi.iv-p32.2
 471. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=21#viii_2-p92.10
 472. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=14#v-p20.3
 473. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#vi.iv-p42.2
 474. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=11#i_3-p113.3
 475. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=23#iv.iii.iv-p93.1
 476. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=23#vii-p52.5
 477. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=30#vii-p24.3
 478. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#i_3-p131.2
 479. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#i_3-p108.2
 480. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi-p69.3
 481. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=13#v.v-p33.4
 482. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p82.3
 483. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=21&scrV=3#v-p59.3
 484. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=3#ix-p18.1
 485. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=3#vi.ii-p30.1
 486. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=9#v-p35.3
 487. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=10#v-p35.4
 488. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=1#i_3-p89.4
 489. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v-p19.1
 490. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#vi_1-p20.1
 491. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=6#iv.ii-p45.1
 492. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=6#iv.ii-p61.2
 493. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=1#vi.ii-p15.2
 494. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=5#vii-p149.3
 495. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=6#vi-p78.5
 496. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=7#vi-p78.6
 497. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=8#iv.ii-p76.2
 498. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=8#v.v-p13.1
 499. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=8#viii_2-p92.11
 500. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=10#i_5-p43.4
 501. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=28&scrV=4#v-p60.1
 502. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=22#viii_1-p25.2
 503. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=22#viii_1-p35.2
 504. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#vi-p90.1
 505. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#vi-p168.1
 506. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#vii.ii-p23.2
 507. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#vi-p191.1
 508. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=2#vi-p168.2
 509. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=3#viii-p20.4
 510. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=4#viii-p20.5
 511. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#iv.ii-p186.1
 512. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p74.4
 513. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#vi-p77.2
 514. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=6#vii.iv-p24.4
 515. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#i_5-p47.4
 516. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=6#v-p59.2
 517. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#v.iv-p37.1
 518. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#v.iv-p39.7
 519. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#v.iv-p47.3
 520. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#viii_1-p68.1
 521. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#vii.iv-p42.4
 522. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=9#v.iii-p43.5
 523. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=10#v.iii-p43.6
 524. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=15#vi.ii-p12.4
 525. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=19#viii-p42.1
 526. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=19#viii_1-p23.1
 527. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=3#i_3-p93.2
 528. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=3#viii_2-p92.7
 529. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=27#viii_1-p34.5
 530. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#vi.ii-p25.3
 531. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=1#vii-p114.2
 532. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=16#v-p20.4
 533. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=34#v.v-p68.1
 534. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=5#vi.iii-p29.1
 535. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=5#vi.iv-p45.1
 536. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=6#vi_1-p57.3
 537. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=9#iv.ii-p154.4
 538. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=1#viii_1-p35.4
 539. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=8#iv.iii.iv-p152.3
 540. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=17#v-p59.1
 541. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=9#i_5-p43.3
 542. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=8#vi-p166.3
 543. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=11#i_3-p89.3
 544. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=4#ix-p47.1
 545. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=4#viii_1-p34.6
 546. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=5#iv.iii.ii-p82.4
 547. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=20#vii_1-p11.19
 548. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=1#iv.ii-p151.2
 549. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p102.2
 550. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=2#viii_2-p28.5
 551. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=6#ix-p52.4
 552. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=6#viii_2-p18.10
 553. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=11#vii_1-p28.1
 554. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=11#vii.vi-p51.1
 555. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=29#vii.iv-p44.1
 556. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=1#vii_2-p24.1
 557. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=12#vi_1-p62.2
 558. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=12#vii.iv-p26.3
 559. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=20#v.iv-p28.3
 560. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=32#iv.ii-p53.2
 561. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=1#vii_2-p17.3
 562. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p139.1
 563. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p13.8
 564. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#viii-p21.1
 565. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=21#iv.ii-p135.1
 566. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=2#vi-p50.2
 567. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=2#vii.ii-p23.1
 568. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=3#vi-p50.3
 569. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#vi-p153.1
 570. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p111.1
 571. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=6#vii-p73.1
 572. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=8#vi-p79.2
 573. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=12#vi-p79.3
 574. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p52.1
 575. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p102.1
 576. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p84.1
 577. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p86.3
 578. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=54&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p93.3
 579. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=12#i_5-p39.6
 580. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=17#iv.ii-p74.3
 581. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=19#vii.v-p40.2
 582. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=3#vii-p112.1
 583. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=8#iv.ii-p184.2
 584. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=2#vii_1-p29.4
 585. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=3#vi.v-p46.3
 586. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=11#viii_1-p64.2
 587. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=8#vii_1-p35.2
 588. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=8#vi.ii-p24.3
 589. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=8#vii.v-p38.1
 590. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=4#i_3-p132.3
 591. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=8#vi.ii-p29.1
 592. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=1#ix-p51.1
 593. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=5#vii_2-p17.4
 594. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p51.1
 595. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=67&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p93.2
 596. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=67&scrV=5#ix-p16.1
 597. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=16#viii_1-p68.3
 598. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=17#viii_1-p68.4
 599. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=17#vii.iv-p42.1
 600. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=18#vii.iv-p42.2
 601. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=19#v-p75.1
 602. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=35#vii_2-p38.4
 603. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=4#vi-p44.3
 604. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p26.1
 605. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#v-p62.2
 606. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#vi-p201.2
 607. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#v.iii-p44.1
 608. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#v.iii-p43.1
 609. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=2#vii-p117.2
 610. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=24#iv.iii.iv-p102.2
 611. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=25#i_3-p93.3
 612. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=25#i_3-p134.1
 613. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=27#viii-p32.2
 614. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#viii-p32.3
 615. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=12#ix-p48.2
 616. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=10#iv.iii.ii-p64.1
 617. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=18#vii-p24.4
 618. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=18#v.v-p23.1
 619. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=18#v.v-p38.1
 620. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=18#v.v-p52.9
 621. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=19#v-p67.3
 622. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=19#v.v-p23.2
 623. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=19#v.v-p52.10
 624. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=20#v.v-p51.1
 625. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=22#v.v-p49.1
 626. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=22#v.v-p58.1
 627. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=32#v.v-p58.2
 628. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=38#v-p38.2
 629. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=41#viii_1-p80.1
 630. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=41#v.v-p39.1
 631. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=49#v.iv-p24.3
 632. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=56#v.v-p50.1
 633. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p17.2
 634. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=19#vi.v-p47.4
 635. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=11#v-p40.1
 636. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p65.1
 637. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p78.4
 638. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#ix-p52.2
 639. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=7#ix-p52.3
 640. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p97.6
 641. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=11#v.iii-p43.7
 642. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=8#vi-p57.1
 643. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=8#vii_2-p53.2
 644. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=8#ix_1-p47.1
 645. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=4#vi.ii-p15.3
 646. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=8#vi-p110.2
 647. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=8#i_5-p39.7
 648. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=9#i_5-p39.8
 649. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=7#iv.ii-p189.2
 650. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=17#vii_2-p38.3
 651. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=27#iv.iii.iii-p34.1
 652. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=27#vii.iii-p38.5
 653. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=27#vii.iv-p4.1
 654. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=32#vi-p81.1
 655. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=33#vi-p81.2
 656. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=2#ix-p52.1
 657. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=2#vii.v-p16.1
 658. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=3#v.iv-p24.2
 659. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#viii_1-p73.6
 660. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#v.iv-p11.1
 661. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=12#viii_1-p73.7
 662. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=12#v.iv-p11.2
 663. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=18#viii_1-p35.7
 664. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=9#vii-p24.1
 665. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=9#v.v-p22.1
 666. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=9#v.v-p37.1
 667. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=10#v.v-p37.2
 668. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=4#vii_2-p38.2
 669. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=8#iv.iii.ii-p109.1
 670. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=98&scrV=4#iv.iii.ii-p61.1
 671. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=6#vi.ii-p38.1
 672. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=100&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p61.2
 673. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=100&scrV=2#vii_1-p41.1
 674. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p87.3
 675. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p86.1
 676. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=23#v.iii-p39.1
 677. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=28#iii-p9.1
 678. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p110.2
 679. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=1#ix-p25.1
 680. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=3#vi-p196.4
 681. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=9#viii_1-p28.1
 682. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=12#vi-p196.1
 683. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=13#i_3-p46.1
 684. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=14#viii_1-p28.2
 685. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=19#i_3-p106.3
 686. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p12.2
 687. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p34.5
 688. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=20#iv.iii.iv-p32.3
 689. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=20#vi.vi-p28.2
 690. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=20#vii.iv-p31.1
 691. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=20#vii.iv-p40.1
 692. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=21#iv.iii.iv-p32.4
 693. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=21#v.iv-p36.4
 694. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=22#iv.iii.ii-p46.1
 695. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=2#vii.v-p26.1
 696. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p34.9
 697. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=29#vii.v-p21.2
 698. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=29#vii.v-p42.1
 699. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=31#vi.v-p43.2
 700. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=19#vii-p30.2
 701. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=19#v.iii-p37.8
 702. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p86.2
 703. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=13#v.v-p53.1
 704. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=14#v.v-p52.8
 705. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=14#v.v-p53.2
 706. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=15#v-p26.1
 707. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=24#vi.iv-p61.3
 708. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=45#vi-p177.3
 709. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=20#v.iii-p37.4
 710. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=2#v.iv-p16.2
 711. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p100.1
 712. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=9#vii_2-p38.1
 713. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=1#ix-p51.2
 714. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=6#vii_2-p22.3
 715. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=7#vii_2-p22.4
 716. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p14.1
 717. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=1#v-p46.7
 718. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=1#ix-p59.1
 719. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#i_3-p122.1
 720. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=8#vi.ii-p18.2
 721. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=16#v-p19.2
 722. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=1#iv.ii-p148.3
 723. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=1#iv.ii-p63.1
 724. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=10#viii_2-p55.1
 725. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=11#viii_1-p35.3
 726. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#iv.iii.iii-p74.2
 727. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#vi_1-p65.3
 728. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=7#iv.iii.ii-p58.4
 729. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=11#vii_1-p8.3
 730. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=37#iv.iii.iv-p102.3
 731. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=37#vii-p107.5
 732. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=37#vi_1-p28.1
 733. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=50#vii-p143.6
 734. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=50#vii_1-p8.4
 735. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=56#viii_1-p64.1
 736. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=60#iv.iii.iv-p151.2
 737. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=63#i_5-p34.2
 738. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=68#v.v-p64.1
 739. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=73#iv.ii-p182.2
 740. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=73#vii.iv-p53.1
 741. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=86#vi_1-p57.6
 742. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=91#iv.iii.iv-p58.1
 743. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=92#vii_1-p8.6
 744. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=93#iv.iii.iv-p140.1
 745. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=94#i_3-p89.2
 746. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=94#ix-p61.1
 747. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=94#viii_2-p85.1
 748. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=97#vi.vi-p39.2
 749. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=111#v.iii-p36.1
 750. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=115#vii-p107.6
 751. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=120#vii_2-p17.5
 752. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=133#vii-p62.4
 753. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=133#viii-p37.1
 754. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=136#iv.iii.ii-p45.1
 755. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=164#iv.ii-p45.3
 756. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=2#ix-p49.2
 757. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=2#vii.iv-p46.4
 758. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=123&scrV=1#i_3-p119.1
 759. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=8#i_3-p32.2
 760. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=2#vi_1-p10.1
 761. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=3#viii_1-p29.1
 762. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=2#vii_2-p25.1
 763. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=3#vii_2-p25.2
 764. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=3#vi-p77.4
 765. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=4#vi-p77.5
 766. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=2#vii.v-p40.1
 767. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=136&scrV=0#iv.ii-p124.2
 768. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=136&scrV=25#v-p28.1
 769. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=1#vii.iv-p48.1
 770. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=2#iv.iii.ii-p83.5
 771. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=3#vii_2-p53.1
 772. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#vi-p41.1
 773. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=2#vii-p36.1
 774. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#i_3-p76.3
 775. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=14#i_3-p26.4
 776. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=4#i_5-p43.5
 777. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#vi-p77.3
 778. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=8#vi.ii-p15.4
 779. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=10#iv.iii.iv-p23.1
 780. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=10#iv.iii.iv-p55.1
 781. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p63.4
 782. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=0#vi_1-p45.1
 783. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=3#vii_2-p24.2
 784. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=9#v.v-p64.2
 785. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=10#ix-p13.1
 786. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=15#i_3-p30.1
 787. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=15#vii_1-p35.6
 788. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=16#v-p34.1
 789. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=9#v-p45.1
 790. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=15#v.iii-p37.2
 791. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=18#v.iii-p37.3
 792. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=19#iv.iii.ii-p83.3
 793. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p83.4
 794. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=6#iv.iii.iv-p32.2
 795. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=8#iv.iii.iv-p32.1
 796. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=149&scrV=4#viii_1-p34.4
 797. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_5-p37.1
 798. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.iii-p45.2
 799. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p33.3
 800. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.v-p43.2
 801. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v-p54.4
 802. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii-p107.7
 803. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi.ii-p75.3
 804. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii-p67.2
 805. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi-p56.1
 806. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=22#v.ii-p46.1
 807. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=22#viii_1-p51.2
 808. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=6#vi.vi-p29.1
 809. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.v-p22.2
 810. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vii.v-p9.5
 811. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vi.v-p22.3
 812. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.v-p11.1
 813. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=27#vii.v-p11.2
 814. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=30#vi.v-p31.1
 815. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iv.iii.iii-p76.1
 816. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iv.iii.iii-p135.7
 817. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=31#vii.v-p11.3
 818. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=17#v.ii-p48.6
 819. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=18#v.ii-p48.7
 820. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v-p47.2
 821. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vi_1-p50.3
 822. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=17#ix_1-p42.3
 823. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv.ii-p115.1
 824. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vi_1-p50.4
 825. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=15#vi-p45.2
 826. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=31#vi-p81.3
 827. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iv.iii.iv-p61.1
 828. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iv.iii.iii-p63.6
 829. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=20#i_5-p35.1
 830. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=20#i_5-p39.2
 831. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=20#vi.ii-p14.3
 832. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=20#i_5-p37.4
 833. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=27#vii-p139.4
 834. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iv.iii.iii-p93.1
 835. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p69.2
 836. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vi_1-p64.5
 837. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p149.3
 838. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p37.3
 839. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iv.iii.ii-p21.1
 840. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#vii.iv-p28.1
 841. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vi_1-p64.6
 842. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p37.1
 843. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=32#vi-p123.3
 844. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=24#i_5-p39.1
 845. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=6#i_5-p37.5
 846. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=12#vii.v-p23.2
 847. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p60.3
 848. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=27#iv.iii.ii-p15.3
 849. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=2#v-p19.4
 850. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=2#v-p57.1
 851. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=9#i_5-p41.1
 852. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=24#i_5-p35.2
 853. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vii-p52.7
 854. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=25#i_5-p35.3
 855. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=25#vii-p52.8
 856. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=5#v-p21.5
 857. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=5#vi_1-p57.4
 858. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=31#vii-p46.3
 859. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=29#vi-p123.2
 860. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p132.1
 861. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=19#i_5-p39.5
 862. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=26&scrV=26#vii-p37.2
 863. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=6#i_5-p42.1
 864. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=17#i_5-p31.1
 865. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iv.iii.iv-p51.2
 866. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=13#vi-p60.4
 867. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=21#vii-p65.2
 868. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=21#vi_1-p29.3
 869. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=23#i_5-p42.2
 870. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=29&scrV=27#i_5-p36.4
 871. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=8#v-p46.3
 872. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=8#viii-p26.1
 873. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p13.7
 874. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=9#v-p54.3
 875. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=9#vii-p32.4
 876. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=9#viii-p26.2
 877. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=9#v.iii-p41.1
 878. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=33&scrV=26#iv.ii-p179.1
 879. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v-p26.4
 880. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=4&scrV=9#i_5-p32.2
 881. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p104.3
 882. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.ii-p112.1
 883. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.ii-p151.1
 884. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.ii-p163.1
 885. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=2#i_3-p120.1
 886. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.iv-p48.3
 887. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=20#vi-p69.2
 888. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.ii-p12.3
 889. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iv.ii-p106.2
 890. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=7#i_3-p26.6
 891. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ix-p24.2
 892. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=0#viii_1-p17.3
 893. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.iii.iv-p24.4
 894. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i_3-p89.5
 895. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i_3-p122.2
 896. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii_1-p11.14
 897. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii.vii-p59.2
 898. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=16#viii_2-p82.1
 899. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.iii.iii-p137.2
 900. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii_2-p57.1
 901. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii_2-p57.2
 902. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii_2-p57.3
 903. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.vi-p21.3
 904. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=6#viii_1-p60.1
 905. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=7#viii_1-p60.2
 906. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p108.1
 907. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p36.1
 908. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi-p138.1
 909. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.iii-p46.6
 910. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#viii_2-p39.6
 911. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vi.v-p26.4
 912. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=2#viii_2-p18.14
 913. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.iii.ii-p89.1
 914. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vii-p67.1
 915. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p151.1
 916. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iv.iii.ii-p110.1
 917. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=5#viii-p28.1
 918. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii_2-p6.6
 919. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii_2-p33.1
 920. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vii_2-p33.2
 921. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii_2-p54.1
 922. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.v-p31.7
 923. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.v-p26.1
 924. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#viii_2-p18.15
 925. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=8#viii_2-p41.1
 926. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=9#viii_2-p41.2
 927. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iv.iii.ii-p101.3
 928. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=13#iv.iii.ii-p101.2
 929. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=13#viii-p28.4
 930. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#i_3-p19.1
 931. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.v-p26.2
 932. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#viii_2-p18.16
 933. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p35.3
 934. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vii.iv-p31.5
 935. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#viii_2-p18.17
 936. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=4#viii_2-p18.18
 937. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=4#viii_2-p18.19
 938. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=9#viii_1-p65.1
 939. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=9#viii-p53.2
 940. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=10#vii_2-p17.6
 941. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p137.1
 942. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p102.1
 943. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=13#iv.iii.iii-p61.1
 944. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=16#iv.ii-p61.7
 945. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=16#viii-p59.1
 946. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=16#vi.ii-p15.6
 947. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=27&scrV=4#ix_1-p41.5
 948. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#v.v-p39.2
 949. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#viii_1-p35.1
 950. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=21#vi-p176.2
 951. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=29#v.v-p64.3
 952. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=13#vii_1-p11.2
 953. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=23#iv.iii.ii-p88.1
 954. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=12#v.iii-p49.3
 955. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=17#v-p38.6
 956. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=17#vi-p196.3
 957. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=17#vii.ii-p23.3
 958. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=15#vi-p138.2
 959. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=17#v.iii-p49.1
 960. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=18#vii.iii-p18.1
 961. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=29#vii-p97.4
 962. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p54.2
 963. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=4#vii.iv-p15.1
 964. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=1#vi.v-p56.4
 965. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=4#vi.iii-p46.7
 966. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=4#viii_2-p39.7
 967. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#vii_1-p28.2
 968. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#viii_2-p61.1
 969. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=22#vii_1-p35.4
 970. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=24#iv.iii.ii-p15.6
 971. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=24#iv.iii.iii-p78.6
 972. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=25#vi-p149.1
 973. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=25#vi-p177.1
 974. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=25#vi-p195.1
 975. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=5#viii_2-p88.1
 976. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#vii.iv-p15.2
 977. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=17#vii_1-p11.3
 978. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=22#vi-p149.2
 979. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=9#v.v-p48.2
 980. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=9#v.v-p61.1
 981. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=3#v-p35.1
 982. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=4#v-p35.2
 983. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p54.1
 984. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=2#vii.iv-p15.3
 985. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=9#ix-p51.5
 986. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#i_3-p42.3
 987. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=16#i_3-p45.2
 988. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p98.2
 989. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=9#ix-p52.7
 990. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=1#v.iv-p7.2
 991. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iii-p46.1
 992. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iii-p46.2
 993. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=3#vi.iii-p54.1
 994. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#iv.iii.iii-p107.1
 995. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#vi-p45.1
 996. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#vi.iii-p48.2
 997. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#vi.iii-p48.3
 998. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#viii_2-p40.2
 999. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=8#vii-p83.3
1000. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=8#viii_2-p18.20
1001. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=8#ix_1-p33.2
1002. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#ix_1-p48.1
1003. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#vi-p45.3
1004. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#vi.iii-p26.3
1005. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#vi.v-p43.9
1006. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=9#iv.ii-p182.3
1007. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=10#ix_1-p34.1
1008. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=4#vi.vi-p9.2
1009. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=7#iv.iii.iv-p87.4
1010. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=7#vi-p138.7
1011. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=8#vi-p178.2
1012. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=9#vi-p110.3
1013. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=9#vi-p12.3
1014. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=9#vi-p178.3
1015. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=4#viii_2-p87.3
1016. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=2#vii-p83.4
1017. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=14#vii_2-p54.2
1018. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#i_3-p134.3
1019. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#iv.iii.iii-p34.4
1020. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=16#vii_2-p52.1
1021. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=19#vi-p166.1
1022. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=2#v.iv-p7.1
1023. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#viii_2-p26.4
1024. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=9#vi.ii-p37.1
1025. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=1#ix-p52.6
1026. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=2#viii-p48.1
1027. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=2#vi.iv-p71.3
1028. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=17#vii_1-p31.1
1029. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=20#vi-p195.5
1030. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=7#viii_1-p63.6
1031. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=1#viii_2-p28.4
1032. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=9#v.v-p27.6
1033. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=16#iv.ii-p141.1
1034. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=16#i_3-p33.3
1035. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=7#vi.ii-p23.1
1036. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=8#i_3-p28.1
1037. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=8#iv.ii-p182.1
1038. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=19#vi.v-p60.3
1039. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=24#iv.ii-p186.2
1040. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=24#vi.ii-p39.5
1041. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#i_3-p106.4
1042. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#i_3-p134.2
1043. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p112.2
1044. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p95.1
1045. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii_1-p11.7
1046. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vi-p197.2
1047. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=27#vii_1-p11.4
1048. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iv.ii-p87.1
1049. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iv.ii-p72.1
1050. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i_3-p53.2
1051. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=6#i_3-p53.3
1052. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi-p177.2
1053. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p176.1
1054. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p88.2
1055. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii_2-p17.2
1056. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vi-p17.1
1057. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=21#vii-p32.7
1058. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iv.iii.ii-p72.1
1059. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.ii-p28.1
1060. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=17#iv.ii-p48.2
1061. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=17#i_5-p25.3
1062. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iv.iii.iv-p121.10
1063. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iv.iii.iv-p121.13
1064. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=14&scrV=7#ix-p51.3
1065. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=9#iv.iii.iv-p112.2
1066. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=9#vii-p57.2
1067. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=11#vi_1-p62.4
1068. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=13#vii-p32.6
1069. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=13#vi_1-p62.3
1070. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.v-p48.1
1071. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p80.1
1072. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vii_1-p11.6
1073. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=5#viii_2-p18.21
1074. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#viii_2-p18.22
1075. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=23#vii_1-p29.2
1076. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#i_3-p106.2
1077. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#vii_1-p29.3
1078. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=28&scrV=6#iv.iii.iii-p116.2
1079. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=28&scrV=6#x-p3.3
1080. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=10#i_5-p45.1
1081. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=11#iv.ii-p146.1
1082. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=30&scrV=21#viii_2-p92.2
1083. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=20#iv.ii-p186.3
1084. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=34#vii.ii-p23.5
1085. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=17#vii_2-p17.1
1086. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=5#i_3-p82.1
1087. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=6#i_3-p82.2
1088. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p69.1
1089. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=36&scrV=12#vii_2-p18.2
1090. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=17#iv.iii.iv-p80.2
1091. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=20#vii.ii-p16.2
1092. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii-p153.4
1093. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=24#i_3-p93.1
1094. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=41#i_3-p119.2
1095. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=41#vi.ii-p15.1
1096. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=4#viii_1-p63.3
1097. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=28#vii_2-p6.2
1098. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii_2-p49.1
1099. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.iii-p67.3
1100. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vii_1-p11.18
1101. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.ii-p76.1
1102. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=11&scrV=19#iv.iii.iv-p101.1
1103. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=13&scrV=19#vi_1-p29.2
1104. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.v-p46.1
1105. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vii.iv-p28.5
1106. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vii-p63.1
1107. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=34#vii-p63.2
1108. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p58.1
1109. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=14#v.v-p61.4
1110. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#vi-p85.1
1111. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p74.1
1112. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=12#vi-p205.1
1113. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=25#ix_1-p42.2
1114. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=0#iv.ii-p146.2
1115. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p114.1
1116. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=22#ix-p51.4
1117. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iv.iii.iv-p112.1
1118. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iv.iii.iv-p101.2
1119. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#iv.iii.iv-p101.3
1120. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=28#viii_2-p82.2
1121. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=37#iv.ii-p146.3
1122. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=37#i_5-p45.2
1123. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=26#ix_1-p34.2
1124. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=38&scrV=23#iv.iii.ii-p87.1
1125. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=46&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p52.2
1126. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.iii-p48.2
1127. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii.vi-p49.2
1128. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vi_1-p20.2
1129. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=37#vi_1-p20.3
1130. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.v-p68.2
1131. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=17#viii_1-p34.7
1132. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.v-p68.3
1133. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii.iv-p46.1
1134. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=28#v.v-p52.7
1135. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#viii_1-p75.1
1136. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=17#viii_1-p75.1
1137. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=30#iv.iii.ii-p90.5
1138. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii.v-p20.2
1139. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.ii-p45.2
1140. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.ii-p74.2
1141. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p68.2
1142. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=8&scrV=18#vi.iv-p11.1
1143. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p119.2
1144. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p119.3
1145. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii_2-p16.1
1146. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=8#ix-p58.1
1147. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi-p150.1
1148. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=9#ix-p58.2
1149. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=17#iv.ii-p122.3
1150. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iv.ii-p34.1
1151. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iv.ii-p50.1
1152. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iv.ii-p85.1
1153. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=21#vi.ii-p37.4
1154. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=22#iv.ii-p85.2
1155. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=26#vi.iii-p26.4
1156. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vii_2-p6.7
1157. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vi.iv-p11.2
1158. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vii_2-p6.8
1159. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p63.3
1160. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.iii.iii-p42.4
1161. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p55.5
1162. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p22.3
1163. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p131.1
1164. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p132.2
1165. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=18#i_3-p111.1
1166. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p129.4
1167. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=3#i_3-p94.1
1168. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p93.4
1169. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii_1-p11.8
1170. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.iv-p71.4
1171. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vii_2-p51.1
1172. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=8#viii-p26.4
1173. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv.iii.ii-p16.1
1174. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=14#ix-p15.1
1175. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=8&scrV=2#viii_2-p84.1
1176. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.iv-p31.6
1177. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vi.vi-p39.3
1178. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vii_1-p11.9
1179. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p69.2
1180. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=2#i_3-p2.5
1181. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=9#vi-p110.4
1182. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=9#vi-p178.1
1183. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vii_1-p11.10
1184. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=2#vi.v-p54.5
1185. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v-p49.1
1186. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=18#vii_1-p11.17
1187. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iv.ii-p161.1
1188. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=3#i_3-p66.1
1189. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iv.ii-p179.3
1190. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v-p27.1
1191. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v-p68.1
1192. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii_2-p25.3
1193. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii-p65.1
1194. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi_1-p29.4
1195. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p148.3
1196. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=26#vii_1-p11.11
1197. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p148.1
1198. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=3#viii-p50.3
1199. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iii-p16.1
1200. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=9&scrV=7#viii_2-p92.5
1201. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p133.2
1202. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.iii-p12.3
1203. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p74.1
1204. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vii-p115.1
1205. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.iv-p50.1
1206. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vi.v-p26.3
1207. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.v-p13.1
1208. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#viii_2-p18.23
1209. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi.iii-p56.2
1210. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi.v-p47.2
1211. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi.iii-p56.3
1212. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi.v-p47.3
1213. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii-p153.2
1214. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vi-p175.1
1215. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vi-p176.1
1216. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vi-p138.5
1217. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vi-p196.2
1218. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vi-p196.5
1219. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vii.ii-p23.4
1220. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii_2-p16.3
1221. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=13#ix_1-p24.1
1222. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ii-p7.1
1223. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=18#viii_2-p90.3
1224. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.v-p37.1
1225. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.ii-p61.3
1226. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi.v-p60.4
1227. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi_1-p50.1
1228. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p22.4
1229. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=15#viii_1-p32.1
1230. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p94.1
1231. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii-p91.2
1232. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii-p86.3
1233. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii-p86.4
1234. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.iv-p11.3
1235. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii-p87.2
1236. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p87.3
1237. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iv.ii-p31.1
1238. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iv.iii.ii-p27.1
1239. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iv.ii-p31.2
1240. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iv.iii.ii-p27.2
1241. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=6#vii.vii-p66.2
1242. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.ii-p48.1
1243. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv.ii-p61.4
1244. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#i_3-p80.3
1245. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#viii_2-p18.24
1246. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iv.ii-p43.1
1247. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vi-p89.1
1248. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#vi.v-p26.5
1249. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#viii_2-p18.25
1250. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=9#viii_2-p82.3
1251. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii-p50.1
1252. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#i_3-p52.1
1253. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.iii.iv-p53.1
1254. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.iii.ii-p22.1
1255. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii_1-p25.4
1256. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#ix-p57.1
1257. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p149.1
1258. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_3-p120.3
1259. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#ix-p57.2
1260. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii_2-p24.4
1261. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi-p201.1
1262. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.iv-p16.1
1263. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi-p13.4
1264. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p129.6
1265. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii-p41.1
1266. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p24.2
1267. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.v-p30.1
1268. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.v-p33.5
1269. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi-p34.1
1270. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#i_3-p46.2
1271. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#viii-p51.1
1272. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p32.1
1273. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ix_1-p26.1
1274. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#i_3-p35.1
1275. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi.v-p38.2
1276. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.vi-p30.6
1277. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii-p65.3
1278. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#i_1-p16.1
1279. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vii-p34.2
1280. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vii-p129.1
1281. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p1.1
1282. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=2#i_1-p17.1
1283. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.iii-p1.1
1284. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii-p45.1
1285. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=3#viii-p7.2
1286. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.iii-p14.1
1287. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.iii-p32.1
1288. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=5#i_1-p18.1
1289. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.iv-p1.1
1290. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=6#i_1-p18.2
1291. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iv-p8.1
1292. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=7#i_1-p19.1
1293. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.v-p1.1
1294. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=8#i_1-p20.1
1295. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi_1-p4.1
1296. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi_1-p1.1
1297. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=9#i_1-p20.2
1298. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vi_1-p5.1
1299. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i_1-p21.1
1300. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii-p104.3
1301. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii-p143.4
1302. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi_1-p6.1
1303. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii_1-p1.1
1304. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#i_1-p22.1
1305. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii-p143.5
1306. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.iii-p10.6
1307. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.iii-p20.2
1308. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#viii_1-p1.1
1309. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.iii-p27.1
1310. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.ii-p25.1
1311. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi-p115.1
1312. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.ii-p9.1
1313. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.iii.ii-p13.3
1314. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.iii.ii-p58.2
1315. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv.iii.iv-p87.1
1316. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iv.iii.ii-p114.2
1317. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=29#iv.iii.iv-p93.2
1318. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=37#viii-p4.1
1319. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=39#viii-p4.3
1320. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#vi-p127.2
1321. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#v-p36.2
1322. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#vii.vii-p42.2
1323. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#i_3-p81.1
1324. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#i_5-p25.1
1325. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vii_2-p40.3
1326. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iv.ii-p1.1
1327. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=7#iv.ii-p98.1
1328. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iv.ii-p109.1
1329. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iv.ii-p140.1
1330. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vi-p110.1
1331. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.iv-p40.2
1332. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#i_3-p2.1
1333. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#i_3-p45.1
1334. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi-p114.1
1335. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi-p13.1
1336. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vi-p114.2
1337. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=22#i_3-p121.3
1338. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=23#i_3-p121.4
1339. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#iv.iii.iii-p58.2
1340. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#vii-p52.9
1341. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#i_3-p31.1
1342. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#i_3-p54.2
1343. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=26#i_3-p31.2
1344. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=27#v-p47.1
1345. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=32#iv.ii-p185.3
1346. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=32#v.iii-p43.3
1347. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v-p44.2
1348. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#iv.iii.iv-p3.1
1349. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#iv.iii.iii-p2.3
1350. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.iii-p35.2
1351. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#vi_1-p64.3
1352. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#vi.iv-p48.1
1353. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#vi.iv-p71.1
1354. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#v-p45.2
1355. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#v-p77.1
1356. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iv.ii-p188.1
1357. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iv.ii-p144.1
1358. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vi-p118.2
1359. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#i_3-p42.2
1360. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.iii-p43.8
1361. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p121.7
1362. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#i_3-p104.4
1363. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#iv.iii.iv-p4.1
1364. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv.iii.iv-p152.2
1365. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv.iii.iv-p54.3
1366. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=2#ix-p50.2
1367. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii_2-p48.1
1368. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.iii-p37.6
1369. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vi.iii-p67.1
1370. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vi.iv-p40.1
1371. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.iv-p21.1
1372. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=15#viii_1-p20.4
1373. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=15#vii_2-p48.2
1374. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=29#iv.iii.iii-p122.4
1375. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=31#v.ii-p18.3
1376. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi-p156.1
1377. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=19#vii_2-p48.3
1378. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=28#viii_2-p72.1
1379. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=38#iv.iii.iii-p98.1
1380. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=7#iv.iii.iii-p32.2
1381. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vi-p40.1
1382. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vi-p138.3
1383. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii_2-p26.1
1384. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=30#i_3-p45.3
1385. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vi.iii-p11.2
1386. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#i_5-p30.1
1387. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.vi-p15.1
1388. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#iv.iii.iv-p72.3
1389. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vi.vi-p15.2
1390. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#ix_1-p39.2
1391. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=24#vi.iii-p41.2
1392. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=26#viii-p17.5
1393. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.iii.iii-p24.1
1394. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#vi-p78.3
1395. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=34#iv.iii.iv-p121.8
1396. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=43#iv.iii.iii-p59.1
1397. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=45#viii_1-p56.1
1398. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=50#iv.iii.iv-p53.2
1399. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vii.vi-p24.1
1400. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=19#viii-p3.1
1401. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=19#v.ii-p37.4
1402. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=19#v.ii-p46.3
1403. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=22#vi_1-p50.2
1404. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vii.vi-p24.2
1405. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=25#vi_1-p40.3
1406. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=25#vii.vi-p24.3
1407. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=30#vii.vii-p43.4
1408. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=39#v.ii-p37.2
1409. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=39#vi_1-p40.4
1410. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=41#vi.iii-p68.5
1411. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.iii-p48.4
1412. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iv.ii-p40.2
1413. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iv.ii-p42.1
1414. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iv.ii-p30.1
1415. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#i_5-p24.1
1416. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii-p75.2
1417. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii-p109.1
1418. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv.iii.ii-p44.1
1419. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iv.iii.iv-p50.3
1420. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iv.iii.ii-p44.2
1421. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p57.2
1422. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii_1-p11.1
1423. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=19#vii-p57.1
1424. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=22#v.iv-p23.1
1425. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=25#vii-p70.1
1426. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.v-p62.1
1427. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#viii_1-p34.1
1428. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=36#v-p61.1
1429. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.v-p26.1
1430. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.v-p35.2
1431. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=8#v.v-p65.4
1432. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii_1-p26.4
1433. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.v-p65.5
1434. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#i_5-p18.1
1435. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#vi.v-p50.1
1436. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.iv-p20.6
1437. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vii.vii-p12.1
1438. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vi-p161.1
1439. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#vii-p139.2
1440. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#viii-p23.2
1441. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#viii_1-p10.3
1442. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#vi.iii-p24.1
1443. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#vi.iv-p29.4
1444. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vii-p47.2
1445. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#viii-p23.3
1446. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#v.iv-p20.7
1447. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vii_1-p5.2
1448. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#viii_1-p10.4
1449. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vi.iii-p24.2
1450. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vii-p40.1
1451. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vi_1-p27.1
1452. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vii-p104.6
1453. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vi_1-p51.1
1454. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=27#vi.ii-p67.1
1455. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#i_1-p25.1
1456. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#i_5-p1.1
1457. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#i_1-p26.1
1458. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vi.ii-p1.1
1459. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=3#i_1-p27.1
1460. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vi.iii-p1.1
1461. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=4#i_1-p28.1
1462. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vi.iv-p1.1
1463. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#i_1-p29.1
1464. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#i_1-p30.1
1465. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#i_5-p6.1
1466. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vi.v-p1.1
1467. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vi.vi-p1.1
1468. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vii_2-p3.1
1469. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=6#i_1-p31.1
1470. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vii_2-p1.1
1471. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vii_2-p4.1
1472. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vii_2-p46.1
1473. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=8#vii_2-p5.1
1474. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=8#vii_2-p55.1
1475. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=9#i_5-p22.1
1476. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=15#v.iv-p29.1
1477. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=26#vii.iii-p27.2
1478. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=0#vi-p107.1
1479. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#i_3-p104.5
1480. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#viii_1-p76.2
1481. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#v.iv-p36.5
1482. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#v.iv-p47.4
1483. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#vi.iii-p68.4
1484. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vi-p161.2
1485. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=19#iv.ii-p28.1
1486. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=24#vi-p38.1
1487. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=24#vi-p55.1
1488. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=26#v-p38.3
1489. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=27#v-p38.4
1490. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=28#v-p38.5
1491. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=28#vi-p38.2
1492. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=32#vi-p111.2
1493. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vii.v-p9.3
1494. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=20#vii.vi-p13.2
1495. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=24#v-p67.1
1496. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#vii.vii-p28.2
1497. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#v.ii-p48.2
1498. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=13#v-p64.1
1499. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#i_5-p30.2
1500. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#ix-p46.2
1501. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vi.iv-p63.4
1502. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vi.iv-p70.3
1503. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iv.iii.iii-p34.11
1504. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#vi.iii-p53.2
1505. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#vii.ii-p34.1
1506. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.iii-p10.5
1507. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=29#iv.iii.iv-p82.1
1508. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=30#iv.iii.iv-p82.2
1509. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=43#iv.iii.iii-p16.1
1510. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=18#v.v-p26.2
1511. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#iv.iii.iv-p35.1
1512. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vii.vii-p68.1
1513. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=32#v-p42.1
1514. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=10#viii_2-p65.1
1515. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=12#v.iv-p28.2
1516. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=14#iv.ii-p128.1
1517. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=31#viii_1-p78.2
1518. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=46#iv.iii.iii-p129.1
1519. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=15#vi-p32.2
1520. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#vi.iv-p32.1
1521. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv.iii.iii-p14.3
1522. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv.iii.iii-p21.1
1523. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv.iii.iii-p70.2
1524. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv.ii-p4.2
1525. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#viii-p17.12
1526. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#vii.ii-p56.2
1527. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=44#viii_1-p20.5
1528. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=15#vi_1-p29.1
1529. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=27#i_5-p18.4
1530. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#iv.iii.iii-p137.3
1531. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=33#vii-p43.2
1532. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=39#iv.iii.iv-p14.9
1533. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=40#vi.iv-p13.1
1534. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#vii-p131.2
1535. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=44#iv.ii-p122.1
1536. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=70#vii-p43.2
1537. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=75#i_5-p25.4
1538. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=40#v.iii-p30.1
1539. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=52#vii.vii-p37.7
1540. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=53#vi.iii-p16.3
1541. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=63#vi.iii-p41.1
1542. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=2#viii_1-p17.8
1543. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#vi_1-p21.3
1544. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#vii.vi-p37.1
1545. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#vi.vi-p15.5
1546. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p97.4
1547. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vi.vi-p21.5
1548. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p21.1
1549. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.ii-p26.1
1550. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.iii-p23.1
1551. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iv.ii-p40.1
1552. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iv.ii-p79.1
1553. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.ii-p24.1
1554. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.ii-p24.2
1555. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii_1-p37.1
1556. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.ii-p17.3
1557. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.iii-p41.4
1558. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vi.iii-p11.5
1559. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.iii.iv-p152.1
1560. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vi.ii-p7.2
1561. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.iv-p28.1
1562. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=44#vii.ii-p56.5
1563. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=29#viii_1-p66.4
1564. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=30#viii_1-p66.5
1565. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=29#viii_2-p62.2
1566. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=32#viii_2-p62.3
1567. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=6#vi.vi-p41.3
1568. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=25#i_3-p104.3
1569. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=43#vi.ii-p73.1
1570. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=16#vi.vi-p36.4
1571. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=23&scrV=8#vi.vi-p13.2
1572. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=25&scrV=9#v.ii-p48.5
1573. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=26&scrV=41#vi.iv-p15.2
1574. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=28&scrV=3#vi.ii-p12.2
1575. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.vi-p41.2
1576. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=46#iv.iii.ii-p84.4
1577. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=47#viii_2-p90.4
1578. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=74#vii_1-p38.1
1579. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=75#vii_1-p38.2
1580. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=77#vii.ii-p57.1
1581. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.iii-p10.2
1582. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=13#viii_1-p17.5
1583. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p28.1
1584. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iii.ii-p21.2
1585. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.iii-p10.3
1586. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii_1-p17.6
1587. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=42#v.iii-p10.4
1588. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=49#iv.iii.iv-p57.2
1589. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=38#i_3-p26.3
1590. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p16.1
1591. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p19.1
1592. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.iii-p21.1
1593. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.ii-p19.2
1594. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vii-p46.1
1595. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vi_1-p30.2
1596. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi_1-p19.2
1597. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.iv-p7.4
1598. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=13#viii_1-p10.1
1599. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=14#viii_1-p9.1
1600. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi-p48.1
1601. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=36#v.iii-p37.7
1602. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.iv-p29.1
1603. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii_2-p33.3
1604. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vi.iv-p29.2
1605. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.ii-p40.3
1606. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.ii-p125.2
1607. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=27#vi-p127.1
1608. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=36#vi-p112.1
1609. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=46#vi.vi-p26.1
1610. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=46#vii.vi-p69.1
1611. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=15#vii.vii-p37.4
1612. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=29#iv.iii.ii-p84.5
1613. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=41#vi-p32.1
1614. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=42#vi-p138.4
1615. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.vi-p44.1
1616. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=51#i_5-p18.3
1617. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=55#vii.vii-p37.5
1618. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=28#i_1-p25.2
1619. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=28#i_5-p2.1
1620. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=29#i_1-p26.2
1621. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=29#i_5-p46.1
1622. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=29#vi.ii-p2.1
1623. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=30#i_1-p27.2
1624. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=30#vi.iii-p2.1
1625. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=31#i_1-p27.3
1626. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=32#i_1-p28.2
1627. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=32#vi.iv-p2.1
1628. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=33#i_1-p28.3
1629. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=34#vi.v-p4.1
1630. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=54#vii-p139.1
1631. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=54#viii-p23.4
1632. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.vi-p21.4
1633. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.iv-p28.1
1634. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=25#v.v-p26.3
1635. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=40#viii_1-p20.7
1636. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=42#viii-p31.1
1637. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=3#i_3-p2.2
1638. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vi-p118.1
1639. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=4#i_3-p2.4
1640. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vi-p12.4
1641. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vi-p21.1
1642. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=8#iv.ii-p188.2
1643. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=12#i_3-p2.3
1644. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iv.ii-p144.2
1645. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#i_3-p44.2
1646. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#i_3-p64.1
1647. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iv.iii.iv-p119.4
1648. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iv.iii.iii-p56.1
1649. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=21#vii-p82.1
1650. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.ii-p46.2
1651. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=21#viii_2-p32.1
1652. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=22#iv.iii.iv-p119.5
1653. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vi.vi-p19.4
1654. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.iii.ii-p15.4
1655. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v-p27.2
1656. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v-p68.2
1657. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v.iii-p48.5
1658. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=19#v-p79.2
1659. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=19#vi_1-p42.1
1660. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vi-p39.1
1661. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=29#v-p24.1
1662. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#i_3-p49.2
1663. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#iv.iii.iii-p37.5
1664. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=50#vi-p36.2
1665. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vi.iv-p48.2
1666. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=27#vii.ii-p56.3
1667. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iv.ii-p15.5
1668. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=14#iv.ii-p34.3
1669. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vi.iv-p63.1
1670. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.iii.iv-p141.1
1671. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv.iii.ii-p62.1
1672. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#viii_1-p73.5
1673. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#vi.v-p44.8
1674. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=10#ix_1-p12.3
1675. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=18#i_3-p67.1
1676. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=18#iv.ii-p177.1
1677. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=19#i_3-p67.2
1678. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv.iii.iv-p74.5
1679. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vi-p35.1
1680. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vi-p35.2
1681. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vi.iii-p68.3
1682. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vii.v-p42.3
1683. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#viii_1-p78.1
1684. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vi.iii-p11.3
1685. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=25#vi.iii-p68.1
1686. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=25#vi.iv-p60.1
1687. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=29#vi.iv-p26.1
1688. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=30#v.v-p36.1
1689. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vi-p145.1
1690. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vi-p129.2
1691. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vi-p129.1
1692. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=5#viii_2-p71.1
1693. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=8#viii_1-p20.9
1694. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=10#vi-p24.2
1695. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p14.1
1696. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vii.vi-p23.1
1697. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#iv.iii.iii-p14.2
1698. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#viii-p17.2
1699. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p36.1
1700. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=12#iv.ii-p96.1
1701. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p62.3
1702. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iv.iii.iii-p153.1
1703. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iv.iii.iv-p143.1
1704. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iv.iii.ii-p57.2
1705. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=23#vi-p32.3
1706. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=27#iv.iii.iii-p37.2
1707. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=38#vi.iii-p63.1
1708. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=34#v-p62.1
1709. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=20#viii_2-p92.6
1710. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=27#viii_1-p20.10
1711. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vii-p139.5
1712. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#v.ii-p18.2
1713. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#v.ii-p46.5
1714. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vi_1-p35.1
1715. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=32#vii-p86.1
1716. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=32#vii-p97.5
1717. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=32#vii-p139.6
1718. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=38#v.iv-p31.2
1719. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=41#iv.ii-p48.3
1720. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=42#iv.iii.iv-p14.10
1721. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=43#viii_1-p79.3
1722. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=43#viii_1-p17.7
1723. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#iv.ii-p122.2
1724. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#vi.ii-p26.2
1725. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=53#viii-p19.1
1726. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=53#viii_1-p10.5
1727. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vi-p138.8
1728. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#iv.iii.iii-p20.2
1729. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=25#vi.iii-p27.3
1730. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=25#vi.vi-p17.1
1731. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=26#vi.iii-p27.4
1732. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#vi.iii-p27.2
1733. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#vi.iii-p48.1
1734. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#vi.iv-p14.1
1735. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=45#viii_2-p71.2
1736. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#vi.iii-p27.1
1737. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#vi-p170.2
1738. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.v-p22.6
1739. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.v-p9.1
1740. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iv-p21.1
1741. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i_3-p26.1
1742. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.iv-p53.2
1743. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.v-p23.1
1744. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi-p87.1
1745. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i_3-p33.1
1746. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i_3-p71.1
1747. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.iii.ii-p82.5
1748. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p62.1
1749. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.v-p57.2
1750. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_5-p6.2
1751. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.iii-p10.1
1752. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.ii-p65.2
1753. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.iii-p25.1
1754. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#viii_2-p19.2
1755. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.vi-p10.2
1756. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.vi-p60.1
1757. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v-p28.1
1758. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.iii-p21.1
1759. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=32#i_3-p74.3
1760. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=40#vi.iv-p21.2
1761. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#viii_1-p74.2
1762. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#viii_2-p22.2
1763. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#viii_2-p11.3
1764. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p118.1
1765. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.vii-p21.2
1766. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.iii.ii-p55.1
1767. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vi-p77.8
1768. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi-p77.9
1769. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi-p195.3
1770. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.v-p22.1
1771. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii.ii-p59.1
1772. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p66.1
1773. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p77.1
1774. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.iii.iv-p88.1
1775. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi-p170.3
1776. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.vi-p40.2
1777. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.vi-p42.3
1778. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#vi.v-p32.1
1779. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#vi.vi-p16.1
1780. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#vi.v-p30.2
1781. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#vi.vi-p6.1
1782. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#vi.vi-p15.3
1783. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#vii.vi-p60.2
1784. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#vi.vi-p15.4
1785. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#vi.vi-p36.3
1786. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#vii.vi-p60.3
1787. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.v-p42.3
1788. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#ix_1-p35.3
1789. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.ii-p169.2
1790. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii_1-p25.1
1791. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii_1-p39.1
1792. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=34#iv.iii.iv-p152.4
1793. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.iv-p39.5
1794. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.v-p24.1
1795. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vi.v-p22.4
1796. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.iv-p14.1
1797. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#viii_2-p75.1
1798. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#viii_2-p86.2
1799. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.vi-p45.2
1800. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii.iii-p43.1
1801. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vii.vii-p42.3
1802. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=29#vii.vii-p42.4
1803. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=30#iv.iii.iv-p57.1
1804. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=30#vi.v-p45.2
1805. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vi.iii-p45.1
1806. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=40#iv.iii.iv-p126.1
1807. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=40#vi.vi-p38.1
1808. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=44#iv.iii.ii-p90.3
1809. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=44#vii-p62.3
1810. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=45#vi.iii-p45.2
1811. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii-p32.1
1812. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=5#viii_1-p34.2
1813. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vii-p32.2
1814. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=6#viii_1-p34.3
1815. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v-p28.2
1816. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=23#v-p61.2
1817. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=27#v-p80.1
1818. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=29#iv.iii.iv-p74.2
1819. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=34#vi.iv-p62.3
1820. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=39#vii.vii-p58.1
1821. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=39#vii.vii-p69.1
1822. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#vii.vii-p69.2
1823. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#iv.iii.iv-p121.4
1824. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#vi.vi-p17.3
1825. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#vii.vi-p64.3
1826. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#vi.vi-p17.4
1827. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=47#x-p3.2
1828. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=57#vii.vii-p17.2
1829. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=60#v.ii-p48.1
1830. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=63#vi.vi-p23.1
1831. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=69#vi.iii-p41.5
1832. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#iv.iii.iv-p67.1
1833. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=38#ix_1-p35.4
1834. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#vi.v-p45.8
1835. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#ix_1-p35.5
1836. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=20#vii.ii-p41.1
1837. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#i_3-p34.2
1838. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=29#v.v-p68.4
1839. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vi.v-p45.1
1840. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#vi.iii-p47.2
1841. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iv.iii.iii-p43.1
1842. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#viii-p50.5
1843. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vii.ii-p33.2
1844. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#iv.iii.iv-p66.1
1845. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#iv.iii.iii-p35.6
1846. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iv.iii.iv-p18.1
1847. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#viii-p6.3
1848. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#v.ii-p37.5
1849. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#vii.v-p9.2
1850. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=47#vi.vi-p35.5
1851. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#vii.v-p8.1
1852. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#iv.iii.iii-p152.1
1853. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=29#vi.iii-p41.3
1854. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#iv.iii.iv-p52.1
1855. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#iv.iii.iv-p52.2
1856. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=39#iv.ii-p15.4
1857. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.ii-p184.1
1858. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.vi-p35.2
1859. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.vi-p35.3
1860. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.vi-p21.4
1861. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.v-p30.1
1862. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.vi-p6.2
1863. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#viii_2-p29.4
1864. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vi.iii-p35.1
1865. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vii.vii-p39.1
1866. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#viii_2-p29.5
1867. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=27#vi.vi-p35.4
1868. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=27#vii.iii-p50.1
1869. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii-p90.5
1870. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#viii_2-p41.3
1871. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=29#vii-p90.6
1872. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.iii-p48.3
1873. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iv.ii-p75.1
1874. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.v-p64.4
1875. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=5#viii_1-p35.5
1876. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=6#v.v-p64.5
1877. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=6#v.v-p64.6
1878. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=6#viii_1-p35.6
1879. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=44#vii.vii-p37.6
1880. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=52#vii.vi-p21.5
1881. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=2#viii_1-p20.11
1882. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iv.iii.ii-p24.1
1883. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iv.iii.ii-p37.1
1884. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iv.iii.ii-p56.1
1885. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vi.iv-p73.2
1886. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.iii.ii-p24.2
1887. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.iii.ii-p56.2
1888. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vi.iv-p73.3
1889. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=30#vi.v-p13.1
1890. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vi_1-p22.1
1891. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=39#iv.iii.iv-p121.9
1892. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=39#iv.iii.iv-p121.14
1893. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=40#vii-p132.3
1894. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=42#v.ii-p48.3
1895. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii-p86.2
1896. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#viii_2-p86.3
1897. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=2#vii-p48.2
1898. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.iv-p29.3
1899. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vi.iv-p29.3
1900. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=9#v.iv-p29.4
1901. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#viii_2-p70.2
1902. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p135.1
1903. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p135.2
1904. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p135.5
1905. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vi.vi-p8.4
1906. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.vi-p30.2
1907. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=7#vii.iii-p25.2
1908. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vii.iii-p25.3
1909. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#viii_2-p70.1
1910. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=19#vii.vii-p64.4
1911. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vi.vi-p32.1
1912. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#vi.vi-p32.2
1913. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vi.vi-p32.3
1914. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vii-p143.3
1915. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#i_3-p21.2
1916. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii.iii-p48.2
1917. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vii-p58.2
1918. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#v.iii-p22.1
1919. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vi_1-p22.2
1920. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#viii_1-p10.6
1921. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vii.vii-p18.3
1922. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=2#viii_1-p38.1
1923. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vii.vii-p18.4
1924. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.v-p42.2
1925. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.vi-p59.1
1926. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iv.iii.iv-p121.5
1927. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vii.vi-p46.3
1928. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vi.iv-p70.1
1929. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#vi.iv-p70.2
1930. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vi_1-p22.3
1931. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#vii.vi-p46.6
1932. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vii.vi-p46.7
1933. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=27#i_5-p7.1
1934. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=32#iv.ii-p86.1
1935. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=32#i_5-p43.1
1936. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=32#v.ii-p29.1
1937. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vii-p85.1
1938. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#v.ii-p44.1
1939. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p34.2
1940. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vi.v-p60.1
1941. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.iii.iv-p27.1
1942. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.iii.ii-p69.1
1943. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.iii.ii-p71.1
1944. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.v-p14.2
1945. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=6#i_3-p89.1
1946. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=10#iv.iii.ii-p84.7
1947. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p102.6
1948. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=15#viii-p14.1
1949. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vii.vi-p30.8
1950. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#iv.iii.iii-p97.8
1951. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=23#vi.v-p37.1
1952. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=23#vii.vi-p30.9
1953. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iv.iii.iii-p135.6
1954. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#vi.ii-p70.1
1955. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#vi.iv-p39.2
1956. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#vi.v-p33.1
1957. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=26#vi.v-p37.2
1958. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#vii_2-p6.1
1959. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=11#i_3-p47.2
1960. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#i_5-p30.11
1961. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#iv.iii.iv-p87.2
1962. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.iv-p7.6
1963. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#vi.iii-p34.2
1964. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#vi.v-p45.3
1965. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=2#i_5-p30.5
1966. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#i_3-p22.1
1967. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#v.v-p40.1
1968. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#vi-p160.1
1969. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=24#viii_2-p43.1
1970. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#v.iii-p30.2
1971. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#v.v-p31.2
1972. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#viii_2-p45.1
1973. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=26#viii_2-p47.1
1974. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.iii-p30.3
1975. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.v-p31.4
1976. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.v-p40.2
1977. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#viii_2-p48.1
1978. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#i_3-p90.1
1979. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#viii_2-p19.1
1980. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#viii_2-p42.1
1981. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#viii_2-p49.1
1982. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#vi.v-p53.1
1983. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=7#i_5-p30.7
1984. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p26.2
1985. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=21#i_5-p30.8
1986. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=22#i_5-p30.9
1987. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p97.1
1988. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi.v-p4.2
1989. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=10#viii_1-p17.9
1990. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#viii_1-p17.10
1991. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p82.2
1992. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#viii_2-p71.4
1993. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vi.iii-p31.2
1994. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vii.vii-p28.3
1995. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#ix_1-p35.6
1996. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#vi.vi-p42.2
1997. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=39#vii.vi-p64.4
1998. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=47#vii_1-p23.1
1999. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=1#i_5-p30.6
2000. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vi-p78.2
2001. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p140.1
2002. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vi-p60.5
2003. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.ii-p62.1
2004. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#ix_1-p39.1
2005. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.vi-p43.1
2006. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vi.vi-p36.2
2007. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=25#viii_2-p18.6
2008. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=26#v-p46.1
2009. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=26#viii-p51.2
2010. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=26#viii_2-p18.7
2011. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=0#i_5-p38.1
2012. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii-p109.3
2013. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vi.v-p59.1
2014. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii.vi-p30.3
2015. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=28#iv.iii.iv-p14.3
2016. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=28#vi.iii-p34.1
2017. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=31#vi.ii-p37.9
2018. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#viii-p17.7
2019. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=4#i_3-p56.1
2020. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=4#i_3-p76.4
2021. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.v-p28.2
2022. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.v-p28.1
2023. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.v-p33.6
2024. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.iv-p39.9
2025. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=30#vi.v-p45.4
2026. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=30#ix_1-p35.7
2027. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#iv.iii.iii-p62.2
2028. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#iv.iii.iii-p64.2
2029. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vi-p195.4
2030. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vi.v-p44.4
2031. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vi.v-p45.5
2032. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=32#vi.v-p45.9
2033. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#vi.ii-p76.3
2034. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=55#vii.iv-p46.2
2035. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=56#vii.iv-p46.3
2036. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=2#viii_1-p20.6
2037. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vi.ii-p12.1
2038. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#iv.iii.iii-p77.3
2039. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=56#i_3-p132.1
2040. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#vi-p126.1
2041. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=14#i_5-p30.10
2042. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=37#vi.v-p51.1
2043. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii_2-p6.3
2044. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv.iii.iv-p72.2
2045. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi.ii-p69.5
2046. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iv.ii-p33.2
2047. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iv.ii-p61.1
2048. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iv.ii-p184.3
2049. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vi.ii-p37.8
2050. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=16#iv.iii.iii-p62.4
2051. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=31#iv.iii.iii-p98.3
2052. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iv.ii-p45.4
2053. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iv.ii-p74.1
2054. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.ii-p50.2
2055. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.ii-p37.7
2056. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iv.ii-p86.2
2057. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iv.ii-p50.3
2058. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=25#vii_1-p20.2
2059. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=26#vii_1-p20.3
2060. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=33#vii_2-p40.4
2061. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=36#ix_1-p48.2
2062. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#viii-p17.10
2063. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=43#vi-p204.1
2064. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=44#iv.iii.iii-p97.7
2065. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=2#i_5-p18.2
2066. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=7#viii_1-p77.1
2067. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.iv-p39.10
2068. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=11#viii_1-p77.2
2069. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi.ii-p37.5
2070. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vi.ii-p37.6
2071. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v.iv-p38.1
2072. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vi-p199.2
2073. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=21#vi.ii-p53.1
2074. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=23#vii.iv-p43.5
2075. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=10#viii-p17.4
2076. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=10#vii_1-p5.4
2077. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p112.7
2078. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.iii.iv-p154.1
2079. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.iii.iv-p73.2
2080. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.iii.iv-p60.1
2081. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#vii.vi-p13.4
2082. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#vii.vii-p28.6
2083. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#vii.vii-p64.3
2084. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=34#vii.vii-p38.1
2085. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi_1-p66.4
2086. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vii_1-p20.4
2087. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vi_1-p66.5
2088. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#i_3-p30.2
2089. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#v-p26.2
2090. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#vii.v-p39.1
2091. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.v-p24.1
2092. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p116.1
2093. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.vi-p17.2
2094. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#viii_2-p71.3
2095. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#vi.vi-p41.4
2096. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=26#v-p19.3
2097. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#vii.v-p21.1
2098. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=31#vii.v-p15.1
2099. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=16#v.v-p45.1
2100. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=34#iv.ii-p137.2
2101. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=9#vi.iv-p15.1
2102. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=18#vii.iii-p41.1
2103. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=21#vii.vi-p42.3
2104. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=24#vi.iv-p63.3
2105. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#vii.ii-p40.2
2106. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#viii_2-p19.3
2107. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=38#v.v-p61.6
2108. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p14.8
2109. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=31#vii.vii-p64.2
2110. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=14#vi.iii-p11.1
2111. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=15#vii.vii-p42.1
2112. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=7#vi.ii-p28.4
2113. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=7#vi.ii-p78.3
2114. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=7#vi.iv-p48.3
2115. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p56.3
2116. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#viii-p17.15
2117. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#vii.ii-p45.1
2118. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#vii.ii-p52.1
2119. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=22#vi.iii-p11.4
2120. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=23#vii.vii-p33.1
2121. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=23#viii_1-p79.1
2122. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=23#vii.iv-p47.1
2123. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=24#viii_1-p79.2
2124. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=33#v.iii-p39.2
2125. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iii-p31.1
2126. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#viii_2-p19.4
2127. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.iii-p31.2
2128. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.vi-p13.5
2129. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.vii-p28.7
2130. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#viii_2-p19.5
2131. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=11#i_5-p42.4
2132. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i_5-p42.5
2133. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=18#i_3-p109.3
2134. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p87.5
2135. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.iv-p24.2
2136. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p134.1
2137. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii_1-p25.3
2138. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=32#vi.iii-p56.1
2139. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=32#vii.ii-p54.1
2140. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.iv-p61.2
2141. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi-p185.1
2142. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vi.iv-p61.1
2143. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=25#ix_1-p25.7
2144. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=26#ix_1-p25.8
2145. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.ii-p35.1
2146. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.ii-p35.2
2147. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.iii.iv-p76.1
2148. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=10#i_3-p62.2
2149. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.ii-p60.3
2150. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vi-p33.2
2151. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.iii-p11.6
2152. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#vi-p195.2
2153. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vi-p88.1
2154. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#iv.iii.ii-p13.5
2155. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vi-p60.2
2156. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vi.iii-p58.1
2157. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vi.v-p44.5
2158. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vii.ii-p35.4
2159. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#viii_2-p24.3
2160. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#viii_2-p74.5
2161. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#iv.iii.ii-p13.6
2162. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#vi.iii-p58.2
2163. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#vii.ii-p35.5
2164. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#viii_2-p74.6
2165. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii.iii-p26.4
2166. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii.vii-p54.2
2167. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.iv-p51.2
2168. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi.vi-p24.3
2169. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.iii.ii-p90.1
2170. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p90.2
2171. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=23#ix_1-p36.1
2172. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#vii.vii-p39.2
2173. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#ix_1-p33.1
2174. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.ii-p32.1
2175. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi-p170.1
2176. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi-p199.1
2177. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.v-p48.1
2178. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii_2-p45.1
2179. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ix_1-p38.1
2180. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ix_1-p42.6
2181. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vi.v-p48.2
2182. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii_2-p45.2
2183. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=2#ix_1-p42.7
2184. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p140.2
2185. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#viii_1-p53.1
2186. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#i_3-p78.1
2187. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi.v-p61.3
2188. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=8#ix_1-p30.2
2189. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iv.iii.iv-p112.8
2190. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vi-p197.1
2191. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi-p202.1
2192. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#ix_1-p31.1
2193. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v-p38.1
2194. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.ii-p32.3
2195. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii.ii-p43.1
2196. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi-p138.6
2197. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=18#ix_1-p29.1
2198. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.iii-p60.1
2199. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#viii_2-p40.3
2200. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=21#viii_2-p40.4
2201. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.iii-p61.1
2202. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.ii-p23.1
2203. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=13#viii_2-p88.2
2204. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p68.1
2205. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=14#viii-p41.2
2206. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iv.iii.iv-p112.4
2207. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=21#viii-p59.2
2208. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=22#vii.ii-p44.1
2209. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#vi-p25.1
2210. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=8#vii-p59.4
2211. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iv.iii.iii-p61.3
2212. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=9#viii_1-p47.1
2213. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p64.1
2214. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=15#vii-p104.1
2215. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p103.2
2216. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vi-p68.1
2217. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vii-p52.1
2218. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vii-p59.1
2219. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#viii-p55.2
2220. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi-p68.2
2221. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vii-p104.2
2222. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#viii-p36.1
2223. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#viii_1-p47.2
2224. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.iv-p36.1
2225. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vii-p69.1
2226. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iv.iii.iii-p150.2
2227. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vii.ii-p18.3
2228. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p64.1
2229. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii.ii-p42.1
2230. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#ix_1-p28.1
2231. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iv.iii.iv-p112.6
2232. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iv.iii.iv-p121.2
2233. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iv.iii.iv-p121.12
2234. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iv.iii.iv-p24.2
2235. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#vi.iv-p57.1
2236. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iv.iii.iv-p121.3
2237. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#vii.vi-p67.1
2238. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#ix_1-p22.2
2239. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.vii-p43.3
2240. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.vii-p72.2
2241. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vi-p24.1
2242. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vii-p81.7
2243. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#i_3-p73.1
2244. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.ii-p19.3
2245. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vii.vi-p69.2
2246. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iv.ii-p142.2
2247. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#i_3-p36.1
2248. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#i_3-p80.1
2249. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iv.ii-p173.2
2250. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#i_3-p72.1
2251. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#i_3-p37.1
2252. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#i_3-p49.3
2253. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#vi.iii-p60.6
2254. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#vi.iv-p56.2
2255. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#viii_2-p30.1
2256. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#viii_1-p61.2
2257. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p152.2
2258. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vii.vi-p13.6
2259. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vii.vii-p28.8
2260. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#i_3-p81.2
2261. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p137.1
2262. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vi.iv-p46.3
2263. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.ii-p50.1
2264. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.vi-p13.7
2265. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.vii-p28.9
2266. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.vii-p69.6
2267. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv.iii.ii-p51.2
2268. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#i_5-p47.1
2269. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vi.ii-p25.1
2270. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vi.ii-p25.4
2271. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=27#iv.ii-p33.3
2272. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=27#iv.ii-p184.4
2273. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#vi.iv-p74.1
2274. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#vii.vii-p62.3
2275. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.iii-p30.1
2276. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.iii-p39.1
2277. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.iv-p3.1
2278. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.vi-p14.1
2279. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.vi-p58.1
2280. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.vii-p18.5
2281. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.vii-p61.1
2282. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#v-p44.1
2283. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#vi.v-p54.1
2284. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=33#vi-p154.3
2285. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=33#vi-p168.3
2286. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vi-p168.4
2287. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#ix_1-p33.3
2288. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=38#vii.iv-p12.4
2289. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#i_3-p76.1
2290. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.iii.ii-p33.3
2291. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iv.iii.ii-p33.2
2292. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iv.iii.ii-p62.2
2293. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#viii_2-p19.6
2294. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=19#iv.iii.iv-p14.1
2295. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p70.3
2296. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vii_1-p26.1
2297. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vii_1-p26.2
2298. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iv.ii-p61.5
2299. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iv.ii-p148.1
2300. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vi.ii-p24.1
2301. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vi_1-p32.1
2302. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vi-p195.6
2303. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#iv.iii.ii-p29.2
2304. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#vii.iv-p28.2
2305. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv.iii.iv-p72.1
2306. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vii.iii-p26.3
2307. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p92.1
2308. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.ii-p75.1
2309. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=5#vii.vi-p30.1
2310. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi.ii-p28.2
2311. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=18#i_5-p30.12
2312. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=21#vi-p123.4
2313. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vi-p142.1
2314. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=12#v.ii-p23.3
2315. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#vii-p66.1
2316. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p56.4
2317. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi.iii-p15.1
2318. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=13#vi.ii-p78.2
2319. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.iii.iii-p17.1
2320. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.iii.iii-p35.5
2321. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#ix_1-p48.8
2322. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=13#ix_1-p42.4
2323. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.ii-p49.1
2324. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#vii-p88.2
2325. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#vii-p135.1
2326. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#viii_1-p55.3
2327. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#viii_2-p18.2
2328. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#ix_1-p48.6
2329. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vi.vi-p19.3
2330. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.iii-p25.1
2331. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.v-p12.1
2332. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iv.iii.ii-p57.1
2333. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#vi.vi-p8.5
2334. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#viii_2-p19.7
2335. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p121.1
2336. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iii.iv-p121.11
2337. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.iii.iii-p97.5
2338. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vii.vi-p30.4
2339. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.iii.iii-p35.7
2340. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.iii.iii-p2.1
2341. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=23#v-p20.6
2342. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p2.2
2343. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi-p172.1
2344. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi-p165.3
2345. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p34.4
2346. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.iii.iv-p142.1
2347. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=9#viii_1-p76.1
2348. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p64.4
2349. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p65.2
2350. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi-p144.3
2351. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi-p144.1
2352. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vi-p200.1
2353. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vii.vii-p71.1
2354. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii.vi-p30.7
2355. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.vii-p72.1
2356. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v-p42.2
2357. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iv.iii.iv-p58.2
2358. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#vii.vii-p69.5
2359. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#viii-p20.1
2360. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=31#vi_1-p57.1
2361. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#vii.iv-p29.2
2362. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.v-p27.1
2363. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.v-p54.1
2364. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vii.iv-p48.2
2365. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii-p39.1
2366. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#viii-p40.1
2367. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#viii_1-p26.1
2368. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vii_1-p11.12
2369. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=21#vii_1-p11.13
2370. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=22#v.v-p33.2
2371. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=31#iv.iii.ii-p13.4
2372. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=10#viii_1-p73.3
2373. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=10#v.iv-p49.1
2374. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=10#viii_1-p70.1
2375. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=19#vii-p34.6
2376. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vi_1-p47.1
2377. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=31#iv.iii.iii-p150.1
2378. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=32#vi-p197.3
2379. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vii.vi-p11.2
2380. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vii.vi-p46.5
2381. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vii.vi-p11.1
2382. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vi-p144.2
2383. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vi.iv-p39.1
2384. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=25#vii_2-p38.5
2385. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v.ii-p32.2
2386. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vii.vii-p64.8
2387. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iv.iii.ii-p57.3
2388. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#vii.v-p42.4
2389. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=13#vii.vii-p52.1
2390. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=14#vii.vii-p64.1
2391. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=17#vii.vii-p54.1
2392. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=20#vii.vii-p33.2
2393. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#viii_2-p33.1
2394. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#viii_2-p33.2
2395. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iv.iii.iii-p38.3
2396. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=29#vii.vii-p67.1
2397. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=45#vii.vi-p52.2
2398. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=45#vii.vii-p20.1
2399. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=50#iv.iii.iii-p14.4
2400. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#vi.ii-p74.5
2401. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=56#vi-p201.3
2402. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=56#vii.ii-p55.1
2403. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=57#vii.vii-p53.1
2404. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi-p143.1
2405. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii-p74.2
2406. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.ii-p36.1
2407. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.ii-p36.2
2408. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi_1-p65.1
2409. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vi-p171.1
2410. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii_2-p52.2
2411. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii-p107.2
2412. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.ii-p40.1
2413. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.iv-p29.2
2414. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=3#viii_2-p28.2
2415. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p121.6
2416. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.ii-p14.2
2417. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.ii-p69.1
2418. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.ii-p75.2
2419. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii.iii-p26.2
2420. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii.vi-p46.4
2421. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii.vii-p18.2
2422. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii.vii-p27.1
2423. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.vi-p35.1
2424. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.iii.iii-p57.1
2425. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii-p48.3
2426. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii-p132.2
2427. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#viii-p17.8
2428. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi_1-p22.4
2429. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.iii-p26.1
2430. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vii.vi-p64.1
2431. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#viii_2-p70.3
2432. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.iii.iv-p119.3
2433. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.iv-p52.2
2434. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.iv-p52.1
2435. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#viii-p9.1
2436. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vi.iv-p72.2
2437. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii-p121.1
2438. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi_1-p58.1
2439. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi.iii-p70.2
2440. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#i_3-p135.1
2441. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.iii-p32.4
2442. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vi.iv-p46.1
2443. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.vii-p21.3
2444. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=14#ix_1-p44.2
2445. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii_2-p10.1
2446. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.vii-p16.1
2447. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vii.vii-p26.1
2448. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=18#ix_1-p22.3
2449. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p38.2
2450. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#ix_1-p30.1
2451. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi.vi-p21.6
2452. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#ix_1-p37.1
2453. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.vi-p56.1
2454. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#viii_2-p29.2
2455. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=7#v.ii-p47.2
2456. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p58.1
2457. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#i_3-p42.1
2458. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vi.ii-p78.4
2459. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=21#iv.ii-p14.1
2460. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=10#v-p55.4
2461. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#viii_2-p92.4
2462. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p119.7
2463. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p33.2
2464. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p34.8
2465. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p63.5
2466. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#vi.vi-p24.2
2467. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii-p52.2
2468. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=12#vii-p107.3
2469. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#viii-p23.1
2470. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.iv-p12.1
2471. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#i_3-p104.6
2472. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.ii-p46.2
2473. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vi-p197.4
2474. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vii-p71.1
2475. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vii-p132.1
2476. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vii-p154.1
2477. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.ii-p24.4
2478. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.iii-p10.8
2479. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vii_2-p9.2
2480. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iv.ii-p46.3
2481. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii-p44.1
2482. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii-p150.1
2483. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#viii-p46.2
2484. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#viii-p54.2
2485. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#viii-p55.1
2486. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vii-p43.1
2487. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#i_3-p49.1
2488. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.iii-p10.7
2489. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#viii_2-p24.7
2490. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=32#vii.vii-p48.1
2491. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=4#viii-p25.1
2492. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vii-p75.3
2493. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=13#viii-p28.2
2494. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.iii.ii-p25.1
2495. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.iii.iv-p143.2
2496. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.iii-p60.3
2497. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vii.v-p42.5
2498. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vii.vii-p17.1
2499. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#viii_2-p91.1
2500. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#viii_2-p18.5
2501. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.ii-p44.2
2502. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ix_1-p23.1
2503. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.v-p54.3
2504. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#i_3-p38.3
2505. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.ii-p38.1
2506. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ix_1-p26.2
2507. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#i_3-p38.4
2508. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#ix_1-p26.3
2509. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.ii-p81.1
2510. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#i_3-p44.1
2511. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#i_3-p80.2
2512. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.vi-p46.1
2513. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii_1-p28.3
2514. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.ii-p173.1
2515. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vii.vii-p18.1
2516. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vi-p24.3
2517. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vii-p61.1
2518. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vii-p107.4
2519. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vii-p139.3
2520. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#ix_1-p35.1
2521. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=14#ix_1-p35.2
2522. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii-p59.3
2523. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi_1-p40.7
2524. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#vi.iii-p61.2
2525. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi-p69.4
2526. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vii-p74.1
2527. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi_1-p30.3
2528. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii-p61.2
2529. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi_1-p54.1
2530. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.iii-p61.3
2531. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=16#ix_1-p39.3
2532. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p178.1
2533. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i_3-p115.1
2534. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ix-p13.3
2535. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#i_3-p38.1
2536. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.iii.ii-p17.1
2537. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.v-p36.1
2538. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.v-p60.2
2539. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#viii_1-p74.1
2540. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#ix_1-p12.5
2541. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#i_3-p71.2
2542. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#viii_2-p91.2
2543. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#ix_1-p38.2
2544. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_3-p71.3
2545. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi-p47.1
2546. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.ii-p50.3
2547. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.vii-p62.1
2548. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#i_3-p75.1
2549. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p178.2
2550. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p115.1
2551. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.iv-p62.1
2552. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=20#viii_1-p17.1
2553. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.vii-p64.6
2554. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#viii_1-p17.2
2555. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.iv-p12.1
2556. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.iv-p31.3
2557. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.vii-p64.7
2558. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.iii.iii-p42.3
2559. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.vi-p5.1
2560. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii.vii-p57.1
2561. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.iii.iii-p56.5
2562. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#viii-p17.6
2563. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi_1-p40.1
2564. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#viii_1-p31.2
2565. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.ii-p33.3
2566. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p112.3
2567. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p17.2
2568. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi_1-p40.2
2569. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.v-p46.1
2570. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.ii-p33.5
2571. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p112.9
2572. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iii.iv-p119.1
2573. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.iii.iv-p119.2
2574. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.iv-p52.1
2575. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.vii-p16.2
2576. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p60.1
2577. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p71.1
2578. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#ix_1-p42.8
2579. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#i_3-p22.4
2580. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vii_2-p45.3
2581. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#ix_1-p42.9
2582. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=10#viii_1-p69.2
2583. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii.iv-p12.2
2584. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=11#viii_1-p73.2
2585. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iv.ii-p190.1
2586. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p51.4
2587. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vii_2-p44.2
2588. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#i_3-p22.3
2589. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#i_3-p69.1
2590. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.ii-p178.3
2591. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vii.vi-p22.1
2592. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ix_1-p12.6
2593. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.iii.iv-p102.4
2594. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.vi-p74.1
2595. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.iv-p47.1
2596. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#ix-p50.1
2597. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i_5-p37.6
2598. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=6#i_3-p95.1
2599. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p38.1
2600. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.vi-p44.1
2601. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii.vii-p57.2
2602. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii.vi-p46.8
2603. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vii.vi-p46.9
2604. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p112.5
2605. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#viii-p49.2
2606. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vi-p130.1
2607. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii.iii-p28.2
2608. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=27#viii_1-p39.1
2609. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=28#v-p54.5
2610. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#iv.iii.iii-p129.5
2611. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#vii.ii-p50.2
2612. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#vii.vii-p62.2
2613. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vi-p111.3
2614. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#i_3-p127.4
2615. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vi.iii-p54.2
2616. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iv.iii.iv-p92.2
2617. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii_1-p38.4
2618. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii_1-p38.5
2619. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.vi-p35.1
2620. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii.vi-p35.2
2621. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.iii.iii-p129.7
2622. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi.iv-p36.2
2623. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=30#vii.vi-p49.1
2624. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii-p96.1
2625. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii-p137.2
2626. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii-p140.1
2627. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#viii-p18.1
2628. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vi_1-p34.1
2629. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p56.2
2630. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii-p104.5
2631. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#viii-p6.2
2632. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#viii-p17.1
2633. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi_1-p22.5
2634. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.iv-p12.3
2635. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii-p108.1
2636. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii-p140.2
2637. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=13#viii-p24.1
2638. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=15#ix_1-p48.7
2639. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii-p51.1
2640. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii-p137.3
2641. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#viii-p3.7
2642. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#viii-p18.2
2643. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vi_1-p34.2
2644. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.ii-p42.1
2645. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii_1-p8.1
2646. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iv.ii-p153.2
2647. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#i_3-p98.1
2648. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vii-p97.1
2649. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p33.1
2650. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.iii.ii-p56.3
2651. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.iii.iii-p65.1
2652. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p20.1
2653. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p71.1
2654. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p135.4
2655. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.iii-p32.3
2656. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.iv-p46.2
2657. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi.iv-p73.1
2658. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#i_3-p21.3
2659. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.v-p14.1
2660. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#viii_2-p19.8
2661. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.ii-p43.2
2662. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii_2-p19.9
2663. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ix_1-p29.2
2664. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi.iii-p60.2
2665. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.iv-p4.6
2666. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.iii.ii-p13.1
2667. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p34.3
2668. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p78.2
2669. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.iv-p4.7
2670. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.iii.ii-p13.2
2671. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.iii.iv-p103.1
2672. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii-p97.2
2673. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii-p151.1
2674. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.ii-p14.2
2675. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.iii.ii-p53.1
2676. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p149.2
2677. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vi.iv-p62.4
2678. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vi_1-p42.2
2679. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p122.1
2680. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi_1-p42.3
2681. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.ii-p72.1
2682. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.iv-p43.1
2683. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii.vii-p66.1
2684. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.ii-p148.5
2685. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#i_3-p54.3
2686. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.ii-p185.2
2687. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v-p46.2
2688. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.v-p65.2
2689. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi-p166.2
2690. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.iv-p47.2
2691. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.v-p65.3
2692. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p32.5
2693. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii-p87.1
2694. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.vi-p22.2
2695. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.vi-p74.2
2696. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p70.4
2697. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.iii.iii-p46.1
2698. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.iii.iii-p56.4
2699. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#viii-p17.13
2700. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vi.v-p48.3
2701. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_1-p34.1
2702. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.ii-p1.1
2703. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.vi-p3.1
2704. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_6-p3.1
2705. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#i_1-p35.1
2706. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.iii-p1.1
2707. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.vi-p4.1
2708. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i_1-p36.1
2709. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.iii-p38.3
2710. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.iv-p1.1
2711. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.iv-p4.4
2712. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.vi-p4.2
2713. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#i_1-p37.1
2714. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.iv-p4.5
2715. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.v-p1.1
2716. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.vi-p4.3
2717. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#i_1-p38.1
2718. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#i_1-p39.1
2719. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.vi-p1.1
2720. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.vii-p1.1
2721. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#i_1-p40.1
2722. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vi.v-p43.6
2723. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#viii_2-p1.1
2724. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ix_1-p44.1
2725. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#i_1-p41.1
2726. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.v-p43.7
2727. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ix_1-p1.1
2728. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.v-p46.2
2729. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=21#viii_2-p40.1
2730. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ix_1-p22.1
2731. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii.iv-p32.2
2732. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.vi-p16.2
2733. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.v-p12.2
2734. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.vi-p10.1
2735. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p97.3
2736. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.iii.iii-p63.1
2737. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.vi-p64.2
2738. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#i_1-p40.2
2739. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.ii-p65.1
2740. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii_2-p2.1
2741. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii.ii-p53.1
2742. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi-p51.1
2743. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.ii-p44.4
2744. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vii.ii-p44.5
2745. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vii.iv-p32.1
2746. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=19#i_3-p108.1
2747. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.vi-p36.1
2748. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#i_3-p121.1
2749. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.ii-p73.2
2750. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ii-p73.3
2751. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.iii.ii-p15.1
2752. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii.iii-p28.1
2753. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vi-p123.1
2754. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=14#i_5-p38.3
2755. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.iii.ii-p72.2
2756. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.ii-p39.1
2757. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=2#ix-p21.1
2758. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=42#iv.iii.iv-p73.1
2759. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vi-p42.1
2760. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p122.3
2761. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.ii-p56.6
2762. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=23#ix_1-p48.5
2763. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.iii.iii-p42.1
2764. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p42.2
2765. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.vi-p41.1
2766. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vi.iii-p68.2
2767. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p74.6
2768. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p14.2
2769. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi.ii-p78.1
2770. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=9#i_5-p36.2
2771. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii.vii-p59.1
2772. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.ii-p4.1
2773. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii-p142.1
2774. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#viii_1-p58.1
2775. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vii.vii-p69.4
2776. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vii_1-p22.1
2777. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iv.ii-p39.2
2778. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iv.ii-p71.2
2779. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v-p73.1
2780. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p74.8
2781. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.iii.iv-p91.2
2782. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.iv-p51.1
2783. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p66.2
2784. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.iii-p47.1
2785. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.vi-p42.4
2786. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.ii-p73.5
2787. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.iii.ii-p17.3
2788. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.iii.iii-p65.2
2789. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii-p143.1
2790. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.iii.ii-p17.4
2791. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p65.3
2792. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#i_3-p74.1
2793. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=3#viii-p38.1
2794. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.iii.ii-p51.1
2795. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii-p97.3
2796. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.v-p43.1
2797. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi.vi-p31.1
2798. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#ix_1-p36.2
2799. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=2#ix-p48.3
2800. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii_1-p19.2
2801. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.iii-p53.4
2802. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.ii-p34.2
2803. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#i_3-p99.2
2804. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii-p52.6
2805. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.v-p45.7
2806. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#viii_2-p19.10
2807. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i_3-p36.2
2808. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#i_3-p36.3
2809. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v-p25.1
2810. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v-p54.1
2811. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v-p20.7
2812. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v-p25.2
2813. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi_1-p64.2
2814. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.v-p42.4
2815. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=8#viii_2-p86.1
2816. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=21#viii_1-p73.4
2817. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=21#viii_1-p70.2
2818. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.vi-p43.1
2819. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v-p46.4
2820. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii-p55.1
2821. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii-p62.1
2822. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii_1-p19.1
2823. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii.vi-p52.1
2824. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p97.2
2825. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.vi-p43.2
2826. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iv.iii.iv-p63.1
2827. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#i_3-p113.2
2828. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii_2-p30.2
2829. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v-p55.1
2830. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii_1-p42.1
2831. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.iii-p70.1
2832. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.vi-p33.1
2833. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.v-p64.7
2834. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i_5-p43.2
2835. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii-p41.2
2836. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.ii-p48.4
2837. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.vi-p23.2
2838. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vii-p52.3
2839. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vii_1-p42.2
2840. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iv.iii.iv-p18.2
2841. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iv.iii.iii-p78.5
2842. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#viii-p17.9
2843. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#v.ii-p33.1
2844. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#viii_1-p51.1
2845. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#vii.ii-p33.4
2846. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii-p62.2
2847. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#viii_1-p55.1
2848. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p141.1
2849. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p122.2
2850. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii-p88.1
2851. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#viii_1-p55.2
2852. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi_1-p43.1
2853. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii-p110.1
2854. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#viii-p10.1
2855. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p67.1
2856. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vii-p39.2
2857. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vii-p110.2
2858. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=18#viii-p10.2
2859. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=18#viii-p36.2
2860. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=18#viii-p57.1
2861. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vii-p138.1
2862. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.vi-p44.2
2863. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.ii-p44.3
2864. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.ii-p50.5
2865. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi-p116.1
2866. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi-p116.2
2867. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p59.1
2868. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p78.3
2869. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii.ii-p33.1
2870. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i_3-p74.2
2871. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.vii-p26.2
2872. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.vi-p46.2
2873. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.vii-p26.3
2874. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.iv-p36.3
2875. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi-p44.2
2876. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.v-p25.3
2877. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#viii_2-p28.6
2878. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p20.5
2879. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi_1-p21.1
2880. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.v-p25.4
2881. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.vi-p8.2
2882. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.vi-p21.1
2883. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#viii_2-p28.7
2884. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p21.2
2885. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.iii-p37.1
2886. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.v-p29.1
2887. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.vi-p8.3
2888. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iii-p20.1
2889. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iv-p32.3
2890. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.v-p20.1
2891. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.iv-p31.4
2892. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=6#viii_1-p17.4
2893. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=7#viii_2-p18.11
2894. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.v-p9.4
2895. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i_3-p48.1
2896. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p35.4
2897. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.iv-p36.1
2898. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#viii_1-p68.2
2899. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.iv-p42.3
2900. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#ix_1-p42.5
2901. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.iv-p47.2
2902. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.v-p57.2
2903. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.vi-p21.2
2904. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.iv-p47.3
2905. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.vi-p21.3
2906. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii-p72.1
2907. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.iii-p48.4
2908. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.vii-p13.1
2909. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.iv-p49.1
2910. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii-p83.1
2911. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.iv-p29.1
2912. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#i_3-p38.2
2913. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii.iii-p38.2
2914. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii.vi-p57.1
2915. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#viii_2-p33.3
2916. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi-p168.5
2917. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii-p17.11
2918. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.ii-p33.2
2919. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.iii-p56.4
2920. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.iii-p38.1
2921. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.vii-p53.2
2922. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii_2-p74.1
2923. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.iii-p56.5
2924. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=16#ix_1-p12.1
2925. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=17#viii_2-p74.2
2926. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=17#ix_1-p45.1
2927. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vii-p83.2
2928. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.ii-p34.1
2929. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=18#ix_1-p45.2
2930. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi-p9.1
2931. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi-p13.3
2932. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.iii-p44.1
2933. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=1#viii_2-p29.1
2934. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii.vii-p12.2
2935. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.v-p25.1
2936. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.vi-p5.1
2937. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=5#viii_2-p39.1
2938. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi.v-p25.2
2939. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi.vi-p5.2
2940. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi.vi-p48.1
2941. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#viii_2-p39.2
2942. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.vi-p25.1
2943. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#viii-p33.1
2944. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vii_1-p35.5
2945. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.iii.iv-p141.2
2946. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vi.vi-p40.1
2947. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii_1-p8.2
2948. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.ii-p34.4
2949. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii.vi-p75.1
2950. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=15#viii_2-p29.6
2951. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.ii-p77.2
2952. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#i_3-p127.2
2953. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#ix-p54.1
2954. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#viii_2-p29.7
2955. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.vi-p19.2
2956. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vii.vi-p67.2
2957. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vi_1-p58.3
2958. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vi_1-p65.2
2959. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vi.iv-p52.3
2960. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vi.vi-p42.5
2961. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=2#viii_2-p21.2
2962. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=3#viii_2-p21.3
2963. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vi-p44.1
2964. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=22#viii_2-p92.1
2965. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vi-p49.1
2966. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#v.ii-p28.1
2967. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=27#iv.iii.iii-p89.1
2968. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=1#i_3-p125.1
2969. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p64.3
2970. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=10#viii_2-p28.1
2971. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vii.ii-p17.1
2972. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=4#i_3-p127.1
2973. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=5#viii_2-p24.2
2974. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vii.ii-p49.1
2975. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vii.ii-p40.3
2976. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vii.iii-p41.2
2977. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vi.iii-p56.6
2978. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vi.v-p47.1
2979. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#viii_2-p29.3
2980. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#viii_2-p74.3
2981. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#vi.iii-p26.1
2982. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=23#vi.iii-p26.2
2983. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#i_3-p45.4
2984. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#i_3-p127.3
2985. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#viii_2-p74.4
2986. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=28#iv.iii.iii-p108.2
2987. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=6#vi.v-p44.1
2988. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=7#vi.v-p44.2
2989. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vi.v-p44.3
2990. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vii.ii-p43.3
2991. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vi-p84.1
2992. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vi.iii-p36.1
2993. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=15#vii.ii-p40.1
2994. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv.iii.iv-p51.3
2995. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=19#i_3-p127.5
2996. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vii_2-p44.1
2997. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vi-p79.1
2998. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vi-p54.1
2999. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=31#ix-p52.8
3000. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#v.ii-p24.5
3001. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#i_3-p114.2
3002. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vi_1-p58.2
3003. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#iv.ii-p169.1
3004. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#vi.v-p46.4
3005. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#vii_2-p40.1
3006. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=10#vii.iv-p24.3
3007. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=16#vii.vii-p68.3
3008. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=17#v.ii-p35.2
3009. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iv.iii.iv-p75.1
3010. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.v-p27.2
3011. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#v.v-p27.3
3012. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vi.ii-p76.2
3013. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iv.ii-p52.1
3014. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.ii-p17.1
3015. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vii_2-p40.2
3016. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=35#vi.iv-p63.2
3017. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vii-p65.4
3018. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi_1-p58.4
3019. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#viii_1-p66.1
3020. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.iv-p52.2
3021. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=3#viii_1-p66.2
3022. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=5#v.iii-p42.1
3023. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=5#vii_1-p8.5
3024. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#viii-p54.1
3025. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#i_3-p26.5
3026. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#i_3-p47.1
3027. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vii-p37.1
3028. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vi.iv-p72.1
3029. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iv.iii.iv-p14.12
3030. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#viii-p49.1
3031. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#viii-p53.1
3032. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#viii_1-p38.2
3033. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vi.iv-p74.2
3034. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vii-p117.1
3035. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=16#vi_1-p29.5
3036. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#v.iv-p46.1
3037. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#vii.vi-p21.1
3038. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#iv.iii.iii-p20.3
3039. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#vi.iii-p67.2
3040. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=24#vi.iii-p61.5
3041. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=24#viii_2-p26.1
3042. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=25#vi.vi-p28.1
3043. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vii.iv-p40.3
3044. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.iii.iii-p63.2
3045. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vii_1-p40.1
3046. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vii_2-p28.1
3047. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vii.iv-p48.4
3048. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vii_2-p28.2
3049. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vii.iv-p48.5
3050. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v-p67.2
3051. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.iii-p43.4
3052. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=5#vi_1-p64.4
3053. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=13#vi.ii-p76.1
3054. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=16#vii_1-p38.6
3055. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#vi.v-p45.6
3056. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#ix_1-p34.3
3057. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#ix_1-p48.3
3058. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iv.iii.iv-p24.1
3059. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=21#ix_1-p48.4
3060. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vii-p40.2
3061. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii-p106.3
3062. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p77.1
3063. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=6#x-p4.2
3064. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p43.2
3065. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p35.1
3066. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#viii_1-p66.3
3067. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii-p38.1
3068. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi-p69.5
3069. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii-p58.1
3070. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii-p60.2
3071. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=14#viii-p33.2
3072. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#i_3-p121.2
3073. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii-p148.1
3074. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.iv-p51.1
3075. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.vi-p42.6
3076. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#viii-p25.2
3077. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii_1-p38.3
3078. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#i_3-p37.2
3079. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p36.1
3080. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#viii_2-p90.1
3081. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi-p69.1
3082. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii-p40.3
3083. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.iii.ii-p15.2
3084. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v-p46.6
3085. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi_1-p40.8
3086. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii-p149.2
3087. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii-p98.2
3088. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii-p141.1
3089. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#viii_1-p41.1
3090. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.iii.iv-p70.1
3091. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v-p79.1
3092. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v-p46.5
3093. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p58.1
3094. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii-p66.2
3095. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=11#viii_1-p25.1
3096. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.ii-p188.3
3097. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#x-p4.1
3098. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.ii-p23.3
3099. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.ii-p39.1
3100. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=18#i_3-p104.2
3101. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vi.ii-p39.2
3102. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=9&scrV=19#iv.ii-p61.6
3103. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p144.1
3104. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p135.3
3105. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.vii-p64.5
3106. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v-p80.2
3107. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#viii_2-p9.1
3108. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii-p30.1
3109. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p179.4
3110. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#i_3-p114.3
3111. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p128.1
3112. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#viii_1-p61.1
3113. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.ii-p25.5
3114. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#viii_1-p69.1
3115. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#viii_1-p73.1
3116. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p25.2
3117. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p116.1
3118. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#i_3-p53.1
3119. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#i_3-p82.3
3120. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v-p44.6
3121. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.ii-p50.4
3122. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vi.v-p44.7
3123. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vi.v-p56.2
3124. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.vii-p61.2
3125. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.vi-p42.4
3126. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi_1-p57.5
3127. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p128.2
3128. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.iii.ii-p107.1
3129. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.vi-p21.2
3130. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vi_1-p40.6
3131. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.iii.iv-p74.7
3132. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.iii.iv-p91.1
3133. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.iii.ii-p99.1
3134. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.ii-p88.2
3135. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#i_3-p99.1
3136. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.iii.ii-p101.1
3137. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#viii_2-p19.11
3138. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#viii_2-p24.8
3139. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.iii.iii-p20.4
3140. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vi-p36.1
3141. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii-p81.2
3142. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vii.iv-p31.2
3143. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p43.1
3144. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p19.1
3145. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p58.3
3146. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=2#viii-p28.3
3147. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p70.1
3148. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#i_3-p32.1
3149. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.iii-p43.2
3150. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.iii.iii-p141.2
3151. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#viii_1-p37.1
3152. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv.ii-p185.1
3153. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.v-p65.1
3154. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii-p55.2
3155. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii-p107.1
3156. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.ii-p47.4
3157. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.iv-p20.3
3158. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi_1-p40.5
3159. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vii-p79.1
3160. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vii-p98.1
3161. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vii-p106.1
3162. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vii-p137.1
3163. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.ii-p38.1
3164. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.ii-p47.6
3165. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#viii_1-p41.2
3166. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#viii_1-p59.1
3167. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.iii.iv-p102.5
3168. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vii-p142.2
3169. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vii-p142.3
3170. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vii-p142.4
3171. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.iii.ii-p99.1
3172. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi-p50.1
3173. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi-p60.3
3174. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi-p200.2
3175. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi-p77.6
3176. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#i_3-p22.2
3177. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi-p154.2
3178. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v-p54.3
3179. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.iii-p54.3
3180. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.vi-p71.1
3181. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii-p52.4
3182. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#viii-p3.3
3183. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.ii-p42.2
3184. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi_1-p40.9
3185. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vii-p60.1
3186. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#viii-p32.1
3187. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.ii-p40.2
3188. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.iii.iv-p60.2
3189. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=17#vi.iv-p45.2
3190. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=25#vi.vi-p33.2
3191. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#i_3-p33.4
3192. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#i_3-p88.1
3193. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iii.iv-p41.1
3194. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ii-p14.1
3195. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ii-p73.4
3196. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.iv-p42.1
3197. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.vii-p28.10
3198. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.ii-p12.1
3199. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#viii-p6.1
3200. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#viii-p17.3
3201. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#viii-p50.4
3202. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.ii-p23.4
3203. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vi_1-p66.1
3204. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=10#i_3-p73.2
3205. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.iii-p42.1
3206. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.ii-p33.1
3207. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi-p165.1
3208. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi-p165.2
3209. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.iii.iv-p74.3
3210. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.iii.iv-p119.6
3211. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi.v-p35.1
3212. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vi.v-p61.1
3213. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vii.vii-p15.1
3214. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.v-p54.2
3215. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii.vii-p15.2
3216. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#i_3-p77.1
3217. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.iii.iii-p146.1
3218. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi-p111.1
3219. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi.iii-p60.5
3220. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi.v-p61.2
3221. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#i_5-p36.1
3222. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.v-p51.2
3223. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.iii.iv-p14.11
3224. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi.v-p54.7
3225. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#i_5-p17.2
3226. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=8#i_5-p17.3
3227. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.iii-p61.4
3228. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.v-p56.1
3229. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.v-p56.5
3230. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vi.v-p57.1
3231. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vii.vi-p30.5
3232. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#viii-p41.1
3233. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#viii-p3.5
3234. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#viii_1-p8.1
3235. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.ii-p17.4
3236. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.iii.iv-p34.2
3237. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#i_5-p47.2
3238. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ii-p25.2
3239. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ii-p24.2
3240. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.iii.iii-p35.1
3241. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.iii-p60.4
3242. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vi-p8.1
3243. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.vi-p13.1
3244. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.vii-p28.1
3245. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.vi-p12.3
3246. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii_2-p6.4
3247. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii_2-p49.2
3248. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.iv-p15.4
3249. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii_2-p49.3
3250. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii-p50.2
3251. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.iv-p15.5
3252. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#viii_1-p31.1
3253. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.iv-p12.4
3254. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.iii.ii-p82.1
3255. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p75.1
3256. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p108.2
3257. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.iii.iii-p116.1
3258. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=14#x-p3.1
3259. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vi.vi-p13.5
3260. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vii.vii-p4.3
3261. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p78.1
3262. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.iii.ii-p18.1
3263. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii_2-p41.1
3264. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.iii.ii-p29.1
3265. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.iv-p24.1
3266. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.ii-p49.2
3267. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.ii-p34.3
3268. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.ii-p34.4
3269. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=8#ix-p19.1
3270. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.ii-p49.3
3271. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vi.iii-p28.1
3272. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vi.iii-p28.2
3273. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=10#iv.iii.iii-p77.2
3274. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=7#viii_1-p71.1
3275. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=12#viii-p19.2
3276. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iv.iii.iii-p33.3
3277. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=14#viii-p19.3
3278. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vi_1-p43.2
3279. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=8#iv.iii.iii-p112.1
3280. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vi_1-p66.2
3281. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vii_1-p31.4
3282. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=12#vi-p35.3
3283. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=4#vi.iv-p37.1
3284. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=8#vii_1-p20.5
3285. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=9#vi_1-p66.3
3286. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#iv.iii.iii-p129.2
3287. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vii.iv-p15.6
3288. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iv.iii.iii-p129.3
3289. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iv.iii.iii-p134.1
3290. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p85.1
3291. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.iii.iii-p100.1
3292. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p43.8
3293. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p3.8
3294. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p53.3
3295. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p38.1
3296. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p30.1
3297. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p134.2
3298. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p32.1
3299. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-p23.5
3300. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p49.2
3301. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p7.1
3302. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p17.14
3303. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p33.3
3304. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-p33.1
3305. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p5.1
3306. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p30.14
3307. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-p20.3
3308. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p33.3
3309. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p33.5
3310. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p33.2
3311. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p33.6
3312. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p10.3
3313. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p74.4
3314. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p30.13
3315. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-p10.2
3316. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p32.2
3317. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-p26.3
3318. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p16.2
3319. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p2.1
3320. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p12.1
3321. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p4.1
3322. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p4.4
3323. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p10.4
3324. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-p31.3
3325. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p77.1
3326. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p86.1
3327. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p102.1
3328. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p103.1
3329. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p106.1
3330. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p49.1
3331. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p23.2
3332. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-p20.8
3333. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p74.5
3334. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-p26.4
3335. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p30.1
3336. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p20.1
3337. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p31.1
3338. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p16.1
3339. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p33.1
3340. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p4.2
3341. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p30.3
3342. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p26.1
3343. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-p23.1
3344. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p28.3
3345. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p37.3
3346. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p23.4
3347. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p32.1
3348. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p7.5
3349. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-p25.1
3350. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p35.2
3351. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p24.1
3352. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p10.3
3353. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p53.2
3354. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p31.3
3355. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p36.2
3356. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p28.4
3357. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p53.1
3358. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p4.4
3359. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p26.3
3360. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p26.2
3361. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p106.3
3362. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p10.5
3363. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-p37.1
3364. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p3.2
3365. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p3.6
3366. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-p37.3
3367. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p24.1
3368. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p15.1
3369. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p15.2
3370. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p15.3
3371. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-p23.2
3372. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p12.2
3373. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p10.1
3374. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p22.5
3375. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-p26.2
3376. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p21.1
3377. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p33.1
3378. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p125.1
3379. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p102.2
3380. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p106.4
3381. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_6-p4.2
3382. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p10.6
3383. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p74.4
3384. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p30.4
3385. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-p20.1
3386. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p33.4
3387. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p71.2
3388. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p7.3
3389. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-p10.1
3390. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-p71.1
3391. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-p60.1
3392. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p10.1
3393. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p11.1
3394. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p57.2
3395. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p11.2
3396. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p12.1
3397. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p38.2
3398. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p12.3
3399. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p12.3
3400. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_6-p4.1
3401. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p28.2
3402. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p24.5
3403. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p24.6
3404. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p74.1
3405. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p3.4
3406. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-p32.4
3407. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p10.1
3408. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-p54.2
3409. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p105.1
3410. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-p12.1
3411. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-p12.2
3412. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p42.1
3413. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p81.3
3414. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p81.4
3415. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p22.3
3416. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p50.1
3417. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p155.2
3418. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-p55.1
3419. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p81.5
3420. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p81.6
3421. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p56.1
3422. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-p43.4
3423. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-p20.2
3424. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-p20.1
3425. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p56.2
3426. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p31.1
3427. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p45.4
3428. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p79.2
3429. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p155.1
3430. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p36.2
3431. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p25.2
3432. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p11.3
3433. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p14.1
3434. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p11.1
3435. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p12.1
3436. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p11.2
3437. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-p13.1
3438. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p84.1
3439. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p18.1
3440. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p104.1
3441. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p59.2
3442. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p27.1
3443. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p83.1
3444. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p90.1
3445. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p85.2
3446. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-p68.1
3447. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p4.2
3448. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p112.2
3449. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-p94.2
3450. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p154.1
3451. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-p35.2
3452. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p12.4
3453. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-p28.4
3454. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-p32.1
3455. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-p28.3
3456. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p30.4
3457. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p14.6
3458. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p14.7
3459. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-p45.3
3460. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p56.3
3461. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p14.4
3462. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p14.5
3463. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p41.1
3464. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p60.1
3465. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-p9.2
3466. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p11.1
3467. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p11.2
3468. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p37.8
3469. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p37.7
3470. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-p13.4
3471. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-p13.5
3472. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p43.2
3473. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-p48.1
3474. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-p24.1
3475. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p84.6
3476. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p60.2
3477. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p41.3
3478. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_6-p5.2
3479. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p37.3
3480. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p39.1
3481. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p39.3
3482. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-p22.2
3483. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p62.5
3484. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p24.2
3485. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p62.6
3486. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p24.1
3487. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-p37.5
3488. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p153.1
3489. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-p45.1
3490. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-p45.2
3491. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-p22.1
3492. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p34.1
3493. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p60.3
3494. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p41.4
3495. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p46.1
3496. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p43.1
3497. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p16.1
3498. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p52.10
3499. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p84.2
3500. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p15.6
3501. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p90.3
3502. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-p78.1
3503. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p90.4
3504. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p14.1
3505. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p133.1
3506. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p38.5
3507. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p62.2
3508. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-p38.7
3509. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p33.5
3510. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p33.4
3511. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p25.3
3512. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p25.4
3513. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p25.6
3514. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p26.3
3515. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p42.2
3516. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p10.5
3517. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p50.2
3518. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p10.4
3519. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-p50.1
3520. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p39.2
3521. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p42.1
3522. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p129.1
3523. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p179.2
3524. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p62.4
3525. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p12.2
3526. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p25.1
3527. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-p47.1
3528. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p46.5
3529. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p46.7
3530. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-p46.6
3531. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p56.1
3532. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p56.4
3533. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p62.3
3534. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-p48.2
3535. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-p39.2
3536. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-p4.2
3537. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-p71.1
3538. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_6-p5.1
3539. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-p119.1
3540. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-p89.6
3541. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p37.1
3542. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-p18.2
3543. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p37.2
3544. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p91.3
3545. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p91.4
3546. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p57.2
3547. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-p25.2
3548. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-p81.1
3549. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p104.2
3550. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p86.2
3551. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p84.3
3552. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p86.3
3553. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-p127.6
3554. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-p20.8
3555. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-p9.1
3556. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-p41.1
3557. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-p88.1
3558. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-p34.10
3559. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-p34.1
3560. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-p62.1
3561. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-p15.5
3562. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p74.3
3563. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-p5.1
3564. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-p39.3
3565. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-p4.3
3566. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-p37.2
3567. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p92.8
3568. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-p92.9
3569. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-p23.1
3570. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#-Page_i
3571. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#-Page_ii
3572. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#-Page_iii
3573. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i-Page_iv
3574. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i-Page_v
3575. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_1-Page_vi
3576. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_1-Page_vii
3577. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_viii
3578. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_ix
3579. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_x
3580. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xi
3581. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xii
3582. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xiii
3583. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xiv
3584. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xv
3585. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xvi
3586. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xvii
3587. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xviii
3588. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xix
3589. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xx
3590. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxi
3591. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxii
3592. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxiii
3593. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxiv
3594. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxv
3595. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxvi
3596. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxvii
3597. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxviii
3598. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxix
3599. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxx
3600. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxxi
3601. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_xxxii
3602. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iii-Page_1
3603. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv-Page_2
3604. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv-Page_3
3605. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_2-Page_4
3606. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_5
3607. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_6
3608. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_7
3609. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_8
3610. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_9
3611. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_10
3612. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_11
3613. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_12
3614. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_13
3615. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_14
3616. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_15
3617. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_16
3618. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_17
3619. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_18
3620. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_19
3621. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_20
3622. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_21
3623. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_22
3624. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_23
3625. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_24
3626. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_25
3627. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_26
3628. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_27
3629. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_28
3630. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_29
3631. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_30
3632. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_31
3633. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_32
3634. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_33
3635. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_34
3636. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_35
3637. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_36
3638. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_37
3639. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_38
3640. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.ii-Page_39
3641. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_40
3642. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_41
3643. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_42
3644. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_43
3645. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_44
3646. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_45
3647. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_46
3648. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_47
3649. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_48
3650. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_49
3651. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_50
3652. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_51
3653. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_52
3654. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_53
3655. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_54
3656. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_55
3657. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_56
3658. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_57
3659. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_58
3660. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_59
3661. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_60
3662. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_61
3663. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_62
3664. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_63
3665. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_64
3666. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_65
3667. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_3-Page_66
3668. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_67
3669. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_68
3670. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_69
3671. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_70
3672. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_71
3673. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_72
3674. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_73
3675. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_74
3676. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_75
3677. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_76
3678. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_77
3679. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_78
3680. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_79
3681. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_80
3682. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_81
3683. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_82
3684. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_83
3685. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_84
3686. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_85
3687. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_86
3688. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_87
3689. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_88
3690. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_89
3691. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.ii-Page_90
3692. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_91
3693. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_92
3694. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_93
3695. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_94
3696. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_95
3697. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_96
3698. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_97
3699. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_98
3700. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_99
3701. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_100
3702. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_101
3703. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_102
3704. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_103
3705. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_104
3706. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_105
3707. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_106
3708. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_107
3709. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_108
3710. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_109
3711. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_110
3712. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_111
3713. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_112
3714. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_113
3715. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_114
3716. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_115
3717. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_116
3718. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_117
3719. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_118
3720. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_119
3721. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iii-Page_120
3722. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_121
3723. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_122
3724. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_123
3725. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_124
3726. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_125
3727. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_126
3728. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_127
3729. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_128
3730. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_129
3731. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_130
3732. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_131
3733. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_132
3734. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_133
3735. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_134
3736. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_135
3737. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_136
3738. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_137
3739. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_138
3740. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_139
3741. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_140
3742. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_141
3743. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_142
3744. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_143
3745. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_144
3746. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_145
3747. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_146
3748. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_147
3749. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_148
3750. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#iv.iii.iv-Page_119
3751. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_150
3752. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_151
3753. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_152
3754. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_153
3755. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_154
3756. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_155
3757. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_156
3758. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_157
3759. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_158
3760. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_159
3761. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_160
3762. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_161
3763. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_162
3764. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_163
3765. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_164
3766. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_165
3767. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_166
3768. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v-Page_167
3769. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_168
3770. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_169
3771. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_170
3772. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_171
3773. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_172
3774. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_173
3775. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_174
3776. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_175
3777. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_176
3778. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_177
3779. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_178
3780. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_179
3781. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_180
3782. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_181
3783. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_182
3784. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_183
3785. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_184
3786. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_185
3787. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_186
3788. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_187
3789. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_188
3790. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_189
3791. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_190
3792. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_191
3793. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_192
3794. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_193
3795. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_194
3796. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_195
3797. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_196
3798. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_197
3799. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_198
3800. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi-Page_199
3801. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_200
3802. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_201
3803. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_202
3804. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_203
3805. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_204
3806. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_205
3807. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_206
3808. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_207
3809. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_208
3810. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_209
3811. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_210
3812. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_211
3813. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_212
3814. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_213
3815. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_214
3816. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_215
3817. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_216
3818. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_217
3819. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_218
3820. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_219
3821. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_220
3822. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_221
3823. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_222
3824. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_223
3825. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_224
3826. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_225
3827. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_226
3828. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_227
3829. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_228
3830. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_229
3831. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_230
3832. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_231
3833. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii-Page_232
3834. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_233
3835. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_234
3836. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_235
3837. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_236
3838. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_237
3839. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_238
3840. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_239
3841. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_240
3842. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_241
3843. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_242
3844. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii-Page_243
3845. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_244
3846. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_245
3847. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_246
3848. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_247
3849. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_248
3850. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_249
3851. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_250
3852. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_251
3853. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_252
3854. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix-Page_253
3855. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#x-Page_254
3856. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#x-Page_255
3857. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v_1-Page_256
3858. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v_1-Page_257
3859. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_4-Page_258
3860. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_259
3861. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_260
3862. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_261
3863. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_262
3864. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_263
3865. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_264
3866. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_265
3867. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_266
3868. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.ii-Page_267
3869. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_268
3870. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_269
3871. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_270
3872. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_271
3873. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_272
3874. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_273
3875. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_274
3876. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_275
3877. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iii-Page_276
3878. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_277
3879. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_278
3880. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_279
3881. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_280
3882. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_281
3883. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_282
3884. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_283
3885. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_284
3886. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_285
3887. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.iv-Page_286
3888. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_287
3889. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_288
3890. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_289
3891. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_290
3892. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_291
3893. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_292
3894. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_293
3895. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_294
3896. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_295
3897. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_296
3898. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_297
3899. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_298
3900. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_299
3901. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_300
3902. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#v.v-Page_301
3903. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_302
3904. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_303
3905. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_304
3906. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_305
3907. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_306
3908. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_307
3909. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_308
3910. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_309
3911. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_310
3912. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_311
3913. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_312
3914. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi_1-Page_313
3915. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_314
3916. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_315
3917. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_316
3918. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_217
3919. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_318
3920. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_319
3921. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_320
3922. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_321
3923. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_322
3924. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_1-Page_323
3925. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_324
3926. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_325
3927. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_326
3928. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_327
3929. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_328
3930. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_329
3931. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_330
3932. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_331
3933. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_332
3934. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_333
3935. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_334
3936. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_335
3937. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_336
3938. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_1-Page_337
3939. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_338
3940. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_339
3941. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_340
3942. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_341
3943. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_342
3944. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_343
3945. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_344
3946. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_345
3947. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_346
3948. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_5-Page_347
3949. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_348
3950. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_349
3951. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_350
3952. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_351
3953. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_352
3954. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_353
3955. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_354
3956. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_355
3957. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_356
3958. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_357
3959. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.ii-Page_358
3960. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_359
3961. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_360
3962. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_361
3963. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_362
3964. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_363
3965. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_364
3966. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_365
3967. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_366
3968. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_367
3969. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_368
3970. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_369
3971. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iii-Page_370
3972. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_371
3973. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_372
3974. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_373
3975. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_374
3976. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_375
3977. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_376
3978. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_377
3979. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_378
3980. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_379
3981. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_380
3982. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_381
3983. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.iv-Page_382
3984. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_383
3985. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_384
3986. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_386
3987. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_387
3988. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_388
3989. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_389
3990. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_390
3991. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_391
3992. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.v-Page_392
3993. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_393
3994. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_394
3995. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_395
3996. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_396
3997. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_397
3998. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_398
3999. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_399
4000. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_400
4001. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_401
4002. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vi.vi-Page_402
4003. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_403
4004. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_404
4005. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_405
4006. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_406
4007. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_407
4008. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_408
4009. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_409
4010. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_410
4011. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_411
4012. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_412
4013. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_2-Page_413
4014. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_3-Page_414
4015. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii_3-Page_415
4016. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_6-Page_416
4017. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#i_6-Page_417
4018. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_418
4019. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_419
4020. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_420
4021. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_421
4022. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_422
4023. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_423
4024. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_424
4025. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_425
4026. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_426
4027. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.ii-Page_427
4028. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_428
4029. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_429
4030. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_430
4031. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_431
4032. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_432
4033. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_433
4034. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iii-Page_434
4035. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_435
4036. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_436
4037. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_437
4038. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_438
4039. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_439
4040. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_440
4041. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_441
4042. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_442
4043. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_443
4044. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.iv-Page_444
4045. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_445
4046. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_446
4047. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_447
4048. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_448
4049. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_449
4050. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_450
4051. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_451
4052. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_452
4053. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.v-Page_453
4054. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_454
4055. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_455
4056. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_456
4057. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_457
4058. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_458
4059. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_459
4060. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_460
4061. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_461
4062. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_462
4063. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_463
4064. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vi-Page_464
4065. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_465
4066. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_466
4067. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_467
4068. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_468
4069. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_469
4070. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_470
4071. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_471
4072. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_472
4073. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_473
4074. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_474
4075. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_475
4076. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#vii.vii-Page_476
4077. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_477
4078. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_478
4079. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_479
4080. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_480
4081. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_481
4082. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_482
4083. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_483
4084. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_484
4085. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_485
4086. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_486
4087. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_487
4088. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_488
4089. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_489
4090. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_490
4091. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_491
4092. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_492
4093. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_493
4094. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#viii_2-Page_494
4095. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_495
4096. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_496
4097. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_497
4098. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_498
4099. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_499
4100. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_500
4101. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_501
4102. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_502
4103. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_503
4104. file:///ccel/m/manton/manton01/cache/manton01.html3#ix_1-Page_504
