     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Messiah Vol. 2
      Creator(s): Newton, John (1725-1807)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Sermons;
     __________________________________________________________________

   MESSIAH

   Fifty Expository Discourses

   Preached in the years 1784 and 1785

   by John Newton

   VOLUME II

   Digitized by Susanna K. Martens
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXVI

   The Ascension of Messiah to Glory

   Psalm 24:7-10

   Lift up your head, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors;

   and the King of glory shall come in.

   Who is this King of glory?

   The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in battle.

   Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting
   doors;

   and the King of glory shall come in.

   Who is this King of glory?

   The LORD of hosts, he is the King of glory.

   T he institutions of the Levitical law were a "shadow" or "sketch" of
   good things to come. They exhibited a faint and general outline of the
   mediation and glory of MESSIAH. They may be compared to the delicate
   engravings on a seal, the beauty and proportions of which cannot be
   plainly discerned without the assistance of a magnifying glass. The
   Gospel answers to such a glass. Beheld through this medium, the
   miniature delineations of the law, which to the eye of unassisted
   un-humbled reason, appear confused and insignificant; display a
   precision of arrangement in the parts, and an importance of design in
   the whole, worthy the wisdom of their great Author.

   From the similarity of the subject of this 24 ^th Psalm and the 68 ^th
   , it is at least probable that they were both composed upon the same
   occasion --the removal of the Ark of the Lord from its last stationary
   residence, to its fixed abode in Zion, when the king, the priests, the
   singers and the harpers all assisted in the procession; attended by a
   great concourse of the people. The language of the latter part of the
   Psalm is evidently alternate. And we may conceive that when the Ark
   approached the Tabernacle, the priests and Levites who accompanied it
   demanded admittance for it in these words, Lift up you heads, O ye
   gates, etc., and were answered by those who were waiting within to
   receive it, Who is the King of glory? To which question the proper
   reply is made, The LORD of hosts, He is the King of glory.

   This, if taken according to the letter of history, was a grand and
   solemn transaction. But at the same time it was a type [prophetic
   symbol] of an event unspeakably more glorious. They who know that the
   Scriptures of the Old Testament testify of Christ, that it is He of
   whom Moses in the Law, David in the Psalms, and all the succeeding
   prophets wrote, will I think, agree in considering this passage as
   referring to His ascension, in the nature in which He suffered, into
   the true holy place in the heavens, as the representative and High
   Priest of His people; when, after having by His own self purged our
   sins, He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Then having
   spoiled principalities and powers, He triumphed over them openly,
   though not in the view of mortal eyes. He lifted up His hands, and
   blessed His apostles, and while in this attitude He was parted from
   them (Luke 24:51) . He ascended gently and gradually, and they,
   admiring and adoring, beheld Him with fixed attention, till a cloud
   concealed them from their sight (Acts 1:9) . The pomp and triumph of
   His ascension were displayed in the invisible world. But this
   description, accommodated to our apprehensions, is given to assist the
   faith of His people; that their hearts may be comforted, their
   meditations enlarged, and that in the exercise of grateful love, they
   may follow Him in their thoughts, ascend with Him into the heavenly
   places, and rejoice in His glory.

   We conceive of Him, therefore, from this sublime passage, as ascending
   to His Father and our Father; to His God and our God; accompanied with
   a train of worshipping angels, who demand admittance for MESSIAH the
   Saviour and friend of sinners, as the King of glory. The question is
   asked, who is He that claims this honour? An answer is given, asserting
   His character, His victories, and the justice of His claims -- The LORD
   of Hosts, the LORD strong in battle, He is the King of glory!

   The principal points which offer to our consideration, are,

   I. His title, the LORD of Hosts

   II. His victories, implied in the expression The LORD strong and mighty
   in battle.

   III. His mediatorial title, the King of glory.

   IV. His authoritative entrance into the holy place

   I.

   MESSIAH , who humbled Himself to the death of the cross, is the LORD of
   Hosts. He is so, if the Scripture be true; I attempt no other proof.
   This is a point not referred to in the discussion of our fallen reason,
   but proposed by the authority of God in His Word, as the foundation of
   our faith and hope. He is the husband of the Church; and the husband of
   the Church is the LORD of Hosts (Isaiah 54:5) It was the LORD of Hosts
   whom Isaiah saw seated upon a throne, His train filling the temple
   (Isaiah 6:1) . The vision filled him with astonishment, and he cried
   out, Woe is me, I am undone; for mine eyes have seen the LORD of Hosts.
   But the Apostle John assures us, that when Isaiah said these things he
   saw His glory and spake of Him (John 12:41) . This is the title of God
   in the Old Testament; or, as some choose to speak, of the Supreme
   Being. And it is ascribed to MESSIAH in many places. Therefore if He
   were not the LORD of Hosts, the Scripture would be chargeable with
   authorizing, yea, with enjoining idolatry. But He is the true God and
   eternal life (I John 5:20) : and they who give Him the true honour due
   to His name, have everything to hope for, and nothing to fear.

   II.

   He is the LORD, strong and mighty in battle. It was in His human nature
   that by Himself He engaged with His enemies and ours, and the victory
   was the LORD's. Therefore, tho' He trod the winepress alone , and of
   the people there was none with Him (Isaiah 63:3) , His own arm brought
   Him salvation. He is the Conqueror of Satan, sin, and death. We were
   under the domination of these, therefore for our sakes He engaged in
   conflict with their united force. He fought, He bled, He died; but in
   dying He conquered. The strength of sin is the law. He subdued this
   strength by obeying the precepts of the Law, and by sustaining the
   penalty due to our transgressions. He defeated death, and disarmed it
   of its sting. He destroyed him that had the power of death, Satan. He
   shook, He overturned the dominions of his kingdom, broke open the
   prison-doors, released his prisoners, delivered the prey out of the
   hand of the mighty, and having spoiled principalities and powers, He
   made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it (Colossians
   2:15) that is, His cross. The Apostle alludes to the manner of a Roman
   triumph, in which the conqueror was drawn in a chariot of state,
   attended by his officers and soldiers; the principal prisoners followed
   in chains, and all the treasures and trophies, gained from the
   vanquished enemy, were displayed to adorn the procession. Thus MESSIAH
   subdued the strength and policy of the powers of darkness, in the hour
   of His lowest humiliation, when He hung and expired upon the cross;
   and, when He ascended on high He triumphed over them, gloriously
   leading captivity captive (Psalm, 68:18) . Satan, though still an enemy
   to His Church and Cause, is despoiled of his dominion; his power is
   only permissive, and in his fiercest assaults, he is limited by bounds
   which he cannot pass; by a chain which he cannot break. And all his
   attempts are controlled and overruled, to the furtherance of the Cause
   he would suppress, and to the good of the persons whom he would worry
   and destroy. They are made acquainted with his devices, furnished with
   armour sufficient to repel him; and they fight under encouragement of a
   sure promise, that the God of peace will shortly and finally bruise
   Satan under their feet. As MESSIAH their King has conquered for them,
   so they in due time shall be made more than conquerors, by faith in His
   blood, and by the word of His testimony.

   III.

   The title of King of glory,' I understand as being peculiarly
   applicable to Him in the character of Mediator. The glory of His divine
   nature is essential to Him. But in consequence of His obedience unto
   death, He obtained in the human nature, a name that is above every name
   (Philippians 2:9). He suffered as a man, yea, as a malefactor; there
   was no appearance of glory in that form of a servant which He assumed
   for our sakes. Though without sin, He was made in the likeness of
   sinful flesh, subject to poverty, disgrace, and death; but the same man
   who was crucified, dead, and buried, received glory and authority at
   His resurrection, and was highly exalted to the administration of all
   dominion and government. Perhaps the world glory is not easily defined.
   We conceive it as expressing brightness and splendour. The glory of
   Solomon was the combined effect of his wisdom, power, and riches; which
   distinguished him, from other men, in his character, conduct, and
   appearance. The glory of the sun, is its effulgence and influence. The
   word glory, when applied to the blessed God, seems to denote that
   manifestation of Himself by which His intelligent creatures are capable
   of knowing Him; for in Himself, He is infinite, inaccessible, and
   incomprehensible, and dwells in that light which no man, which no
   creature, can approach unto (I Timothy 6:16) . Of this manifestation
   there are various degrees. --His glory shines in the creation. Not only
   do the heavens declare it by their immensity (Psalm 19:1) , and furnish
   us with an idea of His unspeakable greatness, who has sent forth ten
   thousand worlds to tell us, that He resides above them all; but the
   smallest of His works, the grass and flowers of the field, the insects
   which creep upon the ground (Psalm 104:24, 25) , bear an impression of
   His wisdom and goodness, an inimitable criterion of His wonder-working
   hand, which so far displays His glory. --To an attentive and discerning
   mind, His glory shines in His Providence; in His preserving the world
   which He has made; in supplying the various wants of His creatures, and
   particularly in His moral government of mankind. Here, besides His
   wisdom, power, and general goodness, we discover some traces of His
   character as the righteous Judge of the earth. But to our limited
   capacities and views, this glory is obscured by many difficulties.
   Though righteousness and judgment are the habitation of His throne, yet
   clouds and darkness are round about Him (Psalm 97:2) . --By His holy
   Word, His revealed will, we are favoured with a still brighter display
   of His glory, in the perfections of holiness, justice, truth, and
   mercy, which fallen man is unable clearly to discover in His works of
   creation and providence. --But chiefly His Son is the brightness of His
   glory, and the express image of His Person (Hebrews 1:3) . No one has
   seen God at any time, but the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of
   the Father (John 1:1) , intimately acquainted with His counsels, He has
   declared Him. This was the great design of His Advent, to make God
   known to man: for it is life eternal to know the only true God, so He
   is only to be known in and by Jesus Christ, whom He has sent (John
   17:3) , and who is the Way and the Door, and there is no entrance to
   the knowledge of God but by Him. In the Person and Work of MESSIAH ,
   the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, the brightness and
   harmony of all His attributes, is transcendently revealed. In this
   sense He is the LORD, the King of glory. When we are enlightened by the
   Holy Spirit, to conceive of Him according to the testimony given of Him
   in the Scripture, we see the glory of God. Other discoveries of it are
   but scattered rays and emanations of light; but, in Jesus, the glory of
   God resides in its source and fulness, as light in the sun. He is
   therefore the King of glory.

   IV.

   He ascended, in the nature of man, as the acknowledged King of glory .
   The everlasting gates unfolded wide, and He entered into the holy
   place, not made with hands, there to appear in the presence of God for
   His people,

   (1.)

   As their REPRESENTATIVE . The glory is properly His own, the benefit
   redounds to His people. Sin had excluded them from the Kingdom, but He
   claimed and took possession, in their name (Hebrews 6:20) . Hence He is
   styled their Forerunner, because by virtue of their relation to Him,
   and their interest in Him, they shall surely follow Him. This is the
   encouragement of Believers. He is the Head of His Body the Church; and
   though the Church, while in this world, is in a suffering perilous
   state, yet as the body of a man is not in danger of drowning, while his
   head is out of the water, so our Forerunner and Head being in heaven on
   their (our) behalf, He will assuredly draw all His living members to
   Himself. He has said, Because I live you shall live also (John 14:19) .
   And He has stipulated for them, that each in his appointed time, they
   shall be with Him where He is to behold His glory (John 17:24)

   (2.)

   As their HIGH PRIEST and INTERCESSOR . He presents their persons and
   their prayers acceptable to God. He bears the iniquity of their holy
   things. With this encouragement, weak and unworthy as they are in
   themselves, and though their best services are polluted, they find a
   liberty of access; and because He ever lives, thus to make intercession
   for all who come to God by Him (Hebrews 7:25) , they know that He is
   able to save them to the uttermost.

   (3.)

   Though the heavens must receive and contain the holy human nature, till
   the restitution of all things, He is not unmindful of them in their
   present circumstances. He is seated upon the Throne of universal
   dominion, and He exercises His authority and rule, with an especial
   view to their welfare. While He pleads for them on high, He is present
   with them below by the power of His Spirit. He comforts their hearts,
   enlivens their assembles, and manages their concerns. He is their
   Shepherd, who gives them food, controls their enemies, revives their
   fainting spirits, and restores their wanderings (Psalm 23) His ear is
   open to their prayers, His eye is upon them in every situation, and His
   arm stretched forth for their relief. Therefore, though persecuted,
   they are not forsaken; though cast down, they are not destroyed. And He
   has promised that He will not leave them, until He has done all that
   for them, which His Word has taught them to hope for; until He has made
   them victorious over all their enemies, and put the conqueror's song in
   their mouths, and a crown of life upon their heads.

   This High and Holy One, this King of glory, who is seated on the throne
   of heaven, dwells also in the humble and lowly spirit. He thus solemnly
   claims the throne of the heart of each of His people, which in a state
   of nature is usurped by self and Satan; and He is thus willingly
   acknowledged and admitted in the day of His power. Behold! He stands at
   the door and knocks (Revelation 3:20) ; and because He is as yet
   unknown, He is for a while rejected. The bolts and bars of prejudice
   and unbelief withstand His entrance. But when He comes on a purpose of
   grace, He will take no denial. For a season He waits to be gracious.
   But He has an appointed hour, when He reveals His great name, and makes
   the soul sensible to who He is! Then the gates of brass and bars of
   iron are broken before Him. His greatness and His goodness, what He is
   in Himself, and what He has done and suffered for sinners, are motives
   which cannot be resisted when they are truly understood. Satan, who as
   the strong one armed,' long laboured to hinder Him from His rightful
   possession, is himself dispossessed. The soul laments its former
   obstinacy, throws down its arms, throws wide open its doors, and bids
   the King of glory welcome. Then old things pass away, and all things
   become new. Such was the change the poor man experienced, out of whom
   Jesus cast a legion of evil spirits. At first, if he could, he would
   have prevented His kind purpose; he was afraid of his Deliverer and
   said, I beseech Thee torment me not (Mark 5:7) . How wretched was his
   state then, miserable in himself, and a terror to others! But what a
   wonderful and happy alteration, when he sat quietly at his Saviour's
   feet, clothed and in his right mind!

   I close the subject with the Apostle's inference, Seeing then that we
   have so great a High Priest, who is passed into the heavens, Jesus the
   Son of God, let us hold fast our profession (Hebrews 4:14) . Let not
   those who know Him be ashamed of their attachment to Him. You will not
   repent in a dying hour, that you once thought too highly of Him, or
   devoted yourself with too much earnestness to His service. Nor yield to
   unbelief and fear. Though your enemies are many and mighty, and your
   trials great, greater is He that is with you. If the Lord, the Lord of
   hosts, the Lord strong and mighty in battle be for you, who can be
   against you, so as eventually to harm you? Continue instant in prayer,
   persevere in well-doing. Our ascended Lord will one day return; and
   then they who have lived for, and served and trusted Him here, shall
   appear with Him in glory (Colossians 3:4)

   Others, if they can, must prepare to meet Him. But alas! How shall they
   stand before Him? Or whither shall they flee from Him whose presence
   fills heaven and earth? (Jeremiah 23:24) . Have they an arm like God?
   Or can they thunder with a voice like His? As yet He is proclaimed by
   the Gospel, as a Saviour, seated upon a throne of grace, stretching
   forth the golden sceptre of His love, and inviting sinners to be
   reconciled. Now is the accepted time. Hereafter He will be seen upon a
   Throne of Judgment, to take vengeance of His enemies.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXVII

   Messiah the Son of God

   Hebrews 1:5

   For to which of the angels said He at any time,

   Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee?

   T hough every part of a revelation from God must of course be equally
   true, there may be a considerable difference even among truths proposed
   by the same authority, with respect to their immediate importance.
   There are fundamental truths, the knowledge of which are essentially
   necessary to our peace and holiness: and there are others of a
   secondary nature, which, though very useful in their proper connection,
   and though the right apprehension of them is greatly conducive to the
   comfort and establishment of a believer; are not so necessary, but that
   he may be a true believer before he clearly understands them. Thus our
   Lord pronounced Peter, "Blessed" (Matthew 16:17) , for his
   acknowledgment of a truth, which had been revealed to him, not by flesh
   and blood, but from above, though he was at that time very deficient in
   doctrinal knowledge. It is not easy to draw the line here, and
   precisely to distinguish between fundamental and secondary truths; yet
   some attention to this distinction is expedient; and the want of this
   attention has greatly attributed to foment and embittered controversies
   in the Church of Christ; while fallible men, from a mistaken zeal for
   the faith once delivered to the saints, have laboured to enforce all
   their religious sentiments, with an equal and indiscriminate vehemence.
   It is evident that the truths essential to the very being of a
   Christian, must be known, and experienced by all, of every nation,
   people and language, who are taught of God (Isaiah 54:13) . For they,
   and they only, are Christians indeed, who are thus taught. And
   therefore it seems to follow, that no doctrine, however true in itself,
   which humble and spiritual persons who study the Scripture with prayer,
   and really depend upon divine teaching, are not agreed in, can be
   strictly fundamental. And perhaps the chief part of the apparent
   diversity of their sentiments, does not so often respect the truth
   itself, as the different acceptation they put upon the words and
   phrases, by which they endeavour to express their meaning to each
   other.

   However, if there be any doctrine fundamental and necessary to be
   rightly understood, what the Scripture teaches concerning the person of
   MESSIAH the Redeemer, must be eminently so. Mistakes upon this point,
   must necessarily be dangerous. It cannot be a question of mere
   speculation, whether the Saviour be God, or creature. He must be either
   the one or the other. And the whole frame of our religion is
   unavoidably dependant upon the judgment we form of Him. If he be a man
   only, or if he be an angel, though of the highest order, and possessed
   of excellencies peculiar to himself; still upon the supposition that he
   is but a creature, he must be infinitely inferior to his Maker, in
   comparison of whose immensity the difference between and angel and a
   worm is annihilated. Then all they who pay divine worship to Jesus, who
   love Him above all, trust Him with all their concerns for time and
   eternity, and address Him in the language of Thomas, My Lord, and my
   God , (John 20:28) , are involved in the gross and heinous crime of
   idolatry, by ascribing to Him that glory which the great God has
   declared He will not give to another' (Isaiah 42:8) . On the contrary,
   if He be God over all, blessed forever, Jehovah, the LORD of hosts,
   then they who refuse Him the honour due His name, worship they know not
   what (John 4:22) . For there is but one God; and according to this
   plan, they who know Him not in Christ, know Him not at all, but are
   without God in the world (Ephesians 2:12) . The judgment we form of the
   Saviour demonstrates, likewise, how far we know ourselves. For it may
   be fairly presumed, that they who think a creature capable of making
   atonement for their sins, or of sustaining the office of shepherd and
   bishop of their souls, have too slight thoughts both of the evil of
   sin, and of the weakness and wickedness of the human heart.

   We ascribe it, therefore, to the wisdom and goodness of God, that a
   doctrine so important, the very pillar and ground of truth, is not
   asserted once, or in a few places of Scripture only. It does not depend
   upon texts which require a nice skill in criticism, or a collation of
   ancient manuscripts, to settle their sense; but, like the blood of the
   animal economy, it pervades and enlivens the whole system of
   revelation. The books of Moses, the Psalms, and the prophets, all
   testify of Him, who was styled the Son of God in so peculiar a sense,
   that the Apostle, in this passage, considers it as a sufficient proof
   that He is by nature superior to all creatures. The form of the
   question implies the strongest assertion of this superiority; as if He
   had said, Conceive of the highest and most exalted of the angels, it
   would be absurd to suppose that God would say to him, Thou art my Son,
   today have I begotten thee

   The verse contains three terms which require explanation. My Son ,'
   Begotten ,' and This Day .' But who is sufficient for these things? If
   I attempt to explain them, I wish to speak with caution and with
   modesty becoming the sense I ought to have of my own weakness, and to
   keep upon safe ground; lest instead of elucidating so sublime a
   subject, I should darken counsel by words without knowledge. And, in
   these enquiries, I know of no safe ground to go upon but the sure
   testimony of Scripture. It would be improper to the last degree to
   indulge flights of imagination, or a spirit of curiosity, or conjecture
   upon this occasion. Those are the deep things of God., in which if we
   have not the guidance of His Word and Spirit, we shall certainly
   bewilder ourselves. Nor would I speak in a positive dogmatizing strain.
   At the same time I trust the Scripture will afford light sufficient, to
   preserve us from a cold and comfortless uncertainty.

   The gracious design of God in affording us His holy Scripture, is to
   make us wise unto salvation (II Timothy 3:15) His manner of teaching is
   therefore accommodated to our circumstances. He instructs in heavenly
   things by earthly. And to engage our confidence, to excite our
   gratitude, to animate us to our duty by the most affecting motives; and
   that the reverence we owe to His great and glorious Majesty, as our
   Creator and our Legislator, may be combined with love and cheerful
   dependence; He is pleased to reveal Himself by those names which
   express the nearest relation and endearment amongst ourselves. Thus He
   condescends to style Himself the Father, the Husband, and the Friend of
   His people. But though in this way we are assisted in forming our
   conceptions of His love, compassion, and faithfulness, it is obvious
   that these names, when applied to Him, must be understood in a sense
   agreeable to the perfections of His nature, and in many respects
   different from the meaning they bear amongst men. And thus, when we are
   informed that God has a Son, it is our part to receive His testimony,
   to admire and adore; and for an explanation adapted to our profit and
   comfort, we are to consult, not our own preconceived ideas, but the
   further declarations of His Word, comparing spiritual things with
   spiritual, attending to His instructions with the simplicity of
   children, and avoiding, as much as possible, those vain reasonings,
   upon points above our comprehension, which, though flattering to the
   pride of our hearts, are sure to indispose us for the reception of
   divine truth. A distinction of the Divine Nature inconceivable by us,
   but plainly revealed in terms, must be admitted upon the testimony and
   authority of Him who alone can instruct us in what we are concerned to
   know of His adorable essence. There are three that bear record in
   heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are
   one (I John 5:7) . The perfections of Deity are attributed and
   ascribed, in various parts of the Scripture, to each of these Three.
   Each of them, therefore, is God; and yet we are sure, both from
   Scripture and reason, that there is, there can be, but one God. Thus
   far we can go safely; and that we can go no further, that our thoughts
   are lost and overwhelmed if we attempt to represent to ourselves how or
   in what manner three are one, and one are three, may be easily
   accounted for, if any just reason can be given why a worm cannot
   comprehend infinity. Let us first, if we can, account for the nature,
   essence, and properties of things with which, as to their effects, we
   are familiarly acquainted. Let us explain the growth of a blade of
   grass, or the virtues of the loadstone. Till we are able to do this, it
   becomes us to lay our hands upon our mouths, and our mouths in the
   dust. Far from attempting to explain the doctrine of the Trinity to my
   hearers, I rather wish to leave an impression upon your minds, that it
   is, to us, (and perhaps to the highest created intelligences,)
   incomprehensible. But if it be contained in the Scripture, (which I
   must leave to your own consciences to determine in the sight of God,)
   it is thereby sufficiently proved; and humble faith requires no other
   proof.

   Allow me to confirm my own sentiments, by and observation of a
   celebrated French ^* writer to the following purport: --The whole
   difference, with respect to this subject, between the common people and
   the learned doctors, is, that while they are both equally ignorant, the
   ignorance of the people is modest and ingenuous, and they do not blush
   for being unable to see what God has thought fit to conceal. Whereas
   the ignorance of their teachers is proud and affected; they have
   recourse to scholastic distinctions, and abstract reasonings, that they
   may not be thought upon a level with the vulgar.' ^* Jakob Abbadie
   (1654?-1727)

   The form of baptism prescribed by our Lord for the use of His Church,
   is thus expressed, Baptizing them in the name of the Father , and of
   the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matthew 28:19) . It is evident, by
   comparing this sentence with that which I before recited from the
   epistle of John, that the Word and the Son are synonymous terms,
   expressive of the same character. They are both the titles of MESSIAH.
   Of Him John spoke, when he said, The Word was made flesh, and dwelt
   among us ; and of Him God the Father said, Thou art my Son, this day
   have I begotten thee. Had God spoken thus to an angel, it would have
   been in effect saying, Thou art the Word, which in the beginning was
   with God, and was God, by whom all things were made. But to which of
   all the angels would the great God use language like this?

   Our Lord, in His conference with Nicodemus, was pleased to say, God so
   loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son , etc. (John 3:16) .
   It was undoubtedly His design, by this expression, to give to
   Nicodemus, and to us the highest idea possible of the love of God to
   sinners. He so loved the world beyond description or comparison, that
   He gave His only begotten Son. Surely, then, the gift spoken of must
   not be limited to the human nature only. This was not all that He gave.
   The human nature was the medium of the acts and sufferings of MESSIAH;
   but He who assumed it was the Word, who was before all, and by whom all
   things were made. It is true the human nature was given ,
   supernaturally formed by divine power, and born of a virgin. But He who
   was in the beginning God with God, was given to appear, obey, and
   suffer in the nature of man, for us and for our salvation. And to Him
   are ascribed the perfections and attributes of Deity; of which the
   highest angels are no more capable, than the worms which creep upon the
   earth.

   I cannot, therefore, suppose, that the title Son of God, is merely a
   title of office, or belonging only to the nature which He assumed. But
   that MESSIAH is the Son of God, as He is God and man in one person. If
   the forming of a perfect and spotless man, like Adam when he was first
   created, could have effected our salvation, it would have been a great
   and undeserved mercy to have vouchsafed [graciously granted] the gift;
   but I think it would not have required such very strong language as the
   Scripture uses, in describing the gift of the Son of God. The God-man,
   the whole person of Christ, was sent, came forth from the Father. The
   manhood was the offering, but the Word of God, possessed of the
   perfections of Deity, was the altar necessary to sanctify the gift, and
   to give a value and efficacy to the atonement.

   The term begotten , expresses with us the ground of relation between
   Father and Son, and upon which an only son is the heir of the father. I
   feel and confess myself to be at a loss here. I might take up your
   time, and perhaps conceal my own ignorance, by borrowing from the
   writings of wiser and better men than myself, a detail of what have
   been generally reputed the more prevailing orthodox sentiments on this
   subject. But I dare not go beyond my own ideas. I shall not, therefore,
   attempt to explain the phrase eternal generation , because I must
   acknowledge that I do not clearly understand it myself. Long before
   time began, the purpose of constituting the Mediator between God and
   sinners, was established in the Divine Counsels. With reference to
   this, He Himself speaks in the character of the Wisdom of God. The Lord
   possessed me in the beginning of His way, before His works of old. I
   was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.
   Then I was by Him, as one brought up with Him, rejoicing always before
   Him; rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth, and my delights
   were among the sons of men (Proverbs 8:22, 31) . If the Word of God had
   not engaged according to an everlasting and sure covenant, to assume
   our nature, and to accomplish our salvation, before the earth was
   formed, He would not have appeared afterwards; for we cannot with
   reason conceive of any new determinations arising in the mind of the
   infinite God; to whom, what we call the past and the future, are
   equally present. In this sense, (if the expression be proper to convey
   such a sense) I can conceive that He was the begotten Son of God from
   eternity. That is, set up and appointed from eternity for the office,
   nature, and work, by which, in the fulness of time, He was manifested
   to men. But if the terms, begotten , or eternal generation , be used to
   denote the manner of His eternal existence in Deity, I must be silent.
   I believe Him to be the eternal Son; I believe Him to be the eternal
   God. And I wish not to exercise my thoughts and enquiries more than is
   needful, in things which are too high for me.

   The Scripture, in different places, evidently applies the purport of
   this phrase I have begotten thee,' to transactions which took place in
   time, This Day, and particularly to two principal events.

   (1.)

   His INCARNATION . Thus the angel said to Mary, The Holy Ghost shall
   come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee
   (Luke 1:35) ; therefore also the holy thing which shall be born of
   thee, shall be called the Son of God. So the Apostle, In the fulness of
   time God sent forth His Son made of a woman (Galatians 4:4) . And in
   the passage we are next to consider, When He bringeth His
   first-begotten into the world, He saith, and let all the angels of God
   worship Him (Hebrews 1:6)

   (2.)

   His RESURRECTION . To this purpose our text is quoted from the second
   Psalm. The promise which was made unto the fathers, God hath fulfilled
   the same to the children, in that He hath raised up Jesus again; as it
   is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I
   begotten thee (Acts 13:32, 33) And in another place He teaches us, that
   He who was of the seed of David, according to the flesh, was declared
   to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness,
   by the resurrection from the dead (Romans 1:4)

   After all, I would remind you, that the best knowledge of the doctrine
   of the person of Christ, that which affords life and comfort to the
   soul, is to be obtained, not so much by enquiry and study on our part,
   as by a gracious manifestation on His part. Prayer, attention to the
   great Teacher, a humble perusal of the Scripture, and a course of
   simple obedience to His known will, are the methods which He has
   prescribed for our growth in grace, and in the knowledge of Himself.
   Thus even babes are made wise; while they who are wise and prudent in
   their own sight, the more they endeavour to investigate and ascertain
   the sense of Scripture, are frequently involved more and more in
   perplexity. He has given a promise and direction for the encouragement
   of those who sincerely seek Him. He that hath my commandments and
   keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me, shall be
   loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself unto
   him (John 14:21)

   This is He with whom we have to do. In and by this Son of His love, we
   have access by faith unto God. Unworthy and helpless in ourselves, from
   hence we derive our plea; here we find a refuge; and on this we rest,
   that God hath given us eternal life, and this life is in His Son; who
   is so much better than the angels, as He hath by inheritance obtained a
   more excellent name than they (Hebrews 1:4)

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXVIII

   Messiah Worshipped By Angels

   Hebrews 1:6

   Let all the angels of God worship Him.

   M any of the Lord's true servants, have been in a situation so nearly
   similar to that of Elijah, that like him they have been tempted to
   think they were left to serve the Lord alone (I Kings 19:10) . But God
   had then a faithful people, and He has so in every age. The preaching
   of the Gospel may be compared to a standard erected, to which they
   repair, and thereby become known to each other, and more exposed to the
   notice and observation of the world. But we hope there are always many
   who are enlightened by His Word and Holy Spirit, and training up in the
   life of faith and holiness, known and dear to God, though they have
   little advantage from public ordinances, and perhaps no opportunity of
   conversing with those who are like-minded with themselves. But even
   though the number of those who visibly profess the Gospel of the Grace
   of God were much smaller than it is, we need not be disheartened. If
   our sight could pierce into the invisible world, we should be satisfied
   that there are more with us than against us (II Kings 6:16) . And such
   power is attributed to faith. It is the evidence of things not seen
   (Hebrews 11:1) , because it receives the testimony of Scripture, and
   rests upon it as a certainty, and a demonstration; requiring no other
   proof, either of doctrines or facts, than that they are contained in
   the sure Word of God. True Christians, therefore, are comforted by the
   assurance they have, that their Saviour, the Lord of their hearts, is
   not so neglected and despised, nor His character so misunderstood and
   misrepresented in yonder land of light, as in this dark and degenerate
   world. Though too many here, like Festus, treat it as a matter of great
   indifference, whether Jesus be dead or alive (Acts 25:19) ; and ask
   them with a taunt, What is your Beloved more than another beloved? they
   are not ashamed, for they know whom they have believed; and if men will
   not join with them in admiring and praising Him, they are sure that
   they have the concurrence of far superior beings. By faith they behold
   Him seated upon a throne of glory, adored by all holy and happy
   intelligent creatures, whether angels, principalities, powers or
   dominions. And when He was upon earth, in a state of humiliation,
   though despised and rejected of men, He was seen and acknowledged by
   angels. Their warrant and ours is the same. He is proposed to us, as
   the object of our supreme love and dependence; and as we are enjoined
   to kiss the Son and pay Him homage, so when God brought Him into the
   world, He said, Let all the angels of God worship Him.

   Though the bringing of MESSIAH , the first or only begotten into the
   world, may, as I have observed already, be applied to His incarnation,
   or to His resurrection, I apprehend it rather designs the whole of His
   exhibition in the flesh. At His ascension, having finished the work
   appointed for Him to do, He was solemnly invested with authority and
   glory, and sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. But in
   His lowest, no less than in His exalted state, the dignity of His
   divine person is the same yesterday, today, and forever. He was always
   the proper object of worship. It was agreeable to right, and to the
   nature of things, and a command worthy of God, that all the angels of
   God should worship Him.

   The holy angels that excel in strength (Psalm 103:20) , always do His
   commandments, hearkening to the voice of His word. We might be certain,
   therefore, that this highest and most comprehensive command a creature
   is capable of receiving from his Creator, is fulfilled by them, even if
   he had no express information of the fact. But we have repeated
   assurances to this purpose. Thus Isaiah, when he saw His glory and
   spoke of Him, saw the seraphim standing; each one had six wings; with
   twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with
   twain he did fly. And one cried to another, Holy, holy, holy is the
   LORD of hosts, and the whole earth is full of His glory (Isaiah 6:2, 3)
   . I see not how the force of the argument, arising from this passage,
   can be evaded, to prove that MESSIAH is the proper object of the most
   solemn adoration which creatures can offer to the Most High; unless any
   were hardy enough to assert, either that the Prophet was himself
   imposed upon, or has imposed upon us by a false vision; or that the
   Apostle John was mistaken when he applied this representation to Jesus
   Christ (John 12:41) . But the Apostle likewise had a vision of the same
   effect; in which, while His people, redeemed from the earth by His
   blood, cast their crowns at His feet, the angels were also represented
   as joining in the chorus of their praises, saying with a loud voice,
   Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and
   wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing (Revelation
   5:12) . In brief, He is the Lord of angels. The heavenly hosts waited
   upon Him, and sang His praises at His birth (Luke 2:13, 14) . Angels
   ministered unto Him in the wilderness. And they are so entirely His
   servants, that at His command they are sent forth to minister unto, and
   attend upon, His believing people. Are they not all ministering spirits
   [worshipping spirits'] (Hebrews 1:14) , adoring the divine Majesty, yet
   sent forth to minister to [ to the service of' ] the heirs of
   salvation. He is likewise the Head of angels, though they are not in
   the same near relation to Him, as the sinners whom He has redeemed with
   His blood; for He took on Him their nature. There was no redemption
   appointed for the angels who kept not their first habitation. But the
   confirmation of those who continue in holiness and happiness, is in and
   through Him. For all things both in heaven, and which are on earth are
   gathered together in one in Him [are reduced under one head into one
   body] (Ephesians 1:10) . And they are therefore styled The elect angels
   (I Timothy 5:21) , in contradistinction from the others. He is their
   life, and strength, and joy, as He is ours, though they cannot sing the
   whole song of His people. It is appropriate to the saved amongst men to
   say, This God shines glorious in our nature, He loved us, and gave
   Himself for us.

   Here then, as I have mentioned, is a pattern and encouragement for us.
   The angels, the whole host of heaven, worship Him. He is Lord of all.
   We in this distant world have heard the report of His glory, have felt
   our need of such a Saviour, and are, in some degree, witnesses and
   proofs of His ability and willingness to save. He lived, He died, He
   arose, He reigns for us. Therefore humbly depending upon His promised
   grace, without which we can do nothing, we are resolved, that whatever
   others do, we must, we will worship Him, with the utmost powers of our
   souls. It is our determination and our choice, not only to praise and
   honour Him with our lips, but to devote ourselves to His service, to
   yield ourselves to His disposal, to entrust our all to His care, and to
   place our whole happiness in His favour. I hope, in speaking thus, I
   speak the language of many of your hearts.

   Some reflections easily offer from this subject, with which I shall
   close it.

   (1.)

   They who love Him, may rejoice in the thoughts of His glory. They have
   deeply sympathized with Him, when reading the history of His
   humiliation and passion. It has not been a light concern to them, that
   He endured agonies, that He was rejected, reviled, scourged and slain.
   He who suffered these things was their best friend, their beloved Lord,
   and He suffered for their sakes. In the glass [magnifying glass] of His
   Word, and by the light of His Holy Spirit, He has been set forth as
   crucified before their eyes. And they have been crucified with Him, and
   have had fellowship with Him in His death. From hence they derive their
   indignation against sin, and their indifference to the world, which
   treated Him thus. But now He is no more a man of sorrows; His head,
   which was once crowned with thorns, is now crowned with glory; His
   face, which was defiled with spittle, shines like the sun; His hands,
   which were manacled, wield the sceptre of universal government; and,
   instead of being surrounded with insulting men, He is now encircled by
   adoring angels. Therefore they rejoice with joy unspeakable, expecting
   soon to see Him as He is, and to be with Him forever, according to the
   gracious promises He has made them, and the tenor of His prevailing
   intercession for them.

   (2.)

   What an honour does His exaltation and glory, reflect upon His faithful
   followers? The world that rejected him pays little regard to them. They
   are slighted, or scorned, or pitied, and, in proportion as they
   manifest His Spirit, experience a degree of the treatment which He met
   with. They are accounted visionaries or hypocrites. Many of them are
   great sufferers. And few of them, comparatively, are distinguished
   among men by abilities, influence or wealth. They are pilgrims and
   strangers upon earth. Yet this God is their God. He who is worshipped
   by angels is not ashamed to call them brethren (Hebrews 2:11) . They
   are nearly [closely] related to Him who sits upon the Throne. And He is
   pleased to account them His portion, and His jewels. It doth not yet
   appear what they shall be . But the day is coming when their mourning
   shall be ended, their characters vindicated, and they shall shine like
   the sun in the Kingdom of their Lord. They shall stand before Him with
   confidence, and not be ashamed when He appears. Then shall the
   difference between the righteous and the wicked clearly be discerned.
   In that day the righteous shall say, Lo, this is our God, we have
   waited for Him, and He will save us: this is the LORD , we have waited
   for Him, we will be glad and rejoice in His salvation (Isaiah 25:9)
   .While the others, however once admired or feared by mortals, the kings
   of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, no less than those
   of inferior rank, shall tremble, shall wish in vain to conceal
   themselves, and shall say to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and
   hide us from the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne, for the
   great day of His wrath is come (Revelation 6:15, 16) In that hour, the
   striking description in the Book of Wisdom (which, though apocryphal,
   is in this passage quite consonant with the declarations of authentic
   Scripture) will assuredly be realized. Then shall the righteous man
   stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him,
   and made no account of his labours. When they see it, they shall be
   troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of
   his salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. And they
   repenting, and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within
   themselves, This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a
   proverb of reproach. We fools counted his life madness, and his end to
   be without honour. How is he numbered among the children of God, and
   his lot is among the saints! (Wisdom 5:1-5)

   (3.)

   We may well admire the condescension of this great King, who humbles
   Himself even to notice the worship of heaven; that He should look upon
   the worship of sinful men with acceptance, and permit such worms as we
   are to take His holy name upon our polluted lips. If we know ourselves,
   we must be conscious of such defects and defilement attending our best
   services, as are sufficient to affect us with shame and humiliation.
   What wanderings of imagination, what risings of evil thoughts, what
   unavoidable though unallowable workings of self-complacence, mingle
   with our prayers and praises, and disturb us in our secret retirements,
   in the public assembly, and even at the table of the Lord! I hope we
   know enough of this, to be sensible that we need forgiveness, not only
   for our positive transgressions of His will, but for our sincerest,
   warmest and most enlarged attempts to render Him glory due to His name!
   Yet we are incompetent and partial judges of ourselves; we know but
   little of the evil of our own hearts, and have but a slight sense of
   the malignity of that evil which is with our observation. But the Lord
   searches the heart and the reins, to Him all things are naked, without
   covering, open without concealment (Hebrews 4:13) . He understands our
   thoughts afar off, and beholds us exactly as we are. Our dislike of sin
   is proportional to our attainments in holiness, which are exceedingly
   short of the standard. But He is infinitely holy, and therefore evil is
   unspeakably hateful to Him. --How vile and abominable therefore must
   our sins appear in His view! Indeed, if He was strict to mark what is
   amiss, we could not stand a moment before Him. Nor would it be
   agreeable to His majesty and purity to accept any services or prayers
   at our hands, if we presumed to offer them in our own name. But now
   there is an atonement provided, and a way of access to the throne of
   Grace, sprinkled with the blood which speaks better things than the
   blood of Abel. Now that we have an Advocate, Intercessor, and High
   Priest, to bear the iniquity of our holy things, we are accepted in the
   Beloved. Now the great and holy God vouchsafes [graciously grants] to
   admit such sinners into communion with Himself. He invites us to draw
   near with boldness; and because of ourselves we know not how to pray as
   we ought, He favours us with the influence of His Holy Spirit (Romans
   8:26) . It is a great instance of the power of faith, that, remembering
   what we have been, and feeling what we are, and having some right
   apprehension of Him with whom we have to do, we are enabled to approach
   Him with confidence, and to open our hearts to Him, with greater
   liberty than we can use to our dearest earthly friends. His people know
   by many infallible proofs, that His presence is with them in their
   secret retirements, and in their public assemblies, according to His
   promise. He hears and answers their prayers, He revives their spirits,
   He renews their strength; He gives them reason to say that, a day in
   His courts is better than a thousand of the world's days. Such are
   their expectations, and such, in the exercise of faith, is their
   experience. They worship Him whom the angels worship; and they know
   that, unworthy and defective as they are, their worship is no less
   acceptable to Him than that of the angels in glory, by virtue of their
   relation to Him, who is Lord both of angels and men.

   (4.)

   Hence we may infer the necessity of that change of heart, which the
   Scripture expresses by a new birth, a new life, a new creation, and
   other representations, which denote it can only be effected by divine
   power. Till we are the subjects of this operation, we are incapable of
   enjoying or even of seeing the Kingdom of God (John 3:3) . Though to
   outward appearance the congregation before me seem all to be serious
   and attentive, as if engaged in the same design, and animated with the
   same desire and hope, He to whom our hearts are known, doubtless
   observes a great difference. Some of you, though custom or a regard to
   your connections bring you here, yet must be sensible that this is not
   your chosen ground, and that these are not the subjects that give you
   pleasure. We preach Christ Jesus and Him crucified --Christ Jesus the
   Lord. The Lord sees, though I cannot, the indispositions of your heart
   towards Him. You are soon weary and uneasy. And you wish to throw the
   blame of your uneasiness upon the preacher. You regard his method, his
   manner, his expressions, with no friendly intention, in hopes of
   noticing something that may seem to justify your dislike; and a sermon,
   not very long in itself, is to you very tedious. We wish well to your
   souls, we study to find out acceptable words; for though we dare not
   trifle with or flatter you, we are unwilling to give you just offence.
   But if you will be faithful to yourselves, you may perceive that it is
   not so much the length or the manner, as the subject of our sermons
   that disgusts you. You would, perhaps, hear with more attention and
   patience, if we spoke less of Him whom the angels worship. There are
   assemblies more suited to your taste, and there are public speakers to
   whom you can probably afford a willing ear, for a much longer time than
   we detain you. Because there you are at home. You are of the world, and
   you love the world. The amusements, the business, the conversations,
   and the customs of the world, suit your inclination. But here you are
   not, if I may so speak, in your proper element: and yet it may be,
   there are persons in the same seat with you, who think themselves happy
   to hear, what you hear with indifference or disgust. If you knew your
   state as a sinner, your need of a Saviour, and the excellence and glory
   of the Saviour whom we preach to you, you likewise would be pleased;
   and a preacher of very moderate powers would fix your attention, and
   gain your esteem, if he preached this Gospel. But what ideas do you
   form of a future state? Surely, you cannot suppose that in the eternal
   world you will meet with any of the poor expedients you have recourse
   to now, for filling up your time, which otherwise would hang heavy upon
   your hands. To attempt a detail of the round of vanities, which
   constitute a worldly life, would be unsuitable to the dignity of the
   pulpit. Let it suffice to say, that death will remove you from them
   all. If they are now necessary to what you account your happiness, must
   you not of course be miserable without them? If you believe that you
   shall exist hereafter, do you not desire heaven? But such a heaven as
   the Word of God describes could not afford you happiness, unless your
   mind be previously changed and disposed to relish it. Neither the
   employment nor the company of heaven would be pleasing to you. It is a
   state where all the inhabitants unite in admiring and adoring Him who
   died upon the cross. If this subject is displeasing to you here, it
   would be much more so there. Heaven itself would be a hell to an
   un-humbled, and unholy soul. Consider this seriously, while there is
   time to seek His face; and tremble at the thoughts of being cut off by
   death in your present state, insensible as you are of who He is, and
   what He has done for sinners. May He enlighten your understanding, and
   enable you to see things pertaining to your true peace, before they are
   forever hidden from your eyes.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXIX

   Gifts Received for the Rebellious

   Psalm 68:18

   Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive:

   Thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also,

   that the LORD God might dwell among them.

   W hen Joseph exchanged a prison for the chief honour and government of
   Egypt, the advantage of his exaltation was felt by those who little
   deserved it (Genesis 45:4, 5) . His brethren hated him, and had
   conspired to kill him. And though he was preserved from death, they
   were permitted to sell him for a bond-servant. He owed his servitude,
   imprisonment and sufferings to them; and they were afterwards indebted
   to him for their lives, subsistence, honour and comfort; God in a
   wonderful manner overruling their evil conduct, for future good to
   themselves. Thus Jesus was despised, rejected and sold; and He was
   actually slain. But He arose, and ascended. The man of sorrows took
   possession of the throne of glory, and not for Himself only. His honour
   is the source of happiness to those who were once His enemies, and
   rebellious against Him. For the sake of such He lived and died.

   For their sakes He lives and reigns. He fought, conquered, and
   triumphed over their enemies. As their representative, He received
   gifts to bestow upon them. Such gifts as their necessities required,
   derived from the relation He was pleased to stand in to them, and from
   the value and dignity of His engagements on their behalf. Such gifts as
   He alone could communicate, and which alone could restore them to the
   favour of God, and revive His image in their hearts; so as to make it
   suitable to His holiness and truth, for the Lord God to return to His
   polluted temples, and to dwell in them, and among them.

   I formerly observed [sermon XXVI, second paragraph] that this Psalm,
   and the 24 ^th , were probably composed and first published on the
   memorable occasion when David, having obtained the victory over his
   numerous enemies, and settled his kingdom in peace, removed the ark,
   which till then had no fixed residence, into Zion.

   The Apostle's application of this passage (Ephesians 4:8) authorizes us
   to consider that transaction as typical of our Lord's ascension. Jesus
   is the true ark. The holy law of God was in His heart; His obedience
   unto death was fully commensurate to the demands of the law (Romans
   3:25) ; as the mercy seat, or propitiation, which covered the ark, was
   exactly equal to its dimensions. He who had thus obeyed on earth,
   ascended on high; the everlasting gates unfolded, and He entered the
   holy place not made with hands, there to appear in the presence of God
   for us (Hebrews 9:24) . In this state He is highly exalted upon a
   throne of glory, and administers all power in heaven and in earth. From
   hence is the honour, safety, and happiness of those who believe in Him.
   They have nothing to plead for themselves. But, unworthy as they are,
   He is not ashamed to own them; and He assures them that all He did, and
   that all He has received, so far as they are capable of sharing in it,
   is for them.

   The clauses, as they lie in the text, suggest a convenient method for
   our meditation, and will lead me briefly to consider four points:

   I. His ascension;

   II. His victories;

   III. The gifts He received for men;

   IV. And the great end for which He bestows them.

   I.

   Thou hast ascended on high . God formed man originally for Himself, and
   gave him an answerable capacity, so that no inferior good can satisfy
   and fill his mind. Man was likewise, by the constitution and will of
   his Maker, immortal, provided he persevered in obedience. But sin
   degraded and ruined him, shut the gates of Paradise, and the gates of
   Heaven against him. Man destroyed himself; but wisdom and mercy
   interposed for his recovery. A promise was given of the seed of the
   woman, who should bruise the serpent's head, defeat his policy, destroy
   his power, and repair the mischiefs he had introduced by sin. MESSIAH
   fulfilled this promise. And when He had finished all that was appointed
   for Him on earth, as the second Adam, the Head and Representative of
   His people, He ascended on high, and opened the Kingdom of Heaven to
   all believers. As an illustrious proof to the universe, that God is
   reconciled: that there is forgiveness with Him for sinners who implore
   His mercy: one in our nature, and in our behalf, has taken possession
   of the Kingdom.

   The series of texts in this part of the Oratorio recalls this subject
   frequently to our thoughts; nor can we think of it too often. It is the
   foundation of our hopes, the source of our most sublime joys, and the
   sufficient, the only sufficient answer to all the suggestions by which
   guilt, fear, unbelief and Satan, fight against our peace. Surrounded as
   we are with enemies and difficulties, we plead against every accusation
   and threatening, that our Head is in heaven; we have an Advocate with
   the Father, a High Priest upon the Throne, who, because He ever lives
   to make intercession, is able to save to the uttermost. This is all our
   plea, nor do we desire any other. His ascension on high, is a sure
   pledge that His servants shall follow Him (John 12:26) . And even at
   present, by faith they ascend and are seated with Him in heavenly
   places (Ephesians 2:6) . They behold invisibles with the eye of their
   mind; they realize the glorious scene, from which they are separated by
   the veil of flesh and blood. They know that, even now, day and night,
   day without night, myriads of golden harps and happy voices resound His
   praise. The Babe of Bethlehem, the Man who once hung dead and forsaken
   upon the cross, is now the Lord of glory. In the thought of His glory
   they greatly rejoice, because they love Him, and because they expect
   shortly to be with Him.

   II.

   Thou hast lead captivity captive. The expression is emphatic. He has
   conquered and triumphed over all the powers which held us in captivity,
   so that captivity itself is taken captive. The spirit and force of it
   is destroyed, and His people, when released by Him, and walking in His
   ways, have no more to apprehend from those whose captives they were,
   than a conqueror has to fear from a prisoner in chains. The energy of
   the phrase is not unlike that of the Apostle which we are hereafter to
   consider -- death is swallowed up in victory. Man by nature is a
   captive, in a state of confinement and bondage, from which he cannot
   escape by any address or effort of his own.

   He is captive to sin; a sinful state is a state of bondage; and this,
   notwithstanding the sinner is a willing captive, speaks swelling words
   of vanity, and boasts of liberty while he is the servant, the slave of
   corruption. He is not always, and in every sense, a willing captive.
   Conscience sometimes remonstrates, fills him with fears and
   forebodings, which make him struggle to be free. And there are many
   sins, which, besides being offences against the law of God, are
   directly contrary to the sinner's present interest and welfare; and
   would be so upon his own plan, and if he was wholly his own master, and
   had no account to render of his conduct. Persons enslaved to habits of
   lewdness or drunkenness, need not be told from the pulpit, that the
   courses they pursue are injurious to their health, their business, or
   substance, their reputation and their peace. They know it and feel it,
   without a monitor. There are seasons, when the ill consequences they
   bring upon themselves, make them sick of the drudgery, and excite some
   effort towards a reform. But in vain. The next return of temptation,
   bears down all their resolutions like a torrent, and, after every
   attempt to amend, they usually become worse than before. For none can
   escape, unless the Son makes them free. His grace can overcome the most
   obstinate habits of licentiousness, and implant the contrary habits of
   purity and temperance. But they, who are not delivered by Him, must die
   in their chains.

   III.

   Thou hast received gifts, even for the rebellious. To bestow gifts upon
   the miserable, is bounty ; but to bestow them upon rebels, is grace .
   The greatness of the gifts contrasted with the characters of those who
   receive them, displays the exceeding riches of the Redeemer's grace. He
   came to save not the unhappy only, but the ungodly . He gives pardon,
   peace, and eternal life to His enemies; whose minds are so entirely
   alienated from Him, that unless He makes them willing, in the day of
   His power, their minds are determined against accepting any favour from
   Him. They live long in contempt of the law and authority of God; and
   though justly obnoxious to His displeasure, while left to themselves,
   they despise and reject the proposals of His mercy. If they sometimes
   acknowledge themselves to be sinners, they still presume that they are
   able to procure His favour by their own performances. They strangely
   imagine they have a sufficient ground of hope, so long as it appears to
   themselves that they are not altogether so bad as others. And when, by
   the Gospel, the Lord treats them as sinners already justly condemned by
   the tenor of His holy laws, and informs them of the exigency of their
   case; that nothing less than the resources of His infinite wisdom, and
   the most expensive exertion of His unspeakable love, can possibly save
   them from destruction; the pride of their hearts rises against His
   declarations. His wisdom, in their view, is folly; and His love
   provokes their enmity and scorn. He says of MESSIAH, This is My beloved
   Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him; but the language of their
   hearts is, we will not have Him to reign over us (Luke 19:14) . They
   revile and oppose the messengers of His grace, account them as enemies,
   charge them as troublers of their peace, and as those who turn the
   world upside down: and when not restrained by the Providence of God,
   inflict reproaches, stripes, imprisonments, tortures, and death upon
   them, besides. If their dearest friends, and those who are connected
   with them by the nearest ties of relation, submit to the testimony of
   God, and yield themselves to the appointed Saviour, they are treated as
   apostates from the general opinion. This defection from the common
   cause, is often sufficient to cancel the strongest obligations, to
   dissolve the closest intimacy, to raise a person foes in his own
   household, and to excite envy, hatred, and malice, in those who once
   professed esteem and love.

   Can the spirit of rebellion rise higher, than when they who have
   insulted the authority, defied the power, and resisted the government
   and will of the great God, proceed at length to trample upon His
   tenders [offers] of reconciliation, and to affront Him in that concern,
   which of all others, is dearest to Him, the glory of His grace in the
   person of His Son? Yet this is no exaggerated representation. Such is
   the disposition of the heart of man towards God. Such were some of us.
   And such, I fear, some of us are to this hour. I do not say that this
   enmity of the carnal mind acts with equal rage and violence in every
   person who is not subject to the grace of God. In a land of light,
   liberty, and civilization, like ours, a variety of circumstances may
   concur to set bounds to its exercise; education, a natural gentleness
   of temper, and even interest, may keep it within limits of decorum,
   especially towards some individuals; but I affirm, or rather the
   Scripture declares, that enmity against God, a disaffection to His
   Gospel, no less than to His law, and a dislike to those who profess and
   obey the truth, are principles deeply rooted in our nature, as fallen:
   and however they may seem dormant in some persons, for a season, would
   operate vigorously, if circumstances were so to alter, as to afford a
   fair occasion. For, as of old, he that was born after the flesh,
   persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now
   (Galatians 4:29) . And it is still true, as in the Apostle's days, that
   all who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall, in one degree or form
   or another, suffer persecution , from those who will not (II Timothy
   3:12)

   Thus men are characterized in the Word of God. Rebel and enemies have a
   neck of iron, to denote their obstinacy; a brow of brass (Isaiah 48:4)
   , to express their insolence and presumption; and a heart of stone
   (Ezekiel 36:26) , insensible to the softest methods of persuasion;
   incapable of receiving tender, kind, and generous impressions, though
   they are wooed and besought by the consideration of the mercies of God,
   of the dying agonies of MESSIAH; unless that mighty power be displayed
   in their favour, which brought forth streams of water from the rock in
   the wilderness.

   MESSIAH died, arose, and ascended on high, that He might receive gifts
   for rebels of this spirit and disposition. The one grandest gift I
   shall specify, is, indeed, comprehensive of every other good. The gift
   of the Holy Spirit. He said to His sorrowing disciples, It is expedient
   for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
   come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him to you (John 16:7) .
   Soon after His ascension, this promise was fulfilled. The disciples
   were filled with the Holy Spirit (Acts 2:4-37) , and the people who had
   slain the Lord, were pricked to the heart, repented of their sin,
   received faith in Him whom they had pierced, and expressed joy and
   peace in believing.

   That the Gospel is preached upon earth, by a succession of ministers,
   called and furnished for that service; and that the Gospel, when
   preached, is not rejected by all, as it is by many, is wholly to be
   ascribed to the agency of the Holy Spirit, whose office and covenant
   engagement it is, to convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and
   of judgment (John 16: 9, 11) , and to glorify MESSIAH. He opens the
   eyes of the understanding, subdues the stubborn will, softens, or
   rather, removes, the heart of stone, and gives a feeling, tender heart,
   a heart of flesh. Then the rebels relent and sue for mercy. Then they
   obtain faith, repentance, remission, a full and free salvation, and all
   the gifts which MESSIAH has received for them.

   IV.

   His ultimate design, in favour of rebellious men, the great final cause
   of His mediation, and particularly of His bestowing on them the gift of
   the Holy Spirit, is, that the Lord God may dwell among them. Man was
   created in the image of God, who formed him for Himself. But he sinned,
   and was forsaken. God withdrew His light and love from him, and man
   sank into darkness and misery. Sin and Satan took possession of the
   heart, which was originally designed to be the temple of the living
   God. But the Lord had a merciful purpose, to return in a way worthy of
   His perfections. Without Him, the souls of men, and the whole human
   race, as to their proper happiness, are like what the earth would be
   without the sun --dark, cold, fruitless, and comfortless. But the
   knowledge of MESSIAH, like the sun, enlightens the world, and the
   heart.

   When in the day of His power, by the revelation of His light and love,
   He destroys the dominion of sin, and dispossesses Satan, He reclaims
   His own, and takes possession for Himself. The heart, sprinkled with
   the blood of Jesus, and anointed with the holy unction, becomes a
   consecrated temple of the Holy Ghost. This persuasion, though now
   deemed by many to be the essence of enthusiasm [fanaticism], (yet who
   have not renounced the name of Christian), was once thought essential
   to Christianity; so that the Apostle speaks of it as an
   incontrovertible fact, with which no Christian could be unacquainted.
   Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost? (I
   Corinthians 6:19) . Again, he speaks of Christ dwelling in the heart
   (Ephesians 3:17) Christ in you, the hope of glory (Colossians 1:27) .
   And in another place, Ye are the temple of the living God, as God hath
   said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them (II Corinthians 6:16) ;
   agreeably to His promise by the prophets. He lives in them, as the
   principle of their life, wisdom, and power; therefore the Apostle says,
   I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me (Galatians 2:20) . There is
   a mutual indwelling between the Lord and His people. They in Him as the
   branch in the vine; and He in them as the sap in the branch. He in them
   as in His temples; they in Him as in their strong tower of defence. And
   from hence we infer the duration of their life of grace; that it shall
   continue and spring up into everlasting life; since it is properly not
   their own, but His; and since He has said, Because I live, ye shall
   live also.

   He dwells likewise among His people in their collective capacity. His
   whole Church, comprising all the members of His mystical Body, built
   upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, form a building fitly
   framed together, a palace, a holy temple for the Lord the great King.
   He dwells likewise in every particular society who walk by His rule,
   and adorn the profession of His truth by a conversation becoming the
   Gospel. He is a wall of fire round about them, and a glory in the midst
   of them (Zechariah 2:5, 10) . When they meet together in His name, He
   is there. He walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks. It is His
   presence that gives life and efficacy to all His ordinances, and
   communicates a power to His Word, by which the minds of His worshipping
   people are enlightened, strengthened, healed, and comforted. Here He
   manifests Himself to them, as He does not to the world; and they can
   adopt the words of the Psalmist, A day in Thy courts, is better than a
   thousand. To His presence they owe their peace and increase, their
   union and protection. And if He withdraws, Ichabod [ the glory is
   departed ] may be written upon their solemn assemblies (I Samuel 4:21)
   ; for even His own appointments can afford them neither profit nor
   pleasure, unless they are animated by His glory. Their graces languish,
   their harmony is interrupted, strife and dissension takes place, evil
   roots of bitterness spring up to trouble and defile them (Hebrews
   12:15) ; men arise from among themselves, speaking perverse things, and
   fierce wolves break in, not sparing the flock (Acts 20:29, 30) , if the
   good Shepherd suspends His influence and presence.

   I trust He dwells and walks in the midst of us. He is here as an
   observer, and as a gracious benefactor. He sees who draw near Him with
   their lips, while their hearts are far from Him; and He likewise takes
   notice of them that fear and love Him, and who esteem the light of His
   countenance to be better than life. The high and lofty One who inhabits
   eternity, who dwells in the high and holy place, dwells likewise with
   those that are of a contrite and humble spirit (Isaiah 57:15) , to
   revive and bless them.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXX

   The Publication of the Gospel

   Psalm 68:11

   The Lord gave the word:

   great was the company of those that published it

   [or of the preachers]

   P erhaps no one Psalm has given greater exercise to the skill and
   patience of commentators and critics, than the sixty-eighth. I suppose
   the difficulties do not properly belong to the Psalm, but arise from
   our ignorance of various circumstances to which the Psalmist alludes;
   which probably were, at that time, generally known and understood. The
   first verse is the same with the stated form of benediction which was
   used whenever the ark of the Lord set forward while Israel sojourned in
   the wilderness (Numbers 10:35) ; which confirms the prevailing opinion,
   that the Psalm was primarily designed by David as an act of
   thanksgiving, to accompany the removal of the ark to Zion. The seventh
   and eighth verses are repeated, with little variation, from the Song of
   Deborah (Judges 5:4, 5) . The leading scope of the whole appears to be:
   first, a recapitulation of God's gracious dealing with Israel, and of
   the great things He had done for them, from the time He delivered them
   from their bondage in Egypt; and then, a transition, in the spirit of
   prophecy, to the far greater things He would do for His people under
   and by the Gospel dispensation [order], in consequence of MESSIAH'S
   exaltation to receive gifts for rebellious men. This verse, though the
   particular occasion is not specified, probably refers to some season of
   deliverance or victory, when the women, according to the custom of the
   nation, assembled to praise the Lord with timbrels, songs and dances
   (Exodus 15) . The songs and responses of Miriam and her companions, and
   of the women who welcomed Saul and David after the defeat of the
   Philistine (I Samuel 18:6, 7) , I have formerly mentioned as instances
   (Volume I, Chapter VI, second paragraph) . The word which is rendered,
   Those who published or preached, being expressed with a feminine
   termination, leads the mind to this sense. But we are not necessarily
   confined to it; for the word rendered preacher in the book of
   Ecclesiastes, is likewise in the feminine form, though we are sure the
   person intended by it was Solomon.

   However, this passage is properly introduced in The Messiah Oratorio,
   and in its proper place, immediately after the view given of our
   Saviour's triumphant ascension, as it leads us to consider the first
   visible effect of that great event: for soon afterwards, when the day
   of Pentecost was fully come, the Lord gave the word (Acts 2:1-4) . The
   Holy Spirit, the precious gift which Jesus had received for rebellious
   men, descended with visible emblems, and a powerful energy, and
   inspired and qualified His disciples for the great work of establishing
   and spreading His spiritual kingdom. From that hour, great was the
   number of preachers, and great was the success and efficacy of their
   mission. So that within a few years the Gospel had spread like the
   light, from Jerusalem, through all Judea and Samaria, and to the
   uttermost parts of the earth. And He who said, Lo I am with you always,
   even to the end of the world (Matthew 28:20) , has, by the same Spirit,
   perpetuated His Word and a succession of preachers, to our time; and
   has promised to perpetuate and work by the same means, till time shall
   be no more.

   My text therefore, if not a direct prophecy of the publication of the
   Gospel, is at least a fit motto to discourse on this very important
   subject. We may consider it in two senses, which, though something
   different, are equally agreeable to the words before us, and to the
   general tenor of Scripture.

   I. That the message is the Lord's. He gave the word, and prescribed to
   His servants the subject matter of their preaching.

   II. That the messengers employed, are called and sent forth by Him. The
   Lord gave the word, or command; in consequence of which word, the
   number of preachers was great, as when in the beginning He said, Let
   there be light, and there was light.

   I.

   The Lord gave the word which the multitude of preachers went forth to
   publish. His merciful design was great, to deliver sinners from
   bondage, misery and death; and to bless them with liberty, life and
   peace. But they are by nature rebellious and obstinate, and must be
   made willing. He only can subdue their prejudices, and soften their
   spirits; and He has promised to display His power in their favour, by a
   certain mean [medium; method] of His own appointment, and we cannot
   expect that He will do it in any other way. This mean [medium; method]
   is the Gospel, which, for its admirable suitableness and efficacy, is
   commended to us as His wisdom and power (I Corinthians 1:23, 24) . He
   has given it for this purpose, and His blessing makes it successful. He
   has said concerning it, For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from
   heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh
   it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread
   to the eater: So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it
   shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
   please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it (Isaiah
   55:10, 11) It has been confirmed by the experience of ages, that no
   mean [medium; method] but His, can produce the desirable effect. It is
   confirmed, by observation, in the present day. If the wisdom of man, if
   learning, if oratory, if animated descriptions of the beauty of virtue,
   and pathetic persuasions to the practice of it could reform, we should
   be a reformed people. But alas, this is only to oppose a mound of sand
   to the violence of a flood. Notwithstanding many ingenious sermons and
   treatises upon this plan, are admired and praised, wickedness prevails
   and triumphs. They have little influence upon the conduct of civil
   life; and, I may boldly say, no influence to inspire the heart with the
   love and peace of God, and to bring it into a habit of subjection to
   His will and command. Nothing will do this but the Gospel, the word
   which the Lord has given. This alone shows the evil of sin in its true
   light, affords a solid ground for the hope of mercy, and furnishes
   those motives which alone are sufficient to break the force of the
   temptations and difficulties with which we have to conflict. When this
   Word is simply and cordially [sincerely] received, an immediate and
   wonderful change takes place. The sinner abandons his false hopes and
   vain pursuits, is freed from his former slavery to the love of the
   world and the fear of man, and becomes the willing servant of Him who
   redeemed him with His own blood.

   But we are sometimes asked, What do we understand by the Gospel? The
   use of the term in a restrained sense, so as to imply there are but
   comparatively few who preach it, is deemed invidious and assuming; and
   it is supposed by many that a sermon, if delivered from a pulpit and if
   the text be taken from the Bible, must of course be the Gospel. It is
   undeniable, however, that there are a variety of different and opposite
   sentiments delivered from pulpits; and surely the Gospel cannot be
   opposite, contrary, yea contradictory to itself! It is a mournful
   consideration that multitudes of people are not qualified to judge of
   this point. Not properly for want of ability, for many of them are
   persons of good sense and discernment, and can judge and talk well upon
   other subjects; but for want of attention. Their application is
   engrossed by the demands of business or pleasure, and they have neither
   leisure nor taste for a careful perusal of the Scriptures, nor for the
   examination of religious sentiments. If the language and elocution of
   the preacher be good, and if there be no close and painful address to
   the conscience, they are satisfied. The Apostle Paul undoubtedly
   preached the Gospel; and he tells us himself that he preached Christ
   crucified; he preached Christ as appointed of God, wisdom,
   righteousness, sanctification and redemption (I Corinthians 1:30) . He
   preached the cross of Christ (Galatians 6:14) --he gloried in it, and
   he determined to glory in nothing else. It treats all mankind as
   already in a state of condemnation; it declares their utter inability
   to save or help themselves; and it gives assurance of pardon and
   salvation to all who believe in the Son of God. That they may be
   encouraged and enabled to believe, it describes the dignity of His
   person, the necessity and greatness of His sufferings, the completeness
   of His atonement, the prevalence of His intercession --His love,
   authority, power and faithfulness. These truths revealed and applied to
   a guilty conscience, by the power of the Holy Spirit, produce faith.
   The sinner perceives the sufficiency and excellency of such a Saviour,
   commits himself to His compassion and care, and renounces every other
   hope and service. He looks to the Saviour by the eye of his mind, with
   desire and admiration, and derives life from His death, healing from
   His wounds, as the Israelites, when wounded, were healed by looking
   upon the brazen serpent. And not only is the conscience relieved by
   this knowledge of Christ crucified --the understanding is likewise
   enlightened, the judgment is formed, the affections regulated and
   directed by it. Then old things pass away, all becomes new. The love of
   sin departs, and the future life is devoted to Him, who therefore died
   and revived, that He might be Lord both of the dead and the living
   (Romans 14:9)

   There is likewise a certain energy or power which accompanies the
   Gospel when it is truly preached, which sufficiently characterizes and
   distinguishes it from all other religious schemes and systems. Our
   Lord, during His personal ministry, frequently gave proofs that He knew
   the heart of man. When Zacchaeus thought himself unknown and unseen, He
   called him by his name (Luke 19:5) . He reminded Nathanael of what had
   passed in secret under the fig tree (John 1:48) ; and by a few words,
   brought to the remembrance of the woman of Samaria all that she had
   done in her life (John 4:29) . A similar effect accompanies the
   preaching of His Gospel to this day. The Gospel is preached, when they
   who are present find the secrets of their hearts are made manifest;
   when the preacher, who perhaps never saw them before, reminds them of
   what they have done, or said, or thought, possibly of things transacted
   long ago, and almost forgotten by themselves; and likewise describes
   the very feelings of their hearts while He is speaking to them. It is
   usually in this way that conviction of sin first takes place; and in
   this way, that a convinced burdened sinner meets with seasonable
   support and direction, so exactly suited to his case, that he almost
   thinks the preacher is speaking to none but himself. No preachers but
   those who speak in conformity to the word which the Lord gave, have
   this power over the heart and conscience.

   II.

   It is owing to the word, the appointment and power of God, that any
   persons are induced or enabled to preach this Gospel. Men may, indeed,
   assume the office of a preacher upon other grounds; there are too many
   who do. But though they speak in the name of the Lord, and as His
   ministers, if He has not sent them, they cannot declare His message in
   such a manner as to make full proof of their ministry (II Timothy 4:5)
   . They may profit themselves, according to their low views, and may
   obtain such honours and emoluments as the world can give; but they have
   not the honour which cometh from God only. They are not wise to win
   souls (Proverbs 11:30) . They have no testimony in the consciences of
   their hearers. Occasionally they may deliver truths which are valuable
   and useful in their proper places, but for want of knowing how to
   connect them with what the Apostle styles, "t he truth as it is in
   Jesus" (Ephesians 4:21) , they are unable either to break the hard
   heart, or to heal the wounded spirit. The thoughtless are not alarmed,
   nor the ignorant instructed. The wicked go on in their evil ways--

   The hungry sheep look up, but are not fed.

   Nay, we see in fact, though a few persons may still be found, who place
   their religion in a dull, unmeaning attendance upon the form of public
   worship, upon any form in which it was their lot to be educated; yet,
   in many places, the bulk of the people, by their contempt of the Lord's
   day, and by their customary manner of absenting themselves from their
   appointed teachers, give sufficient proof that they have neither found,
   nor expect to find, so much benefit or pleasure, as to make them think
   it worth their while to attend.

   From the following considerations it will appear to competent judges,
   that faithful preachers are called and prepared for their office by the
   Lord, the Head of the Church, and not by human institutions--

   (1.)

   That the Gospel cannot be rightly understood but by [except by] divine
   teaching. The natural man, however distinguished by abilities or
   literature, cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God (I
   Corinthians 2:14) ; nay, he cannot discern them. He may, indeed, know
   something of the Gospel system, considered as a matter of science; he
   may know how to defend the outworks of Christianity, and be master of
   the external evidences for its truth; and he may espouse orthodox
   opinions, and be a successful champion in the field of controversy. But
   the inward power and life, that which constitutes the essential
   difference of true religion, is no less remote from his apprehension,
   than the idea of light is from a person born blind. This he can only
   learn by experience. The first lesson received and learned by those who
   are taught of God, is a conviction of guilt, ignorance and misery --and
   then they begin to learn the importance, necessity, and design of the
   Gospel. The man who is thus instructed, if the Lord be pleased to call
   him to the office of teaching others, will in due time proceed to
   deliver to the people, what he has himself learned; not with
   hesitation, uncertainty or indifference, not what he has acquired by
   hearsay or from books, but he has the witness in himself (I John 5:10)
   . His heart teaches his mouth (Proverbs 16:23) . He believes, therefore
   he speaks. He simply and freely declares that which he himself has
   known and seen, and tasted of the word of life. And speaking from the
   fulness of his heart, with an earnestness inspired by the greatness and
   importance of his subject, he speaks to the heart and feelings of his
   hearers, and impresses a manifestation of the truth upon their minds.

   (2.)

   That the desire of preaching this Gospel when known, if it be a right
   desire, must likewise be given. If a man should attempt the service,
   without counting the cost, or considering the consequences, he will
   most probably be disgusted and wearied. And if, beforehand, he
   seriously and properly considers what he is about to engage in, and has
   a due sense of his own weakness, he will tremble at the prospect, and
   direct his thoughts to some other employment, unless his call and
   support be from on high. What courage, wisdom, meekness, and zeal
   appear requisite, in the view of such an enquirer, to qualify a man for
   preaching, and continuing to preach, a doctrine so unpleasing to the
   world, as the doctrine of the cross has in all ages proved! What
   opposition, snares and difficulties, what fightings from without, what
   fears within , may be expected! Surely, he will be ready to shrink
   back, and to say, Who is sufficient for these things? But the Lord, by
   the constraining sense of His love, and by giving a deep impression of
   the worth of souls, and by exciting in the mind a dependence upon His
   all-sufficiency, can and does encourage those whom He calls and chooses
   to serve Him in the Gospel. In themselves they are quite unequal to
   what is before them, but they obey His voice; they trust in His
   promises for guidance and protection, and are not disappointed. We are
   therefore directed to pray that the Lord of the harvest would send, or
   rather (according to the force of the Greek word), thrust forth
   labourers into His harvest (Matthew 9:38)

   (3.)

   That only He who sends forth His ministers can enable them to
   persevere. It is a service of continual exertion and expense, and
   requires a continual supply. The opposition of the world, and the power
   of temptation, acting upon the weakness and depravity of the heart,
   would quickly prevail against the best ministers, if they were left to
   carry on the warfare at their own charges. They are at times, yea
   frequently, in situations and circumstances, which teach them feelingly
   the meaning of the Apostle's words, We were pressed out of measure,
   above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life (II Corinthians
   1:8) . Besides the trials incidental to the Christian profession, which
   they are exposed to in common with others, they have many which are
   peculiar to their calling as preachers of the Gospel. Their chief
   pre-eminence over Christians in private life, is a painful one; they
   have the honour of bearing a double share of the heat and burden of the
   day, and of standing in the foremost ranks of the battle, to provoke
   and receive the fiercest assaults of the enemy. Their only resource and
   hope is in the faithfulness and compassion of their Lord, under whose
   banner and eye they fight, and who has said, Lo! I am with you always,
   even to the end of the world.

   (4.)

   That the Lord only can give success to their endeavours. Paul may
   plant, and Apollos may water, but there is no increase unless He
   affords a blessing (I Corinthians 3:6) . It is at least a presumptive
   proof, that He has called a man to preach, if He owns his labours,
   since He has not promised to own any but those whom He sends.

   We must however allow, and observe, that to preach salvation to others,
   and even to be instrumental in saving souls, will not absolutely prove
   that the preacher is in a state of salvation himself: we hope it is
   generally so; but there are exceptions and instances which should
   awaken our circumspection, and keep us constantly looking to the Lord
   in a spirit of humility and dependence. There was a Judas among the
   Apostles; and we are assured that at the last day, some, yea many, will
   plead having done great things in the name of Christ, whom He will
   notwithstanding disown as workers of iniquity (Matthew 7:22, 23) . Even
   the Apostle Paul was impressed by this thought, and he has recorded the
   improvement he made of it for our instruction. I keep under my body,
   and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have
   preached to others, I myself should be a castaway (I Corinthians 9:27)

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXI

   The Gospel Message, Good Tidings

   Romans 10:15

   [As it is written] How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
   Gospel of peace,

   and bring glad tidings of good things!

   T he account which the Apostle Paul gives of his first reception among
   the Galatians (Galatians 4:15) , exemplifies the truth of this passage.
   He found them in a state of ignorance and misery; alienated from God,
   and enslaved to the blind and comfortless superstitions of idolatry.
   His preaching, accompanied with the power of the Holy Spirit, had a
   great and marvellous effect. His principal subject was the death of
   Jesus, who had lately suffered as a malefactor at Jerusalem. Though the
   transaction was past, and the scene at a considerable distance, yet by
   the manner of his representation, the fact was realized to their minds
   [the fact became real to them]; and they could have been no more
   affected, had they been actually upon the spot, at the time. Jesus
   Christ was exhibited to them, as crucified before their eyes (Galatians
   3:1) . By the same divine energy they were instructed in the knowledge
   of His character, who He was, and why He suffered; and likewise,
   understood their own need of such a Saviour. Thus they hearkened to
   him, not with the indifference of the Athenians, but with the
   application to themselves of all that he had said. They heard, they
   believed, and they rejoiced. The Apostle reminds them, that they had
   not received a cold speculative doctrine, but such a one as imparted
   blessedness to them. Indeed, many of them lost this afterwards, when
   they were unhappily seduced by false teachers. But for a time the
   knowledge of a Saviour, so exactly suited to their circumstances, made
   them happy. And while they were so, they felt very strong emotions of
   gratitude and esteem for the messenger who brought them these glad
   tidings. Though he was by many accounted and treated as the
   off-scouring and filth of all things, the Galatians received him as an
   angel of God, and attended to him, as if the Lord, who sent him, had
   spoken to them in person. And although he had, till then, been an
   entire stranger to them, his message opened a way to their hearts, and
   they gave him every testimony of the most cordial friendship; insomuch
   that had it been possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes,
   and have given them to him.

   Thus, likewise, when Philip preached the Gospel in Samaria, the
   consequence was great joy in that city (Acts 8:8) . But when the Gospel
   is thus gladly received, there must be a suitable disposition of mind.
   It is sent to the poor. It is designed to heal the broken-hearted, to
   deliver the captives, and to give sight to the blind (Luke 4:18) . And
   therefore they who are well-satisfied with themselves, who say, We see
   , and who boast of their freedom, cannot possibly judge either of the
   truth, or of the importance of the Gospel doctrine. As the Lord waters
   the earth with a profusion worthy of His magnificence and bounty, and
   does not confine His rain to cultivated soils, so the good seed of His
   Word often falls upon the highway, upon the rocks, and among thorns
   (Luke 8:13-15) ; but is only productive upon the good ground of an
   honest and good heart. Not that any human heart is truly good by
   nature, but some are prepared for the reception of the truth. And this
   preparation is the first effect of the Word, when it brings forth fruit
   unto life eternal. It undeceives those who were for a time deluded with
   vain hopes, and convinces them that they are poor, blind, and wretched
   and helpless. Then they gladly accept the Gospel of peace, and the
   message is to them as life from the dead.

   The passage in the Prophet Isaiah from which my text is quoted, is very
   animated and descriptive. How beautiful on the mountains are the feet
   of him that bringeth good tidings! (Isaiah 52:7) . Imagine a distressed
   people, at the will and disposal of a conqueror who was justly offended
   with them, and under an anxious trembling uncertainty how he would
   treat them. If an authorized messenger should inform them that, instead
   of the punishment they deserved, the king vouchsafed [graciously
   granted] them a free pardon, was ready to receive them with favour, and
   to bestow honours and possessions upon all who applied to him, without
   excepting the most guilty, even the ringleaders in rebellion: how
   welcome would this messenger be to them! This, indeed, is beyond the
   manner of men. No earthly monarch has either magnanimity to make, or
   power to make good, so gracious and unlimited a proclamation to a whole
   nation of rebels. But this is the manner of the great God. Such an act
   of grace is the Gospel. An act of grace to sinners, yet founded in
   righteousness, and displaying the glory of His justice equally with the
   riches of His mercy. For it is founded on the mediation of the Son of
   His love, and procured by His blood. The messengers of this grace are
   thus welcomed and honoured by those who believe their report: and are
   esteemed very highly in love for their work's sake (I Thessalonians
   5:13) . We may observe,

   I. The message of the Gospel is glad tidings of peace and good things.

   II. The messengers, or preachers, find ample reward in their success
   and acceptance.

   I.

   According to the Hebrew idiom, (which frequently obtains [is
   applicable] in the New Testament) all good things are comprised
   [included] in the term peace. They are eminently comprised in the peace
   of the Gospel, for it is the peace of God which passes understanding.
   It brings a blessed assurance, that MESSIAH has made peace by the blood
   of His cross. They who believe this good report, derive peace of
   conscience from it; and are able to say, Though thou wert justly angry,
   thine anger is turned away (Isaiah 12:1) . It dispels their fears and
   forebodings, and inspires them with liberty to come to God as children;
   consequently, on their parts, alienation and enmity cease. They no
   longer conceive of Him as an avenging Judge, or a hard Master. They no
   longer dispute His authority, nor repine at His appointments. They
   become a willing people. They yield themselves to Him. They cultivate
   peace in all their connections. The forgiveness and bounty they have
   received, teaches them likewise to forgive, and be kind, as they have
   opportunity. They possess good things --communion with God, grace,
   wisdom, and power; such as the world can neither give nor take away.
   They serve Him with their all, and are supported by His good Spirit in
   every trying circumstance. And they have a good hope, which enables
   them to rejoice in tribulation, and to smile in death.

   If the wickedness and obstinacy of mankind were not so strongly
   described and exemplified in the Bible, and if we could forget that
   this obstinate perverseness was once our own character, we should find
   it difficult to conceive, after we understand the nature and design of
   the Gospel, upon what grounds a scheme so wisely and completely adapted
   to relieve men from misery, to promote their present comfort, and to
   secure their future happiness, should, instead of being received with
   thankfulness, generally excite contempt and opposition. Can the world
   afford a peace which shall abide and cheer the heart under all the
   changing circumstances incident to us in this mortal state? Can it
   propose any good, any honours, profit, or pleasures, worthy of being
   compared with the honour which comes from God only, the light of His
   countenance, and the riches of glory? Can the influence of the world
   preserve us from trouble, or support us under it, or deliver us out of
   it? Has it any charms capable of soothing the anguish of a wounded
   conscience? Can it obviate [prevent] the stroke, or overcome the fear
   of death? Or can it inspire the soul with confidence and joy, in the
   contemplation of that approaching day, when we must all appear before
   the tribunal of the supreme Judge? That the world, if we possessed the
   whole of it, cannot do these things for us, is acknowledged by many,
   and felt by all. The Gospel proposes a cordial [tonic; cheering
   comfort] for every care, a balm for every wound; and none who make the
   experiment of its efficacy are disappointed. In other cases, they who
   have received great obligations may speak highly of their benefactor;
   and they, who beyond hope, have been recovered from a dangerous malady,
   may commend the skill and care of their physician, to those who are
   labouring under the same disease, without giving offence. But if they
   who have obtained life and peace by believing in Jesus, proclaim His
   goodness, and point Him out to their fellow-sinners, as the only
   Physician and Saviour of souls, their testimony is charged with folly,
   and their endeavours rejected with scorn, as officious and impertinent.
   Men, while left to themselves, will not come to Him that they may have
   life. The god of this world so works upon their prejudices, pride, and
   passions, that though the light of truth shines around them like the
   light of the sun, the eyes of their mind are blinded, and they are
   pleased with their darkness, and unwilling to see (II Corinthians 4:4)
   . Hence, of the comparatively few who are favoured with a clear and
   faithful dispensation [declaration] of the Gospel, the greater part, it
   is to be feared, reject the counsel of God against themselves: and His
   ministers, in all ages, have had cause to adopt the Prophet's
   complaint, Lord, who hath believed our report?' (Isaiah 53:1) . It
   would be thus universally, if the Lord who gave the Word, and who sends
   forth the preachers, had not engaged His promise, that they shall not
   labour wholly in vain, nor spend their strength for naught. He prepares
   a people to serve Him, and to show forth His praise. And while some
   mock, others refuse to hear; (Acts 17:32) and others, with an indolent
   indifference, are content to hear again and again; there are others,
   whose hearts are opened to receive the truth in the love of it. They
   hear and believe to everlasting life.

   II.

   The instruments of this happy change, find their reward in their work.
   It being owned to the salvation of a few, they are compensated for all
   the opposition they meet with from the many; and this on a two-fold
   account--

   First, and principally, for the love they bear to their Lord and to
   souls for His sake.

   To see His name made precious to the hearts of sinners; to see those
   who were blind admiring His excellence; to see those who were so far
   off from God brought so nigh; to see those who were wretched, rejoicing
   in His goodness; to hear those whose lips were filled with folly,
   falsehood, or blasphemy, proclaiming His praise. Such salutary effects
   of their ministry fill them likewise with praise and joy. And when
   their hearers express the power and spirit of the Gospel, in their
   tempers and conduct, they can say, Now we live, if you stand fast in
   the Lord (I Thessalonians 3:8)

   A secondary satisfaction, which of itself is sufficient to make them
   full amends for all the scorn of an unkind world, is, the share they
   have in the affections of the people, who are thus benefited by their
   ministry. This is the popularity which alone is desirable. It would be
   a small thing to be able merely to hold a multitude by the ears; but to
   be approved, and loved, by those to whom the Lord has made them useful,
   is a high honour, and a source of sublime pleasure. When Peter and John
   (Acts 3:11) had healed the lame man, I doubt not but they were more
   affected by the simple honest testimony of his gratitude, than by the
   unmeaning wonder of all the surrounding multitude. If a true servant of
   the Lord, by any advantage of abilities or elocution, should attach a
   large congregation to a personal regard for himself; should be admired
   and beloved by them, and yet discover no attachment in them to the
   Saviour whom he preaches, their partiality to him would give him but
   little pleasure. He would be more ready to weep over them, than to
   rejoice in the preference they gave him. For he seeks not their
   applause, but their edification. And he aims not to promote his own
   glory, but the glory of Him who sent him (John 7:18) . He is, indeed,
   glad to see them attending upon the means which God has promised to
   bless. But the faithfulness and closeness of his addresses to their
   consciences, by which many are sooner or later disgusted and driven
   away, is a proof that he does not want them merely to make up a number
   about him. They who make the office of a preacher an occasion whereby
   to promote their own interest or reputation, may, perhaps, obtain the
   reward they seek; but it is such a reward, as can only satisfy a weak
   and mercenary mind. And from Him, whose name they prostitute, they can
   only expect the reward assigned to hypocrites and unbelievers.

   But true Christians will, and do, set a high value upon the ministers,
   who with simplicity and godly sincerity, preach the Gospel of peace, in
   such a manner as to evidence that they are influenced by a regard to
   the glory of God, and to the good of souls. And they give proof of
   their affection in more ways than by speaking well of them.

   (1.)

   By the satisfaction with which they accept a faithful ministry, as a
   balance to the trials they meet with in common life. There are many
   poor, and many afflicted people, who have little comfort in the things
   of this life, and in their own houses. Some are pinched by penury, and
   some who live in opulence, yet dwell, as the Psalmist expresses it
   (Psalm 57:4) , in the fire and among lions. They suffer not less than
   the others, though in a different way, from the unkindness and
   opposition of their nearest connections. But in the house of God, they
   are satisfied and comforted. And, according to the words of the
   Prophet, though the Lord is pleased to give them the bread of
   adversity, and the water of affliction (Isaiah 30:20) , yet, since
   their teachers are not removed into corners, but they have free access
   to the preaching of His Word, and can attend upon a minister who cares
   for their souls, and meets them with a word in season when they are
   weary, they bear their appointed cross with cheerfulness. Though they
   have much bitterness of heart at home, known only to themselves, they
   have a pleasure with which a stranger intermeddles not, when they go up
   to the house of the Lord. But if the instrument, who is the messenger
   of God to them for good be removed, and they are deprived of these
   opportunities, the regard they bore him is manifested, by their sorrow
   for losing him; which often affects them more sensibly than all their
   other griefs.

   (2.)

   By, in public, taking kindly and in good part his most searching
   discourses, or even his reproofs and admonitions in private, if
   needful. For they know that he watches over their souls, as one who
   must give account (Hebrews 13:7) . And because they love him, they do
   all in their power to make the service a pleasure, and not a grief to
   him. They do not wish him to speak smooth things to them, or to
   entertain them with the discussion of points in which they have little
   concern, but to hear that which is suitable to their own case and
   circumstances. And if the preacher discovers to them, that through
   inadvertence, they have allowed themselves in any wrong practice, or
   have lived in the omission of any duty, instead of being offended with
   his plain dealing, they love him the better for it.

   (3.)

   By their tenderness and sympathy with him in all his exercises; and by
   their care, according to their ability, to make his situation
   comfortable, and to avoid everything that might give him just occasion
   for complaint or grief. The trials of a faithful minister are neither
   few nor small. His work is great; he is sure to meet with enemies and
   discouragements. He travails in birth for souls (Galatians 4:19) ; he
   is pained by the opposition of the wicked, the inconstancy of the
   wavering, and the inconsistency of many who make profession of the
   truth. He feels many anxieties for those who are enquiring the way to
   the Kingdom, lest they should be turned aside and hindered; and too
   often the hopes he had indulged, of some who discovered a concern for
   religion, are disappointed. His inward conflicts are many. He often
   walks in much weakness, fear, and trembling (I Corinthians 2:3) . When
   he considers what he is, what he ought to be, and what he has to do, he
   is often distressed, afraid, and ashamed, and unable to speak. His path
   is spread with snares, his heart wounded with temptations. But his
   judicious hearers have some knowledge of what he endures for their
   sakes, and in their service; they love him, pity him, and pray for him,
   and their kind attention comforts him under all his tribulations.

   Sometimes their regard is rather improperly expressed; as when they not
   only value his ministry, but hold him so highly a favourite, that they
   can hardly hear another. A preference is certainly due to the person
   who is made especially useful, but no faithful preacher should be
   slighted. Though gifts and abilities are not equal in all, yet, they
   are all the Lord's messengers, and entitled to regard.

   Again, it is an improper regard, if they yield themselves implicitly to
   him, to be governed by his will. So far as we speak agreeably to the
   Scripture, which is the rule and standard of faith and practice, both
   to you and to us, we are authorized to require your attention and
   obedience; but you are not bound to receive what we propose, merely
   upon our own authority. There are those who account ignorance the
   mother of devotion, and expect an implicit compliance with their
   injunctions, by virtue of their office and personal influence. But a
   true minister, will account it his honour and pleasure to preach to an
   enlightened people, who love and study the Bible, and, like the
   Bereans, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
   searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so (Acts
   17:11) We have no dominion over your faith, but wish to be helpers of
   your joy (II Corinthians 1:24) . Nor do we pretend to dominion over
   your purses, though we are to remind you of the Apostle's charge, To do
   good and to communicate forget not (Hebrews 13:16)

   How much are they to be pitied, who account that word of grace a
   burden, which to those who receive it with thankfulness, proves the
   balm and cordial [cheering comfort] of life! Take heed how you hear. If
   the Gospel is not made to you a savour of life, it will be a savour of
   death. It will aggravate your guilt and condemnation, and leave you
   utterly hopeless and inexcusable. If you continue impenitent and
   obstinate, the hour is coming when you will wish you had never heard
   the name of Jesus. It had been better for you never to have been born,
   or to have lived and died among the savage Indians; or to have been an
   idiot or a lunatic to the end of your days, than to have lived where
   the doctrine of salvation was published in your hearing, if you finally
   reject the counsel of God against yourselves!

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXII

   The Progress of the Gospel

   Romans 10:18

   Their sound went into all the earth,

   and their words unto the end of the world.

   T he heavens declare the glory of God (Psalm 19:1) . The grandeur of
   the arch over our heads, the number and lustre of the stars, the beauty
   of the light, the splendour of the sun, the regular succession of day
   and night, and of the seasons of the year, are such proofs of infinite
   wisdom and power, that the Scripture attributes to them a voice, a
   universal language, intelligible to all mankind, accommodated to every
   capacity. There is no speech nor language where their voice is not
   heard. The combined effect of the visible works of the great Architect,
   presses a declaration upon the ear of reason -- The hand that made us
   is divine. We must, however, understand it of the ear of right reason.
   The loudest voice is unnoticed by the deaf. Thus it ought to be, and
   thus it would be, if man were indeed a rational creature, as he proudly
   boasts himself. That the fact in general is otherwise; that the bulk of
   mankind are no more affected by the works of God, than the beasts of
   the field: that the philosophers who profess to study them, so faintly
   discern, so frequently deny, the great first Cause of all, is proof
   that sin has darkened and depraved the noblest powers of the soul, and
   degraded man into the state of an inattentive idiot. However, the
   evidence, if it does not excite his admiration and praise, is
   abundantly sufficient to convict him of stupidity and ingratitude, and
   to leave him without excuse (Romans 1:20)

   This passage, taken from that sublime ode of David, the 19 ^th Psalm,
   is applied by the Apostle to illustrate the character, and the progress
   of the still more wonderful display of the divine perfections, which
   God has made known by the glorious Gospel. A variety of truths shine
   (like stars in the firmament) in the system of revelation. But
   principally Jesus the Sun of truth and righteousness, the Source of
   spiritual light and life, answers to the description there given of the
   material sun, His going forth is from the end of heaven, and his
   circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from his heat
   (Psalm 19:6)

   But the fulfilment of the promises respecting MESSIAH'S Kingdom is
   progressive. So far as this prophecy has been accomplished, the arm of
   the Lord has been revealed. It is His doing, and may justly be
   marvellous in our eyes. The truth of the prophecy will be proved by its
   final completion; which, though not likely to take place in our time,
   we may be assured that it cannot fail, for the Lord has spoken it. And
   besides, we have a sufficient pledge and security for the whole, in
   what He has already done. It was not necessary for the fulfilling of
   this prophecy, nor consistent with the tenor of many other prophecies,
   that the spread of the Gospel should be instantaneous and universal on
   its first publication. MESSIAH is to rule in the midst of His enemies,
   till the appointed season, when all enemies shall be subdued under His
   feet. The Gospel, the rod of His power, is so admirably adapted to the
   necessities of mankind, that the obstructions it has met with must be
   ascribed to their wickedness and obstinacy. Not that they could resist
   the will of God. Had He intended to give it universal success from the
   beginning, the event would have been answerable. But it was His
   pleasure to conduct the dispensation [ordering] of it, so as on the one
   hand to display His sovereignty, wisdom, and power, and on the other,
   to afford a full proof of the depravity and alienation of the heart of
   man. This point is so much misunderstood and misrepresented, that
   though it is attended with great difficulties, especially if we give
   way to vain reasonings upon it, I shall venture in the present
   discourse to offer a few thoughts towards clearing the subject, and
   vindicating (if the very attempt be not presumptuous) the ways of God
   to man.

   When the Sun of righteousness, after a long night of darkness, rose
   upon the world, there appeared a strong probability that the prophecies
   concerning the extent of His vital influence, from east to west, from
   pole to pole, would soon be completely realized.

   In a very short space He was known and adored by multitudes, through
   the greatest part of the Roman Empire, and beyond its limits. But,
   perhaps, for about seventeen hundred years since that period, the
   boundaries of His Kingdom, though they have been altered, have not been
   much enlarged. If He has since in some measure enlightened the more
   western parts of the globe, the eastern regions which once rejoiced in
   His light, are now overwhelmed with gross Mohammedan darkness. And if
   we were capable of investigating the state of the world at this day, we
   should probably find that five out of six of the human race now living,
   never so much as heard of the name of Jesus as a Saviour. There is
   reason to fear likewise, that in the nations that professedly call Him
   Lord, and are not unwilling to be themselves called Christians, a
   greater proportion than five out of six, are no less strangers to His
   power and grace than the Mohammedans who reject Him, or the heathens
   who never heard of Him.

   There is not perhaps a darker chapter in the book of divine providence,
   nor a meditation which calls for a more absolute subjection and
   submission to the holy will and unsearchable wisdom of God, than this.
   The first spread of the Gospel proved it to be a divine expedient,
   fully capable of producing all the great purposes which the prophets
   had foretold, and which the state of the world required. It reconciled
   men to God, to themselves, and to each other. It subdued their
   passions, regulated their affections, freed them from the guilt and
   bondage of sin, from the love of the world, and from the fear of death.
   Wherever the doctrine of the cross was preached, it produced that
   salutary change of conduct, which philosophy had long attempted in
   vain; and raised men to that life of communion with God, of which
   philosophers had no conception. Such was the bright morning of the
   Gospel Day. But in time, yea, in a little time, dark clouds obscured
   its light, its progress was impeded, and in a manner stopped. On one
   hand, the profession and name of the Gospel gave occasion to mischief
   and abominations, which had been unknown among the heathens; so that
   the part of the world which received the name of Christendom, was
   little distinguished from the rest, in a religious view, but by a
   fierce and rancorous superstition which tyrannized over the
   consciences, liberties, and the lives of men. On the other hand, as I
   have observed, the very name of Christianity was restrained to a small
   portion of the earth; many nations have not heard of it to this day,
   and many who once professed it, have renounced it long ago.

   Thus the fact stands. We cannot deny it. But how shall we account for
   it? Infidels and petty-reasoners think they here find an invincible
   objection against the truth. They say,

   " If the Gospel you speak of be so salutary and necessary, if it be
   indeed the greatest effect of the divine goodness, why has not God who
   is the common Father of mankind, afforded it to all the nations of the
   earth? And why is it restrained to so few?"

   But I think we may retort the question, and let them who propose it,
   give such an answer (if they can) as shall not amount to a confession
   of the obstinacy and ungrateful folly of mankind. When the world saw
   the happy tendency and effects of this Gospel in the age of the
   apostles, why did they not universally receive it? We know that when
   the use of the mariner's compass, the art of printing, and many other
   inventions that might be named, were discovered in one country, they
   were presently adopted by the surrounding civilized nations. Even the
   recent attempts to venture through the air with a balloon, hazardous as
   they certainly are, and insignificant with respect to real usefulness,
   are likely in a little time not only to engage the notice, but to
   excite the imitation of Europe. Why then was the Gospel, the most
   beneficial and important discovery the world has been favoured with,
   the only one that has been treated with general contempt? Certainly our
   Lord has assigned the true reason, Light is come into the world, but
   men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil (John
   3:19) . They hate the light; they will not come to it, nor will they
   permit it to come to them if they can possibly prevent it. This
   glorious Gospel of the blessed God, has been and still is shunned and
   dreaded, and every human precaution and exertion has been employed to
   withstand and suppress it, as though, like the pestilence, it was
   baneful to the welfare of society. May we not say, speaking after the
   manner of men, that the Lord has done enough to confirm His own express
   and solemn declaration, that He has no pleasure in the death of the
   wicked, but that the wicked may turn from his way and live! (Ezekiel
   33:11) . He has raised up a succession of faithful servants, from age
   to age, to publish these glad tidings. The reception they have met
   with, not only from the heathens, but from nominal Christians, is well
   known to those are acquainted with ecclesiastical history; which
   contains little more than a detail of the arts and cruelties, by which
   the civil and ecclesiastical powers of almost every kingdom where the
   Gospel has been known, have endeavoured to suppress it.

   The nation of Great Britain, in particular, has but little right to
   ask, Why has the Gospel of Christ spread no farther among the heathen?'
   The Providence of God has favoured us with peculiar advantages for this
   service. Our arms and commerce have opened us a way to the most distant
   parts or the globe; and of late years, the enterprising spirit of our
   navigators, has added almost a new world to the discoveries of former
   times. How far have our plans been formed with a subservience to the
   great design of evangelizing the heathen? How much have we done to
   promote it in Asia, where our influence and opportunities have been the
   greatest? What impression of the name and spirit of Christianity has
   our conduct given to the inhabitants of India? But I forbear --Facts
   are too well known to need recital; too glaring to need a comment. It
   is true, we have an incorporated society for propagating the Gospel in
   foreign parts, and we hear the missionaries; but of the good effects of
   their missions, as at present conducted, we neither hear, nor expect to
   hear. While America was ours, the efforts of a few individuals from the
   northern provinces in the last and present century, were not without
   success. But I fear this is all the honour we can claim. Some good has
   been done by the Danish mission to ^* Tranquebar, but I believe our
   influence in it, has been rather nominal than effective. The extent and
   effects of the labours of the Unitas Fratrum (more generally known
   amongst us by the name of The Brethren, or Moravians), compared with
   their circumstances and resources, must not be omitted on this
   occasion. They doubtless excite admiration, and thankfulness to God, in
   every serious mind acquainted with the subject. But excepting in these
   instances, I believe the heathens have derived but little knowledge of
   the Gospel from their connections with Christendom, for some ages past.
   And I think none of the commercial nations in Europe have had the
   propagation of Christianity less at heart than the English. What
   obligations the natives in Africa are under to us, for instruction or
   example, may be estimated, in part, by a cursory survey of the state of
   our West-India Islands.

   ^* 17 ^th Century Danish colony on the Coromandel coast of India

   That the Gospel is so little known in the world, and so little received
   where it is known, cannot be so properly ascribed to the will of God,
   as the wickedness and wilfulness of men. Undoubtedly He to whom all
   things are possible, who has absolute power over the hearts of His
   creatures, could make a way for the universal reception of it. And we
   trust that in His own time He will do so. But power is not His only
   attribute. It would be rash and absurd to suppose that the great God
   will do everything that He can do. We are sure that He will do what is
   worthy of Himself; but of this, His own infinite wisdom is the only
   competent judge. What is becoming of His perfections and holy
   government, we can know no farther than He is pleased to inform us. But
   it certainly becomes us to lay our hands upon our mouths, and our
   mouths in the dust, when we contemplate His conduct. Or, if we do
   speak, to adopt the Apostle's language, O the depth of the riches, both
   of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His judgments,
   and His ways past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord?
   Or who has been His counsellor? Or who has first given to Him, and it
   shall be recompensed unto him again? For of Him, and through Him, and
   to Him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen. (Romans
   11:33-36)

   However, my text is fulfilling, and shall be fulfilled. This joyful
   sound has already been spread far abroad, in defiance of all attempts
   to restrain it. Multitudes from age to age have heard it, and found it
   to be the power of God unto salvation. And it would be easy to prove,
   if it belonged to my subject, that the superior advantages of
   civilization which Christendom enjoys, are remotely owing to the
   knowledge of revelation. To this must be chiefly ascribed, the
   different state of this island, from what it was when visited by Julius
   Caesar. Yea, our modern philosophers would make but a poor figure, were
   they despoiled of all the plumes they have borrowed from the Book they
   affect to despise. Farther, the purpose of God to save sinners, by
   faith in His beloved Son, is the primary ground of that patience and
   long-suffering which He still exercises towards such a world as this.
   And some imperfect traces of this design, transmitted by tradition, are
   probably to be found, though woefully disfigured, among every nation
   and people under heaven; which have at least preserved, in a degree,
   the notices of right and wrong, and some faint warnings of conscience,
   in the most savage state of human nature. But were it not for reasons
   connected with the designs of His mercy, we can scarcely conceive that
   the holy God would have perpetuated the race of mankind in a state of
   rebellion and enmity against His government. Or if He had permitted
   them to multiply, and left them wholly and absolutely to themselves,
   without interposing some restraints upon their depravity, I believe the
   inhabitants of the earth would have been no better than incarnate
   fiends.

   The prophecies both of the Old and New Testaments, encourage us to hope
   for a time, when the light of the Gospel truth will break forth with
   meridian brightness, the glory of the Lord be revealed, and all flesh
   shall see His salvation. As a pledge of this, and of the truth of the
   whole Scripture, we have, what may be called a standing miracle
   continually before our eyes. I mean the state of the Jews, who, though
   dispersed far and wide among many nations, are everywhere preserved a
   distinct and separate people. The history of the world affords no other
   instance of the kind. The great monarchies, by which they were
   successively conquered and scattered, have successively perished. Only
   the names of them remain. But the people whom they despised, and
   endeavoured to exterminate, subsist to this day; and though sifted like
   corn over the earth, and apparently forsaken of God, are still
   preserved by this wonderful Providence, unaffected by the changes and
   customs around them; still tenacious of the law of Moses, though the
   observance of it is rendered impracticable. Many days, many ages they
   have lived, as the prophets foretold they should, without a temple,
   without sacrifice or priest (Hosea 3:4, 5) . As yet, many heathen
   nations are permitted to walk in their own ways. But at length the
   fulness of the Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall be saved
   (Romans 11:25, 26) . The revolutions and commotions in kingdoms and
   nations, which astonish and perplex politicians, are all bringing
   forward this great event. The plan of the human drama, to us, who only
   see a single scene, is dark and intricate but the catastrophe is
   approaching; and in the close of the whole, the manifold wisdom of God
   will be admired and adored, and all holy and happy intelligences will
   acknowledge with transport, He has done all things well.

   But the point I am chiefly to press upon my hearers, is, that this Word
   of Salvation is sent to you (Acts 13:26) . How the great Judge will
   deal with the heathens, who were never favoured with it, He has not
   seen fit distinctly to inform us. But thus far He has assured us, that
   it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon, yea for Sodom and
   Gomorrah, than for those who have the privilege of knowing the Gospel,
   if they reject it (Matthew 11:20-24) . To them much is given, and of
   them much will be required. Do not think ministers assuming [haughty,
   arrogant] if they magnify their office. We have no reason to think
   highly of ourselves. Nor would you be blameable for disregarding us if
   we spoke in our own names. But if we preach the truth of the Gospel, in
   simplicity and sincerity, then we speak in the name of the Lord, and
   demand your attention. Do you ask for our authority and commission? Ask
   your own consciences. If, like Felix, when you mean only to indulge
   your own curiosity by hearing us, you are constrained to tremble (Acts
   24:25) ; if we force upon your mind the remembrance of what you have
   said or done; if our message makes you uneasy and dissatisfied with
   yourselves; if you cannot avoid feeling the truth of our principles at
   some times, and the necessity of the change we would press upon you;
   if, though you have been repeatedly displeased and offended with what
   you hear, and, perhaps, have gone away purposing or threatening that
   you would hear it no more, you still appear amongst us --then, you have
   a sufficient proof, that the ministers are sent and authorized to speak
   to you, and we take your consciences to witness that we preach the
   truth.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXIII

   Opposition to Messiah Unreasonable

   Psalm 2:1-3

      Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

   The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
   together, against the LORD , and against His Anointed, saying,

   Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

   I t is generally admitted, that the institutes of Christianity, as
   contained in the New Testament, do at least exhibit a beautiful and
   salutary system of morals; and that a sincere compliance with the
   precepts of our Lord and His apostles, would have a good effect upon
   society. Few infidels have ventured to contradict the common sense of
   mankind, so far as to deny this. Nor can it be denied that the Author
   of this institution [referring to Christianity] , ( if we judge by the
   history and character given of Him by the evangelists), exemplified by
   His own conduct the precepts which He enjoined to His followers, in the
   highest perfection. While He lived as a man amongst men, the tenor of
   His behaviour was such as became the Friend of mankind. Though He
   submitted to a low estate, and often suffered hunger, thirst, and
   weariness, we do not read of His having wrought a single miracle merely
   for His own relief. But the wants and calamities of others continually
   excited His compassion, and engaged His assistance. He gave sight to
   the blind, health to the sick, and sometimes wiped away the tears of
   mourners by restoring their dead to life. He endured hunger Himself;
   but, once and again, provided food for multitudes, lest they, having
   nothing to eat, should faint by the way. Nor did He confine His acts of
   benevolence to His followers, but was easy of access, and granted the
   requests of all indiscriminately, who applied to Him. He went about
   doing good (Acts 10:38) , and often put Himself in the way of those who
   would not otherwise have known Him. And though He was opposed,
   calumniated [slandered], and laughed to scorn, He continued unwearied,
   and determined in the same cause, bestowing benefits on all around Him,
   as occasions offered, and returning good for evil. May we not with
   reason ask, Why then did Jews and Heathens, priests and people, scribes
   and Sadducees, rage so furiously against Him who did nothing amiss, who
   did all things well? Why did persons of the most opposite interests,
   parties, and sentiments, who could agree in nothing else, so cordially
   [heartily] agree in opposing MESSIAH ?

   His Gospel breathes the spirit of the great Author, and has a direct
   tendency to make men happy and useful. Wherever it was published, in
   the first age, among the heathens, many of them turned from the worship
   of dumb idols, to serve the living and true God. It taught and enabled
   them to renounce ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
   righteously, and godly (Titus 2:12) . And it still produces the same
   effects. The world now bears the name Christian,' but under this new
   and honourable name, it retains the same spirit as formerly. Many who
   are called Christian,' are no less under the power of evil tempers and
   evil habits, than the heathens to whom the apostles preached. But where
   the Gospel of the grace of God reaches the heart, a real and observable
   change is produced. The profane person learns to fear an oath, the
   libertine [unrestrained, debauched person] is reclaimed, the drunkard
   becomes sober, and the miser kind. Wherever the truth of the Gospel is
   known and received, instances may be found of persons who were a terror
   and a burden to their families, being delivered from the stings of a
   guilty conscience, from the dominion of headstrong passions, from the
   slavery of habitual wickedness, and made peaceful, useful, and
   exemplary members of society, by what the Apostle calls, The preaching
   of the Cross . And we challenge history to show that an abiding,
   consistent reformation was ever effected by any other doctrine, in a
   single province, or city, or village, or even in a single family.

   What then shall we say of that zeal which kindled the fire of
   persecution against our Lord and His apostles, and His followers
   through a succession of ages? What is the common principle, the bond of
   union, which at this day connects people who differ so widely in other
   respects, and points their displeasure, from all sides, against this
   one object? In a ^* former discourse, I briefly mentioned the principal
   grounds of that dislike which the Jews manifested to MESSIAH'S personal
   ministry ; and I observed that they are deeply rooted in the nature of
   fallen man, and therefore not peculiar to any one age or nation. ^*
   Volume I, Sermon XVII

   The Gospel always did, and always will, produce the same happy change,
   in those who receive it; and provoke the same opposition and resentment
   in those who do not. The actings will be different as circumstances
   vary, but the principle is universally the same. In this island [Great
   Britain], which the good Providence of God has distinguished by many
   signal and peculiar favours; the spirit of our constitution and
   government is friendly to liberty of conscience, and the rights of
   private judgment; so that our religious profession does not expose us
   to the penalties of fire and sword, stripes or tortures, imprisonment
   or banishment. Such trials have been the lot of our forefathers, when
   the servants of God, under names of Gospellers, or Puritans, were
   treated as heretics of the worst sort. We are bound to acknowledge with
   thankfulness, the blessings of religious and civil liberty which we
   enjoy. But the world at large around us, is not more favourably
   disposed to the grace and rule of MESSIAH'S Kingdom, than it was in the
   days of heathen and Popish darkness. The tongue, at least, is
   unrestrained, and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will
   speak. The Gospel offends the pride of men, by considering them all on
   a level, as sinners in the sight of God; and by proposing only one way
   of Salvation, without admitting any difference of plea or character. It
   offends them likewise by its strictness. Like Herod, they might,
   perhaps, consent to do many things (Mark 6:20) , if they were left at
   liberty to please themselves in others, in which, though expressly
   contrary to the will of God, they will not submit to be controlled. And
   therefore they are much displeased with the Gospel; which, by affording
   no allowance or connivance to the least known sin, but prescribing a
   rule of universal holiness, crosses their inclinations and favourite
   interests. When Paul preached at Ephesus, Demetrius and his companions
   perceived that their craft was in danger. This was the real cause of
   their anger, but they were ashamed to avow it; and therefore their
   ostensible reason for opposing him, was of a religious kind (Acts
   19:28) , and they professed a great concern for the honour of Diana.
   Few, perhaps, would have given themselves much trouble, to promote or
   preserve the gain of the craftsmen; but a pretended regard for the
   worship which had long been established, was a popular topic, which
   wrought powerfully upon the superstition of the ignorant multitude, and
   thousands were presently induced to join with them in the cry, Great is
   Diana of the Ephesians.

   The like arts are still practiced, with the like success. The same
   secret motives, are disguised by the same plausible pretences. The
   deceitfulness and wickedness of the heart appears in no one instance
   more plainly, than in the cavils which are repeated and multiplied
   against the grace of the Gospel. When we preach a free Salvation by
   faith in Jesus, and propose His obedience unto death, as the sure and
   only ground of acceptance with God; when we say, in the words of the
   Apostle, to the vilest of sinners who feel the burden, and fear the
   consequences of their sins, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
   shalt be saved (Acts 16:31) , and alarm is raised, and a concern
   pretended for the interests of morality. The doctrine of salvation by
   faith only, is charged with opening a door, a flood-gate for
   licentiousness; and it is supposed, that if this doctrine be true,
   people may live as they please, and still comfort themselves with the
   expectation of heaven at last. Considering our natural propensity to
   trust in ourselves that we are righteous, I do not wonder that persons
   who are comparatively sober and decent, should speak thus, while they
   are ignorant of the strictness of the holy Law of God, and of the
   depravity of their own hearts. But I sometimes wonder that they are not
   a little disconcerted by the characters of so many (so different from
   what they suppose their own to be) who join them in the objections they
   make. For in this point, with the sober and decent, the licentious and
   profligate readily concur; and whoremongers, adulterers, drunkards, and
   profane swearers, almost equal them in gravely expressing their
   apprehensions, that the doctrine of Salvation by Grace, will prove very
   unfavourable to the practice of good works. How very remarkable is this
   -- that the virtuous and the vile, the most respectable and the most
   infamous people, should so frequently agree in sentiment, and unite in
   opposing the Gospel, professedly from the same motive. But thus it was
   at the commencement of MESSIAH'S Kingdom -- kings, rulers, priests, and
   people, all conspired and raged against Him. Herod and Pilate, the
   Jewish elders and the Roman soldiers, the Pharisees and the Sadducees,
   thus differed, and thus agreed. They hated each other till He appeared;
   but their greater common hatred of Him, made them act in concert, and
   they suspended their mutual animosity, that they might combine to
   destroy Him.

   I may seem to have digressed from the immediate scope of my text, but I
   judge it proper to bring the subject home to ourselves. If I confined
   myself to prove that the enemies of our Lord, when He was upon earth,
   were very unreasonable and unjust in treating Him as they did, I should
   have an easy talk, and, I suppose, the ready assent of all my hearers.
   But there may be persons present, who, though they little suspect
   themselves, are equally misled by prejudices; and under a semblance of
   zeal for a form of godliness, oppose the truth and power of it, upon
   the same principles and in the same spirit, as the Jews and heathens
   did of old. The Jews who condemned MESSIAH to death, blamed their
   forefathers for persecuting the prophets who foretold His appearance
   (Matthew 23:30, 31) ; but their own conduct towards Him was a proof
   that, had they lived in the days of the prophets, they would have acted
   as their fathers had done. So the resentment that many who bear the
   Christian name in this day, discover against the doctrines of the
   Gospel, and against the people who profess them, is a proof that they
   would have concurred with those who crucified the Lord of glory, had
   they lived in Jerusalem at that time.

   In this prophecy, David, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, speaks
   of the future as actually present. He saw the resistance that would be
   made to the Person and Kingdom of MESSIAH, by the powers of the world;
   that they would employ their force and policy to withstand and suppress
   the decree and appointment of God. The question Why? implies that their
   opposition would be both groundless and ineffectual.

   (1.)

   It was entirely groundless and unreasonable. MESSIAH was indeed a King,
   and He came to set up a Kingdom that should endure forever. But His
   Kingdom is not of this world; and, if rightly understood, would give no
   umbrage to human governments. It does not interfere with the rights of
   princes. His subjects are indeed primarily bound by the laws of their
   immediate King, and they must obey God rather than man (Acts 5:29) , if
   man will presume to enjoin such laws as contradict His known will. But
   with this exception, it is a part of the duty they owe to their Lord,
   to obey those whom He has placed, by His Providence, in authority over
   them. The Kingdom of MESSIAH has little to do with what we call
   politics. His people are taught to render to Caesar the things that are
   Caesar's (Matthew 22:21) , and to yield a peaceful subjection to the
   powers that be, under whatever form of government their lot may be
   cast. They are strangers and pilgrims upon earth (I Peter 2:11) , their
   citizenship, treasures, and conversation are in heaven; and they have
   no more direct concern with the intrigues and parties of politicians,
   than a traveller has in the feuds and disturbances which may happen in
   a foreign country through which he is passing. They are to obey God,
   they are to obey kings and governors in subordination to God, they are
   to render to all their due; tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom
   custom, honour to whom honour (Romans 13:7) . But where they cannot
   comply with the laws of the government, without breaking the laws of
   God, then they are not to obey, but to suffer patiently, committing
   their cause to Him whom they serve; well knowing that He is able to
   protect or relieve them, so far as His wisdom judges it fit, and to
   make them abundant amends for all they can suffer for His sake. I am
   not a direct advocate for the doctrines of passive obedience, and
   non-resistance, in the largest sense. I set a great value upon the
   blessings of civil and religious liberty. I reverence the
   constitutional rights of nations, particularly of our own. But they are
   all dependant upon the will of our Lord; and I know not by what means
   they can be preserved to a people, when their sins have made them ripe
   for judgment. But let the dead bury their dead (Matthew 8:22) . God
   will never want instruments, when it is His pleasure to relieve the
   oppressed, or to abase the proud. For these purposes, He overrules the
   counsels and affairs of men, pours contempt upon the designs of
   princes, and takes the wise in their own craftiness. The subject of His
   spiritual Kingdom have only to commit their cause to Him, to wait upon
   Him, to observe and to admire His management. Their best interest is
   always safe. And even the troubles they meet with, are appointed for
   their good. But if they so far conform to the world, as to take an
   active and decided part in the disputes and contentions around them,
   they usually dishonour their Christian character, and obstruct their
   own peace and comfort. There may possibly be some exceptions. God may
   sometimes place a servant of His, by the leading of His Providence, in
   a post of high political importance, as He did Joseph and Daniel, but I
   believe such instances are few; and if any venture of their own accord,
   beyond the proper line of their calling, as Christians, the event is
   usually grief and loss to them. They [believers] are described in His
   Word, as those who are quiet in the land (Psalm 35:20) , and such
   should be their deportment.

   We are sure it was thus, in the first and golden days of Christianity.
   The Roman government was then absolute, arbitrary, and oppressive.
   Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, and others, who presided over it, and bore
   the name of Roman emperors, were vile and abominable beyond measure:
   one of them [one of the Christians] was, by a decree of the Roman
   senate, sentenced to death as a public enemy to mankind -- but the
   Christians neither disputed their right, nor disobeyed their authority.
   Kings and rulers, therefore, have nothing to fear from the Gospel of
   Christ. The maxims of sound policy would engage all their influence in
   facilitating its progress, for true Christians will assuredly be good
   subjects. Impatience of subordination, contempt of lawful authority,
   tumults, riots, and conspiracies, are evils which would have no place,
   if the Gospel was generally received. But princes have usually been
   exposed to the flattery of designing men, who, by their arts and
   misrepresentations, have seduced them to act contrary to their true
   interest. Their mistaken efforts to suppress that cause, which if
   maintained, would have been the best security of their thrones, have
   often stained the annals of their reign with innocent blood, and filled
   their dominions with misery. History furnishes many instances of kings
   who might otherwise have lived beloved, and died lamented, that have
   involved themselves and their families in the calamities with which
   they unjustly punished those who deserved their protection. For --

   (2.)

   Opposition to MESSIAH and His Kingdom is no less vain and ineffectual,
   than unreasonable and groundless. Nor is it in vain only, but ruinous
   to those who engage in it. What did the Jews build, when they rejected
   the Foundation Stone which God had laid in Zion? They acted, as they
   thought, with precaution and foresight. They said, If we let Him thus
   alone, all men will believe on Him; and the Romans shall come and take
   away both our place and our nation (John 11:48) . Foolish politicians!
   Did they preserve their city by crucifying the Son of God?! The very
   evil they feared came upon them. Or rather, being abandoned of God to
   their own counsels, they brought it upon themselves. In a few years,
   the Romans with whom they appeared so desirous to keep upon good terms,
   destroyed their city with an unheard of destruction, and exterminated
   them from the land. This was an emblem of the inevitable, total,
   irreparable ruin, which awaits all those who persist in rejecting the
   rule of MESSIAH. The nation, the individual, that will not serve Him
   must surely perish.

   Ah! If sinners did but know what the bonds and cords are, which they
   are so determined to break; if they knew that His service is perfect
   freedom; if they were aware what more dreadful bonds and chains they
   are riveting upon themselves, by refusing His easy yoke, they would
   throw down their arms and submit. They think, if they yield to the
   Gospel, they must bid adieu to pleasure. But what will become of their
   pleasure when, the day of His forbearance being expired, He will speak
   to them in His wrath, and fill them with hopeless horror and dismay?

   Bless the Lord, ye favoured few, whose eyes are opened, whose hearts
   are softened, and who are become the willing people of this Saviour.
   Yet a little while and He will appear again, and then you also shall
   appear with Him in glory!

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXIV

   Opposition to Messiah in Vain

   Psalm 2:4

      He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh;

   the Lord shall have them in derision.

   T he extent and efficacy [effects] of the depravity of mankind cannot
   be fully estimated by the conduct of heathens destitute of divine
   revelation. We may say of the Gospel, in one sense, what the Apostle
   says of the Law, It entered that sin might abound (Romans 5:20) . It
   afforded occasion for displaying the alienation of the heart of man
   from the blessed God, in the strongest light. The sensuality,
   oppression and idolatry which have prevailed in all ages, sufficiently
   prove the wickedness of men to be very great. But the opposition which
   they who have rebelled against the government of their Creator make to
   the proposals of His grace, is a proof still more striking. If sin has
   so hardened their hearts, and blinded their eyes, that of themselves
   they neither can nor will implore His mercy, yet it might be thought
   that if the great God whom they have so heinously offended, should be
   pleased, of His own goodness, to make the first overtures of
   reconciliation, and to invite them to receive pardon, they would gladly
   attend to His gracious declaration, especially when they were informed
   that, to preserve them from perishing, He gave up His only Son to
   sufferings and death. But when they not only defy His power, but insult
   His goodness; when they reject and blaspheme the Saviour whom He
   commends to them; when they are but the more exasperated by His tenders
   [offers] of mercy; when they scorn His message, and persecute His
   messengers by whom He entreats them to be reconciled; this mad and
   ungrateful carriage shows such a rooted enmity against God in fallen
   men, as even the fallen angels are not capable of discovering. For
   MESSIAH took not on Him the nature of angels, nor did He make proposals
   of mercy to them. But He did take upon Him our nature. He visited us in
   person, for us He lived a Sufferer, and died that we might live.

   The prophets foresaw and foretold the reception He would meet with, and
   their predictions were fulfilled. The Jews, who professed to expect
   Him, and the heathens who have not heard of Him, united their utmost
   efforts to withstand and defeat the purposes of His unexampled love.
   What must the holy angels think of the baseness, presumption, and
   obstinacy of such creatures!

   But rebellion against God is not only wickedness, but folly and
   infatuation in the extreme. Who ever hardened himself against the Lord
   and prospered? (Job 9:4) . He whom they opposed, and against whom they
   thought they had prevailed when they saw Him dead upon the cross, soon
   resumed His glory and His throne. The text, therefore, principally
   respects the opposition made to His Gospel and to His Kingdom after His
   ascension, which is still carrying on, but which always was, and always
   will be, in vain. The words I have read offer two points for the
   consolation of those who love Him, and for the timely consideration of
   those who have hitherto disregarded Him.

   I. That He sits in the heavens.

   II. That He takes notice of His enemies He smiles at their rage, and
   treats both their power and their policy with contempt.

   I.

   He whom God has anointed (therefore called MESSIAH ) He against whom
   kings and rulers, nations and people rage, sits in the heavens. He has
   finished His great work, and entered into His rest; having by Himself
   purged our sins, He is immovably seated upon His throne, at the right
   hand of the Majesty on High (Hebrews 1:3) . He is the Head, King, and
   Lord of all principalities, dominions, and powers, possessed of all
   authority, unchangeably fixed over all, God blessed forevermore (Romans
   9:5) . In this character He is the Representative, High Priest,
   Advocate and Shepherd of all who put their trust in Him. He is ever
   mindful of them. While He is preparing a place for them near Himself,
   by the power of His Spirit He maintains an intercourse with them, and
   manifests Himself to them as He does not to the world. By His
   Providence, which rules over all, He manages their concerns upon earth,
   supplies their wants, and gives them present and effectual help and
   support in their time of trouble. To Him their eyes and hearts are
   directed, they look to Him and are enlightened (Psalm 34:5) ,
   strengthened, and comforted. And under His protection they are safe. He
   having taken charge of them, and engaged to save them to the uttermost,
   no weapon formed against them can prosper. Now they may draw nigh to
   God with boldness, for they have One who ever lives to make
   intercession for them. Now they may lay aside all anxious uneasy cares,
   for they have a mighty Friend who cares for them. Now they may say,
   each one for himself, I will trust and not be afraid, for the Lord
   Jehovah is my strength, and my song, and my salvation (Isaiah 12:2) .
   Whether you have indeed fled to Him for refuge as the hope set before
   you, committed your soul to Him, and accepted Him in all His offices,
   as your Prophet, Priest, and King, is a point of experience; if you
   have, He knows it; for He enabled you to do it and He will not
   disappoint the hope and expectation which He Himself has wrought in
   you. If you have, methinks you must know it likewise. Have you not done
   it more than once? Do you not daily repeat this surrender of yourself
   to Him? It is certainly possible to assent to the truths of the Gospel,
   considered merely as doctrines or propositions, yea to plead and
   dispute for them with much seeming earnestness, and yet to be entirely
   a stranger to their power. But I trust that they to whom I now speak
   will understand me. Our Lord reminded Nathanael of what had passed
   under the fig tree (John 1:48) , when he thought himself alone. Do not
   I remind you of seasons, when no eye but the eye of Him who sees in
   secret was upon you? Did not you then and there, once and again, accept
   Him as your Saviour upon the warrant of His own Word, devote yourself
   to His service, resign yourself to His disposal, and entrust yourself
   to His care? Then fear not. He that sits in the heavens is on your
   side. If the premise be well grounded, the inference is sure. And
   though many may rise up against you, they shall not prevail, for He
   will teach your hands to war, and your fingers to fight, He will cover
   your head in the day of battle, and in the end make you more than a
   conqueror. For the battle is not yours, but the Lord's. Your enemies
   are His, and His cause is yours. They who associate against Him shall
   be dashed in pieces, as the billows break and die upon a rocky shore.

   II.

   The feebleness and insignificance of their rage against MESSIAH, is
   intimated by the manner in which He notices their proceedings. He holds
   them in derision, He laughs them to scorn. He has them perfectly under
   His control, holds them in a chain when they think themselves to be
   most at liberty, appoints the bounds beyond which they cannot pass, and
   can in a moment check them, and make them feel His hook and bridle,
   when in the height of their career.

   It is the Lord's pleasure not only to favour and to support His people,
   but to do it in such a way that it may be seen that it is wholly His
   own work, and that the praise belongs to Him alone. And therefore He
   permits their enemies for a season to try if they can prevent His
   designs. For a season, things take such a course that their attempts
   seem to prosper; they threaten, they boast, and confidently expect to
   carry their point. But the contest always issues in their shame and
   confusion. He not only disconcerts their schemes, but makes them
   instrumental to the promoting of His own designs. Thus when He sent
   Moses to deliver Israel from Egypt, Pharaoh, instead of complying with
   His command, increased their burdens, added to the rigour of their
   bondage, and, though rebuked by a succession of severe judgments, he
   hardened himself the more, and was determined to detain them if he
   could. But he could not detain them a day or an hour beyond the
   appointed time, which God had long before made known to Abraham (Exodus
   12:41, 42) . Then they were delivered, and Pharaoh and his host
   overthrown in the Red Sea. Hereby the name of the God of Israel was
   more known, noticed and magnified, than it would have been if Pharaoh
   had dismissed the people without reluctance and delay.

   In like manner, when MESSIAH left the earth, His followers were
   considered as sheep without a shepherd. The world conspired to suppress
   His cause, and to root out the remembrance of His people. But the
   methods they employed counteracted their own designs. They who were
   dispersed by the persecution that followed the death of Stephen,
   preached the Word wherever they went, the Gospel spread from place to
   place, and the number of disciples daily increased. So that the Jewish
   rulers soon found themselves unequal to the task, and foreboded their
   own disappointment, doubting whereunto these things would grow (Acts
   5:24) . In some cases the Lord signally interposed, and showed how
   entirely the lives and the hearts of His adversaries were in His hands.
   The haughty Herod was suddenly smitten by an invisible hand, with a
   loathsome and fatal disease (Acts 12:23) . He fell, devoured by worms;
   but the success of the Gospel, which he had presumed to withstand,
   greatly increased and spread. The furious zeal of Saul of Tarsus (Acts
   9) against the truth, was silenced in a different manner. Jesus, whom
   he ignorantly persecuted, appeared to him in the way to Damascus, when
   he was breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples ,
   disarmed his rage, made him a monument of His mercy, and an earnest and
   successful preacher of the faith he had laboured to destroy.

   From the Jews the business was transferred to the heathens, whose
   opposition was no less unavailing. Though they sometimes affected to
   boast that they had suppressed the Christian name, the Gospel was
   propagated in defiance of their attempts to prevent it. The worst and
   the best of the Roman emperors, were alike industrious, and alike
   unsuccessful, in their endeavours to stifle the work of God. At length,
   in the reign of Constantine, the Christian religion obtained the
   sanction and protection of imperial authority.

   But it soon appeared that the religion of the New Testament gained
   little advantage by this revolution. Though the worship of heathen
   idols gradually declined, and sank into disrepute, the bulk of the
   people of all ranks were only changed in name. The world still lay in
   wickedness (I John 5:19) , and true Christianity was still exposed to
   persecution. When the name Christian' ceased to be invidious and
   despicable, new names were soon invented to stigmatize the real
   servants of God; and ecclesiastical powers gradually increased, till
   the mystery of iniquity reigned for ages in the temple of God. The
   persecutions of popery equalled and exceeded those of paganism. And
   they who aspired to be Christians indeed, were constrained, like the
   worthies of old, to wander on mountains and in deserts, to hide
   themselves in dens and caves of the earth (Hebrews 11:38) . Yet, under
   all disadvantages, there was still a remnant, according to the election
   of grace, who could not be compelled to wear the mark of the beast. And
   while persecutors, who could only kill the body, seemed to weaken the
   Church militant, they increased the number and the songs of the Church
   triumphant.

   To appearance, the Church of Christ was often brought low. It was very
   low at the time of the Reformation. But then it suddenly was revived,
   and broke forth like the sun from behind a dark cloud; and the light of
   the Gospel was diffused far and wide, almost as at the beginning, in
   the apostles' days. But the Protestants were quickly actuated by the
   same spirit, as their popish and pagan predecessors had been. The form
   of Christianity was professed and protected, and the power of it denied
   and opposed. And to this day it remains a truth verified by experience,
   that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus, must, in one way or
   other, suffer persecution (II Timothy 3:12)

   Of late years the sanguinary [blood-thirsty; murderous] spirit, which,
   under pretence of doing God's service, destroyed His people by fire and
   tortures, is much subsided. We live in a time when great pretences are
   made to candour and moderation. We have reason to be thankful to the
   good Providence of God for our religious liberty. But, so far as men
   are concerned, we are not indebted for it, to a just sense and
   acknowledgment of the right of private judgment, but to the prevalence
   of sceptical indifference and infidelity. The religion of the Gospel
   was, perhaps, never more despised and hated than at present. We seem to
   be returning apace to the state of primitive ages when there were but
   two sorts of persons --Christians and infidels. But notwithstanding all
   the arts and assaults of men, whether open enemies or pretended
   friends, the Bible is still extant [still in existence], the Gospel is
   still preached, yea, is still spreading. The Lord has always had a
   people, though they have been often hidden from the general notice and
   observation of men. He that sits in the heavens laughs His opposers to
   scorn, and maintains His own cause in defiance of them all.

   Surely if this work was not of God, the united efforts of kings,
   councils, popes, and philosophers, the great, the wise, the decent, and
   the profligate, must have overthrown it long ago. If a miracle be
   demanded in proof of Christianity, behold one! Though the world has
   been raging and plotting against it, from its first appearance; though
   it has been fiercely assaulted by those without, and shamefully
   betrayed by many within, it still subsists, it still flourishes. And
   subsist it shall, for it is maintained by Him, who has the hearts of
   all men in His hands, and can control or change them as He pleases. He
   can, and He will, support and strengthen His people under all their
   sufferings. He can disappoint His adversaries by unexpected events,
   divide them among themselves, and so manage them by His Providence, as
   to make them protect and promote the very cause which they hate. And
   whenever He pleases He can, as it were, from the stones (Matthew 3:9) ,
   raise up instruments to carry on His work, and to show forth His
   praise. Therefore,

   (1.)

   Let not His people tremble for the ark. Our eyes indeed should affect
   our hearts. It becomes us to be jealous for the LORD of hosts, to be
   concerned for the contempt and dishonour that is cast upon His
   government and grace, to be grieved for the abounding abominations of
   the day, and to pity and pray for obstinate sinners who know not what
   they do. But we need not fear the failure of His promise. His truth and
   honour are engaged for the success of His Gospel, and they must stand
   or fall together. It is a cause dearer to Him than it can be to us. The
   manifestation of His glory in the salvation of sinners, by the doctrine
   of the Cross, is the one great concern, for which the succession of day
   and night, and of the seasons of the year is continued, and the visible
   frame of nature is preserved. He will work, and none shall let it
   (Isaiah 43:13) . The kingdoms of the earth shall become the kingdoms of
   the Lord and of His Christ (Revelation 11:15) . The fulness of the
   Gentiles shall come in, and the dispersed of Israel shall return to the
   Lord (Romans 11:25) . These great events, to those who judge by an eye
   of sense, and according to the recent state of things, may appear
   improbable or impossible. But the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who
   shall disannul it? His hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it
   back? (Isaiah 14:27)

   (2.)

   Think it neither strange nor hard, if any of you are called to suffer
   for the sake of the truth. Think it not strange; for thus it has been
   from the beginning. Think it not hard; for our sufferings are small, if
   compared with the lot of many who have lived before us. We are not
   called to resist unto blood. Many prophets and righteous men have
   desired to see such days of liberty as we are favoured with, but have
   not seen them.

   (3.)

   Consider seriously, Who is on the Lord's side? His is the strongest
   side and must prevail. If you have yielded yourselves to Him, and taken
   upon you His yoke, your best interests are safe, your final happiness
   is secured. Nothing can separate you from His love. You shall be kept
   by His power through faith, and no weapon formed against you shall
   prosper. But if you are against Him, tremble; for the Day of His Wrath
   will come, it will burn like an oven, and all the proud, and all that
   do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them
   up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither root nor
   branch (Malachi 4:1) . Turn therefore in time from your evil ways,
   submit yourselves unto Him, and implore His mercy while He waits to be
   gracious, that iniquity may not be your ruin.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXV

   Opposition to Messiah Ruinous

   Psalm 2:9

      Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron;

   Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel

   T here is a species of the sublime in writing, which seems peculiar to
   the Scripture, and of which, properly, no subjects but those of divine
   revelation are capable, With us, things inconsiderable in themselves
   are elevated by splendid images, which give them an apparent importance
   beyond what they can justly claim. Thus the poet, when describing a
   battle among bees, by a judicious selection of epithets and figures,
   excites in the minds of his readers, the idea of two mighty armies
   contending for empire. But the works and ways of God are too great in
   themselves, to admit of any heightening representation. We conceive
   more forcibly of small things by illustrations borrowed from those
   which are greater; but the Scripture frequently illustrates great
   things by contrasting them with those, which in our estimation, are
   trivial and feeble. One instance out of many which might be mentioned,
   is that truly sublime passage of the prophet, And all the host of
   heaven shall be dissolved; and the heavens shall be rolled together as
   a scroll; and all their host shall fall down as the leaf falleth off
   from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig-tree (Isaiah 34:4) .
   The Apostle, when favoured with a heavenly vision, introduces the same
   thought, almost in the same words. And the stars of heaven fell unto
   the earth, even as a fig-tree casts her untimely figs, when she is
   shaken of a mighty wind: and the heavens departed as a scroll when it
   is rolled together (Revelation 6:13, 14) . Such forms of expression are
   becoming [proper; belonging to the character of] the Majesty of the
   great God, before whom the difference between the great and the small
   in our judgment, is annihilated. In His view, all the inhabitants of
   the earth are but as a drop which falls unnoticed from the bucket, or
   as the dust which cleaves to the balance (Isaiah 40:15) , without
   affecting its equilibrium. At the same time, the simplicity of these
   illustrations, so well suited to confound the pride of the wise, is
   striking and obvious to the lowest capacities. If ^* Homer or ^* Virgil
   had been asked to describe the exertion and effect of the power of God,
   in subduing and punishing His enemies, they would probably have
   laboured for a simile sufficiently grand. But I much question if they
   would have thought of the image in my text, though none can be more
   expressive of utter irreparable ruin, or of the ease with which it is
   accomplished. He shall dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel
   (Psalm 2:9)

   ^* Homer - Greek poet (8 ^th century BC) ^* Virgil - Roman poet (70BCE
   - 19BCE)

   The series of the passages, we have lately considered, is very regular
   and beautiful . MESSIAH ascended on high, and received gifts for men.
   The first and immediate consequence of His exaltation in our nature is
   the publication of the Gospel. Then follows the happy and beneficial
   influence of the Gospel on those who thankfully receive it. How
   beautiful are the feet of them that preach these glad tidings. The next
   passage secures and describes its extensive progress -- The sound went
   forth into all the earth. The opposition awakened by it is there
   described, as unreasonable, Why do the Heathen rage? ; as ineffectual,
   the Lord laughs at His opposers; He sits upon His immovable throne, and
   derides their attempts. The final issue of their mad resistance, their
   confusion and ruin , is the subject of the verse I have read, which
   prepares for the close of the second part of the Oratorio . His enemies
   shall perish, His Kingdom shall be established and consummated. And
   then all holy intelligent beings shall join in a song of triumph,
   Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.

   The two expressions of "breaking with a rod of iron" and "dashing in
   pieces" suggest nearly the same idea. But as elsewhere He is said to
   rule His enemies with a rod of iron (Revelation 19:15) . I shall avail
   myself of this variation, in order to give you a more complete view of
   the dreadful state of those who oppose MESSIAH and His Kingdom. He
   rules them at present with a rod of iron, and hereafter He will dash
   them in pieces like a potter's vessel. Let us, therefore, consider:

   I.

   How the Lord MESSIAH rules over impenitent and obstinate sinners in the
   present life. They attempt (in vain) to withdraw from His subjection.
   They oppose His holy will. They refuse to submit to His golden sceptre.
   He will, therefore, rule them with a rod of iron. For though they boast
   of their liberty, and presume to say Who is Lord over us? (Psalm 12:4)
   , yet in the thing wherein they speak proudly, He is above them (Exodus
   18:11) . They cannot hide themselves from His notice, nor avoid the
   intimations of His displeasure.

   (1.)

   One branch of His iron rule over them, consists in that certain and
   inseparable connection, which He has established between sin and
   misery. The fruit of righteousness is peace (James 3:18) . They who
   live in the fear of the Lord, and yield a willing obedience to His
   Word, not only possess a peace of conscience, and a hope which can look
   with comfort beyond the grave; but are thereby preserved from
   innumerable evils, into which they who attempt to cast off His yoke,
   unavoidably plunge themselves. On the contrary, the way of the
   transgressors is hard (Proverbs 13:15) . It is hard in itself, if we
   set aside, for a moment, the consideration of the dreadful end to which
   it leads. If you could see what passes within the breast of a man who
   disdains to be governed by the rule of God's Word, you would see his
   heart torn to pieces by the clamorous, insatiable demands of the
   various, violent, inconsistent appetites and passions, which, like so
   many wild beasts, are continually preying upon him. Not one of them can
   be fully gratified, much less all, for many of them are diametrically
   opposite to each other. The boilings of anger, the gnawing of envy, the
   thirst of covetousness, the anxieties attendant on pride and ambition,
   must make the mind that is subject to them, miserable. There is no
   peace to the wicked; there can be none. Farther, their evil tempers and
   irregular desires produce outward and visible effects, which publicly
   and manifestly prove that the service of sin is a hard drudgery, and
   whatever pleasure it may seem to promise, its pay is misery and pain.
   Who hath woe, contentions, and wounds, without cause? (Proverbs 23:29)
   . The drunkard. Lewdness and drunkenness, are highways, if I may so
   speak, leading to infamy, disease, penury, and death. Such persons do
   not live out half the days which their constitutions might have
   afforded, if they had not sold themselves to do wickedly. Again, look
   into their houses. Where the Lord does not dwell, peace will not
   inhabit. How frequently may we observe, in their family connections,
   discord and enmity between man and wife, unkind parents, disobedient
   children, tyrannical masters, and treacherous servants? Thus they live,
   hateful in themselves, and hating one another (Titus 3:3) . If they
   have what the world counts prosperity, their hard master, Satan, so
   works upon their evil dispositions, that they can derive no real
   comfort from it. Every day, almost every hour, puts some new bitterness
   into their cup. And in trouble they have no resource; having no access
   to God, no promise to support them, no relief from Him against their
   anxieties and fears, they either sink down in sullen comfortless
   despondency, or in a spirit of wild rebellion, blaspheme Him because of
   their plagues (Revelation 16:21) . In society, they are dreaded and
   avoided by the sober and serious, and can only associate with such as
   themselves. There, indeed, they will pretend to be happy; they carouse,
   and make a nose, and assist each other to banish reflection; yet
   frequently the drink, or the devil, break their intimacies, and stir
   them up to quarrels, broils, and mischief. Such is a life of sin. The
   Lord rules them with a rod of iron. They renounce His fear, and He
   refuses them His blessing. Nothing more is necessary to render them
   miserable, than to leave them to themselves.

   (2.)

   He rules them with a rod of iron, by His power over conscience. They
   may boast and laugh, but we know the gall and bitterness of their
   state, for we, likewise, were in it, until the Lord delivered us. Let
   them say what they will, we are sure that there are seasons, when, like
   him whom they serve, they believe and tremble (James 2:19) . They
   cannot always be in company, they cannot always be intoxicated; though
   this is the very reason why many intoxicate themselves so often,
   because they cannot bear their own thoughts when sober. They are then a
   burden and a terror to themselves. They feel the iron rod. How awful
   are the thoughts which sometimes awaken them, or keep them awake, in
   the silent hours of the night! What terrors seize them in sickness, or
   when they are compelled to think of death! What a death warrant do they
   often receive in their souls, under the preaching of that Word of God,
   which fills His people with joy and peace! Many will not hear it. But
   why not? They will not, because they dare not. I am persuaded there are
   more than a few of the brave spirits of the present day, who would
   willingly change conditions with a dog; and be glad to part with their
   reason, if they could at the same time get rid of the horrors which
   haunt their consciences. Is there one such person here? Let me entreat
   you to stop and consider, before it is too late. There is yet
   forgiveness with God. Your case, though dangerous, is not desperate, if
   you do not make it so yourself. I would direct your thoughts to Jesus.
   Look to Him, and implore His mercy. His blood can cleanse from all sin.
   He is able to save to the uttermost.

   It is possible some may affect to contradict the representation I have
   made, and be ready to say, "I find nothing of all this. I take a
   pleasure in my way. I have a healthy body, money at my command, and I
   can sleep soundly. I feel none of the qualms of conscience you speak
   of; and though the saints and good folks care as little for me as I do
   for them, yet I am very well and happy with such acquaintance as I like
   best. As to an hereafter, I do not think of it; but I am determined to
   live now."

   In answer to sentiments of this kind, which I am afraid are too common,
   I observe,

   (3.)

   That the amazing hardness and blindness of heart to which some sinners
   are given up, is another, and the most terrible effect of that iron
   rod, with which the Lord rules His enemies. Pharaoh would say as
   positively as you, Who is the Lord that I should obey Him? (Exodus
   9:16) . But because being often rebuked, he perished in his obstinacy,
   the contest terminated in his destruction. If you are obstinate like
   him now, I believe you were not always so. You must have laboured hard,
   you must have resisted the light of truth, and have stifled many a
   conviction, before you could arrive to this pitch of obduracy
   [invincible hardness of heart]. You have fought against the Holy
   Spirit, and woe unto you, if He be gone, gone for ever, and will strive
   with you no more. To be thus given up of God to a reprobate mind, is
   the heaviest judgment that a sinner can be visited with on this side of
   hell. I am at a loss what to say to a person thus disposed, and I hope
   there are none such present. But I would warn those, who, though they
   have sinned with a high hand, are not yet altogether past feeling, lest
   you fall into such a state of confirmed disobedience and unbelief. Take
   heed lest you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin (Hebrews
   3:13) . If under the light of the Gospel you can go on in a course of
   wilful, wanton, deliberate wickedness, you are upon the very edge of
   the unpardonable sin, of that state from which it is impossible to
   renew you to repentance. If the Bible be, as you vainly wish it may
   prove, a cunningly devised fable, you may trample upon it with
   impunity, and laugh on securely to the end of life. But if it be true,
   remember you have been this day warned of the consequences of despising
   it. If you will perish, I am clear of your blood.

   II.

   I proceed to consider the final issue of this unequal contest, between
   the worms of this earth and their Maker. He will dash them in pieces
   like a potter's vessel. Such a vessel may be curiously wrought, and
   appear beautiful to the eye, but it is frail, easily broken, and when
   once broken to pieces it is irreparable. It is, therefore, a fit emblem
   of mortal man in his best estate. We are fearfully and wonderfully made
   (Psalm 139:14) . The texture of the human frame is admirable. The
   natural capacities of the mind of man, the powers of his understanding,
   will, and affections, the rapidity of imagination, the comprehension of
   memory, especially in some instances, are so many proofs, that,
   considered as a creature of God, he is a noble creature. And though he
   is debased and degraded by sin, there are traces of his original
   excellence remaining, sufficient to denominate him, in the words of the
   poet, ^* majestic tho' in ruins. But if you suppose him rich, powerful,
   wise, in the common sense of the words, he is brittle as a potter's
   vessel, and while possessed of every possible advantage, he is like the
   grass or the flower of the field, which in its most flourishing state,
   falls, in a moment, at the stroke of the scythe, and withers and dies.
   A fever, a fall, a tile, a grain of sand, or the air that finds its way
   through a crevice, may be an overmatch for the strongest man, and bring
   him down hastily to the grave. By a small change in the brain, or some
   part of the nervous system, he who prides himself in his intellectual
   abilities, may soon become a lunatic, or an idiot. Disease may quickly
   render the beauty loathsome, and the robust weak as infancy. There are
   earthen or china vessels, which might possible endure for many ages, if
   carefully preserved from violence. But the seeds of decay and death are
   sown in our very frame. We are crushed before the moth, and moulder
   away untouched, under the weight of time. How surely and inevitably
   then must they whom the Lord strikes with His iron rod, be shattered
   with the blow!

   ^* from CORNUBIA - by George Woodley (1819)

   Communities and collective bodies of men, are, in His hand, no less
   frail than individuals. The first-born throughout Egypt, and the vast
   army of Sennacherib, perished in a night. The Romans were the iron rod
   in His hand, wherewith He dashed the Jewish nation to pieces. Their
   fragments are scattered far and wide to this day, and who can gather
   them up? The Roman Empire was likewise dashed to pieces in its turn;
   and such has been the end, successively, of many powers, and of many
   persons, who have presumed to oppose His designs. For a while they were
   permitted to rage, and plot, and strive; but at length they stumbled
   and fell, and their memory is perished.

   But it is proper to bring the consideration nearer home. I have been
   informed that the music to which this passage is set, is so well
   adapted to the idea it expresses, as in a manner to startle those who
   hear it. They who live in sinful habits, regardless of the Gospel,
   would be startled, indeed, if they were duly sensible how directly the
   words apply to their own situation, and that the Psalmist describes the
   manner in which God will treat them if they continue impenitent. If we
   could see all that passes upon dying beds, we should often see the
   false peace and vain hopes of sinners dashed to pieces when eternity is
   opening upon their view. We shall certainly see the solemnity of the
   great day: For we must all appear , not only as spectators, but as
   parties nearly interested in the proceedings before the judgment-seat
   of Christ (II Corinthians 5:10) Behold, He cometh in the clouds, and
   every eye shall see Him, and they also who pierced Him! (Revelation
   1:7) . He will descend with a shout, with the voice of the archangel,
   and with the trump of God (I Thessalonians 4:16) , and before Him shall
   be gathered all nations (Matthew 25:32) . Where, then, shall the sinner
   and the ungodly appear? What will then become of those who despise, and
   those who abuse the Gospel of the grace of God? The libertine, the
   infidel, the apostate, the hypocrite, the profane scoffer, and false
   professor, how will they stand, or whither will they flee, when the
   great Judge shall sit upon His awful Throne, and the books shall be
   opened, and every secret thing shall be disclosed? Alas! for them that
   are full , and that laugh now, for then they shall pine and mourn (Luke
   6:25) . Then their cavils will be silenced, their guilt, with all its
   aggravations, be charged home upon them, and no plea, no advocate be
   found. Can their hearts endure, or their hands be strong, when He shall
   speak to them in His wrath, and say, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
   everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels?

   But let them who love His name rejoice. You have fled for refuge to the
   hope set before you. To you His appearance will be delightful, and His
   voice welcome. You shall not be ashamed. This awful God is yours. He
   will then own and accept you before assembled worlds, and will say,
   Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.
   Then the days of your mourning shall be ended, and your sun shall go
   down no more (Isaiah 60:20)

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXVI

   The Lord Reigneth

   Revelation 19:6

   Hallelujah; for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth!

   T he book of the Revelation, being chiefly prophetical, will not,
   perhaps, be fully understood, till the final accomplishment of the
   events shall draw near, and throw a stronger light upon the whole
   series. But while the learned commentators have been, hitherto, divided
   and perplexed in their attempts to illustrate many parts of it, there
   are other parts well adapted for the instruction and refreshment of
   plain Christians. Particularly, those passages in which the scenery and
   images seem designed to give us some representation of the happiness
   and worship of the heavenly state. Thus a plain unlettered believer,
   when reading with attention the fourth and fifth chapters, though he
   cannot give a reason why the elders are twenty-four, and the number of
   their wings neither more nor less than six; yet, from the whole
   description of the Lamb upon the Throne, the songs of the redeemed, and
   the chorus of the angels, he receives such an impression of glory, as
   awakens his gratitude, desire and joy; and excites him likewise to take
   up the same song of praise, to Him who has loved him, and washed him
   from his sins in His own blood. He is content to leave the discussion
   of hard questions to learned men, while he feeds by faith upon those
   simple truths, which can only be relished by a spiritual taste; and
   which, where there is such a taste, make their way to the heart,
   without the assistance of critical disquisition [critical discussion].

   The subject of the preceding chapter, is the destruction of mystical
   Babylon, the head of the opposition against the Kingdom of the Lord
   Christ. But Babylon sinks like a mill-stone in the mighty ocean, and is
   no more found. So must all His enemies perish. The catastrophe of
   Babylon, like that of Pharaoh at the Red Sea, is beheld by the saints
   and servants of the Lord with admiration, and furnishes them with a
   theme for a song of triumph to His praise. This may be properly styled
   sacred music indeed. It is commanded, inspired and regulated, by the
   Lord Himself. The performers are all interested in the subject, they
   who fear God , and are devoted to His service and glory. And though
   persons of this character are comparatively few upon earth, hidden, and
   in a manner, lost among the crowd of mankind; they will be, when
   brought together at last, a very large company. Their united voices are
   here compared to the voice of many waters, and of mighty thunders, and
   this is the solemn close, the chorus of their song, Hallelujah, for the
   L ORD God Omnipotent reigneth.

   The impression, which the performance of this passage in the Oratorio
   usually makes upon the audience, is well known. But however great the
   power of music may be, should we even allow the flights of poetry to be
   truth, that it softens rocks, and bends the knotty oak, one thing we
   are sure it cannot do. It cannot soften and change the hard heart, it
   cannot bend the obdurate will of man. If all the people who
   successively hear the Messiah Oratorio, who are struck and astonished,
   for the moment, by this chorus in particular, were to bring away with
   them an abiding sense of the importance of the sentiment it contains,
   the nation would soon wear a new face. But do the professed lovers of
   sacred music in this enlightened age, generally live, as if they really
   believed that the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth ? Rather, do not the
   greater part of them live, as they might do, if they were sure of the
   contrary? as if they were satisfied to a demonstration, that either
   there is no God, or that His Providence is not concerned with human
   affairs? I appeal to conscience; I appeal to fact.

   I apprehend that this passage, taken in the strictest sense, refers to
   a period not yet arrived. Babylon is not yet fallen. The servants of
   God in the present day, will most probably fulfill their appointed time
   upon earth, like those who have lived before them, in a state of
   conflict. They must endure the cross, and sustain opposition for His
   sake. The people who shall live when the kingdoms of the world become
   the kingdoms of our Lord and His Christ, when the nations shall learn
   war no more, are yet unborn. But even now we may rejoice that the L ORD
   God Omnipotent reigneth, and that Jesus is King of kings, and L ORD of
   lords. I must consider my text as referring to Him. Many of the
   heathens believed that God reigned. The Christian doctrine is, that the
   L ORD God Omnipotent exercises His dominion and government in the
   person of Christ. The Father loves the Son, and has committed all
   things into His hands (John 3:35) . And thus our Lord, after His
   resurrection, assured His disciples, All power is committed unto Me in
   heaven and in earth (Matthew 28:18) . He has already taken to Himself
   His great power, and reigneth. His right of reigning over all, is
   essential to His divine nature; but the administration of government in
   the nature of man, is the effect and reward of His obedience unto
   death. But in the union of both natures, He is one person, Christ Jesus
   the Lord. All the riches and fulness of the Godhead, all the peculiar
   honours of the Mediator, centre in Him. They may be distinguished, but
   they are inseparable.

   Happy are they who can, upon solid and Scriptural grounds, exult in the
   thought that the Lord reigns, and can make His government the subject
   of their hallelujahs and praises! Happy are they, who see, acknowledge
   and admire His management in the kingdom of providence, and are the
   willing subjects of His kingdom of grace. Let us take a brief survey of
   his reigning glory in these kingdoms.

   I.

   Great and marvellous is this L ORD God Omnipotent in His Kingdom of
   Universal Providence ! His mighty arm sustains the vast fabric of the
   universe. He upholds the stars in their courses. If we attentively
   consider their multitude, their magnitudes, their distances from us and
   from one another, and the amazing swiftness, variety and regularity of
   their motions, our minds are overwhelmed, our thoughts confounded, by
   the vastness and wonders of the scene. But He spoke them into being,
   and they are preserved in their stations and revolutions by His power
   and agency. If we fix our thoughts upon the earth, though in comparison
   of the immensity of His creation, it is but as a point, or a grain of
   sand, it is the object of His incessant care. All its various
   inhabitants derive their existence and their support from Him. He
   provides for the young ravens when unable to fly, and for the young
   lions that traverse the woods. The instinct of animals, whereby they
   are unerringly instructed, in whatever concerns the welfare and
   preservation of their species, so vastly exceeding the boasted wisdom
   of man, that he can neither imitate nor comprehend it, is communicated
   by Him. He teaches the birds to build their nests, the spider to weave
   his web, and instructs the communities of bees, and insignificant
   emmets [ants] , to form their admirable policies and government among
   themselves. If we speak of intelligent beings, He does what He pleases
   in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of earth. He directs
   and overrules the counsels and purposes of men, so that though they act
   freely, the event of all their different interfering schemes, is only
   the accomplishment of His purposes. When they are employed as His
   instruments, from small beginnings, and in defiance of difficulties
   apparently insuperable, they succeed beyond their own expectations.
   When unhappily engaged against His designs, in vain they rage and plot.
   He takes the wise in their own craftiness, pours contempt upon their
   power and policy, and all their great preparations melt like a mist, or
   like snow before the sun, and leave no trace behind. Still more
   wonderful, to the eye of faith, is His control over Satan and the
   powers of darkness. Whatever He may permit them to do, for wise
   reasons, though unknown to us, they cannot detain one soul in their
   bondage (with all their subtlety or strength) longer than till His
   appointed time of release; nor recover one soul back to their dominion,
   of which He is pleased to undertake the care. On the contrary, He
   breaks the heads of these Leviathans in pieces, turns their counsels
   against themselves, and makes them instrumental in purifying His
   people, and extending His Church, by the means they employ for the
   destruction of both. Thus they who dwell under His shadow are safe; for
   all things are in His power, and He always cares for them, and keeps
   them as the pupil of His eye. And therefore though they are exercised
   with trials, and suffer many things for their good, His eye being
   always upon them, and His ear open to their prayer, they are supported,
   supplied, relieved, delivered, and at last made more than conquerors.

   II.

   He has a peculiar Kingdom, which He has established distinct from the
   kingdoms of this world, though diffused and extended among them, and
   which, in due time, like leaven, will pervade and assimilate them all
   to Himself. This is the Kingdom of the Gospel, His Church. It is
   founded upon a Rock, and though the gates of hell continually war
   against it, they cannot prevail. For He is a wall of fire round about
   it, and a glory in the midst of it (Zechariah 2:5)

   Here He reigns upon a throne of grace. He possesses and exercises
   unlimited authority as a sovereign, to save whom He pleases, to pardon
   all manner of sins and offences, and to admit rebels and enemies, when
   they submit themselves and bow to His golden sceptre, into the number
   of His children and His friends. Seldom do the kings of the earth
   publish an act of grace in favour of those who have been guilty of
   rebellion, without clogging it with exceptions. Either they feel a
   resentment against some of the delinquents, which they have not
   magnanimity sufficient to conquer, or they dare not trust them. But His
   mercy is infinite. And He knows how to change their hearts when He
   pardons their sins.

   Perhaps it may not be a digression, wholly un-useful and impertinent,
   if I take this occasion to point out the several senses in which the
   word Church may be understood, agreeable to the Scripture.

   (1.)

   It denotes the aggregate, the mystical Church, the whole body of that
   spiritual kingdom, of which the Redeemer is the living and life-giving
   Head (Colossians 1:18) . A succession of these has appeared upon earth
   in every age, from the days of righteous Abel whom Cain slew. And we
   have reason to believe, that the far greater part of them are yet
   unborn. They will all be assembled together before the Throne, in the
   great Day of His final appearance, and inherit the kingdom of glory
   prepared for them. This is the Church which God has bought with His own
   blood (Acts 20:28) . Happy are those who belong to this society of the
   redeemed, whose names are written in heaven.

   (2.)

   The visible Church contains all those who bear and acknowledge the name
   of Christians, and who admit and enjoy the Gospel revelation. The
   Church, in this sense, includes many nations. But it is a small thing
   to belong only to the visible church, for it is compared to a
   corn-floor (Matthew 3:12) on which chaff is mingled with the wheat; to
   a field in which tares grow promiscuously with the good seed; to a
   fisher's net enclosing both good and bad (Matt. 13:24, 47) But a time
   of discrimination will come. The chaff and the tares, and whatever is
   evil, will be consumed. Alas! what will it avail at last to say, "
   Lord, we have eaten and drank in Thy presence , at Thy table with Thy
   true disciples, and Thou has taught in our streets (Luke 13:26, 27) ,
   and we have heard in our own language of Thy wonderful works," if you
   can say no more? My heart is pained with the apprehension, lest some of
   you who have joined in the same public worship with true believers,
   have sat in the same seat, and lived in the same families, should at
   last see them, with whom you have been very nearly connected in this
   world, received into the kingdom of heaven, and you yourselves be shut
   out.

   (3.)

   The catholic [universal] church , in one period, is part of the visible
   church which is united to the Lord by living faith. It comprises all
   who agree in the profession of the fundamental truths of the Gospel,
   and whose conversation is regulated by its precepts, or, in the
   Apostle's words, All who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity
   (Ephesians 6:24) . This catholic Church, through the policy of Satan
   and the deceitfulness of the heart, is too much divided against itself.
   Prejudice, bigotry, and remaining ignorance, greatly prevent that
   desirable union amongst true Christians, which would promote their
   peace, comfort, and increase, and would contribute more than a thousand
   arguments to put their adversaries to shame and to silence. That
   shameful contention for denominations, parties, and favourite
   preachers, for which the Apostle reproved the Corinthians, is still
   greatly to be lamented (I Corinthians 3:4) . But, though they are too
   backward in acknowledging and assisting each other, the Lord is
   merciful to their weakness, and bears with them all. And as they grow
   in grace, and drink more into His Spirit, their hearts are enlarged,
   and they approach nearer to His pattern of long-suffering, patience and
   tenderness.

   (4.)

   The word church is applied to particular societies or Christians who
   are connected by a participation in the same ordinances of the Gospel,
   and who maintain a Scriptural separation from the sinful spirit and
   customs of the world. And though there may be pretenders among them, as
   there were among the apostolic churches, they are denominated by the
   better part. They belong to the catholic [universal] church by their
   profession of the truth, and those of them that are in deed and in
   truth what they profess to be, are living members of the mystical
   Church, to which all the promises are made. By whatever name they are
   known or distinguished among men, they are branches of the true vine,
   they have their fruits unto holiness, and their end, everlasting life.
   But to return--

   In this His Church, or spiritual Kingdom, He rules by wise and gracious
   laws and ordinances. He releases His subjects from all authority, in
   point of conscience, but His own, and enjoins them to call no one
   master, but Himself (Matthew 23:8-10) . If they stand fast in the
   liberty wherewith He has made them free (Galatians 5:1) , they will not
   give themselves up implicitly to the dictates of any man, nor follow
   him farther than he follows their Lord. And consequently, if they are
   influenced by His royal law of doing to others, as they would that
   others should do unto them, they will not attempt to exert an undue
   authority, or wish to be called masters themselves; so as to assume a
   dogmatic carriage, or to expect a universal and absolute submission.
   But it must be owned, that in our present state of infirmity, this
   privilege is not sufficiently prized, nor this command duly complied
   with; there being scarcely a man who does not either arrogate too much
   to himself, or allow too much to others. A fault in the one or the
   other of these respects, may be assigned as a principal cause of most
   of the evils which deform the appearance, or injure the peace of the
   Church. But the design of His Gospel is to set His people at liberty
   from the yoke of men, from the fetters of custom and tradition, of
   superstition and will worship [self-imposed worship] ; that they may
   enjoy, in His service, a state of perfect freedom.

   For it is the principal glory of His Kingdom, that He reigns in the
   hearts of His people. There He writes His precepts, impresses His
   image, and erects His throne; ruling them, not merely by an outward
   law, but by an inward secret influence, breathing His own life and
   spirit into them, so that their obedience becomes, as it were, natural,
   pleasurable, and its own reward. By the discoveries He affords them of
   His love, He wins their affections, captivates their wills, and
   enlightens their understandings. They derive from Him the spirit of
   power, of love, and of a sound mind (II Timothy 1:7) , and run with
   alacrity in the way of His commandments.

   It is impossible, therefore, to make this song our own, and cordially
   [sincerely; heartily] rejoice that the L ORD God Omnipotent reigns,
   unless we are the willing subjects of His government; unless we are
   really pleased with His appointed way of salvation, approve of His
   precepts, and, from a view of His wisdom and goodness, can cheerfully
   submit and resign ourselves to the disposal of His Providence. In all
   these respects we are by nature at variance with Him. We are too proud
   to be indebted to His grace, too wise in our own conceits to desire His
   instruction, too obstinately attached to the love and practice of sin,
   to be capable of relishing the beauty and spirituality of His
   commandments. And our love of the world, and the things of it, is too
   strong and grasping, to permit us to be satisfied with the lot, and
   with the dispensations [circumstances; experiences] He appoints for us.
   We wish, if possible, and as far as possible we attempt, to be our own
   carvers. We are unthankful, when He bestows; impatient, if He
   withholds; and if He sees fit to resume the gifts of which we are
   unworthy, we repine and rebel against His will. This enmity must be
   subdued, before we can be pleased with His government. In other words,
   we must be changed, we must be made new creatures. To produce this
   change, this new creation, the Gospel is the only expedient; and when
   revealed and applied to the heart by the power of the Holy Spirit, the
   miracle is wrought. The sinner who is first convinced of his guilt and
   misery, and then reconciled to God by faith in the great atonement,
   willingly yields to His administration. He owns and feels the propriety
   of His proceedings, is ready to acknowledge, in his sharpest
   afflictions, that the Lord is gracious, and has not dealt with him
   according to the desert of his iniquities. He considers himself as no
   longer his own, but bought with a price, and brought under the
   strongest obligations, to live no longer to himself, but to Him who
   loved him, and gave Himself for him. And what was before his dread and
   dislike, becomes now the joy of his heart -- the thought, that the Lord
   reigns, and that all his concerns are in the hands of Him who does all
   things well.

   Are there any among us, who say in their hearts, We will not have this
   Saviour to rule over us ? The thought is no less vain than wicked. He
   must, He will reign, till He has subdued all enemies under His feet.
   You must either bend or break before Him.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXVII

   The Extent of Messiah's Spiritual Kingdom

   Revelation 11:15

   The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord,

   and of His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever!

   T he Kingdom of our Lord in the heart, and in the world, is frequently
   compared to a building or house, of which He Himself is both the
   Foundation and the Architect (Isaiah 28:16 and 54:11, 12) . A building
   advances by degrees (I Corinthians 3:9; Ephesians 2:20-22) , and while
   it is in an unfinished state, a stranger cannot, by viewing its present
   appearance, form an accurate judgment of its design, and what the whole
   will be, when completed. For a time, the walls are of unequal height,
   it is disfigured by rubbish, which at the proper season will be taken
   away; and by scaffolding, which, though useful for carrying on the
   building, does not properly belong to it, but will likewise be removed
   when the present temporary service is answered. But the architect
   Himself proceeds according to a determinate plan, and His idea of the
   whole work is perfect from the beginning. It is thus the Lord views His
   people in the present life. He has begun a good work in them, but as
   yet every part of it is imperfect and unfinished; and there are not
   only defects to be supplied, but deformities and encumbrances that must
   be removed. Many of the dispensations [occurrences; experiences] and
   exercises, which contribute to form their religious character, do not
   properly belong to that work which is to abide, though they have a
   subservience to promote it. When that which is perfect is come, the
   rest shall be done away.

   And thus, although the growth and extent of His Kingdom is the great
   scope and object of His Providence, to which all the revolutions that
   take place in the kingdoms of this world shall be finally subservient;
   yet the steps by which He is carrying forward His design, are, for the
   most part, remote from the common apprehensions of mankind; and,
   therefore, seldom engage their attention. His Kingdom, founded upon the
   Rock of Ages, is building, advancing, and the gates of hell shall not
   be able to withstand its progress. Only detached and inconsiderable
   parts of the plan are as yet visible, and the beauties are everywhere
   obscured by attendant blemishes. But His counsel shall stand, and He
   will do all His pleasure. Princes and statesmen seldom think of Him,
   are seldom aware that in pronouncing their own schemes, they are
   eventually fulfilling His purposes, and preparing the way to promote
   the cause which they despise, and often endeavour to suppress. But thus
   it is. Sometimes He employs them more directly as His instruments, and
   when they are thus engaged in His work, their success is secured. So
   Cyrus, whom Isaiah mentioned by name (Isaiah 45:1-5) long before his
   birth, as the appointed deliverer of Israel from their captivity,
   prospered in his enterprises, being guided and girded by Him whom he
   knew not, and established his own power upon the ruins of the Assyrian
   monarchy. The Roman Empire likewise increased and prospered from small
   beginnings, that a way might be opened, in the proper season, for the
   destruction of the Jewish economy, and for facilitating the preaching
   of the Gospel. And posterity will see that the principal events of the
   present age, in Asia and America, all have a tendency to bring forward
   the accomplishment of my text; and are leading to one grand point, the
   spreading and establishment of the Church and Kingdom of our Lord. His
   plan is unalterably fixed. He has said it, and it shall be done. Things
   will not always remain in their present disordered state. And though
   this desirable period may be yet at a distance, and appearances very
   dark and unpromising, the Word of the Lord shall prevail over all
   discouragements and opposition.

   Prophecies which are not yet fulfilled will necessarily be obscure.
   Many learned men have laboured to explain the prophecies in this Book
   [Bible], to ascertain the facts which are foretold, and to fix the
   dates when they may be expected to take place. But they are so divided
   in their judgments, and with regard to several of the most eminent who
   thus differ, the support their opinions derive from the character and
   abilities of the proposers is so nearly equal, that those who consult
   them are more likely to be embarrassed, than satisfied. For myself, I
   think it becomes me to confess my ignorance and my inability, either to
   reconcile the conjectures of others, or to determine which is the more
   probable, or to propose better of my own. I do not, therefore,
   undertake to give the precise sense of this passage, as it stands
   connected with the rest of the chapter. Nor should I, perhaps, have
   attempted to preach from it, but upon this occasion. It is introduced
   with great propriety in the Messiah Oratorio , as a close to the second
   part, which begins with a view of the Lamb of God taking away the sins
   of the world, by the power of His priestly office; and concludes with
   an account of His glorious success as the King of kings, and Lord of
   lords.

   My business is only to lead you to some pleasing and profitable
   reflections upon this subject, now it comes in my way. There are many
   prophecies in the Old Testament that speak in magnificent strains of a
   kingdom which God would, in His appointed time, establish upon the
   earth; the sense of which is greatly weakened and narrowed, if
   restrained, as some commentators would restrain it to the restoration
   of Israel to their own land from their captivity in Babylon. Yet it
   must be allowed, that the highly figurative language in which many of
   these prophecies are expressed, a great part of which cannot be
   understood literally, renders the interpretation difficult.

   What we read in the 20 ^th chapter of this book, of a period in which
   the saints shall reign with Christ during a thousand years, has given
   occasion to almost a thousand conjectures, concerning a Millennial
   state. Some persons suppose, that the present frame of nature shall be
   dissolved and changed, and expect a proper resurrection of the dead;
   after which, the Lord will personally reign with His people upon the
   earth, when purified by fire and restored to its primitive perfection
   and beauty. If so, earth will be heaven; for the state of happiness
   believers are taught to hope for, depends not upon local circumstances,
   but chiefly consists in the enjoyment of His unveiled immediate
   presence, and in beholding His glory. Others seem to conceive of the
   Millennium nearly in the same manner as the Jews formed their
   expectations of MESSIAH'S Kingdom. They think that temporal honours,
   dominion, prosperity, and wealth, will then be the portion of
   believers; the very portion, which they are now called upon to renounce
   and despise. But as I have hinted, large allowances must be made for
   the metaphorical language of prophecy. We read that the streets of the
   New Jerusalem are paved with gold, and that the twelve gates are twelve
   pearls (Revelation 21:15, 21) ; but no person of sound judgment can
   suppose that this description is to be understood strictly according to
   the letter. The personal presence of MESSIAH with His people, is not
   necessary to such degrees of happiness, as are compatible with the
   present state of mortality and imperfection. It is sufficient, if He
   vouchsafes [graciously promises] to dwell with them by His Spirit. Much
   less are temporal dominion and wealth necessary to the prosperity and
   honour of His spiritual Kingdom. But what, then, are we encouraged to
   expect, beyond what has been hitherto known, with regard to this point?
   Let us consult the Scriptures, which alone can guide and determine our
   enquiry. I will select some express passages, a few out of many which
   might be adduced, but sufficient, I hope, by the rules of sober
   interpretation, to lead us to a satisfactory answer.

   The glory and happiness of MESSIAH'S Kingdom, is described by the
   prophets in terms which cannot be justly applied to any period of the
   Church already past. They sometimes represent it by a variety of
   beautiful pastoral images, and sometimes in plainer language. Thus says
   Isaiah, And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain
   of the L ORD'S house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
   and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto
   it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
   mountain of the L ORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will
   teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths: for out of Zion
   shall go forth the law, and the word of the L ORD from Jerusalem. And
   He shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and
   they shall beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into
   pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither
   shall they learn war any more (Isaiah 2:2-4) . Again, The wolf also
   shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid;
   and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little
   child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young
   ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
   And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned
   child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den. They shall not hurt
   nor destroy in all My holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the
   knowledge of the L ORD, as the waters cover the sea. (Isaiah 11:6-9) .
   I might likewise transcribe the whole of the 16 ^th chapter, but shall
   only offer you the latter part of it, Violence shall no more be heard
   in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt
   call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise. The sun shall be no
   more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light
   unto thee: but the L ORD shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and
   thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy
   moon withdraw itself: for the L ORD shall be thine everlasting light,
   and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy people also shall be
   all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of My
   planting, the work of My hands, that I may be glorified. A little one
   shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the L ORD
   will hasten it in his time (Isaiah 60:18-22) . To the same purpose, the
   Prophet Ezekiel: And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and He shall
   feed them, even my servant David; He shall feed them, and He shall be
   their Shepherd. And I the L ORD will be their God, and my servant David
   a prince among them; I the L ORD have spoken it. And I will make with
   them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out
   of the land: and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep
   in the woods. And I will make them and the places round about my hill a
   blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season; there
   shall be showers of blessing (Ezekiel 34:23-26) . And again, Then will
   I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your
   filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart
   also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I
   will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you
   an heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
   to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them
   (Ezekiel 36:25-27) And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it
   lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by. And they shall say,
   This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the
   waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are
   inhabited (verses 34, 35) . The Prophet Zechariah speaks to the same
   effect: Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I
   will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the L ORD. And many nations
   shall be joined to the LORD in that day, and shall be My people: and I
   will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the LORD of
   hosts hath sent Me unto thee . . . And the L ORD shall be King over all
   the earth: in that day shall there be one L ORD , and His name one
   (Zechariah 2:10, 11 and 14:9)

   Though the promises and prophecies of this import are addressed to the
   Church, under the names of Israel, Jacob, Zion, or Jerusalem, we are
   certain they were not fulfilled to the nation of Israel, while their
   civil government subsisted. Their national prosperity and glory were
   greatly diminished, before any of these prophecies were revealed. They
   were an inconstant and a suffering people, during the reigns of the
   kings of Judah and Israel, till at length their city and temple were
   destroyed by the Chaldeans. And though they returned from their
   captivity, and their city and temple were rebuilt; they continued
   tributary and dependent, and were successively subject to the Persian,
   Macedonian, and Roman power. Their obstinate rejection and crucifixion
   of MESSIAH filled up the measure of their iniquities, and brought wrath
   upon them to the uttermost. They were soon afterwards exterminated from
   their land, their constitution, both of church and state, utterly
   subverted; and they remain, to this day, in a dispersed state, which
   renders the observance of the law impracticable.

   It seems equally plain, that these prophecies have not yet been
   fulfilled to the Christian Church. The greater part of the earth, to
   this day, is unacquainted with the name of Jesus. And the general face
   of Christendom, whether in Popish or Protestant countries, exhibits
   little more of the spirit and character of the Gospel, than is to be
   found among the heathens. If Christianity be compatible with pride or
   baseness, with avarice or profusion, with malice and envy, with
   scepticism in principle, and licentiousness of conduct, then Christians
   abound; but if humility, integrity, benevolence, and a spiritual mind
   are essential to a Christian; if we judge by the criterion which our
   Lord Himself appointed, and account only those His disciples, who live
   in the exercise of mutual love, it is to be feared that they are but
   few, even in the places which are most favoured with the light of the
   Gospel. But can the Scriptures be broken? Can the promises of the Lord
   fail? By no means. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot or
   tittle of His word shall fail of accomplishment.

   It is not necessary to suppose that every individual of mankind shall
   be savingly converted to the Lord, in this future day of His power; but
   I apprehend the current language of the prophecies warrants us hope
   that the prayers and desires of the Church, shall, in some future
   period, be signally answered in the following respects:

   (1.)

   That the Gospel shall visit the nations which are at present involved
   in darkness. The heathen are given to MESSIAH for His inheritance, and
   the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession. At present (as I
   have formerly observed) if the whole of Christendom was inhabited by
   real Christians, they would bear but a small proportion to the rest of
   mankind. Large countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa, where the Gospel
   was once known, have been, for many ages, involved in Mohammedan
   darkness. The scattered remnant of the Greek church, in Turkey, are so
   miserably depraved and ignorant, that they scarcely deserve to be
   mentioned as an exception. The rest of Asia knows little of
   Christianity; unless they have learnt it in the eastern parts, from the
   cruelty and tyranny of men who bear the name of Christians. The like
   may be said of America, excepting the northern provinces of our late
   dominion there. For the zeal of the Spaniards and Portuguese has
   produced few other effects, than rapine, slavery, and deluges of human
   blood. The interior parts, both of Africa and America, are unknown. The
   countries and islands, lately discovered in the Southern Hemisphere,
   are left as they were found, in gross ignorance. The exertions of our
   navigators to supply them with sheep and cows, and useful implements
   from Europe, were humane and laudable. But it does not appear that the
   least attempt was made, to impart to them the knowledge of our holy
   religion. The only missionary they have from us (if he be yet living)
   is, the much spoken of Omiah [Omaha - a native from Tahiti, brought to
   England in 1774 by Captain Cook after one of his voyages]. This man was
   brought to England, almost from the Antipodes; he spent some time among
   us, and was then sent back to tell his countrymen what he had seen and
   heard. But, if he gave a faithful account of our customs, morals, and
   religion, so far as they fell within the circle of his own
   observations, the relation would certainly be little to our honour,
   and, I am afraid, much to their hurt. In brief, a large part of Europe,
   almost the whole of the other three continents, with the Islands in the
   Eastern and Southern Oceans, are destitute of the true Gospel. But
   there is a time approaching, called the fulness of the Gentiles, when
   the Redeemer's glory shall dawn and shine upon all nations. And though
   we cannot see when, or how this happy change shall be effected, yet, in
   the Lord's hour, mountains shall sink into plains. Nor is it more
   improbable to us now, than it would have seemed to an inhabitant of
   Rome, in the time of Julius Caesar, that the island of Great Britain
   should one day be distinguished by all those privileges which the
   Providence of God has since bestowed upon it.

   (2.)

   That this Gospel shall prevail, not in word only, but in power. Even
   where the name of Christ is professed, but little of the power of it is
   known at present. The superstition and false worship, generally
   prevalent within the pale of Roman and Greek churches, may be mentioned
   without offence to Protestants. But the bulk of the Protestant
   countries are equally overspread with scepticism and wickedness. Few,
   comparatively, among Protestants, are friendly to that Gospel which the
   Apostles preached; and much fewer are they who are influenced by it.
   Perhaps no nation is favoured with greater advantage for knowing the
   truth than our nation, nor any city more favoured than this city [
   London, England ]. I doubt not but there are persons now living, who
   would have been thought eminent Christians, if they had lived in the
   first and happiest age of the Church; and I trust their number is
   greater than we are aware of. The Lord has a hidden people, little
   known to the world, or to each other. But if we judge by the standard
   of truth, we must acknowledge that the power of religious profession is
   very low. How little does it appear in the lives, tempers, and pursuits
   of the most who hear the Gospel? But the time will come when Christians
   shall again be known by their integrity, spiritual-mindedness, and
   benevolence, and by all the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus
   Christ, to the glory and praise of God. The fall of mystical Babylon,
   and of Anti-Christ, in its various forms, and the calling of the Jews,
   are events which are positively foretold; and which, when they come to
   pass, will have great effects. Zion, as yet, is only building; but it
   shall be built.

   ( 3.)

   That the animosities and disputes which prevail among Christians shall
   cease. The observation of a late ingenious writer, which, it is to be
   feared, he was confirmed in by his own experience, is too much founded
   in truth: "We have just religion enough to make us hate one another."
   The spirit of party, prejudice, bigotry, and interest, a zeal for
   systems, forms, modes, and denominations, furnish men with plausible
   pretences for indulging their unsanctified passions; and deceive them
   into an opinion that, while they are gratifying their pride and
   self-will, they are only labouring to promote the cause of God and
   truth. Hence often the feuds which obtain among religious people are
   pursued with greater violence and to greater lengths, and are
   productive of more mischievous consequences, than the quarrels of
   drunkards. The lovers of peace, who refuse to take part in these
   contentions, but rather weep over them in secret, are censured and
   despised as neutrals and cowards, by the angry combatants on both
   sides, while the world despises and laughs at them all. It was not so
   in the beginning, nor will it be so always. The hour is coming when
   believers shall be united in love; shall agree in all that is essential
   to a life of faith and holiness, and shall live in the exercise of
   forbearance and tenderness towards each other, if, in some points of
   smaller importance, they cannot think exactly alike; which possibly may
   be the case in the best times, in the present imperfect state of human
   nature. Ephraim then shall no more envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim
   (Isaiah 11:13)

   (4.)

   That it will be a time of general peace. At present, the kingdoms
   which, by their profession, should be subjects of the Prince of Peace,
   are perpetually disturbing, invading, and destroying each other. They
   live in habits of mutual fear and jealousy, and maintain great armies
   on all sides; that each nation may be prepared, if occasion offers, to
   strike the first blow. War is followed as a trade, and cultivated as a
   science; and they who, with the greatest diligence and success, spread
   devastation and ruin far and wide, and deluge the earth with human
   blood, acquire the title of heroes and conquerors. Can there be a
   stronger confirmation of what we read in Scripture, concerning the
   depravity of man? Can we conceive an employment more suited to gratify
   the malignity of Satan and the powers of darkness, if they were
   permitted to appear and act amongst us in human shapes? Could such
   enormities possibly obtain, if the mild and merciful spirit of the
   Gospel generally prevailed? But it shall prevail at last, and then the
   nations shall learn war no more (Isaiah 2:4)

   How transporting the thought! That a time shall yet arrive, when the
   love of God and man, of truth and righteousness, shall obtain [shall
   prevail] through the earth. The evils (and these are the greatest evils
   of human life) which men bring upon themselves, and upon each other, by
   their wickedness, shall cease; and we may believe that the evils in the
   natural world will be greatly abated. Sin will no longer call down the
   tokens of God's displeasure, by such public calamities as hurricanes,
   earthquakes, pestilence, and famine. And if some natural evils, as pain
   and sickness, should remain, submission to the will of God, and the
   compassion and tenderness of men towards the afflicted, will render
   them tolerable.

   If this prospect be desirable to us, surely it will be the object of
   our prayers. The Lord will do great things, but He will be enquired of
   by His people for the performance.

   But to many persons, the extension of dominion and commerce appears
   much more desirable. The glory and extent of the British government has
   been eagerly pursued; and the late diminution of our national grandeur
   and influence, has been much laid to heart; while the glory of the
   Redeemer's Kingdom, and the conversion of the heathens, are considered
   by the politicians and merchants of the earth, as trivial concerns,
   unworthy of their notice; or rather, as obstacles to the views and
   ambition of avarice. But it is said of MESSIAH , and of His Church, The
   nation and kingdom that will not serve Thee, shall perish (Isaiah
   60:12) . The Word of God may be slighted, but it cannot be annulled.
   And it is more a subject for lamentation than wonder, that our national
   prosperity should decline; when we are indifferent, yea, adverse to
   that cause which the great Governor of the world has engaged to promote
   and establish.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXVIII

   King of Kings and Lord of Lords

   Revelation 19:16

   And He hath on His vesture and on His thigh a name written,

   K ING OF K INGS AND L ORD OF L ORDS

   T he description of the administration and glory of the Redeemer's
   Kingdom, in defiance of all opposition, concludes the second part of
   Messiah Oratorio. Three different passages from the book of Revelation
   are selected to form a grand chorus, of which Handel's title in this
   verse is the close --a title which has been sometimes vainly usurped by
   proud worms of this earth. Eastern monarchs, in particular, have
   affected to style themselves King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. In the
   Scriptural language, men, whether high or low, rich or poor, one with
   another, are compared to worms and potsherds of the earth; but they are
   by nature so strongly infected by pride, that they cannot invent titles
   of honour answerable to the idea they have of their own importance,
   without intrenching [infringing] upon the divine prerogative. Thus
   sovereignty, majesty, holiness and grace, and other attributes which
   properly belong to God alone, are parcelled out among the Great. But
   let the great and mighty know, that wherein they speak proudly, MESSIAH
   is above them. The whole verse (of which the latter clause only is in
   the Oratorio ) offers two points to our meditations.

   I. How He is represented as wearing His title. It is written, or
   inscribed, upon His vesture dipped in blood, and upon His thigh. Either
   upon that part of His vesture which covers His thigh; or, upon the
   upper part of His vesture, and upon His thigh likewise.

   II. The title itself. King of kings, and Lord of lords. Whatever power
   the kings and lords among mankind possess, is derived from Him, and
   absolutely subject to His control.

   I.

   The manner in which He wears His name or title. It is written upon His
   vesture, and upon His thigh.

   (1.)

   This name being written upon His vesture , denotes the manifestation,
   and the ground of His authority. It is written upon His outward
   garment, to be read, known, and acknowledged by all beholders. And it
   is upon His bloody garment, upon the vesture stained with His own
   blood, and the blood of His enemies; which intimates to us, that His
   government is founded upon the success of His great undertaking. In the
   passage from whence this verse is selected, there are three names
   attributed to MESSIAH . He has a name which no one knows but Himself
   (verse 12) , agreeable to what He declared when upon earth. No man, no
   one, (neither man or angel) knoweth the Son, but the Father; this
   refers to His eternal power and Godhead. A second name, the Word of God
   (verse 13) , denotes the mystery of the divine personality. The name in
   my text imports His glory, as the Mediator between God and man, in our
   nature, which, when He resumed it from the grave, became the seat of
   all power and authority; which power, we are now taught to consider
   --not merely as the power of God, to whom it essentially belongs, but
   as the power of God exercised in and by that Man who died upon the
   cross for our sins. In consequence of His obedience unto death, He
   received a name which is above every name (Philippians 2:9) . In the
   present life, His own people read this inscription by the eye of faith,
   and it inspires them with confidence and joy, under the many
   tribulations they pass through in the course of their profession.
   Hereafter, it shall be openly known and read by all men. Every eye
   shall see it, and every heart must either bow or break before Him.

   (2.)

   It is written upon His thigh. The thigh is the emblem of power, and is
   the part of the body on which the sword is girded (Psalm 45:3) . By
   this emblem we are taught that He will assuredly maintain and exercise
   the right which He has acquired. As He has a just claim to the title,
   He will act accordingly. Many titles among men are merely titular. So
   the king of Great Britain is styled likewise king of France, though he
   has neither authority nor possessions in that kingdom. But this name
   which MESSIAH bears is full of life, truth and influence. He is styled
   King of kings, and Lord of lords , because He really is so. Because He
   actually rules and reigns over them, and does according to His own
   pleasure in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
   earth, with an absolute and uncontrollable sway, so that none can stay
   His hand, or say unto Him, What doest thou? (Daniel 4:35)

   II.

   The title itself is K ING OF K INGS , AND L ORD OF L ORDS He is the
   Prince of the kings of the earth (Revelation 1:5) . Too many of them
   imagine a vain thing. They take counsel together, and set themselves
   against Him saying, Let us break His bands asunder. But He sits in the
   heavens, and has them in derision (Psalm 2:3, 4) He has His hook in
   their nose, and His bridle in their lips, and the result of all their
   contrivances is neither more nor less than the accomplishment of His
   will.

   (1.)

   The rage they discover, and the resistance they make, cannot weaken
   this truth, but rather render it more evident. If it be asked, Why does
   He permit them to resist?' we may give an answer, in point, from the
   case of Pharaoh --he resisted, and he perished. He was often warned and
   rebuked, but he still hardened his neck, and continued stubborn under
   repeated judgments, till at length he was destroyed without remedy.
   Thus the God of Israel was more magnified, and the people of Israel
   were more honoured, in the view of the surrounding nations, when they
   were brought from Egypt with a high hand and with a stretched out arm;
   and when Pharaoh and his armies were overthrown in the Red Sea, than
   the nature of the case would have been admitted, if Pharaoh had made no
   opposition to their departure. Yet the obstinacy of Pharaoh was
   properly his own. It is true, we are assured that God hardened his
   heart; but we are not thereby warranted to suppose that God is the
   author of the sin, which He hates and forbids. It is written again,
   that God cannot be tempted by evil, neither tempteth He any man (James
   1:13) , and the Scripture is to be interpreted consistently with
   itself. It would be absurd to ascribe darkness, or ice, to the agency
   of the sun; though both inevitably follow, if the light and heat of the
   sun be withdrawn to a certain degree. A degree of heat is necessary to
   keep water in that state of fluidity which we commonly suppose
   essential to its nature; but it is rather essential to the nature of
   water to harden into ice, if it be derived of the heat which is
   necessary to preserve it in a fluid state; and the hardest metals will
   melt and flow like water, if heat be proportionably [proportionally]
   increased. Thus it is with the heart of fallen man. In whatever degree
   it is soft and impressionable, capable of feeling and tenderness, we
   must attribute it to the secret influence of the Father and Fountain of
   Light; and if He is pleased to withdraw His influence, nothing more is
   needful to its complete induration [hardening].

   (2.)

   The kings of the earth are continually disturbing the world with their
   schemes of ambition. They expect to carry everything before them, and
   have seldom any higher aim in view, than the gratification of their own
   passions. But in all they do, they are but servants of this great King
   and Lord, and fulfill His purposes as the instruments He employs to
   inflict prescribed punishment upon transgressors against Him, or to
   open a way for the spread of His Gospel. Thus under the Old Testament
   dispensation [order] (for He was King from everlasting) the successes
   of Sennacherib and Nebuchadnezzar, and the exaltation of Cyrus, were
   entirely owing to their being employed by Him, as an axe or a saw in
   the hands of a workman (Isaiah 10:15) . And they acted under a limited
   commission, beyond which they could not go. They had one thing in view,
   He had another; and when His design was accomplished, we hear of them
   no more. Time would not suffice, were I to adduce the many striking
   instances of the like kind, which offer to observation from the perusal
   of modern history. It is well known, with respect to that great event,
   the Reformation from Popery in the 16 ^th Century, and especially in
   our own land, that many of the principal persons who contributed to its
   establishment, hated it in their hearts. But their ambition, appetites,
   and worldly policy, engaged them in such measures, as the King of kings
   overruled to produce consequences which they neither intended, nor
   could foresee; and which, when they did apprehend, they would have
   prevented if they could, but it was too late. Future writers, I doubt
   not, will make the like reflection on the late ^* American war: in the
   origin and progress of which, there was such an evident disproportion
   between the apparent causes, and the effects produced by them; between
   the first designs and expectations of the principal actors on both
   sides, and the final event; that I think they who do not perceive a
   superintending Providence conducting the whole affair, as a preparation
   to still greater and more important revolutions, must be quite at a
   loss to account for what has already happened, upon any principles of
   human policy or foresight.

   ^* The American Revolution (1775-1783)

   (3.)

   That He is King of kings, and Governor among the nations, is farther
   evident from the preservation of His people; for the world is against
   them, and they have no protector but Him. The wrath of man, like the
   waves of the sea, has bounds prescribed to it, which it cannot pass. So
   far as He is pleased to overrule it, to His own praise, He will permit
   it to operate; but the remainder, that is not subservient to the
   accomplishment of His purpose, He will restrain (Psalm 76:10) . But He
   works so secretly, though powerfully, by the agency of second causes,
   that only they who are enlightened by His Word and Spirit can perceive
   His interference He permitted Ahithophel to give that counsel to
   Absalom, which though wicked, was, in the political sense of the word,
   prudent; that is, it was the probable method of putting David into the
   power of his rebellious son. David had prayed that the Lord would turn
   Ahithophel's counsel into foolishness ( II Samuel 15:31) . Had the Lord
   instantly deprived Ahithophel of his reason, this prayer would have
   been more visibly, but not more effectually, answered, than by the
   counter-advice of Hushai, which, though rash and extravagant, being
   suited to gratify the vanity and folly of Absalom rendered the other
   abortive (II Samuel 17:14) Sometimes the enemies of His Church divide
   and wrangle among themselves, and then one party, to mortify and oppose
   the other, will protect those whom, otherwise, they wish to destroy.
   Thus Paul escaped from the malice of the Jewish council, by the sudden
   disagreement which arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees (Acts
   23:7) , though they came together equally determined to destroy him. At
   other times, kings and statesmen act so inconsistently with their
   professed aims, and take steps, so directly calculated, to prevent what
   they wish to obtain, or to bring upon themselves what they mean to
   avoid, that we can only say, they are infatuated. A very small
   compliance, seemed likely to have secured the affection of the twelve
   tribes to Rehoboam. We are ready to wonder that he could not be
   prevailed on to speak mildly to the people, for one day, with a view of
   engaging them to be his servants forever. But when we read that the
   cause was from the Lord (I Kings 12:15) , and that, in this way, His
   purpose of separating the kingdoms of Israel and Judah was effected,
   the wonder ceases. Very observable, likewise, was the coincidence of
   circumstances which preserved the Jews in Persia from the destructive
   designs of their adversary Haman. If the king (Esther 6:1) had slept
   that night, as usual, or if his attendant had read to him in any book
   but the Chronicle of the empire, or in any part of that chronicle but
   the very passage in which the service of Mordecai had been recorded,
   humanly speaking, Haman would have carried his point. In this manner,
   by a concurrence of circumstances, each of them, if considered singly,
   apparently trivial, and all of them, contingent, with respect to any
   human foresight or prevention, the Lord often pours contempt upon the
   wise and the mighty, and defeats their deepest laid and best concerted
   schemes, in the moment when they promise themselves success.

   Many salutary and comfortable inferences may be drawn from the
   consideration of this subject. Some of them I may perhaps have formerly
   mentioned, but they will bear a repetition. We have need to be reminded
   of what we already know.

   (1.)

   It should inspire us with confidence. If the L ORD of hosts, the Lord
   of lords be for us, what weapon or counsel can prosper against us?
   However dark and threatening appearances may be, we need not tremble
   for the ark of God. The concernments of His Church are in safe hands.
   The cause so dear to us, is still more dear to Him. He has power to
   support it, when it is opposed, and grace to revive it when it is
   drooping. It has often been brought low, but never has been, never
   shall be forsaken. When He will work none can hinder. Nor need you fear
   for yourself, if you have committed yourself, and your all to Him. The
   very hairs of your head are numbered (Matthew 10:30) . There is a hedge
   of protection (Job 1:10) around you, which none can break through
   without His permission; nor will He permit you to be touched, except
   when He designs to make a temporary and seeming evil, conducive to your
   real and permanent advantage.

   (2.)

   It should affect us with an admiring and thankful sense of His
   condescension. "Lord, what is man, that Thou shouldest be so mindful of
   him?" He humbles Himself to behold the things that are in heaven (Psalm
   113:6) . But He stoops still lower. He affords His attention and favour
   to sinful men. His eye is always upon His people, His ear open to their
   prayers. Not a sigh or falling tear escapes His notice. He pities them,
   as a father pities his children; He proportions their trials to their
   strength, or strength to their trials, and so adjusts His dispensations
   [orders] to their state, that they never suffer unnecessarily, nor in
   vain.

   (3.)

   How great is the dignity and privilege of true believers. Is the man
   congratulated or envied whom the king delights to honour? Believers are
   more frequently despised, than envied, in this world. But they may
   congratulate one another. The King of kings is their Friend. They have
   honours and pleasures which the world knows nothing of. Their titles
   are high, they are the sons and the daughters of the Lord Almighty (II
   Corinthians 6:18) . Their possessions are great for all things are
   theirs (I Corinthians 3:21) . They are assured of what is best for them
   in this life, and of life eternal hereafter. They are now nearly
   [closely] related to the King of kings, and shall ere long be
   acknowledged and owned by Him, before assembled worlds. They who now
   account the proud happy, will be astonished and confounded when they
   shall see the righteous, whom they once undervalued, shine forth like
   the sun in the Kingdom of God.

   (4.)

   We may lastly infer the extreme folly and danger of those, who persist
   in their rebellion and opposition to this King of kings, and Lord of
   lords. Though He exercises much patience and long-suffering towards
   them for a season, the hour is approaching when His wrath will burn
   like fire. It is written, and must be fulfilled, the wicked shall be
   turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God (Psalm 9:17) . Oh
   the solemnities of that great day, when the frame of nature shall be
   dissolved, when the Judge shall appear, the books be opened, and all
   mankind shall be summoned to His tribunal! Will not you yet tremble and
   bow before Him, ye careless ones, while He is seated upon a throne of
   grace, and while the door of mercy stands open? Once more I call, I
   warn, I charge you, to repent and believe the Gospel. If today you will
   hear His voice, it is not yet too late. But who can answer for
   tomorrow? Perhaps this night your soul may be required of you (Luke
   12:20) . Are you prepared for the summons? If not, seize the present
   opportunity. Attend to the one thing needful. Seek His face that your
   soul may live. If not, remember that you are warned, your blood will be
   upon your own head. We have delivered our message, and if you finally
   reject it, you must answer for yourselves, to Him whose message it is.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXIX

   Job's Faith and Expectation

   Job 19:25, 26

   I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand in the latter
   day upon the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body,
   yet in my flesh shall I see God.

   C hristianity, that is, the religion of which MESSIAH is the author and
   object, the foundation, life, and glory, though not altogether as old
   as creation, is nearly so. It is coeval [contemporary] with the first
   promise and intimation of mercy given to fallen man. When Adam, by
   transgression, had violated the order and law of his creation, his
   religion, that is, the right disposition of his heart towards God, was
   at an end. Sin deprived him at once of faith and hope, of love and joy.
   He no longer desired, he no longer could bear, the presence of his
   offended Maker. He vainly sought to avoid it, and when compelled to
   answer, though he could not deny his guilt, instead of making an
   ingenuous confession, he attempted to fix the blame upon the woman, or
   rather indeed upon the L ORD Himself, who had provided her for him. But
   mercy, undeserved and undesired, relieved him from a state in which he
   was already become obdurate [hardened] and desperate. A promise was
   given him of the seed of the woman (Genesis 3:15) , which virtually
   contained, as the seed contains the future plant, the substance of all
   the subsequent promises, which were fulfilled by the incarnation of the
   Son of God, and by all that He did, or suffered, or obtained for
   sinners, in the character of Mediator. For a sinner can have no
   comfortable intercourse with the holy God, but through a mediator.
   Therefore, the Apostle observes of the patriarchs and servants of God,
   under the Old Testament, These all died in faith (Hebrews 11:13) . We
   can say nothing higher than this, of the apostles and martyrs under the
   New Testament. They died, not trusting in themselves that they were
   righteous, not rejoicing in the works of their own hands, but they
   died, like the thief upon the cross, in faith, resting all their hope
   upon Him, who, by His obedience unto death, is the end of the law for
   righteousness unto everyone that believeth (Romans 10:4) . We have
   greater advantages, in point of light and liberty, than those of old.
   The prophecies concerning MESSIAH , which were obscure at the time of
   delivery, are to us infallibly interpreted by their accomplishment. And
   we know that the great Atonement, typically pointed out by their
   sacrifices, has actually been made; that the Lamb of God has, by the
   one offering of Himself, put away sin. But as to the ground and
   substance, their faith and hope were the same as ours. Abraham rejoiced
   to see the Day of Christ (John 8:56) ; and aged Jacob, soon after he
   had said, I have waited for Thy salvation, O Lord, died with the same
   composure and willingness as Simeon did, who saw it with his own eyes.
   Job, who was, perhaps, contemporary with Jacob, who at least is, with
   great probability, thought to have lived before Moses, gives us in this
   passage a strong and clear testimony of his faith. And it forms a
   beautiful and well chosen introduction to the third part of the Messiah
   Oratorio , the principal subject of which is, the present privileges
   and future prospects of those who believe in the Saviour's name.

   The learned are far from being agreed, either in the translation, or in
   the explanation, of this text. The words worms and body, being printed
   in italics in our version, will apprize [inform] the attentive English
   reader that there are no words answerable to them in the Hebrew. If you
   omit these words, something will evidently be wanting to make a
   complete sense. Different writers have supplied this want according to
   their different judgments, and from hence, chiefly, has arisen, the
   variety of versions and interpretations. But it would be very improper
   for me, in this place, to take up your time, and to draw off your
   attention from the great concerns which should fill our minds when we
   meet in the house of God, by giving you a detail of controversies and
   criticisms, which after all are much more uncertain than important. We
   need not dispute whether Job, in this passage, professes his assurance
   of the incarnation of MESSIAH , or of His resurrection, or of His final
   appearance to judge the world; or whether he is only declaring his own
   personal faith and hope in Him. These several senses are not so
   discordant, that if we determine for one, we must exclude the rest. I
   shall content myself with the words as I find them. And I hope that if
   we should miss some of the precise ideas, which Job might have when he
   spoke, we shall not greatly mistake his general meaning, nor wander far
   wide from the scope of the text.

   Four things are observable:

   I. The title of Redeemer

   II. The appropriating word My'

   III. His standing upon the earth

   IV. Job's expectation of seeing Him in his flesh

   I.

   The title. There is no name of MESSIAH more significant, comprehensive,
   or endearing, than the name REDEEMER . The name Saviour' expresses what
   He does for sinners. He saves them from guilt and wrath, from sin, from
   the present evil world, from the powers of darkness, and from all their
   enemies. He saves them with an everlasting salvation. But the word
   Redeemer' intimates, likewise, the manner in which He saves them. For
   it is not merely by the word of His power, as He saved His disciples
   when in jeopardy upon the lake, by saying to the winds and seas, Peace,
   be still: and there was a great calm (Mark 4:39) ; but by price, by
   paying a ransom for them, and pouring out the blood of His heart, as an
   atonement for their sins. The Hebrew word for Redeemer, Goel, primarily
   signifies a near kinsman' or the next of kin.' He with whom the right
   of redemption lay (Numbers 35:19, 21; Ruth 4:1-3) ; and who, by virtue
   of his nearness of relation, was the legal avenger of blood. Thus
   MESSIAH took upon Himself our nature, and by assuming our flesh and
   blood, became nearly related to us, that He might redeem our forfeited
   inheritance, restore us to liberty, and avenge our cause against Satan,
   the enemy, and murderer of our souls. But thus He made Himself also
   responsible for us, to pay our debts, and to answer the demands of the
   justice and law of God on our behalf. He fulfilled His engagement. He
   suffered, and He died on this account. But our Redeemer who was once
   dead, is now alive, and lives for evermore, and has the keys of death,
   and of Hades (Revelation 1:18) . This is He of whom Job says, I know
   that He lives ( was then living ) though He was not to stand upon the
   earth, until the latter day. He is the living One, having life in
   Himself, the same yesterday, today, and for ever (Hebrews 13:8) Such
   was His own language to the Jews, Before Abraham was, I am (John 8:58)
   Therefore, the Redeemer is mighty, and His redemption is sure. He is
   able to save to the uttermost. His power is unlimited, and His official
   authority, as Mediator, is founded in a covenant, ratified by His own
   blood, and by the oath of the unchangeable God (Psalm 110:4)

   II.

   But Job uses the language of appropriation. He says my' Redeemer And
   all that we know, or hear, or speak of Him, will avail us but little,
   unless we are really and personally interested in Him [personally
   affected by Him] as our Redeemer. A cold speculative knowledge of the
   Gospel, such as a lawyer has of a will or a deed which he reads, with
   no further design than to understand the tenor and import of the
   writing, will neither save, nor comfort the soul. The believer reads
   it, as the will is read by the heir who finds his own name in it, and
   is warranted by it, to call the estate, and all the particulars
   specified, his own. He appropriates the privileges to himself, and
   says, " The promises are mine, the pardon, the peace, the heaven, of
   which I read, are all mine. This is the will and testament of the
   Redeemer, of my Redeemer. The great Testator remembered me in His will,
   which is confirmed, and rendered valid by His death (Hebrews 9:16) ,
   and therefore I humbly claim, and assuredly expect the benefit of all
   that He has bequeathed ."

   But how shall we obtain this comfortable [reassuring] persuasion, and
   preserve it against all the cavils of our enemies, who will endeavour
   to litigate our right? I seem to have before me a proper occasion of
   discussing a point, very important, and by too many misunderstood; I
   mean, the nature of that assurance of hope, which the Scripture speaks
   of as attainable, which has been happily experienced by many believers,
   and which all are exhorted and encouraged to seek after, in the methods
   of God's appointment. But my plan will only permit me to offer a few
   brief hints upon the subject.

   (1.)

   Many respectable writers and preachers, have considered this assurance,
   as essential to true faith. But we have the Scripture in our hands, and
   are not bound to abide by the decision of any man, farther than as they
   agree with this standard. The most eminent properties, or effects
   ascribed to faith, are, that it works by love (Galatians 5:6) ,
   purifies the heart (Acts 15:9) , and overcomes the world (I John 5:4) .
   I think it cannot be easily denied, by those who are competent judges
   in the case, that there are persons to be found, who give these
   evidences that they are believers, and yet are far from the possession
   of an abiding assurance. They hope they love the Lord, but there is
   such a disproportion between the sensible exercise of their love, and
   the conviction they have of their obligations to Him, that they are
   often afraid that they do not love Him supremely; and if not, they know
   that in the Scriptural sense they do not love Him at all. They can say
   from their hearts that they desire to love Him, but they dare not go
   farther. But there is a weak, and a strong, faith; they differ, not in
   kind, but only in degree. Faith is compared to a grain of mustard seed
   (Matthew 17:20) , which, under the cultivation of the heavenly
   husbandman, who first sows the seed in the heart, grows up to
   assurance. But in its infant and weak state, it is true and acceptable
   faith. Far from breaking the bruised reed (Isaiah 42:3) , He will
   strengthen it. He will not quench the smoking flax, but will, in due
   time, fan it into a flame.

   (2.)

   I will go a step farther. Were I to define the assurance we are
   speaking of, I should perhaps say, It is, in our present state, the
   combined effect of faith and ignorance . That assurance which does not
   spring from true faith in the Son of God, wrought by the operation of
   the Holy Spirit, is not better than presumption. But I believe, what we
   call assurance , even when it is right, is not entirely owing to the
   strength of our faith, but in a great measure, to our having such faint
   and slight views of some truths, which, if we had a more powerful
   impression of them, unless our faith was likewise proportionably
   [proportionally] strengthened at the same time, might possibly make the
   strongest assurance totter and tremble. I will explain myself.
   Admitting that I had a right to tell you, that I am so far assured of
   my interest in the Gospel salvation, as to have no perplexing doubt
   either of my acceptance, or of my perseverance; you would much overrate
   me, if you should suppose this was a proof that my faith is very
   strong. Alas! I have but very slight perception of the evil of sin, of
   the deceitfulness of my own heart, of the force and subtlety of my
   spiritual enemies, of the strictness and spirituality of the holy law,
   or the awful majesty and holiness of the great God, with whom I have to
   do. If in the moment, while I am speaking to you, He should be pleased
   to impress these solemn realities to my mind, with a conviction and
   evidence, tenfold greater than I have ever known hitherto (which I
   conceive would still be vastly short of the truth) unless my faith was
   also strengthened, by a tenfold clearer and more powerful discovery of
   the grace and glory of the Saviour, you would probably see my
   countenance change and my speech falter. The Lord, in compassion to our
   weakness, shows us these things by little and little, as we are able to
   bear them; and if, as we advance in the knowledge of ourselves, and of
   our dangers, our knowledge of the unsearchable riches of Christ
   advances equally, we may rejoice in hope, we may even possess an
   assured hope. But let not him who has put on his harness, boast as
   though he had put it off (I Kings 20:11) . We are yet in an enemy's
   land, and know not what changes we may meet with, before our warfare is
   finished.

   (3.)

   How far our assurance is solid may be estimated by its effects. It will
   surely make us humble, spiritual, peaceful and patient. I pity those
   who talk confidently of their hope, as if they were out of the reach of
   doubts and fears, while their tempers are unsanctified and their hearts
   are visibly attached to the love of the present world. I fear they know
   but little of what they say. I am better pleased when persons of this
   character complain of doubts and darkness. It proves at least that they
   are not destitute of feeling, nor, as yet, lulled into a spirit of
   careless security. And there are professors, whom instead of
   endeavouring to comfort in their present state, I would rather wish to
   make still more suspicious of themselves than they are; till they are
   convinced of the impossibility of enjoying true peace while their
   hearts are divided between God and the world. For though sanctification
   is not the ground of a good hope, it is the certain concomitant
   [accompaniment] of it. If it be true that without holiness no man shall
   see the Lord (Hebrews 12:14) , it must likewise be true that without
   holiness no man can have a Scriptural and well-founded hope of seeing
   Him.

   (4.)

   But to give a direct answer to the inquiry, How shall I know that He is
   my Redeemer?' I may use the Prophet's words, Then shall ye know, if ye
   follow on to know the Lord (Hosea 6:3) . Our names are not actually
   inserted in the Bible, but our characters are described there. He is
   the Redeemer of all who put their trust in Him. You will not trust Him,
   unless you feel your need of Him; you cannot, unless you know Him as He
   is revealed in the Word; you do not unless you love Him, and are
   devoted to His cause and service. If you know yourself to be a sinner
   deserving to perish, if you see that there is no help or hope for you
   but in Jesus, and venture yourself upon His gracious invitation,
   believing that He is able to save to the uttermost; and if you include
   holiness and a deliverance from sin in the idea of salvation which you
   long for, then He is your Redeemer. If, among us, an act of grace was
   published, inviting all criminals to surrender themselves, with a
   promise of mercy to those who did, though no one was mentioned by name
   in the act, yet everyone who complied with it, and pleaded it, would be
   entitled to the benefit. Such an act of grace is the Gospel. The Lord
   says, This is My beloved Son, hear Him (Mark 9:7) . If you approve Him,
   He is yours. If you are still perplexed with doubts, they are owing to
   the weakness of your faith. But there are means appointed for the
   growth of faith. Wait patiently upon the Lord in the use of those
   means, and you shall find He has not bid you seek His face in vain.
   Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. Live not in
   the omission of known duty. Do not perplex yourself with vain
   reasonings, but believe and obey, and the Lord shall be with you. There
   are some peculiar cases. Allowances must be made for the effects of
   constitution and temperament. Some sincere persons are beset and
   followed, through life, with distressing temptations. But in general,
   simplicity and obedience lead to assurance. And they who hearken to the
   Lord, and walk in the way of His commandments, go on from strength to
   strength (Psalm 84:7) , their peace and hope increase like a river
   which, from small beginnings, runs broader and deeper till it falls
   into the ocean. But to return to Job: --

   III.

   Another article of his creed, concerning the Redeemer, is, He shall
   stand in the latter day upon the earth. The latter or last days, in the
   prophetical style, usually denote the MESSIAH'S day, the times of the
   Gospel. To this time Job looked forward. He beheld the promises afar
   off. Thus MESSIAH was the consolation of His people of old, as He who
   was to come. And it should be our consolation, to know that He has
   come. His "standing upon the earth" may include the whole of His
   appearance in the flesh: His life, passion, and resurrection. The
   manner of expression intimates something important and wonderful. Had
   Job, in the spirit of prophecy, spoken of any individual of Adam's
   race, of Isaiah or Paul, there would have been nothing extraordinary
   predicted by saying he shall stand upon the earth , for all men do so
   in their successive generations. But that the Redeemer, the L ORD of
   glory, the Maker of all things, should condescend to visit His
   creatures, to dwell with men for a season, to stand and walk upon the
   earth with them, clothed in a body like their own, is an event which
   never could have been expected, if it had not been revealed from
   heaven. It was the object of Job's faith, and well deserving the solemn
   preface with which he introduces his firm persuasion of it, Oh! That my
   words were graven with an iron pen in the rock forever! When Solomon
   had finished the temple of the L ORD of Hosts, instead of admiring the
   magnificence of the building, he was struck with the condescension of
   the Lord, who would vouchsafe [graciously agree] to notice it, and
   honour it with a symbol of His presence. Will God indeed dwell with men
   upon the earth? Behold the heaven of heavens cannot contain Him; how
   much less this house which I have built! (I Kings 8:27) . But what was
   the visible glory which appeared in that temple, if compared with the
   glory of the only-begotten Son of God when He tabernacled in our flesh!
   The human nature of Christ is that true temple, not made with hands, in
   which God is manifested upon a throne of grace, that sinners may
   approach Him without dismay, and receive out of His fulness grace for
   grace. To Him all the prophets gave witness: on Him the desire and hope
   of His people, in all ages have been fixed. He was to stand upon the
   earth, as mediator between God and man. And in the same office now He
   is upon the Throne of glory: He is, and will be, admired, adored, and
   trusted in by all believing people, to the end of time.

   IV.

   From the Redeemer's appearance upon earth, Job infers the restoration,
   and resurrection, of his own body. His trials had been great --bereaved
   of his children and substance, afflicted with grievous boils, harassed
   with temptations, reproached by his friends: out of all these troubles
   the L ORD his Redeemer delivered him, and his latter days were more
   prosperous than his beginning. But he knew that he must go the way of
   all the earth, that his body must lie in the grave, and return to dust.
   But he expected a future time after his dissolution, when in the flesh,
   for himself, and with his own eyes, he should see God. The expressions
   are strong and repeated. He does not speak the language of hesitation
   and doubt, but of confidence and certainty. It likewise appears that he
   placed his ultimate happiness in seeing God. His words are not very
   different from those of the Apostle. When He shall appear, we shall be
   like Him, for we shall see Him as He is (I John 3:2) . To behold the
   glory of God, as our Redeemer, to be in a state of favour and communion
   with Him, and according to the utmost capacity of our nature, to be
   conformed to Him, in holiness and love; is that felicity which God has
   promised, and to which all His servants aspire. Some foretastes of it
   they enjoy in the present life, which cheer them under their trials,
   and raise them above the grovelling pursuits of those who have their
   portion only in this world; but their chief possession is in hope. They
   look forward to a brighter period, when they shall awaken from the
   sleep of death, to behold His face in righteousness (Psalm 17:15) .
   Then, and not till then, they shall be completely satisfied. The
   expectation of Job, therefore, affords a sufficient proof, that the
   doctrines of an immortal state, and of a resurrection unto life, were
   included in the revelations which God afforded to His people in the
   earliest times; and, consequently, that the religion of the Old
   Testament and of the New, is substantially the same.

   The great inquiry this subject should impress upon us is, Are we thus
   minded?' What think you, my dear friends, of Christ? Have you accepted
   Him as your Redeemer? And have you a good hope that you shall see Him
   to your comfort, when He shall return to judge the world? If so, you
   may rejoice. Changes you must expect. You must die, and your flesh must
   be food for worms. But He has promised to change our vile bodies, that
   they may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to the
   mighty power whereby He is able to subdue all things unto Himself
   (Philippians 3:21)

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XL

   The Lord is Risen Indeed

   I Corinthians 15:20

   But now the Lord is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
   them that slept.

   A s, in the animal economy [As, in the function of physical bodies],
   the action of the heart and of the lungs, though very different, are
   equally necessary for the maintenance of life, and we cannot say that
   either of them is more essentially requisite than the other; so, in the
   system of divine revelation, there are some truths, the knowledge and
   belief of which, singly considered, are fundamentals with respect to
   the salvation of a sinner. And though they are distinct in themselves,
   we cannot determine which of them is of most importance to us; for
   unless we know, approve, and receive them all, we can have no
   experience of a life of faith in the Son of God. Such, for instance, is
   the Scriptural doctrine concerning the depravity of human nature. This
   is a first principle; for unless we understand what our state is in the
   sight of God, the enormity of our transgressions, and our incapacity
   for true happiness; until our hearts are changed by the power of His
   grace, we cannot rightly understand a single chapter in the Bible.
   Such, likewise, is the doctrine of the Atonement. For if we could know
   how totally we are lost, without knowing the gracious method which God
   has appointed for our recovery, we must unavoidably sink into despair.
   Again, if we were sensible of our state, as sinners, and even if we
   trusted in Christ for salvation, yet the Apostle observes, in this
   chapter, that unless He be indeed risen from the dead, our faith in Him
   would be in vain, and we should still be in our sins. The resurrection
   of Christ, therefore, is a doctrine absolutely essential to our hope
   and comfort: and it is likewise a sure pledge, that they who believe in
   Him, shall be raised from the dead also, by virtue of their union with
   Him, and according to His pattern. For now is Christ risen from the
   dead, and is become the first-fruits of them that slept. Let us, at
   present, consider His resurrection. The sure consequence of it, that
   His people shall be raised from the dead, will offer to our
   meditations, from the following verses.

   The resurrection of Christ, being, as a fact, the great pillar upon
   which the weight and importance of Christianity rest, it has pleased
   the Lord to put the indubitable proof of it within our power. There is
   no one point of ancient uninspired history, so certainly and
   unquestionably authenticated. It may seem unnecessary to prove it, and
   to many of you it is entirely so. Yet I think it proper to take some
   notice of it; not so much on account of the weak and trifling cavils of
   infidels, as for the sake of persons who may be assaulted with
   temptations. For many plain people, who are not much acquainted with
   the subtleties of sceptics, are sometimes pestered with difficulties
   and objections in their own minds, perhaps more shrewd and powerful
   than such as are commonly found in books, or retailed [conversed about]
   in coffee-houses. For unbelief is deeply rooted in every heart; and
   Satan, our great enemy can, and if permitted will, work powerfully upon
   this evil disposition. He endeavours to beat us off from the belief of
   every truth of Scripture, and of this among the rest. And many persons
   who have been so well convinced that our Lord rose from the dead, as to
   venture their souls and their all upon it, have found themselves at a
   loss how to answer the enemy in an hour of sharp and pressing
   temptation.

   Let us suppose then, that we had lately received the news of some
   extraordinary, and almost incredible event; and let us consider what
   evidence we should require to satisfy us that the report was true, and
   apply the same kind of reasoning to the point in hand. That there was,
   a great while ago, a person named Jesus, who gathered disciples, and
   died upon a cross, is universally acknowledged. Both Jews and heathens,
   who lived at the time, and afterwards, not only admitted it, but urged
   it as a reproach against His followers. Many testimonies of this kind
   are still extant.

   The turning point between His enemies and His friends is His
   resurrection. This has been denied. We acknowledge that He did not
   appear publicly, after He arose, as He did before His death, but only
   to a competent number of His followers, to whom He showed Himself and
   satisfied them by many infallible proofs, that He was alive and that He
   was the same person whom they had seen crucified. They reported what
   they saw, and we believe their report. We are therefore to enquire, Who
   were they?' and On what grounds do we receive and rely upon their
   testimony?'

   If they were mistaken themselves, or if they were engaged and agreed in
   a crafty design of imposing upon mankind, we who depend upon their
   relation [report] may be involved in their mistake, or deceived by
   their artifice. But if neither of these suppositions can possibly be
   true, if they were competent and impartial witnesses, then we are not
   only justified in giving credit to their testimony, but it must be
   unreasonable, and (in a case of this importance) presumptuous, and
   dangerous to reject it.

   I.

   That they were competent judges of what they asserted is evident:

   (1.)

   From their numbers. The eye-witnesses of this fact were many. He was
   seen of Cephas, then of the twelve; after that He was seen of five
   hundred brethren at once; after that He was seen of James, then of all
   the apostles. And last of all, He was seen of me also (I Corinthians
   15:5-8) . Thus Paul wrote when multitudes who lived at the time were
   still living, and would readily have contradicted him if he had
   declared an untruth. Five hundred concurring witnesses are sufficient
   to establish the credit of a fact which they all saw with their own
   eyes, if their word may be depended upon. We can be certain of things
   which we never saw, no otherwise than by the testimony of others. And
   certainty may be attained in this way. For though some persons would
   appropriate the word demonstration to mathematical evidence, yet moral
   evidence may, in many cases, be equally conclusive, and compel assent
   with equal force. I am so fully satisfied by the report of others, that
   there are such cities as Paris or Rome, though I never saw them, that I
   am no more able seriously to question their existence, than I am to
   doubt the truth of a proposition in ^* Euclid, which I have seen
   demonstrated.

   ^* Euclid of Alexandria (300 BC)- Greek mathematician, often referred
   to as the Father of Geometry

   (2.)

   From the nature of the fact, in which is was not possible that so many
   persons could be mistaken or deceived. Some of them saw Him not once
   only, but frequently. His appearance to others was attended with
   peculiar striking circumstances and effects. His disciples seem not to
   have expected His resurrection, though He had often foretold it
   pervious to His sufferings. Nor did they hastily credit the women who
   first saw Him, in their way from the sepulchre. Thomas refused to
   believe the report of all his brethren, to whom our Lord had shown
   Himself. He would see for himself; he required more than ocular proof;
   for he said, Except I put my finger into the print of the nails, and
   thrust my hand into His side, I will not believe (John 20:25) . It is
   no wonder that when these proofs were offered him, he fully yielded to
   conviction, and with gratitude and joy, addressed his risen Saviour in
   the language of adoration and love, My Lord, and my God!' But his
   former conduct showed that he was not credulous, nor disposed to
   receive the report as a truth, however desirable, without further
   evidence.

   II.

   As they were competent judges, so they were upright and faithful
   witnesses. There is no more room to suspect that they had a design to
   deceive others, than that they were mistaken or deceived themselves.
   For:

   (1.)

   If we judge of them by their writings, we must, at least, allow them to
   have been well-meaning men. They profess to aim at promoting the
   knowledge and honour of the true God, and thereby to promote the
   morality and happiness of mankind. Their conduct was uniformly
   consistent with their profession, and their doctrines and precepts were
   evidently suited to answer their design. The penmen of the New
   Testament were, confessedly, men in private life, most of them
   destitute of literature, and engaged in low occupations, till they
   became the disciples of Jesus. Is it possible, that men who speak so
   honourably of God, who inculcate upon [who indoctrinate] their
   fellow-creatures such an entire devotedness to His will and service,
   should be impostors themselves? Is it at all credible that a few men,
   in an obscure situation, should form a consistent and well concerted
   plan, sufficient to withstand and overcome the prejudices, habits, and
   customs, both of Jews and heathens; to institute a new religion; and,
   without the assistance of interest or arms, to spread it rapidly and
   successfully, in a few years, throughout the greatest part of the Roman
   Empire? Or is it possible, that such men could, at their first effort,
   exhibit a scheme of theology and morality, so vastly superior to the
   united endeavours of the philosophers of all ages? A learned man in
   France attempted to prove that most of the Latin poems, which are
   attributed to those whom we call the Classic writers, and particularly
   the Aeneid of Virgil, were not the production of the authors whose
   names they bear, but gross forgeries, fabricated by monks, in the dark
   ages of ignorance, and successfully obtruded [imposed] upon the world
   as a genuine, till he arose to detect the imposture. He gained but few
   proselytes to his absurd paradox. Yet, to suppose that men who could
   only express their own dull sentiments in barbarous Latin, were capable
   of writing with the fire and elegance of ^* Virgil, when they undertook
   to impose upon the world; or to affirm that the Principia of Sir Isaac
   Newton, was in reality written by an ignorant plough-man, and only sent
   abroad under the sanction of a celebrated name; cannot be more
   repugnant to true taste, sound judgment, and common sense, than to
   imagine that the Evangelists and Apostles were, from their own
   resources, capable of writing such a book as the New Testament. The
   whole of which must stand or fall with the doctrine of our Lord's
   resurrection.

   ^* Virgil - Roman poet (70BCE - 19BCE)

   (2.)

   But farther, They could not possibly propose any advantage to
   themselves, in their endeavours to propagate the Christian religion, if
   they had not been assured, that the crucified Jesus, whom they
   preached, was risen from the dead and had taken possession of His
   Kingdom. Knowing whom they had believed, filled with a constraining
   sense of His love, and depending upon His promise and power to support
   them in the service to which He had called them, they were neither
   ashamed nor afraid to proclaim His Gospel, and to invite and enjoin
   sinners everywhere to put their trust in Him. Otherwise, they had
   nothing to expect but such treatment as they actually met with, for
   professing their belief of His resurrection; and especially for the
   pains they took to publish it: first among the people who had put Him
   to death, and afterwards among the heathens. It required no great
   sagacity to foresee that this doctrine would be an offence to the Jews,
   and foolishness to the Greeks (1 Corinthians 1:23) . They were, in
   fact, despised, hated, opposed, and persecuted wherever they went; and
   those who espoused their cause, were immediately exposed to a
   participation in their sufferings. Nor was there the least probability
   that the event could be otherwise. Impostors there have been many, but
   we cannot conceive that any set of men, would deliberately, and by
   consent, contrive to an imposture, which, in the nature of the thing,
   could procure nothing to them or to their followers, but contempt,
   stripes, imprisonment, and death.

   (3.)

   Even if we could for a moment suppose them capable of so wild and
   wicked an undertaking as, under pretence of the service of God, to
   provoke and dare the hatred of mankind, by asserting and propagating an
   offensive falsehood, it would be impossible, upon that ground, to
   account for the success which they met with. If this counsel and cause
   had not been of God, it must have come to nought (Acts 5:38) . But by
   preaching Jesus and His resurrection, in defiance of all the arts
   [schemes, stratagems] and rage of their enemies, they mightily
   prevailed over the established customs, and inveterate prejudices of
   mankind, and brought multitudes into the belief of their doctrine,
   against all disadvantages. The Lord confirmed their word with signs
   following. The miracles which were wrought in the name of Jesus were
   numerous, notorious, and undeniable. And the moral effects of their
   preaching, though too frequent and universal to be styled miraculous,
   were such as can only be, with reason, ascribed to a divine power. The
   pillars of paganism, the superstitions of idol worship, though in every
   country connected and incorporated with the frame of civil government,
   and guarded for ages, not more by popular veneration, than for reasons
   of state, were very soon shaken, and, in no great space of time,
   subverted. Within about two hundred years after ^* Tacitus had
   described the Christians as the objects of universal contempt and
   hatred, Christianity became the established religion of the Empire. And
   in a letter of Pliny to Trajan on the subject, we have indisputable
   evidence, that even in the time of Tacitus, hated, vilified, and
   persecuted as the Christians were, their religion so greatly prevailed,
   that in many places the idol temples were almost deserted.

   ^* Publius (or Gaius) Cornelius Tacitus (AD 56 - AD 117) - senator, and
   historian of the Roman Empire

   (4.)

   But the proof of the resurrection of Christ, which is the most
   important and satisfactory of any, does not depend upon arguments and
   historical evidence, with which multitudes of true Christians are
   unacquainted; but is, in its own nature, equally convincing in all ages
   and equally level to all capacities. They who have found the Gospel to
   be the power of God to the salvation of their souls, have the witness
   in themselves. And are very sure that the doctrine which enlightened
   their understandings, awakened their consciences, delivered them from
   the guilt and dominion of sin, brought them into a state of peace and
   communion with God, and inspired them with a bright and glorious hope
   of eternal life, must be true. They know that the Lord is risen indeed,
   because they are made partakers of the power of His resurrection, and
   have experienced a change in themselves, which could only be wrought by
   the influence of that Holy Spirit which Jesus is exalted to bestow. And
   many believers, though not qualified to dispute with philosophers and
   sceptics, upon their own learned ground, can put them to shame and to
   silence, by the integrity and purity of their conduct, by their
   patience and cheerfulness under afflictions; and would especially
   silence them, if they were eye-witnesses of the composure and elevation
   of spirit, with which true believers in a risen Saviour welcome the
   approach of death.

   This is the evidence, which I would principally recommend to my hearers
   to seek after. If the resurrection of Christ be a truth, and a fact,
   much depends upon the right belief of it. I say a right belief; for
   though I have offered you a brief view of the external evidence in
   proof of this point, I am aware that I am not preaching to Jews, or
   Mohammedans. If I should ask you, Do you believe the resurrection?'
   might I not answer myself, as the Apostle did on another occasion, I
   know you do'? (Acts 26:27) . But so powerful is the effect of our
   depravity, that it is possible, yea very common, for people most
   certainly to believe the truth of a proposition, so as not to be able
   to entertain a doubt of it, and yet to act as if they could demonstrate
   it to be false. Let me ask you, for instance, Do you believe that you
   shall die? I know that you believe it. But do you indeed live, as if
   you were really assured of the certainty of death, and (which is
   equally undeniable) the uncertainty of life? So in the present case --
   If Christ be risen from the dead, according to the Scriptures, then all
   that the Scripture declares of the necessity and design of His
   sufferings, of His present glory, and of His future advent, must be
   true likewise. What a train of weighty consequences depend upon His
   resurrection! If He rose from the dead; then He is the Lord of the
   dead, and of the living -- then He has the keys of death and Hades --
   then He will return to judge the world, and you must see Him for
   yourself, and appear at His tribunal -- then it is He with whom you
   have to do -- and then, finally, unless you really love, trust, and
   serve Him, unless He is the beloved and the Lord of your heart, your
   present state is awfully dangerous and miserable.

   But let those who love His name be joyful in Him. Your Lord who was
   dead, is alive, and because He lives, you shall live also. If you be
   risen with Him, seek the things which are above, where He is seated at
   the right hand of God. And, when He, who is our life, shall appear,
   then shall you also appear with Him in glory.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLI.

   Death By Adam, Life By Christ

   I Corinthians 15:21, 22

   For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
   dead.

   For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

   F rom Mr. Handel's acknowledged abilities as a composer, and
   particularly from what I have heard of his great taste and success in
   adapting the style of his music to the subject, I judge, that this
   passage afforded him a fair occasion of displaying his genius and
   powers. Two ideas, vastly important in themselves, are here represented
   in the strongest light, by being placed in contrast to each other.
   Surely the most solemn, the most pathetic strains must be employed, if
   they accord with the awful words, By man came death.; in Adam all die.
   Nor can even the highest efforts of the heavenly harpers, more than
   answer to the joy, the triumph and the praise, which the other part of
   my text would excite in our hearts, if we are interested in it,
   provided we were capable of comprehending the full force and meaning of
   the expressions, By man came also the resurrection; In Christ shall all
   be made alive.

   By one man came death. By one man sin entered into the world, and death
   by sin (Romans 5:12) . Sin opened the door to death. The creation, at
   the beginning, was full of order and beauty. God saw everything that He
   had made, and behold all was very good (Genesis 1:31) . Adam, happy in
   the image and favour of his Maker, breathed the air of immortality in
   Paradise. While moral evil was unknown, natural evils, such as
   sickness, pain and death, had no place. How different has the state of
   things been since! Would you account for the change? Charge it upon
   man. He sinned against his Creator, Lawgiver, and Benefactor; and thus,
   by him, came death. The fact is sure, and therefore our reasonings upon
   it, in order to account for it farther than we are enlightened and
   taught by Scripture, are unnecessary and vain. God is infinitely wise,
   and therefore this change was foreseen by Him. He doubtless could have
   prevented it, for to Omnipotence everything that does not imply a
   contradiction, is possible, is easy. But He permitted it, and therefore
   it must have been agreeable to His wisdom, holiness and goodness, to
   permit it. He can overrule it to the purposes of His own glory, and to
   ends worthy of Himself, and He has assured us that He will do so. Thus
   far I can go, nor do I wish to go farther. An endeavour to vindicate
   the ways of God to man, to fallen man, upon the grounds of what he
   proudly calls his reason, would be an impracticable, and, in my view, a
   presumptuous attempt. In proportion as His grace enlightens our minds,
   convinces us of our ignorance, and humbles our pride, we shall be
   satisfied that in whatever He appoints or permits, He acts in a manner
   becoming His own perfections. Nor can we be satisfied in any other way.
   We see, we feel, that evil is in the world. Death reigns. It has
   pleased God to afford us a revelation, to visit us with the light of
   His Gospel. If, instead of reasoning, we believe and obey, a way is set
   before us, by which we may signally overcome every evil, and obtain a
   happiness and honour, superior to what belonged to man, in his original
   state. They who refuse this Gospel, must be left to their cavils
   [trivial objections] and perplexities, until the day in which the great
   Judge and Governor of all shall arise to plead His own cause, and to
   vindicate His proceedings from their arrogant exceptions. Then every
   mouth will be stopped (Romans 3:19) . Let us look to the heavens, which
   are higher than we; and attend to what we may learn from sure
   principles, that the earth, with all its inhabitants, is but as dust
   upon the balance, if compared with the immensity of God's creation.
   Unless we could know the whole, and the relation which this very small
   part [mankind on planet earth] bears to the rest of His government, we
   must be utterly incompetent to judge how it becomes the great God to
   act. We are infected with the sin, and we are subject to the death,
   with all its concomitant [attendant] evils, which came into the world
   by the first man. But we are likewise invited to a participation of all
   the blessings, which the second Man has procured, by His atonement of
   sin, and by His victory over death. For as by man came death, so by man
   came also the resurrection from the dead.

   Let us take a survey, first of the malady, and then of the remedy:

   I.

   The malady, the effect and wages of sin, is death. Many ideas are
   included in this word, taken in the Scriptural sense.

   (1.)

   The sentence annexed to the transgression of that commandment, which
   was given as an especial test of Adam's obedience, and which affects
   all his posterity, is thus expressed, In the day that thou eatest --
   thou shalt surely die (Genesis 2:17) . But ordinarily, man was not to
   die by a stroke of apoplexy, or by a flash of lightening. The sentence
   includes all the natural evils, all the variety of woe, which sin has
   brought into the world. The rebellious tempers and appetites which so
   often cut short the life of man, together with the sufferings and
   troubles which, sooner or later, bring him down with sorrow to the
   grave, being the consequences of sin, may be properly considered, as
   belonging to that death in which they terminate. Even the earth and the
   elements partook in the effects of man's disobedience. Thorns and
   thistles (Genesis 3:18) , were not the produce of the ground till after
   he had sinned. Nor can I suppose that hurricanes, floods and
   earthquakes were known in a state of innocence. But had the whole earth
   been a paradise, man, having sinned, must have been miserable. It is
   not in situation to make that heart happy, which is the seat of
   inordinate passions, rage, envy, malice, lust and avarice. And were the
   earth a paradise now, it would be stained with blood, and filled with
   violence, cruelty and misery, while it is inhabited by sinners. Many
   persons at present, who dwell in stately houses, and have everything
   around them that is suited to gratify and please their senses, know by
   painful experience, how little happiness these external advantages
   afford, while their minds are tortured with disappointments and
   anxiety. Thus the outward afflictions, which everywhere surround and
   assail the sinner, and the malignant passions which, like vultures,
   continually gnaw his heart, all combine to accelerate the execution of
   the sentence of death.

   (2.)

   Death , in a very important sense, entered immediately with sin.
   Besides the rational life, which still distinguishes man from the brute
   creation, he originally possessed a spiritual and divine life, for he
   was created in the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness. He
   was capable of communion with God, of rejoicing in His favour, and of
   proposing His will and glory as the great end of his actions. In a
   word, the presence and life of God dwelt in him, as in a temple. As the
   soul is the life of the body, which becomes a carcase, a prey to worms
   and putrefaction, when the soul has forsaken it; so God is the life of
   the soul. Sin defaced His temple, and He forsook it. In this sense,
   when Adam had transgressed the law, he died instantly, in that very
   day, in that very moment. He lost his spiritual life, he lost all
   desire for communion with God, he no longer retained any love for his
   Benefactor. He dreaded His presence, he sought to hide himself from
   Him, and, when obliged to appear and answer, stood self-condemned
   before Him, till revived and restored by the promise of grace. And thus
   his posterity derive from him, what may be called, a living death. They
   are dead while they live, dead in trespasses and sins (Ephesians 2:1)
   till they are again quickened by His Holy Spirit. This is not a subject
   of common place declamation [oratory; tirade]; it is to be proved by
   the tenor of Scripture, the nature of Redemption, and the very reason
   of things. Unless we allow that man, in his present state, is thus
   fallen, depraved and dead; we must be reduced to the absurdity of
   supposing that God made him such a creature as he now is. That when He
   formed him for Himself, and endued him with a capacity and desires,
   which nothing short of His own infinite goodness can satisfy, He should
   at the same time create him with a disposition to hate his Maker, to
   seek his satisfaction in sensuality upon a level with the brutes, and
   to confine his views and pursuits within the limits of this precarious
   life, while he feels, in defiance of Himself, an instinctive thirst for
   immortality. Man considered in this view, would be a solecism
   [incongruity] in the creation; and they who do not acquiesce [agree
   without argument], in the cause which the Scripture assigns, for the
   inconsistencies and contradictions, which are found in his character,
   will never be able to assign any other cause, which will bear the trial
   of sober and rational examination. What the poet says of Beelzebub, ^*
   Majestic though in ruins, may be truly affirmed of man. His faculties
   and powers are proofs of his original greatness; his awful
   misapplication of them equally prove, that he is a fallen and ruined
   creature. He has lost his true life, he is dead in sin, and unless
   renewed and revived by the grace of God, can only, in a future state,
   be fit for the company of fallen angels. ^* from CORNUBIA - by George
   Woodley (1819)

   (3.)

   Death, as the wages of sin, extends still farther. There is the second
   death, the final and eternal misery of soul and body in hell. This we
   know is the dreadful lot of the impenitent. We need no other proof that
   this was included in the sentence; for, certainly, the righteous Judge
   would not inflict a greater punishment than He had denounced
   [threatened]. Indeed, it follows of course, in the very nature of
   things, if we admit the soul to be immortal, a resurrection both of the
   just and the unjust, and that there remains no other sacrifice for sin
   in favour of those who reject the Gospel. For to be disowned of God in
   the great day, to be separated from His favourable presence, and
   conscious of His endless displeasure; to be abandoned to the
   unrestrained rage of sinful dispositions, and hopeless despair; to be
   incessantly tormented by the stings of a remorseful conscience must be,
   upon the principles of Scripture, the unavoidable consequences of being
   cut off by death in an unhumbled, unpardoned, unsanctified state.

   II.

   But, blessed be God, the Gospel reveals a relief and remedy, fully
   adapted to the complicated misery in which sin has involved us. As by
   man came death, by man also came the resurrection from the dead.
   MESSIAH has made an end of sin, and destroyed the power of death. They
   who believe in Him, though they were dead shall live (John 11:25) . For
   He is the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the living.

   (1.)

   He raises the soul from the death of sin, unto a life of righteousness.
   By His blood He procures a right and liberty, and by His Spirit He
   communicates a power, that those who were afar off, may draw nigh to
   God. Thus, even at present, believers are said to be risen with Him
   (Colossians 3:1) . Their spiritual life is renewed, and their happiness
   is already commenced, though it be as yet subject to abatements.

   First: Though when they are made partakers of His grace, and thereby
   delivered from the condemning power of the law, sin has no longer
   dominion over them as formerly; yet it still wars and strives within
   them, and their life is a state of continual warfare. They now approve
   the law of God as holy, just and good, and delight in it after the
   inward man (Romans 7:12-23) , yet they are renewed but in part. They
   feel a law in their members warring against the law of their minds.
   They cannot do the things that they would, nor as they would; for when
   they would do good, evil is present with them. They are conscious of a
   defect, and a defilement, attending their best services. Their
   attainments are unspeakably short of the desires, which love to the
   Redeemer has raised in their hearts. They are ashamed, and sometimes
   almost discouraged. They adopt the Apostle's language, Oh wretched man
   that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. But with
   Him they can likewise say, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
   They know He is on their side, and expect that He will at last make
   them more than conquerors; yet, while the conflict lasts, they have
   much to suffer, and much to lament.

   Secondly: They are subject, like other people, to the various
   calamities and distresses incident to this state of mortality; and they
   have, more or less, troubles peculiar to themselves, arising from the
   nature of their profession and conduct (if they are faithful to their
   Lord) while they live in a world that lies in wickedness. But the curse
   and sting is taken out of their afflictions, and they are so moderated
   and sanctified, by the wisdom and grace of Him whom they serve, that in
   the event, they work for their good. But though they yield the peaceful
   fruit of righteousness (Hebrews 12:11) in themselves, and at the time,
   they are not joyous but grievous.

   Thirdly: They are still subject to the stroke of death; the separation
   of soul and body. But this death has lost its sting, as to them. And
   therefore they are said, not to die, but to sleep in Jesus. To them,
   instead of being an evil, it proves a deliverance from all evil, and an
   entrance into everlasting life.

   (2.)

   That new life to which they are raised, is surely connected with life
   eternal, the life of grace, with the life of glory. For Christ lives in
   them, and being united to Him by faith, they shall live while He lives.
   They only shut their eyes upon the pains and sorrows of this world, to
   open them immediately in His presence, and so they shall be forever
   with the Lord. How wonderful and happy is the transition! From disease
   and anguish, from weeping friends, and often from a state of indigence
   and obscurity, in which they have no friends to compassionate them,
   they remove to a state of glory, honour and immortality, to a mansion
   in the realms of light, to a seat near the throne of God. In the
   language of mortals, this ineffable honour and happiness is shadowed
   out to us, by the emblems of a white robe, a golden harp, a
   palm-branch, (the tokens of victory) and a crown, not of oak or laurel,
   not of gold or diamonds, but a crown of life. Such honour have all the
   saints. However afflicted or neglected, despised or oppressed, while
   upon earth, soon as their willing spirits take their flight from hence,
   they shine like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Thus Lazarus
   lay for a time, diseased, necessitous, and slighted, at the rich man's
   gate. Yet he was not without attendants. A guard of angels waited
   around him, and when he died conveyed his spirit into Abraham's bosom
   (Luke 16:22) . The Jews thought very highly of Abraham, the father of
   their nation, the father of the faithful. Our Lord therefore teaches
   us, by this representation, that the beggar Lazarus was not only happy
   after death, but highly exalted by Him who sees not as man sees; for he
   was placed in Abraham's bosom , a situation which, according to the
   custom of the Jews, was a mark of peculiar favour, intimacy, and
   distinction. Thus the beloved disciple was seated in the bosom of our
   Lord when He celebrated His last Passover with His disciples (John
   13:22-25)

   (3.)

   Their dead bodies shall be raised at the great day, not in their former
   state of weakness and corruption, but that which was from weakness
   shall be raised in power, and the mortal shall put on immortality. He
   shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned according to the
   likeness of His own glorious body. So that His own resurrection is both
   the pledge, and the pattern of theirs. I have only farther to observe
   upon this subject at present, that as Adam is the root and head of all
   mankind, from whence they all derive a sinful and mortal nature; so
   Jesus, the second Adam, is the root of a people who are united to Him,
   planted and engrafted in Him, by faith. To these the resurrection,
   considered as a blessing, is to be restrained. There will be a
   resurrection of the wicked likewise (John 5:29) , but to condemnation,
   shame, and everlasting contempt (Daniel 12:2) . But the connection is
   close and indissoluble, between Christ the first-fruits, and them that
   are Christ's at His coming.

   May we be happily prepared for this great event, that when He shall
   appear we may have confidence in Him, and not be ashamed before Him (I
   John 2:28) . Happy they who shall then be able to welcome Him in the
   language of the Prophet, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for Him,
   and He will save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for Him, we will
   be glad, and rejoice in His salvation (Isaiah 25:9) . But how awful the
   contrast of those (many of them once the great, mighty and honourable
   of the earth) who shall behold Him with horror; and in the anguish of
   their souls, shall call (in vain) to the rocks and mountains, to fall
   on them and hide them from His presence, saying, The great day of His
   wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? (Revelation 6:16, 17)

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLII.

   The General Resurrection

   I Corinthians 15:51-53

   Behold, I show you a mystery. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all
   be changed;

   in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump,

   for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
   incorruptible,

   and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption,

   and this mortal must put on immortality.

   A n object, great in itself, and which we know to be so, will appear
   small to us, if we view it from a distance. The stars, for example, in
   our view, are but as little specks or points of light; and the tip of a
   finger, if held very near to the eye, is sufficient to hide from us the
   whole body of the sun. Distance of time has an effect upon us, in its
   kind, similar to distance of space. It diminishes in our mind the idea
   of what, we are assured, is, in its own nature, of great magnitude and
   importance. If any of us were informed that we should certainly die
   before this day closes, what sudden and powerful change would take
   place in our thoughts? That we all must die, is a truth of which we are
   no less certain, than that we are now alive. But because it is possible
   that we may not die today, or tomorrow, or this year, or for several
   years to come, we are often little more affected by the thoughts of
   death, than if we expected to live here forever. In like manner, if you
   receive the Scripture as a divine revelation, I need offer you no other
   proof that there is a day, a great day, approaching, which will put an
   end to the present state of things, and introduce a state, unchangeable
   and eternal. Then the Lord will descend with a shout, with the voice of
   an archangel, and with the trump of God. The earth, and all its works,
   will be burnt up. The great Judge will appear, and all the human race
   must give an account of themselves to God, and, each according to his
   righteous award, be happy or miserable, in a degree beyond expression
   or conception, and that for ever.

   If we were infallibly assured that this tremendous scene would open
   upon us tomorrow; or if, while I am speaking, we should be startled
   with the signs of our Lord's coming in the air, what confusion and
   alarm would overspread the congregation? Yet, if the Scripture be true,
   the hour is approaching when we must all be spectators of this solemn
   event, and be parties nearly [personally, closely] interested in it.
   But because it is at a distance, we can hear of it, speak of it, and
   profess to expect it, with a coolness, almost equal to indifference.
   May the Lord give us that faith which is the evidence of things not
   seen, that while I aim to lead your meditations to the subject of my
   text, we may be duly impressed by it: and that we may carry from hence
   such a consideration of our latter end, as may incline our hearts to
   that which is our true wisdom!

   Many curious enquiries and speculations might be started from this
   passage, but which because I judge them to be more curious than useful
   , it is my intention to wave. I shall confine myself to what is plainly
   expressed, because I wish rather to profit than to amuse my hearers.
   The principal subject before us is the resurrection of the dead, in the
   most pleasing view of it; for my text speaks only of those who shall
   change the mortal and corruptible, for incorruption and immortality.

   I. The introduction, Behold I show you a mystery.

   II. What we are taught to expect. We shall not all sleep, but we shall
   all be changed.

   III. The suddenness of the event. In a moment, in the twinkling of an
   eye.

   IV. The grand preceding signal. The trumpet shall sound.

   I.

   The Apostle apprizes [informs] the Corinthians that he is about to show
   them a mystery. As the word mystery has been treated with no small
   contempt, I shall embrace this occasion of offering you a short
   explanation of it as it is used in the Scriptures. We are allowed to
   say, that there are mysteries in nature, and perhaps we may be allowed
   to speak of mysteries in Providence; but though an Apostle assures us
   that Great is the mystery of godliness (I Timothy 3:16) , many persons
   will scarcely bear the application of the word to religion. And a late
   ingenious writer, who has many admirers in the present day, has
   ventured to affirm, in print, that ^* where mystery begins, religion
   ends . If the frequency of the case did not, in some degree, abate our
   wonder, this might seem almost a mystery, that any persons who profess
   to believe the Scripture, should so openly and flatly contradict what
   the Scripture expressly and repeatedly declares. Or that while, as men
   of reason and philosophy, they are forced to acknowledge a mystery in
   every part of creation, and must confess it beyond their ability to
   explain the growth of a blade of grass; they should, in opposition to
   all the rules of analogy, conclude that the Gospel, the most important
   concern of man, and which is commended to us as the most eminent
   display of the wisdom and power of God, is the only subject so level to
   our apprehensions, as to be obvious, at first sight, to the most
   careless and superficial observers. That great numbers of people are
   very far from being accurate and diligent in their religious enquiries,
   is too evident to be denied. How often do we meet with persons of sense
   who talk with propriety on philosophical, political, or commercial
   subjects, and yet, when they speak of religion, discover such gross
   ignorance, as would be shameful in a child of ten years old, and
   amounts to a full proof, that they have not thought it worth their
   while to acquire even a slight knowledge of its first principles. Can
   we even conceive the possibility of a divine revelation that should
   have nothing in it mysterious to persons of this character?

   ^* Possibly Joshua Bayes (1671 - 1746) a Presbyterian minister, who was
   quoted by Edmond Burke (1729-97); and subsequently, by many others

   A mystery , according to the notation of the Greek word, signifies, a
   secret. And all the peculiar truths of the Gospel may justly be styled
   mysteries or secrets, for two reasons:

   (1.)

   Because the discovery of them is beyond the reach of fallen man, and
   they neither would nor could have been known without a revelation from
   God. This is eminently true of the resurrection. The light of nature,
   which we often hear so highly commended, may afford some faint
   glimmerings of a future state, but gives no intimation of a
   resurrection. The men of wisdom at Athens, the Stoic and Epicurean
   philosophers, who differed widely in most parts of their respective
   schemes, united in deriding this sentiment, and contemptuously styled
   the Apostle Paul a babbler for preaching it (Acts 17:18) . But this
   secret is to us made known. And we are assured, not only that the Lord
   will receive to Himself the departing spirits of His people, but that
   He will give commandment concerning their dust, and in due time raise
   their vile bodies to a conformity with His own glorious body.

   (2.)

   Because, though they are revealed expressly in the Scripture, such is
   the grossness of our conceptions, and the strength of our prejudices,
   that the truths of revelation are still unintelligible to us, without a
   farther revelation of their true sense to the mind by the influence of
   His Holy Spirit. Otherwise, how can the secret of the Lord be
   restrained to those who fear Him (Psalm 25:14) , when the Book which
   contains it is open to all; and the literal and grammatical meaning of
   the words is in the possession of many who fear Him not?

   Books in the arts and sciences, may be said to be full of mysteries to
   those who have not a suitable capacity and taste for them; or who do
   not apply themselves to study them with diligence and patiently submit
   to learn, gradually, one thing after another. If you put a treatise on
   the mathematics, or a system of music into the hands of a ploughman or
   labourer, you will not be surprised to find that he cannot understand a
   single page. Shall the works of a Sir Isaac Newton, or of a Handel, be
   thus inexplicable to one person, while another peruses them with
   admiration and delight? Shall these require a certain turn of mind, and
   a close attention? And can it be reasonably supposed, that the Bible is
   the only book, that requires no peculiar disposition or degree of
   application to be understood; though it is designed to make us
   acquainted with the deep things of God (I Corinthians 2:10) ? In one
   respect, indeed, there is an encouraging difference. Divine truths lie
   thus far equally open to all; and though none can learn them, unless
   they are taught of God; yet all who are sensible of their own weakness
   may expect His teaching, if they humbly seek it by prayer. Many people
   are, perhaps, incapable of being mathematicians. They have not a genius
   for the science. But there is no one who teaches like God. He can give
   not only light, but sight; not only lessons, but the capacity necessary
   for their reception. And while His mysteries are hidden from the wise
   and prudent, who are too proud to wait upon Him for instruction, He
   reveals them unto babes.

   It may, perhaps, be thought that a belief of the doctrine of the
   resurrection does not require the same teaching of the Holy Spirit that
   is necessary to the right knowledge of some other doctrines of the
   Gospel. But such a belief as may affect, cheer, and animate the heart,
   must be given us from above, for we cannot reason ourselves into it.
   Nay, this divine teaching is necessary to secure the mind from the vain
   reasonings, perplexities, and imaginations, which will bewilder our
   thoughts upon the subject, unless we learn to yield, in simplicity of
   faith, to what the Scripture has plainly revealed, and can be content
   to know no farther, before the proper time.

   II.

   What we are here taught to expect, is thus expressed -- We shall not
   all sleep, but we shall all be changed. We are not to suppose that the
   whole human race will die, and fail from the earth, before the
   resurrection. Some will be living at the time, and among them, some of
   the Lord's people. Of the living, it cannot properly be said that they
   will be raised from the dead. But they will experience a change, which
   will put them exactly in the same state with the others. Their
   mortality shall be swallowed up in life. Thus we conceive it to have
   been with Enoch and Elijah. They did not die like other men. But their
   mortal natures were frail and sinful, like ours, and incapable of
   sustaining the glories of heaven, without a preparation. Flesh and
   blood, in its present state, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither
   can corruption inherit incorruption. But the dead shall arise, and the
   living shall be changed. Here is a wide field for speculation, but I
   mean not to enter it. Curiosity would be glad to know how our bodies,
   when changed, shall still be the same. Let us first determine how that
   body, which was once an infant, is the very same when it becomes a full
   grown man, or a man in extreme old age. Let us explain the
   transmutation of a caterpillar or a silkworm, which, from a reptile,
   becomes a butterfly. Isn't this a wonderful change, both in appearance
   and in powers? Who would suppose it to be the same creature? Yet, who
   can deny it? It is safest and most comfortable for us, to refer to the
   wisdom and power of God, [re] the accomplishment of His own word.

   III.

   These great events will take place unexpectedly and suddenly. In a
   moment, in the twinkling of an eye. We have reason to believe, that a
   part at least of mankind will be employed as they are now, and as they
   were in the days of Noah and Lot (Luke 17:26-30) --eating, drinking,
   buying, selling, building, and planting; having nothing less in their
   thoughts than the calamity and destruction which shall overwhelm them
   without warning. For while they are promising themselves peace, the day
   of the Lord shall come upon them, like a thief in the night, unlooked
   for; and, like pangs of a labouring woman, unavoidable. In that day the
   lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of man shall
   be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted (Isaiah 2:11) . So
   large a part of divine prophecy remains yet to be fulfilled, that I
   apprehend it is not probable that any of us [in the 18 ^th Century]
   shall be alive when this great and terrible day of the Lord shall be
   revealed. But are not some of us exposed to a similar, dreadful
   surprise? If you die in your sins, the consequences will be no less
   deplorable to you, than if you saw the whole frame of our nature
   perishing with you. Alas, what will you do, whither will you flee for
   help, or where will you leave your glory, if, while you are engrossed
   by the cares or pleasures of this world, death should arrest you, and
   summons you to judgment? The rich man in the Gospel is not charged with
   any crimes of peculiar enormity. It is not said that he ground the
   faces of the poor, or that he, by fraud or oppression, kept back the
   hire of the labourers who had reaped his harvest; he only rejoiced in
   his wealth, and in having much goods laid up for many years, and that,
   therefore, he might securely eat, drink, and be merry. But God said
   unto him, Thou fool, this night shall your soul be required of you
   (Luke 12:20) . Awful disappointment! Thus will it be sooner or later,
   with all whose hearts and portions are in this world, but are not rich
   towards God! Consider this, you that are likeminded with him. Tremble
   at the thought of being found in the number of those, who have all
   their consolation here, and who, when they die, must leave their all
   behind them. Now is the acceptable time, the day of salvation. Now, if
   you will seek the Lord, He will be found of you. Now, if you pray for
   grace and faith, He will answer you. But when once the Master of the
   house shall arise, and with His own sovereign, authoritative hand,
   shall shut the door of His mercy, it will then be in vain and too late
   to say, Lord, Lord, open unto us (Luke 13:25) !

   IV.

   The great scene will be introduced by a signal. At the last trump; for
   the trumpet shall sound. Thus the approach of a king or a judge is
   usually announced; and the Scripture frequently borrows images from our
   little affairs and customs, and, in condescension to our weakness,
   illustrates things, in themselves too great for our conceptions, by
   comparing them with those which are more familiar to us.

   It will, indeed, be comparing great things with small, if I attempt to
   illustrate this sublime idea, by local customs, which obtain [which
   prevail] in this kingdom. At a time of assize, when the judges, to whom
   the administration and guardianship of our laws are entrusted, are
   making their entrance, expectation is awake, and a kind of reverence
   and awe is felt, even by those who are not immediately concerned in
   their inquest. The dignity of their office, the purpose for which they
   come, the concourse of people, the order of the procession, and the
   sound of the trumpet, all concur in raising an emotion in the hearts of
   the spectators. Happy are they then, upon whom the inflexible law has
   no demand! But who can describe the terror with which the sound of the
   trumpet is heard by the unhappy criminal; and the throbbing of his
   heart, if he be already convicted in his own conscience, and knows or
   fears that there is sufficient evidence at hand to fix the fact upon
   him and to prove his guilt? For soon the judge will take his seat, the
   books will be opened, the cause tried, and the criminal sentenced. Many
   circumstances of this kind are alluded to in the Scripture, to assist
   us in forming some conception of what will take place, when all the
   race of Adam, small and great, shall stand before the sovereign Judge,
   the one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. But the
   concourse, the solemnity, the scrutiny, the event, in the most weighty
   causes that can come before a human judicature, are mere shadows, and
   trivial as the sports of children, if compared with the business of
   this tremendous tribunal. The Lord Himself will descend with the voice
   of the archangel, and the trump of God. What a trumpet that will be,
   whose sound shall dissolve the frame of nature and awaken the dead!
   When the Lord is seated upon His great white throne (Revelation 20:11)
   , the heavens and the earth shall flee from His presence; but the whole
   race of mankind shall be assembled before Him, each one to give an
   account of himself to Him, from whose penetrating knowledge no secret
   can be hidden, and from whose unerring, inflexible sentence there can
   be no appeal. Where then shall the wicked and the ungodly appear?

   But it will be a joyful day to believers. They shall be separated, as
   the wheat from the tares, and arranged at His right hand. When the Lord
   shall come, attended by His holy angels, His redeemed people will
   reassume their bodies, refined, and freed from all that was
   corruptible; and those of them who shall be then living, will be
   changed and caught up to meet Him in the air. He will then own them,
   approve and crown them before assembled worlds. Every charge that can
   be brought against them will be overruled, and their plea, that they
   trusted in Him for salvation, be admitted and ratified. They will be
   accepted and justified. They will shine like the sun in His train, and
   attend as assessors with Him, when He shall pass final judgment upon
   His and their enemies. Then He will be admired in and by them that
   believe. Their tears will be forever wiped away, when He shall say to
   them, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
   you from the foundation of the world (Matthew 25:34)

   Beloved, if these things are so, what manner of persons ought we to be
   in all holy conversation and godliness ? (II Peter 3:11) . Should we
   not give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, that we
   may be found of Him in peace? He who will then be seated upon the
   throne of Judgment, is to us made known as seated upon a throne of
   Grace. It is time, it is high time, and blessed be God it is not yet
   too late to seek His mercy. Still the Gospel invites us to hear His
   voice, and to humble ourselves before Him. Once more you are invited,
   some of you perhaps for the last time; how know you, but sickness, or
   death, may be at the very door? Consider, are you prepared? Examine the
   foundation of your hope--and do it quickly, impartially and earnestly,
   lest you should be cut off in an hour when you are not aware, and
   perish with a lie in your right hand.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLIII

   Death Swallowed Up in Victory

   I Corinthians 15:54

   Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,

   Death is swallowed up in victory!

   D eath, simply considered, is no more than the cessation of life --that
   which was once living, lives no longer. But it has been the general,
   perhaps the universal custom of mankind, to personify it. Imagination
   gives death a formidable appearance, arms it with a dart, sting or
   scythe, and represents it as an active, inexorable and invincible
   reality. In this view death is a great devourer; with his iron tongue
   he calls for thousands at a meal. He has already swallowed up all the
   preceding generations of men; all who are now living are marked as his
   inevitable prey; he is still unsatisfied, and will go on devouring till
   the Lord shall come. Then this destroyer shall be destroyed; he shall
   swallow no more, but be swallowed up himself, in victory. Thus the
   Scripture accommodates itself to the language and apprehensions of
   mortals. Farther the metaphorical usage of the word swallow ,' still
   enlarges and aggrandizes the idea. Thus the earth is said to have
   opened her mouth, and swallowed' up Korah and his accomplices (Numbers
   16:32) . And thus a pebble, a mill-stone, or a mountain, if cast into
   the ocean, would be swallowed up, irrecoverably lost and gone, as
   though they had never been (Revelation 18:21) . Such shall be the
   triumphant victory of MESSIAH , in the great day of the consummation of
   all things. Death, in its cause, and in its effects, shall be utterly
   destroyed. Man was created upright and lived in a paradise until, by
   sin, he brought death into the world. From that time, death has reigned
   by sin and evils abound. But MESSIAH came to make an end of sin, to
   destroy death and him that has the power of it, to repair every
   disorder, and to remove every misery. And MESSIAH will so fully, so
   gloriously accomplish His great undertaking, in the final issue, that
   everything contrary to holiness and happiness shall be swallowed up and
   buried, beyond the possibility of a return, as a stone that is sunk in
   the depths of the sea. Thus, where sin has abounded, grace will much
   more abound.

   This victory however, being the Redeemer's work and the fruit of His
   mediation, the Scripture teaches us to restrict the benefits of it to
   the subjects of His Church and Kingdom. In Adam all die. A depraved
   nature, guilt, sorrow and death, extend to all Adam's posterity. The
   All' who in Christ shall be made alive' are those who, by faith in Him,
   are delivered from the sting of death, which is sin, and are made
   partakers of a new nature. There is a second death,' which, though it
   shall not hurt the believers in Jesus (Revelation 2:11) , will finally
   swallow up the impenitent and ungodly. We live in an age when there is,
   if I may so speak, a resurrection of many old and exploded errors,
   which, though they have been often refuted and forgotten, are admired
   and embraced by some persons, as new and wonderful discoveries. Of this
   stamp is the conceit of a universal restitution to a state of happiness
   of all intelligent creatures, whether angels or men, who have rebelled
   against the will and government of God. This sentiment contradicts the
   current doctrine of Scripture, which asserts the everlasting misery of
   the finally impenitent, in as strong terms, in the very same terms, as
   the eternal happiness of the righteous, and sometimes in the very same
   verse (Matthew 25:46) . Nor can it possibly be true, if our Lord spake
   the truth concerning Judas, when He said, It had been good for that man
   if he had never been born' (Matthew 26:24) . If I could consider this
   notion as harmless though useless, and no worse than many mistakes
   which men of upright minds have made through inattention and weakness
   of judgment, I should not have mentioned it. But I judge it to be
   little less pernicious and poisonous, than false. It directly tends to
   abate that sense of the evil of sin, of the inflexible justice of God,
   and the truth of His threatening, which is but too weak in the best of
   men. Let us abide by the plain declarations of His Word, which assures
   us that there remains no other sacrifice for sin' (Hebrews 10:26, 27) ;
   no future relief against it, for those who now refuse the Gospel; and
   that they who cordially [sincerely] receive it, shall be saved with an
   everlasting salvation, and shall one day sing, Death is swallowed up in
   victory.'

   I would further observe, that many prophecies have a gradual and
   increasing accomplishment, and may be applied to several periods;
   though their full completion will only be at the resurrection and last
   judgment. This passage, as it stands in the prophecy of Isaiah (Isaiah
   25:8) , from whence the Apostle quotes it, appears to have a reference
   to the comparatively brighter light and glory of the Gospel state,
   beyond what was enjoyed by the Church under the Levitical dispensation
   [system]; and especially to the privileges of those happy days, when
   the fulness of the Gentiles and the remnant of Israel shall be brought
   in, and the kingdoms of the world, shall become the kingdoms of the
   Lord and His Christ. I would not exclude these subordinate senses; I
   have already considered them. But my text calls our attention to the
   end of all things. Then, in the most emphatic sense, Death will be
   swallowed up of victory.

   Let us endeavour to realize the great scene before us, to contemplate
   the redeemed of the Lord, when they shall return with Him to animate
   their glorified bodies. Let us ask the question which the elder
   proposed to John, Who are these clothed with white robes, and whence
   came they? (Revelation 7:13) They came out of great tribulation, they
   were once under the power of death; but now death, as to them, is
   swallowed up in victory. In every sense in which death ruled over them,
   they are now completely delivered.

   I.

   They were once dead in law. They had revolted from their Maker. They
   had violated the holy order of His government, and stood exposed to His
   righteous displeasure, and to the heavy penalty annexed to the
   transgression of His commandments. But mercy interposed. God so loved
   them, that He gave His only begotten Son, to make an atonement for
   their sins, and to be their wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
   redemption (I Corinthians 1:30) . They received grace to believe in
   this Saviour, and now they are delivered from condemnation. They are
   accepted in the Beloved. They are considered as one with Him, and
   interested [possess a right, claim, or stake] in all that He did, and
   in all that He suffered. Now they are the children of God, and heirs of
   His Kingdom. Though they were afar off, they are brought nigh, admitted
   into a nearer relation, than the holy angels, to Him who sits upon the
   Throne. For He took upon Himself, and still is pleased to wear, not the
   nature of angels, but the human nature. Their former guilt is
   cancelled, blotted out, and swallowed up. All their sins are covered,
   sunk in His precious blood, as in a deep sea, so that even if sought
   for, they can no more be found. That they have sinned, will always be a
   truth; and probably they will never lose a consciousness of what they
   were by nature and practice, while in this world. But this, so far from
   abating their joy, will heighten their gratitude and praise to Him who
   loved them, and washed them from their sins, in His own blood
   (Revelation 1:5) . Their happiness principally consists in a perception
   of His love to them, and in their returns of grateful love to Him. And
   they love Him much, because, for His sake, much has been forgiven them
   (Luke 7:47)

   II.

   Once they were dead in sin. They were destitute of the knowledge and
   love of God. They were foolish, deceived, and disobedient, enslaved to
   divers lusts (Titus 3:3) , to inordinate, sensual, unsatisfying
   pleasures. They lived in malice and envy, they were hateful, and they
   hated one another. In a word, they were dead while they lived (I
   Timothy 5:6) . But by the power of grace, they were awakened and raised
   from this death, and made partakers of a new, a spiritual and divine
   life. Yet the principle of sin and death still remained in them; and
   their life upon earth, though a life of faith in the Son of God, was a
   state of continual warfare. They had many a conflict, and were often
   greatly distressed. They sowed in tears, to the end of their
   pilgrimage, but now they reap in joy (Psalm 126:5) . This death is also
   swallowed up in victory. They are now entirely and forever freed from
   every clog, defect and defilement. By beholding their Lord as He is in
   all His glory and love, without any interposing veil or cloud, they are
   made like Him, and to the utmost measure of their capacity, conformed
   to His image. Now they are absolutely spotless and impeccable. For
   though mutability seems no less essential to a creature than
   dependence, yet they cannot change because their Lord is unchangeable,
   for their life is hidden with Christ in God (Colossians 3:3) . They
   cannot fall from their holiness or happiness, because He has engaged to
   uphold and maintain them by His almighty power.

   III.

   One branch of the death due to sin, is the tyranny and power of Satan.
   For a time he ruled in their hearts, as in his own stronghold; and
   while they were blinded by his influence, they were little affected
   with their bondage. Hard as his service was, they did not often
   complain of it. They were lead by him according to his will, for the
   most part without resistance; or, if they attempted to resist, they
   found it was in vain. But in His own hour, their Lord who had bought
   them, dispossessed their strong enemy and claimed their hearts for
   Himself. Yet after they were thus set free from his [Satans] ruling
   power, this adversary was always plotting and fighting against them.
   How much have some of them suffered from his subtle wiles, and his
   fiery darts! from his rage as a roaring lion, from his cunning as a
   serpent lying in their path, and from his attempts to deceive them
   under the semblance of an angel of light (II Corinthians 11:14) ! But
   now they are placed out of his reach. Death and Satan are swallowed up.
   The victory is complete. The wicked one shall never have access to
   touch or disturb them anymore. Now he is shut up in his own place, and
   the door sealed, no more to open. While he was permitted to vex and
   worry them, he acted under a limited commission which he could not
   exceed; all was directed and overruled by the wisdom and love of their
   Lord, for their advantage. Such exercises were necessary then, to
   discover [reveal] to them more of the weakness and vileness of their
   own hearts, to make them more sensible of their dependence upon their
   Saviour, and to afford them affecting proofs of His power and care
   engaged in their behalf. But they are necessary no longer. Their
   warfare is finished. They are now where the wicked cease from
   troubling, and where the weary are at rest (Job 3:17)

   IV.

   While they were in the world they had a share, many of them a very
   large share, of the woes and sufferings incident to this mortal state;
   which, as they are the fruits and effects of sin, and greatly
   contribute to shorten the life of man, and hasten his return to dust,
   are, as I formerly observed, properly included in the comprehensive
   meaning of the original sentence, Death. They belong to its train, and
   are harbingers of its approach. None of the race of Adam are exempted
   from these, but especially, the servants of God have no exemption.
   Their gracious Lord, who frees them from condemnation, and gives them
   peace in Himself, assures them that in this world they shall have
   tribulation (John 16:33) . This is so inseparable from their calling,
   that it is mentioned as one special mark of their adoption and sonship
   (Hebrews 12:6-8) . If the prosperity of the wicked sometimes continues
   for a season without interruption, their day is coming (Psalm 37:13) ;
   but the righteous may expect chastisement and discipline daily. Thus
   their graces are refined, strengthened and displayed, to the praise of
   their heavenly Father. There is no promise in the Bible that secures
   the most eminent and exemplary believer from participating in the
   heaviest calamities, in common with others; and they have many trials
   peculiar to themselves. Thus while upon earth, they endure hardship for
   His sake. Because He chose them out of the world, and they would no
   longer comply with its sinful maxims and customs, the world hated them
   (John 15:19) . Many of them wore the mark of public scorn and malice,
   accounted the off-scouring of all things; they were driven to deserts,
   and mountains, and caves; they suffered stripes, imprisonment and
   death. Others had trials of pains, sickness and poverty, of sharp
   bereaving dispensations [circumstances]. Their gourds withered, and the
   desire of their eyes was taken away with a stroke. They had fightings
   without, and fears within. So that if their pressures and troubles were
   considered, without taking into account their inward supports, and the
   consolation they derived from their hopes beyond the grave, they might
   be deemed of all men the most miserable (I Corinthians 15:19) . But
   they were supported under these exercises, brought safely through them,
   and now their sorrows are swallowed up in victory. Now, the days of
   their mourning are ended (Isaiah 60:20) . They now confess, that their
   longest afflictions were momentary, and their heaviest burdens were
   light, in comparison of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of
   glory (II Corinthians 4:17) which they have entered upon. Sorrow and
   sighing have taken their everlasting flight, and joy and gladness have
   come forth to meet them, and to dwell with them forever (Isaiah 51:11)

   V.

   In their collective capacity, the seeds of sin often produced bitter
   fruits. Through remaining ignorance and prejudice, they often mistook
   and misunderstood one another. They lost much good, which they might
   otherwise have enjoyed, and brought upon themselves many evils, through
   their intemperate heats, and unsanctified zeal which divided them into
   little parties and separate interests. The children of the same family,
   the members of the same body, were too often at variance, or at least
   cold and distant in their regards to each other. Yea, Satan could
   foment discord and jealousies among those who lived in the same house,
   or met at the same table of the Lord. But now grace has triumphed over
   every evil; sin and death are swallowed up in victory. Now all is
   harmony, love and joy. They have one heart and one song, which will
   never more be blemished by the harshness of a single discordant note.

   May this prospect animate our hopes, and awaken in those who have
   hitherto been afar off, a desire of sharing in the happiness of the
   redeemed! Awful will be the contrast to those who have had their
   portion in this world! Is it needful to address any in this auditory
   [audience] in the language which our Lord used to His impenitent
   hearers? Woe unto you that are rich! for you have received your
   consolation. Woe unto you that are full! for you shall hunger. Woe unto
   you that laugh now! for you shall mourn and weep (Luke 6:24, 25) ! When
   the rich man, who had lived in honour and affluence here, was torn from
   all that he loved, and lifted up his eyes in torment; the remembrance
   of his former state, that he once had his good things (Luke 16:25) ,
   but that they were gone, forever gone, could only be a keen aggravation
   of his misery. Dreadful will be the condition of all who die in their
   sins; but the case of those who are now frequently envied by the
   ignorant, in the view of a mind enlightened by the truth, must appear
   doubly and peculiarly pitiable. They have the most to lose, they have
   the most to account for. Alas, how terrible, how sudden the change!
   From a state of honour and influence amongst men, to fall in a moment,
   under the contempt and displeasure of the holy God --to pass from a
   crowd of dependants and flatterers, to the company of Satan and his
   angels; from grandeur and opulence, to a state of utter darkness and
   horror, where the worm dieth not, and the fire cannot be quenched (Mark
   9:44, 45, 48) . These are sensible images. It is true; the things of
   the unseen world cannot be described to us, as they are in themselves;
   but we may be certain that the description falls unspeakable short of
   the reality. The malicious insults of the powers of darkness, the
   mutual recriminations of those who having been connected in sin here,
   will be some way connected in misery hereafter (Matthew 13:30)
   --remorse, rage, despair, a total and final exclusion from God the
   fountain of happiness, with an abiding sense of His indignation --this
   complicated misery cannot be expressed in the language of mortals
   --like the joy of the blessed, it is more than eye has seen, or ear has
   heard, or can possibly enter into the heart of man to conceive (I
   Corinthians 2:9) . Add the ideas of unchangeable' and eternal' to the
   rest, that it will be misery admitting of no intermission, abatement,
   or end; and then seriously consider, what can it profit a man should he
   gain the whole world, if at last he should thus lose his soul? (Matthew
   16:26) . No longer make a mock at sin. It is not a small evil. It is a
   great evil in itself, and unless pardoned and forsaken, will be
   productive of tremendous consequences. No longer make light of the
   Gospel. It points out to you the only possible method of escaping the
   damnation of hell. To refuse it, is to rush upon remediless
   destruction. No longer trust in uncertain riches. If you possess them,
   I need not tell you they do not make you happy at present, much less
   will they comfort you in the hour of death, or profit you in the day of
   wrath (Proverbs 11:4) . Waste not your time and talents (which must be
   accounted for) in the pursuit of sensual pleasure. In the end it will
   bite like a serpent. For all these things God will assuredly bring you
   into judgment, unless, in this day of grace, you humble yourselves to
   implore that mercy which is still proposed to you, if you will seek it
   sincerely and with your whole heart; and which I once more entreat,
   charge, and adjure you to seek, by the great name of MESSIAH , the
   Saviour, by His agonies and bloody sweat, by His cross and passion; by
   His precious death, and by the consideration of His future glorious
   appearance, to subdue all things to Himself.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLIV.

   Triumph Over Death and the Grave

   I Corinthians 15:55, 56, 57

   O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting
   of death is sin: and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to
   God, who gives us the victory

   through our Lord Jesus Christ.

   T he Christian soldier may with the greatest propriety, be said to war
   a good warfare (I Timothy 1:18) . He is engaged in a good cause. He
   fights under the eye of the Captain of his salvation. Though he be weak
   in himself, and though his enemies are many and mighty, he may do that
   which in other soldiers would be presumption, and has often been the
   cause of a defeat; he may triumph, while he is in the heat of battle,
   and assure himself of victory before the conflict is actually decided.
   For the Lord, his great Commander, fights for him, goes before him, and
   treads his enemies under His feet. Such a persuasion, when solidly
   grounded upon the promises and engagement of a faithful unchangeable
   God, is sufficient, it should seem, to make a coward bold. True
   Christians are not cowards; yet, when they compare themselves with
   their adversaries, they see much reason for fear and suspicion on their
   own parts; but when they look to their Saviour they are enlightened,
   strengthened, and comforted. They consider who He is, what He has done;
   that the battle is not so much theirs, as His; that He is their
   strength, and their shield, and that His honour is concerned in the
   event of the war. Thus out of weakness they are made strong; and
   however pressed and opposed, they can say, Nay, in all these things, we
   are more than conquerors, through Him that loved us! (Romans 8:37) .
   The whole power of the opposition against them is summed up in the
   words sin' and death.' But these enemies are already weakened and
   disarmed. It is sin that furnished death with his sting; a sting
   sharpened and strengthened by the law. But Jesus, by His obedience unto
   death, has made an end of sin, and has so fulfilled and satisfied the
   law on their behalf, that death is deprived of its sting, and can no
   longer hurt them. They may, therefore, meet it with confidence, and
   say, Blessed be God, who gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
   Christ.'

   We have here two unspeakably different views to take of the same
   subject: Death armed with its formidable sting ; and Death rendered
   harmless, and its aspects softened, by the removal of the sting.

   I.

   The first is a very awful subject. I entreat your attention. I am not
   now about to speak upon a point of speculation. It is a personal, a
   home concern to us all. For we must all die. But should any of you
   feel, not only the stroke, but the sting of death when you leave this
   world, it were better for you that you had never been born.

   The love of life, and consequently a reluctance to that dissolution of
   the intimate union between soul and body, which we call death, seems
   natural to man. But if there was no hereafter, no state of judgment and
   retribution to be expected; if there was no consciousness of guilt, no
   foreboding of consequences upon the mind; if we only considered death
   as inevitable, and had no apprehensions beyond it, death would be
   divested of its principal terrors. We see that when conscience is
   stupefied, or when the mind is poisoned with infidelity, many people,
   notwithstanding the natural love of life, are so disgusted with its
   disappointments, that a fit of impatience, or the dread of contempt,
   often prevail on them to rush upon death by an act of their own will,
   or to hazard it in a duel rather than be suspected of wanting, what
   they account, spirit. But death has a sting, though they perceive it
   not till they feel it --till they are stung by it past recovery.

   But usually, and where the heart is not quite hardened, men are
   unwilling and afraid to die. They have some apprehension of the sting.
   Death can sting at a distance. How often, and how greatly, does the
   fear of death poison and embitter all the comforts of life, even in the
   time of health! Perhaps, some of you well know this to be true. But in
   health, people can, in some measure, run away from themselves, if I may
   so speak. They fly to business, company, and amusements, to hide
   themselves from their own reflections. Their fears are transient,
   occasional, and partial; they would tremble indeed, if they knew all;
   or if they were steadfastly and deliberately to contemplate what they
   do know. How sin is the sting of death is best discovered when
   conscience is alarmed in a time of sickness; when the things of the
   world can no longer amuse, and death is approaching with hasty strides.
   These scenes are mostly kept secret. And, very often, they are not
   understood by those who are spectators of them. Perhaps the unhappy
   terrified sinner is considered as delirious,' because the sting of
   death in his conscience extorts from him such confessions and
   complaints as he never made before. What was once slighted as a fable,
   is now seen and felt as a reality. Such cases, I am afraid, are more
   frequent than we are in general aware of. But they are suppressed,
   ascribed to the violence of the fever, and forgotten as soon as
   possible. Yet they do sometimes transpire. I believe there is no reason
   to doubt the truth of what we have heard of one who, in the horrors of
   despair, vainly offered his physicians many thousand pounds [dollars]
   to prolong his life but a single day. The relation is in print [the
   story is told] of another, who, pointing to the fire in his chamber
   said, if he were only to lie twenty thousand years in such a fire, he
   should esteem it a mercy, compared with what he felt, and with what he
   saw awaiting him. It is not always thus. Many persons die, insensible
   as they lived, and can, perhaps, trifle and jest in their last moments.
   But the Scripture assures us, that when they who die in their sins
   breathe their last in this world, they open their eyes in the other
   world, in torments. For the sting of death, the desert [the merited
   punishment] of sins, unless timely removed by faith in Jesus, will fill
   the soul with anguish forever. It derives a strength, an efficacy, and
   a continuance from the law.

   This law, which gives strength to sin, and sharpens the sting of death,
   is the law of our creation, as connected with the penalty, which God
   has annexed to the breach of it. Our relation to God, as we are His
   creatures, requires us, according to the very nature of things,
   supremely to love, serve, trust, and obey Him who made us, and in whom
   we live, and breathe, and have our being (Acts 17:28) . And our
   revolting from Him, and living to ourselves in opposition to His will,
   is such an affront to His wisdom, power, authority, and goodness, as
   must necessarily involve misery in the very idea of it; if His
   perfections, the capacity of our souls, and our absolute dependence
   upon Him, be attended to. And they must be attended to, sooner or
   later. Though He keep long silence, and the sinner presumes upon His
   patience, and thinks Him such a one as himself, He will at length
   reprove him (Psalm 50:21) , and set his sins in order before him, in
   contrast with the demands of His law. The nature, authority, extent,
   and sanction of this law, all combine to give efficacy to the sting of
   death.

   (1.)

   The law, to which our tempers and conduct ought to be conformed, is not
   an arbitrary appointment; but necessarily results from our state as
   creatures, and the capacities and powers we have received from our
   Creator. It is, therefore, holy, wise, and good; indispensable, and
   unchangeable. To love God with all our heart and strength, to depend
   upon Him, to conform to every intimation of His will, was the duty of
   man from the first moment of his existence; was the law of his nature,
   written originally in his heart. The republication of it, as it stands
   in the Bible, by precepts and prohibitions, would not have been
   necessary, had he continued in that state of rectitude in which he was
   created. It became necessary, after his fall, to restrain him from
   evil, and to convince him of sin; but could not properly increase his
   primitive obligation to obedience.

   (2.)

   We are bound to the observance of this law by the highest authority It
   is the law of God, our Maker, Preserver, and Benefactor, who has every
   conceivable right to govern us. His eye is always upon us, and we are
   surrounded by His power, so that we can neither avoid His notice, nor
   escape His hand. Men are usually tenacious of their authority; they
   seldom allow their dependents to dispute or disobey their commands with
   impunity. It is expected that a son should honour his father, and a
   servant his master (Malachi 1:6) . And when men have power to execute
   the dictates of their pride, they frequently punish disobedience with
   death. But how will these haughty worms, who trample upon their
   fellow-worms, and think they have a right to the most implicit
   obedience from their inferiors; how will they tremble when they shall
   appear before God, who is no respecter of persons, to answer for their
   contempt of the authority of the sovereign Lawgiver who alone is able
   to save or to destroy? That we ought to obey God rather than man (Acts
   5:29) will, perhaps, be allowed as a speculative truth; but whoever
   will uniformly make it the rule of his practice, must expect, upon many
   occasions, to be deemed a fool or a madman by the world around him. But
   sovereignty, majesty, authority, and power, belong to God. He is the
   Governor of the universe, and His throne is established in
   righteousness. He is long-suffering and waits to be gracious, but He
   will not forego His right. Sin is the sting of death, indeed, when the
   authority of Him against whom it was committed is perceived by the
   conscience.

   (3.)

   The extent of the law adds to the strength by which sin acts as the
   sting of death. Human laws can only take cognizance of words and
   actions. But the law of God reaches to the thoughts and inward recesses
   of the heart. It condemns what is most specious [deceptively
   attractive] and most approved amongst men, if not proceeding from a
   right intention, and directed to the right end, which can be no other
   than the will and glory of Him who made us. It condemns the sinner not
   only for the evil which he has actually committed, but for every sinful
   purpose formed in his heart, and which was only rendered abortive for
   want of opportunity (Matthew 5:28) . It likewise takes exact notice of
   every aggravation of sin arising from circumstances, from the abuse of
   superior light and advantages, and from the long train of consequences,
   increasing in proportion to the influence, which the rank, wealth, or
   extensive connections of the offender, give to his example.

   (4.)

   The sanction of the law which thus strengthens the malignity of sin, is
   the very point , if I may so express myself, of the sting' of death.
   This is, the displeasure of the Almighty. His holy, inflexible love of
   order, will exclude those who violate it from His favour. They must be
   miserable, unless they are reconciled, and renewed by the grace of the
   Gospel. They must be separated from Him, and they cannot be happy
   without Him. They are not so, even in this world, which they love. How
   miserable then must they be, when, torn from all their attachments,
   pleasures, and possessions, having no longer anything to divert them
   from a fixed attention to their true state, they shall be made keenly
   sensible of what is implied in that sentence, Depart from me, ye
   accursed, into devouring fire. We cannot now conceive what it will be
   to lose the only good which can satisfy a soul. To be shut out from
   God, whose favour is life, and in whose presence there is fulness of
   joy; and to be shut up where neither peace nor hope can enter. The
   images of fire unquenchable and a never dying worm, are but faint
   emblems of that despair and remorse which will sting the sinful soul in
   a future state. This is the second death. This is eternal death. For
   the wicked and all they who forget God, when thrust into hell, will
   forever desire to die, and death will forever flee from them
   (Revelation 9:6)

   II.

   Let us turn our thoughts to a more pleasing theme, and attempt to take
   a view of death as softened into a privilege, by Him who has brought
   life and immortality to light. Jesus died. His death was penal: He died
   for sin, though not for His own, and therefore suffered the penalty due
   to sin, the curse of the broken law. The torment and shame of His
   crucifixion were preceded and accompanied by unknown agonies and
   conflicts, which caused Him to sweat blood, and to utter strong cries
   and groans. Death stung Him to the heart; but, (as it is said of the
   enraged bee) he lost his sting. The law having been honoured and sin
   expiated, by the obedience and sufferings of the Son of God for us, and
   in our nature, death has no longer power to sting those who believe in
   Him. They do not properly die,' they fall asleep' in Jesus (Acts 7:60 ;
   I Thessalonians 4:15) . To them this last enemy acts a friendly part.
   He is sent to put an end to all their sorrows, and to introduce them
   into a state of endless life and joy.

   (1.)

   Dying believers can sing this song before their departure out of the
   world. We expect it when we are called to attend them in their last
   hours; and if their illness leaves them in possession of the faculties
   and speech, we are seldom disappointed. Yet, I believe a full knowledge
   of this subject cannot be collected from what we observe of others, or
   hear from them, when they are near death. We must be in similar
   circumstances ourselves before we can see as they see, or possess the
   ideas which they endeavour to describe, and which seem too great for
   the language of mortals to convey.

   We know, by the evidence of undeniable testimony, that many faithful
   servants of God, when called to suffer for His sake, have not only been
   supported, but comforted and enabled to rejoice under the severest
   tortures, and even in the midst of the flames. We suppose, I think with
   reason, that such communications of light and power as raise a person,
   in such situations, above the ordinary feelings of humanity, must,
   either in kind or degree, be superior to what is usually enjoyed by
   Christians in the smoother walks of prosperity and outward peace. God,
   who is all-sufficient, and always near, has promised to give His people
   strength according to their day, and in the time of trouble they are
   not disappointed. A measure of the like extraordinary discoveries and
   supports is often vouchsafed [graciously given] to dying believers, and
   thus the gloom, which might otherwise hang over their dying hours, is
   dispelled; and while they contemplate the approach of death, a new
   world opens upon them. Even while they are yet upon earth, they stand
   upon the threshold of heaven. It seems, in many cases, as if the
   weakness of the bodily frame gave occasion to the awakening of some
   faculty, till then dormant in the soul; by which invisibles are not
   only believed, but seen, and unutterables are heard and understood.

   The soul's dark cottage tatter'd and decay'd,

   Lets in new light, through chinks --

   Instances are frequent of those who are thus blessed when they die in
   the Lord; and it does not appear that old age, or great knowledge, or
   long experience, give any considerable advantage in a dying hour; for
   when the heart is truly humbled for sin, and the hope solidly fixed
   upon the Saviour, persons of weak capacities and small attainments,
   yea, novices and children, are enabled to meet death with equal
   fortitude and triumph. And often the present comforts they feel, and
   their lively expectations of approaching glory, inspire them with a
   dignity of sentiment and expression far beyond what could be expected
   from them; and, perhaps, their deportment, upon the whole, is no less
   animating and encouraging than that of the most established, and best
   informed believers. Thus out of the mouths of babes and sucklings the
   Lord ordains strength, and perfects His praise (Psalm 8:2) . In a few
   hours, under the influence of His immediate teaching, they often learn
   more of the certainty and importance of divine things, than can be
   derived from the ordinary methods of instruction, in the course of many
   years. With admiration we hear them declare, in the midst of agonies
   and outward distress, that they are truly happy and that they never
   knew pleasure in their happiest days of health, equal to what they
   enjoy when flesh and heart are fainting. For death has lost its sting,
   as to them; and while they are able to speak, they continue ascribing
   praise to Him, who has given them the victory, through our Lord Jesus
   Christ. Every word in this doxology is emphatic.

   First, Thanks be to God. This blessedness is all His work. The means
   are of His gracious appointment. The application is by His gracious
   power. He gave His Son for them, He sent His Gospel to them. It was the
   agency of His Spirit that made them a willing people. The word of
   promise, which is the ground of their hope, was of His gratuitous
   providing, and it was He who constrained and enabled them to trust in
   it (Psalm 119:49)

   Secondly, Who gives us the victory . This is victory indeed: for it is
   over the last enemy; and after the last enemy is vanquished, there can
   be no more conflicts. In this sense, believers are more than
   conquerors. In other wars, they who have conquered once and again, may
   have been finally defeated; or they may have died (like our long
   lamented ^* General Wolfe) upon the field of battle, and have left the
   fruits of their victory to be enjoyed by others. But the Christian
   soldier, though he may occasionally be a loser in a skirmish, is sure
   to conquer in the last great deciding battle; and when, to an eye of
   sense, he seems to fall, he is instantly translated to receive the
   plaudit of his Commander, and the crown of life which He has prepared
   for them that love Him.

   ^* General James Wolfe (1727 - 1759) , commander of the British army;
   victorious over the French in Quebec, Canada in 1759. He died of wounds
   received in the battle of the Plains of Abraham.

   Thirdly, This victory is through our Lord Jesus Christ. They gained it
   not by their own sword, neither was it their own arm that saved them
   (Psalm 44:3) . He died to deliver them who would otherwise, through
   fear of death, have been always subject to bondage. And it is He who
   teaches their hands to war, and their fingers to fight, and covers
   their heads in the day of battle. Therefore they gladly say, Not unto
   us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name, be the glory and the praise
   (Psalm 115:1) . And this consideration enhances their pleasure; for
   because they love Him above all, they rejoice not only in the victory
   they obtain, but in the thought that they are indebted to Him for it.
   For were it possible there could be several methods of salvation, and
   they were left to their own choice, they would most gladly and
   deliberately choose that method, which should bring them under the
   greatest obligations to Him.

   (2.)

   This triumphant song will be sung to the highest advantage when the
   whole body of the redeemed shall be collected together to sing it with
   one heart and voice, at the great resurrection day. Lot was undoubtedly
   thankful, when he was snatched from the impending destruction of Sodom.
   Yet, his lingering showed that he had but an imperfect sense of the
   greatness of the mercy afforded him (Genesis 19:16) His feelings were
   probably stronger afterwards, when he stood in safety upon the
   mountain, and actually saw the smoke rising, like the smoke of a
   furnace, from the place where he had lately dwelt. At present, we have
   but very faint ideas of the misery from which we are delivered, of the
   happiness reserved in heaven for us, or the sufferings of the Redeemer;
   but if we attain to the heavenly Zion, and see from thence the smoke of
   that bottomless pit, which might justly have been our everlasting
   abode; we shall then more fully understand what we are delivered from,
   the means of our deliverance, and the riches of the inheritance of the
   saints in light. And then we shall sing, in more exalted strains than
   we can at present even conceive of, Thanks be to God who has given us
   the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLV.

   Divine Support and Protection

   Romans 8:31

   [What shall we say then to these things?]

   If God be for us, who can be against us?

   T he passions of joy or grief, of admiration or gratitude, are moderate
   when we are able to find words which fully describe their emotions.
   When they rise very high, language is too faint to express them; and
   the person is either lost in silence, or feels something which, after
   his most laboured efforts, is too big for utterance. We may often
   observe the Apostle Paul under this difficulty, when attempting to
   excite in others such sensations as filled his own heart, while
   contemplating the glories and blessings of the Gospel. Little verbal
   critics, who are not animated by his fervour, are incapable of entering
   into the spirit of his writings. They coldly examine them by the
   strictness of grammatical rules, and think themselves warranted to
   charge him with solecisms [ungrammatical usages] and improprieties of
   speech. For it must be allowed that he sometimes departs from the usual
   forms of expression; invents new words, or at least compounds words for
   his own use, and heaps one hyperbole [figure of speech] upon another.
   But there is a beautiful energy in his manner far superior to the
   frigid exactness of grammarians, though the taste of a mere grammarian
   is unable to admire or relish it. When he is stating the advantage of
   being with Christ as beyond anything that can be enjoyed in the present
   life, he is not content with saying, as his expression is rendered in
   our version, It is far better' (Philippians 1:23) . In the Greek,
   another word of comparison is added, which, if our language would bear
   the literal translation, would be, Far more better,' or, Much more
   better.' And when he would describe the low opinion he had of himself,
   great as his attainments were in our view, he thinks it not sufficient
   to style himself, The least of all saints,' but, less than the least'
   (Ephesians 3:8) . Such phrases do not imply that he was ignorant of the
   rules of good writing, but they strongly intimate the fulness of his
   heart. In the course of the chapter before us, having taken a rapid
   survey of the work of grace, carried on by successive steps in the
   hearts of believers, till at length consummated in glory; in this
   verse, instead of studying for words answerable to his views, he seems
   to come to a full stop, as sensible that the strongest expressions he
   could use would be too faint. He makes an abrupt transition from
   describing, to admiring. He has said much, but not enough. And
   therefore sums up all with, What shall we say to these things ?' Surely
   they who can read what he could not write, with the utmost coolness and
   indifference, without rapture and astonishment, do not take his words
   in his sense. If the Apostle's phraseology is now become obsolete, and
   sounds uncouth in the ears of too many who would be thought Christians,
   is there not too much reason to fear that they are Christians only in
   name?

   Though this short lively question is omitted in the musical composition
   [of the Messiah Oratorio ], I am not willing to leave it out. It stands
   well as a sequel to what we have lately considered. The sting of death
   is taken away. Death itself is swallowed up in victory. Sinners who
   were once burdened with guilt and exposed to condemnation, obtain a
   right to sing, Thanks be to God, who gives us the victory, through our
   Lord Jesus Christ -- What shall we say to these things?'

   It stands well likewise, as introducing the following question. If God
   be for us ,' if His promises, His power, His wisdom, and His love, be
   all engaged on our behalf, who can be against us ?' What shall we see,
   or can we, or need we say more than this? What cause can we have for
   fear? or our enemies for triumph, if God be for us?

   We may consider:

   I. What is implied in the supposition?

   II. The meaning of the inference.

   I.

   The form of the question is hypothetical If the assumption be right,
   that God is for us; the conclusion, that none can be effectually
   against us, is infallibly sure. Many serious persons will allow, that
   if God be indeed for them, all must, and will be well, in the end. But
   they hesitate at the if' and are ready to ask, How shall I know that
   God is for me? I would offer you a few considerations towards the
   determining of this point, in the first place.

   Sin has made an awful breach and separation between God and mankind.
   They are alienated in their minds from Him, and He is justly displeased
   with them. The intercourse and communion with God, which constitute the
   honour and happiness of the human nature, were no longer either
   afforded or desired, when man rebelled against his Maker; except to the
   few who understood and embraced His gracious purpose of reconciliation,
   the first intimation of which, was revealed in the promise of the seed
   of the woman, who should bruise the serpent's head (Genesis 3:15) The
   clear and full discovery of this reconciliation is made known to us by
   the Gospel. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto Himself (II
   Corinthians 5:19) God is already reconciled in this sense, that having
   provided and accepted a satisfaction to His law and justice, He can
   now, in a way worthy of Himself, receive and pardon the returning
   sinner. And He accompanies the word of His grace with the power of His
   Holy Spirit, to make sinners willing to be reconciled to Him. If we be
   for God, He is assuredly for us. If we seek Him, He has been with us
   beforehand; for, in the first instance, He is always found of those who
   sought Him not (Isaiah 65:1) If we love Him, it is because He first
   loved us. True believers walk with God. But two cannot walk together,
   with confidence and comfort, unless they be agreed (Amos 3:3) . This
   agreement is chiefly with respect to those particulars, proposed by the
   Lord God in His Word, and to which the believing sinner cheerfully and
   thankfully accedes.

   (1.)

   In the ground of the agreement; this is MESSIAH , the Mediator between
   God and man. When He entered upon His office, a voice from heaven
   commended Him to sinners, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
   pleased (Matthew 3:17) . And they who are enlightened to behold the
   glory of God in His person and engagement, accept Him as the beloved
   Saviour, in whom and with whom they are well pleased. Without this
   acceptance of the Mediator, there can be no agreement. Jesus is the
   only door, the only way of a sinner's access to the knowledge and
   favour of God. This is the precious and sure foundation which He has
   laid in Zion (I Peter 2:6) ; and to presume to build our hope upon any
   other, is to build upon a quicksand. In this point, reason, in its
   present distempered state, would lead us, if followed, directly
   contrary to the simplicity of faith. Reason suggests, that if we have
   acted wrong, we must repent and amend, and what can we do more? But the
   law against which we have sinned makes no provision for repentance. Nor
   is such a repentance, as includes a change of heart (and nothing short
   of this deserves the name) in our own power. Repentance unto life (Acts
   11:18) , is the gift of God; and Jesus who is exalted to be a Prince
   and a Saviour (Acts 5:31) , bestows it upon those who acknowledge Him,
   and implore it of Him. But God will only treat with us as those who are
   condemned already, who have nothing but sin, and deserve nothing but
   misery. When we feel this to be our proper state, we are referred to
   Jesus, in whom God is well pleased; and for whose sake sins are
   pardoned, and sinners accepted and justified, without condition and
   without exception. And then likewise, we begin to see the necessity,
   propriety and sufficiency of this appointment. Herein all who are
   taught of God are of one mind. However they may differ in some
   respects, they agree in cordially [sincerely] receiving Christ Jesus
   the Lord' (Colossians 2:6) , as He is made of God for us, wisdom,
   righteousness, and salvation.'

   (2.)

   They agree with God in the great design of the Gospel, which is to
   purify unto Himself a peculiar people who, being delivered from their
   fears and their enemies, shall serve Him with an unreserved and
   persevering obedience (Luke 1:74, 75) . A deliverance from the power of
   sin and Satan, a devotedness to God, and a conformity to the mind and
   pattern of His dear Son, are included by every true believer in the
   idea of salvation. He knows that he can be happy in no other way. This
   is a turning point. There are convictions of sin excited by a dread of
   punishment which, though distressing to the conscience, leave the heart
   and affections unchanged. They who are thus impressed, if no farther,
   would be satisfied with an assurance of pardon. But the grace of God
   which brings salvation (Titus 2:11, 12) teaches us to renounce, to
   abhor all ungodliness in the present world; to give ourselves unto Him
   who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity; and
   to walk worthy of God who calls us to His Kingdom and glory (I Thess.
   2:12) This is the will of God; even our sanctification. And this is the
   desire of His people, that they may be sanctified wholly; that their
   whole persons, spirit, soul and body may be preserved blameless; that
   they may be filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus
   Christ; that they may walk as the sons of God, without rebuke, and
   shine as lights in the world (Philippians 2:15) . Though their
   attainments are imperfect, in their judgment and desires they are fully
   agreed with God, as to their aim and design.

   (3.)

   They are agreed with Him likewise as to the ultimate great end, the
   final cause of the redemption, which is, the praise of the glory of His
   grace' (Ephesians 1:6) . That the loftiness, high looks, and proud
   pretences of men may be abased, and the Lord alone may be exalted; and
   that he who glories, may glory only in the Lord (I Corinthians 1:31) .
   Salvation is of the Lord, in every sense; the plan, the price, the
   power, the application, the consummation. He is the Alpha and the
   Omega, the author and the object of it. The praise therefore is wholly
   due to Him, and He claims it. To this claim His people fully consent.
   It is the desire of their souls that His name, which alone is
   excellent, may alone be extolled. And with one heart and voice they
   say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thee, be all the glory,
   and all the praise! (Psalm 115:1)

   If we truly understand and approve these things, then we are certainly
   engaged for God, and of course, His is for us. For He alone could
   either enable us to see them in their true light, or incline our hearts
   to embrace them. Who then can be against us?

   II.

   We are not to understand the question, Who can be against us?' as
   designed to encourage us to expect that they who have the Lord on their
   side will meet with no opposition; but that all opposition against them
   will be in vain.

   (1.)

   They whom God is for, will, on that very account, have many opposers.

   First, the men of the world. Our Lord expressly teaches us to expect
   this: If you were of the world, the world would love its own. But
   because you are not of the world, therefore the world hates you (John
   15:19) And His Apostle: Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you
   (I John 3:14) . Till we declare for Him the world will bear with us,
   but no longer: as the Gibeonites were in a state of honour and
   friendship with the neighbouring cities till they submitted to Joshua
   (Joshua 10:1-4) ; but when they obtained peace from him, they were
   immediately involved in war with their former friends. While Saul
   persecuted the Church the world smiled upon him, and he seemed to be,
   as we say, in the way of preferment. But when he yielded himself to the
   service of Christ, and his defection from the common cause became
   generally known, bonds and afflictions awaited him in every place; and
   they who before had employed and caressed him, sought his life. I do
   not mean to sound a trumpet of defiance. I believe that young converts,
   by their warm, but injudicious zeal, often more than is necessary,
   provoke the spirit of the world, and thereby increase their own
   difficulties. The Gospel, when rightly understood, inspires a spirit of
   benevolence and directs to a conduct which is suited to conciliate
   goodwill and esteem. And when the Apostle exhorts us, If it be
   possible, and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men
   (Romans 12:18) , he gives us hope that much may be done to soften
   prejudices, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, and to make
   them at least ashamed, by a patient perseverance in well-doing. A
   consistent Christian, whose integrity, humility and philanthropy mark
   his character and adorn his profession, will, in time, command respect;
   but his attachment to unfashionable truths, and his separation from the
   maxims and pursuits of the many, will render him, in their eyes,
   singular and precise, weak and enthusiastic. If they say, "He is a good
   sort of man, but has some strange peculiarities," it is the most
   favourable judgment he can hope for; and from some persons, and at some
   times, he will meet with tokens of a settled dislike. For though a
   religious character may be formed, which even the world will approve,
   yet all who will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution
   (II Timothy 3:12) . They walk in the midst of observers who watch for
   their halting, who lay snares for their feet, and will endeavour to
   bribe or intimidate them to forsake the path of duty. It is difficult
   to stem the torrent, or to avoid the infection of the world; and to
   live superior to the fear of man, as becomes us if we know whose we
   are, and whom we serve. But though difficult, it is practicable and
   attainable, and actually attained by believers; for this is the victory
   that overcomes the world, even our faith (I John 5:4)

   Secondly, the powers of darkness. Ordinarily, Satan will not trouble
   while he bears rule. He is indeed an enemy to his own servants, and
   seeks their destruction, both soul and body, by pushing them on in sin,
   which, if persisted in, will prove their ruin; but while they make no
   resistance, he gives them no disturbance. It is otherwise with those
   whom the Lord has freed from his bondage. He will pursue them, like a
   lion seeking his prey (I Peter 5:8) , and lie in wait for them like a
   serpent in the path. This is one cause of the world's hatred; for the
   Scripture styles him the god of this world' (II Corinthians 4:4) , and
   he sets all that he can influence, tongues, and pens, and swords,
   against those who are on the Lord's side. And they also fight against
   him. The former, without the latter, is not conclusive. A mere outward
   profession of religion may excite opposition, and mere pretenders may
   take pleasure in it for a time, if it does not come too close. It may
   feed their vanity, and give them a sort of consequence, by having
   sufferings to talk of. But I would entreat my hearers to seriously
   examine, Is your heart really set against sin, which is the strength of
   Satan's kingdom? Are you against his will and interest in the world?
   Have you renounced his service? If so, fear not. God is for you, and
   none can harm you. For,

   (2.)

   No opposition can prevail against us, if God be for us. It is
   impossible to deny, or even to doubt this truth, upon the principles of
   reason. For who, or what, can injure those who are under the protection
   of Omnipotence? And yet it is not always easy to maintain the
   persuasion of it in the mind, and to abide in the exercise of faith,
   when, to an eye of sense, all things seem against us. But though we
   believe not, he continues faithful, and will not forsake those whom He
   once enables to put their trust in Him. Job was a faithful and approved
   servant of God, yet, for a season, his trials were great, and his
   confidence was sometimes shaken. But he was supported, and at length
   delivered. There are many instances recorded in Scripture to confirm
   our faith, and to teach us that God manifests Himself to be for His
   people, and, in different ways, renders them superior to all their
   difficulties and enemies.

   At one time, He prevents the threatened danger. They only see it, or
   expect it, for He is better to them than their apprehensions and fears.
   Thus, when Sennacherib was furious against Jerusalem, and supposed he
   could easily prevail, he was not suffered [allowed] to come near it
   (Isaiah 37:33) . When he thought to destroy it, he felt a hook and
   bridle which he could not resist, and was compelled to retire
   disappointed and ashamed.

   At another time the enemies go a step farther. His people are brought
   into trouble, but God is with them, and they escape unhurt. So Daniel:
   though he was cast into the den of lions, he received no more harm from
   them than if he had been among a flock of sheep (Daniel 6:23) . The
   Lord permitted three of His servants to be thrown into a furnace of
   fire, but He restrained the violence of the flames, so that not even a
   hair of their heads we singed (Daniel 3:27)

   The most that opposers can do is to kill the body (Luke 12:4) . If God
   permits His people to be thus treated, still they are not forsaken.
   Their death is precious in His sight (Psalm 116:15) . They who die in
   the Lord, are blessed. They are highly honoured, who are called and
   enabled to die for Him. If He is pleased to comfort them with His
   presence, and then to take them home to Himself, they can desire no
   more. Stephen, though apparently given up to the power of his
   adversaries, and cruelly stoned to death, was no less happy than those
   who die in composure upon their beds, with their friends around them.
   Nor was he less composed. For the heavens were opened to him, and he
   saw his Saviour in glory, approving his fidelity, and ready to receive
   his spirit (Acts 7:56-60)

   In brief, whatever men or devils may attempt against us, there are
   three things, which, if we are true believers, they cannot do. They may
   be helpful to wean us from the world; they may add earnestness to our
   prayers; they may press us to greater watchfulness and dependence; they
   may afford fair occasions of evidencing our sincerity, the goodness of
   our cause, and the power of that God who is for us. -- Such are the
   benefits, that the Lord teaches His people to derive from their
   sufferings, for He will not let them suffer, or be oppressed in vain.
   But no enemy can deprive us of the love with which God favours us, or
   the grace which He has given us, or the glory which He has prepared for
   us. Now what shall we say to these things?

   Alas! there are too many that say, at least in their hearts (for their
   conduct betrays their secret thoughts), we care but little about them.
   If they were to speak out, they might adopt the language of the
   rebellious Jews to the prophet, As to the word which thou hast spoken
   to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee; but will
   certainly do whatever thing goes forth out of our own mouth' (Jeremiah
   44:16, 17) . And there are others who plainly say, Let us then continue
   in sin, that grace may abound .' They do not so expressly reject the
   Gospel, as to take encouragement from it to go on in their wickedness.
   The case of the former is very dangerous, that of the latter is still
   worse. But grace, though long slighted, though often abused, is once
   more proclaimed in your hearing. The Lord forbid that you should perish
   with the sound of salvation in your ears!

   At present, and while you persist in your impenitence and unbelief, I
   may reverse the words of my text. Oh! consider, I beseech you, before
   it be too late: If God be against you, who can be for you?' Will your
   companions comfort you in a dying hour? Will your riches profit you in
   the day of wrath? Will the recollection of your sinful pleasures, give
   you confidence to stand before this great and glorious Lord God, when
   you shall be summoned to appear at His tribunal? May you be timely
   wise, and flee for refuge to the hope set before you!

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLVI.

   Accusers Challenged

   Romans 8:33

   Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?

   It is God who justifies.

   T hough the collating of manuscripts and various readings has
   undoubtedly been of use in rectifying some mistakes which, through the
   inadvertency of transcribers, had crept into different copies of the
   New Testament, yet such supposed corrections of the text ought to be
   admitted with caution, and not unless supported by strong reasons and
   authorities. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God: and
   they who thankfully receive it as His Book, will not trifle with it by
   substituting bold conjectural alterations, which, though they may deem
   them to be amendments, may possibly disguise or alter the genuine sense
   of the passage. Some fancied emendations [corrections] might be pointed
   out, suggested by very learned men, which do not seem to afford so
   strong a proof of the sound judgment of the proposers, as of their
   vanity and rashness. Let the learned men be as ingenious as they please
   in correcting and amending the text of ^* Horace or ^* Virgil, for it
   is of little importance to us whether their criticisms be well founded
   or not; but let them treat the pages of divine revelation with
   reverence. ^* Horace - Roman poet (65 BC - 8 BC) ; ^* Virgil - Roman
   poet (70BC - 19BC)

   But the pointing [punctuation] of the New Testament, though it has a
   considerable influence upon the sense, is of inferior authority. It is
   a human invention; very helpful, and for the most part, I suppose, well
   executed. But in some places it may admit of [be in need of] real
   amendment. The most ancient manuscripts are without points [punctuation
   marks], and some of them are even without a distinction of the words.
   With the pointing [punctuation], therefore, we may take more liberty
   than with the text; though even this liberty should be used soberly. A
   change in the pointing [punctuation] of this verse, and the following,
   will not alter the received sense; but, as some critics judge, will
   make it more striking and emphatical. If two clauses should be read
   with an interrogation, instead of a period, the Apostle's triumphant
   challenge may be expressed in the following brief paraphrase:

   Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? Shall God Himself?
   So far from it, it is He who justifies. Who is he that condemns? Shall
   Christ? Nay, He loves them and accepts them. Shall He who died for
   them, yea rather who is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
   God, on their behalf, who also makes intercession for them? There is
   not the least ground to fear, that He will condemn them, who died to
   deliver them from condemnation. Nor can any charge of their enemies
   prevail to the condemnation of those, whom God is pleased to justify,
   and for whom Christ died, and now intercedes before the throne.'

   The death, the resurrection, and ascension of MESSIAH , we have already
   considered. I shall speak only to two points, from this verse.

   I. The title here given to believers, God's elect.

   II. Their great privilege, they are justified . It is God who justifies
   them.

   I.

   The persons who will be finally justified by God, are here styled, His
   elect .' Very near and strong is the connection between peace and
   truth. Yet a mistaken zeal for the truth has produced many
   controversies, which have hurt the peace of the people of God among
   themselves; and at the time, have exposed them to the scorn and
   derision of the world. On the other hand, a pretended, or improper
   regard for peace, has often been prejudicial to the truth. But that
   peace which is procured at the expense of truth, is too dearly
   purchased. Every branch of doctrine, belonging to the faith once
   delivered to the saints, is not equally plain to every believer. Some
   of these doctrines, the Apostle compares to milk, the proper and
   necessary food for babes (Hebrews 5:13, 14) ; others, to strong meat,
   adapted to a more advanced state in the spiritual life, when experience
   is more enlarged and the judgment more established. The Lord, the great
   Teacher, leads His children on gradually, from the plainer to the more
   difficult truths, as they are able to bear them. But human teachers are
   often too hasty, they do not attend sufficiently to the weakness of
   young converts; but expect them to learn and receive everything at
   once; they are not even content with offering strong meat prematurely
   to babes, but force upon them the bones of subtleties, distinctions,
   and disputations. But though a judicious minister will endeavour to
   accommodate himself to the state of his hearers, no Gospel truth is to
   be tamely and voluntarily suppressed, from a fear of displeasing men.
   In fact, however, the controversies which have obtained among real
   Christians, have not so much affected the truth as it lies in the
   Scripture, as the different explanations which fallible men of warm
   passions, and too full of their own sense, have given of it. They who
   professedly hold and avow the doctrine of an election of grace,' are
   now called Calvinists; and the name is used, by some persons, as a term
   of reproach. They would insinuate that Calvin invented the doctrine; or
   at least, that he borrowed it from ^* Austin, who, according to them,
   was the first of the Fathers that held it. It is enough for me that I
   find this doctrine in the New Testament. But many things advanced upon
   the subject by later writers, I confess I do not find there. If any
   persons advance harsh assertions, not warranted by the Word of God, I
   am not bound to defend them. But as the doctrine itself is plainly
   taught, both by our Lord and His apostles, and is of great importance,
   when rightly understood, to promote the humiliation, gratitude, and
   comfort of believers, I think it my duty to state it as plainly as I
   can. I shall offer my view of it, in a series of propositions, so
   evidently founded (as I conceive) on acknowledged principles of
   Scripture, that they cannot be easily controverter [disputed] by any
   persons who have a real reverence for the Word of God, and any due
   acquaintance with their own hearts.

   ^* Austin (St. Augustine) - Roman philosopher and theologian (354AD -
   430AD)

   (1.) All mankind are sinners (Romans 3:23) , by nature and practice.
   Their lives are stained with transgressions, their hearts are depraved,
   their minds blinded and alienated from God. So that they are not
   sensible either of their guilt, or their misery; nor so much as
   desirous of returning to God, till He prevents [intercepts] them with
   His mercy, and begins to draw their hearts towards Himself. Were I to
   prove this at large, I might transcribe one half of the Bible. Nay, it
   is fully proved by experience and observation. The heathens felt and
   confessed it. My present subject does not require me to account for it,
   or to reason upon it. That it is so, I appeal to fact.

   (2.)

   The inestimable gift of a Saviour to atone for sin, and to mediate
   between God and man (John 3:16) ; that there might be a way opened for
   the communication of mercy to sinners, without prejudice to the honour
   of the perfections and government of God --this gift was the effect of
   His own rich grace and love (Romans 5:6, 8) , no less unthought of, and
   undesired, than undeserved, by fallen man.

   (3.)

   Wherever this love of God to man is made known by the Gospel, there is
   encouragement, and a command given to all men every where to repent
   (Acts 17:30, 31) . The manifestation of the eternal Word in the human
   nature, and His death upon the cross, are spoken of as the highest
   display of the wisdom and goodness of God. Designed to give us, in one
   and the same transaction, the most affecting sense of the evil of sin,
   and the strongest assurance imaginable, that there is forgiveness with
   God (Romans 3:24, 25)

   (4.)

   Men, while blinded by pride and prejudice, enslaved to sinful passions
   and under the influence of this present evil world, neither can nor
   will receive the truth in the love of it (II Corinthians 4:4; John 6:44
   and verse 40) . They are prepossessed, and pre-engaged. This, at least,
   is evidently the case with many people in this favoured nation, who,
   when the Gospel is proposed to them in the most unexceptional manner,
   not only disregard it, but treat it with a pointed contempt and
   indignation (Luke 4:28, 29 ; Acts 17:18) . Such was its reception at
   the beginning, and we are not to wonder, therefore, that it is so at
   this day.

   (5.)

   As all mankind spring from one stock, there are not two different sorts
   of men by nature; consequently they who receive the Gospel are no
   better in themselves (Ephesians 2:3) than they are who reject it. The
   Apostle, writing to the believers at Corinth, having enumerated a
   catalogue in which he comprises some of the most flagitious [shamefully
   wicked] and infamous characters (I Corinthians 6:9-11) , and allowed to
   be so by the common consent of mankind; adds, Such were some of you.
   Surely it cannot be said, that they who had degraded themselves below
   the brutes, by their abominable practices, were better disposed, than
   others, to receive that Gospel, which is not more distinguished by the
   sublimity [high spiritual and moral worth] of its doctrine, than by the
   purity and holiness of conversation which it enjoins!

   (6.)

   It seems, therefore, at least highly probable, that all men
   universally, if left to themselves, would act as the majority do to
   whom the Word of salvation is sent; that is, they would reject and
   despise it. And it is undeniable that some, who in the day of God's
   power, have cordially [sincerely] received the Gospel, did for a season
   oppose it with no less pertinacity [obstinacy], than any of those who
   have continued to hate and resist it to the end of life. Saul of Tarsus
   was an eminent instance (Acts 9:1) . He did not merely slight the
   doctrine of a crucified Saviour; but, according to his mistaken views,
   thought himself bound in conscience to suppress those who embraced it.
   He breathed out threatening and slaughter and, as he expresses it
   himself, was exceedingly mad against them (Acts 26:11) , and made havoc
   of them. His mind was filled with this bitter and insatiable rage, at
   the moment when the Lord Jesus appeared to him in his way to Damascus.
   Is it possible that a man thus disposed, should suddenly become a
   preacher of the faith with he had long laboured to destroy, if his
   heart and views had not been changed by a supernatural agency? Or that
   the like prejudices in other persons, can be removed in any other
   manner?

   (7.)

   If all men had heard the Gospel in vain, then Christ would have died in
   vain. But this is prevented by the covenanted office and influence of
   the Holy Spirit (John 16:8) , who accompanies the Word with His energy,
   and makes it the power of God to the salvation of those who believe. He
   prepares the minds of sinners, and, as in the case of Lydia (Acts
   16:14) , opens their hearts to understand and receive the truth, in the
   love of it.

   (8.)

   But who will presume to say, that when God was pleased to make a
   proposal of mercy to a race of rebels, He was likewise bound to
   overcome the obstinacy of men, in every case, and to compel them to
   accept it by an act of His invincible power? If He does thus interpose
   in favour of some, it is an act of free mercy, to which they have no
   claim. For if we had a claim, the benefit would be an act of justice,
   rather than mercy. May not the great Sovereign of the world do what He
   will with His own? (Matthew 20:15) . And nothing is more peculiarly and
   eminently His own than His mercy. Yes, we are assured, that He will
   have mercy on whom He will have mercy (Romans 9:18) ; and whom He will,
   He may justly leave to be hardened, in their impenitence and unbelief.
   We have all deserved to be so left; but He, as the potter over the
   clay, has power and right to make a difference, as it seems good in His
   sight. And who will say unto Him, What doest Thou? (Job 9:12)

   (9.)

   When sinners are effectually called by the Gospel, then they are
   visibly chosen out of the world (John 15:19) , in the spirit and
   tempers of which they before lived, disobedient and deceived, even as
   others. Old things pass away, and all things become new (II Corinthians
   5:17) . Their hopes and fears, their companions, their pursuits and
   aims, are all changed. The change in these respects is so evident that
   they are soon noticed and marked, pitied or derided, by those from whom
   they are now separated. And I think they who really experience this
   change, will willingly ascribe it to the grace of God.

   (10.)

   But if they are thus chosen in time,' it follows of course, that they
   were chosen from everlasting.' Both these expressions, when applied to
   this subject, amount to the same thing; and the seeming difference
   between them is chiefly owing to our weakness and ignorance. To the
   infinite and eternal God, our little distinctions of past, present, and
   future, are nothing. We think unworthily of the unchangeable Jehovah,
   and liken Him too much to ourselves, if we suppose that He can form a
   new purpose. If it be His pleasure to convert a sinner today, He had
   the same gracious design in favour of that sinner yesterday, at the day
   of his birth, a thousand years before he was born, and a thousand ages
   (to speak according to our poor conception) before the world began. For
   that mode of duration which we call time,' has no respect to Him who
   inhabits eternity' (Isaiah 57:15)

   With regard to those who reject the declaration of the mercy of God;
   who, though called and invited by the Gospel, and often touched by the
   power of His Holy Spirit, will not come to the Saviour for life, but
   persist in their determination to go on in their sins --their ruin is
   not only unavoidable, but just in the highest degree. And though, like
   the wicked servant in the parable (Matthew 25:24) , they cavil against
   the Lord, their mouths will be stopped (Romans 3:19) when He shall at
   length appear, to plead with them, face to face. Then their
   cobweb-excuses will fail them, and the proper ground of their
   condemnation will be, that when He sent them light, they turned from
   it, and chose darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil
   (John 3:19)

   (11)

   The great privilege of the elect, comprehensive of every blessing, is
   that they are justified ; finally and authoritatively justified, from
   all that can possible be laid to their charge, for it is God Himself
   who justifies them.

   The justification of a sinner before God, by faith in the obedience and
   atonement of Christ, is considered by many persons, in these days of
   refinement, in no better light than as a branch of a scholastic
   theology, which is now exploded as uncouth and obsolete. At the
   Reformation, it was the turning point between the Protestants and
   Papists. Luther deemed it the criterion of a flourishing, or a falling
   Church; that is, he judged that the Church would always be in a
   thriving or a declining state, in proportion as the importance of this
   doctrine was attended to. How important it appeared to our English
   Reformers, many of whom sealed their testimony to it with their blood,
   may be known by the writings of ^* Cranmer, ^* Latimer, ^* Philpot, and
   others; and by the articles of the Church of England, which are still
   of so much authority, by law, that no person can be admitted into holy
   orders amongst us, till he has declared and subscribed his assent to
   them. But I hope never to preach a doctrine to my hearers, which needs
   the names and authority of men, however respectable, for its support.
   Search the Scriptures (John 5:39) , and judge by them of the importance
   of this doctrine. Judge of it by the text now before us. The Apostle
   speaks of it, as sufficient to silence every charge, to free from all
   condemnation, and inseparably connected with eternal life. For those
   whom God justifies He will also glorify (Romans 8:30) . Though volumes
   have been written upon the subject, I think it may be explained in few
   words. Everyone must give an account of himself to God; and the
   judgment will proceed according to the tenor of His holy Word. By the
   law, no flesh can be justified, for all have sinned (Romans 3:19, 20) .
   But they who believe the Gospel will be justified from all things (Acts
   13:39) , for which the law would otherwise condemn them. And, as they,
   who believe not, are condemned already (John 3:18) ; so believers are
   already justified by faith, and have peace with God, through our Lord
   Jesus Christ (Romans 5:1) , in the present life. They plead guilty to
   the charge of the law. But they can likewise plead, that they renounce
   all hope and righteousness in themselves, and upon the warrant of the
   word of promise, put their whole trust in Jesus, as the end of the law
   for righteousness to everyone that believes (Romans 10:4) . And this
   plea is accepted. To him that worketh not, but believeth on Him who
   justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness (Romans
   4:4, 5) , and his sins are no more remembered against him (Hebrews
   8:12)

   ^* Thomas Cranmer (1489 - 1556), Leader of the English Reformation and
   Archbishop of Canterbury ; ^* Hugh Latimer (1487 - 1555), Bishop of
   Worcester, and Chaplain to King Edward VI ;

   ^* John Philpot, Archdeacon of Winchester (1516 - 1555).

   All three of these godly men were martyred - - - burned at the stake.

   This justification, in its own nature, is authoritative, complete, and
   final. It is an act of God's mercy, which, because founded upon the
   mediation of Jesus, may, with no less truth, be styled an act of His
   justice, whereby the believing sinner is delivered from the curse of
   the law, from the guilt and power of sin, and is translated into the
   Kingdom of His dear Son (Colossians 1:13) . It includes the pardon of
   all sin, and admission to the state of a child of God.--It is a passing
   from death unto life (John 5:24) . By faith of the operation of God,
   the sinner once afar off, is brought nigh, is accepted in the Beloved
   and becomes one with Him, as the branch is united to the vine, and the
   members with the Head (John 15:5) . The sanctification of a believer is
   imperfect and gradual, but his justification, in this sense, from the
   moment when he begins to live a life of faith in the Son of God, is
   perfect and incapable of increase. The principle of life in a newborn
   infant, and the privilege dependent upon his birth (if he be the heir
   of a great family), are the same from the first hour, as at any future
   time. He is stronger as he grows up to the stature of a man, but is not
   more alive; he grows up likewise more into the knowledge and enjoyment
   of his privileges, but his right to them admits of no augmentation; for
   he derives it not from his years, or his stature, or his powers, but
   from the relation in which he stands, as a child to his father. Thus it
   is with those who are born from above. They are, immediately, the
   children and heirs of God, though for a time, like minors, while under
   age, they may seem to differ but little from servants (Galatians 4:1,
   2) , and it does not yet appear what they shall be.

   But though justification, in the sight of God, be connected with the
   reality of faith, the comfortable perception of it in our own
   consciences is proportional to the degree of faith. In young converts,
   therefore, it is usually weak. They are well satisfied that Jesus is
   the only Saviour, and they leave no doubt of His ability and
   sufficiency in that character, in favour of those who put their trust
   in Him. But they are suspicious and jealous of themselves; they are
   apprehensive of something singular in their own case, which may justly
   exclude them from His mercy; or they fear that they do not believe
   aright. But the weakest believer is a child of God; and true faith,
   though at first like a grain of mustard-seed, is interested in [is
   beneficiary of] all the promises of the Gospel. If it be true, it will
   grow (Mark 4:26) , it will attain to a more simple dependence upon its
   great object, and will work its way through a thousand doubts and fears
   (which, for a season, are not without their use) till at length, the
   weakest Christian becomes strong in faith, strong in the Lord, and is
   enabled to say, I know whom I have believed! (II Timothy 1:12) . Who
   shall lay anything to my charge? Who shall condemn? It is God who
   justifies. It is Christ who died for me and rose again.

   But especially at the great day, the Lord the Judge shall ratify their
   justification publicly before assembled worlds. Then every tongue that
   rises in judgment against them (Isaiah 54:17) shall be put to silence.
   Then Satan will be utterly confounded, and many who despised them on
   earth, will be astonished and say -- These are they whose lives we
   accounted madness, and their end to be without honour! How are they
   numbered among the children of God! (Wisdom 5:4, 5)

   The right knowledge of this doctrine, is a source of abiding joy; it
   likewise animates love, zeal, gratitude, and all the noblest powers of
   the soul, and produces a habit of cheerful and successful obedience to
   the whole will of God. But it may be, and too often is, misunderstood,
   and abused. If you receive it by divine teaching, it will fill you with
   those fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the glory
   and praise of God (Philippians 1:11) . But if you learn it only from
   men and books, if you are content with the notion of it in your head,
   instead of the powerful experience of it in your heart, it will have a
   contrary effect. Such a lifeless form, even of the truth itself will
   probably make you heady and high-minded, censorious of others, trifling
   in your spirit, and unsettled in your conduct. Oh! be afraid of
   resembling the foolish virgins (Matthew 25:1-12) , of having the lamp
   of your profession expire in darkness, for want of the oil of grace.
   Lest when the Bridegroom comes, you should find the door shut against
   you.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLVII.

   The Intercession of Christ

   Romans 8:34

   Who is he that condemneth?

   It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again,

   who is even at the right hand of God,

   who also maketh intercession for us!

   T he Redemption of the soul is precious. Fools make mock of sin
   (Proverbs 14:9) . But they will not think lightly of it, who duly
   consider the majesty, authority, and goodness of Him, against whom it
   is committed; and who are taught, by what God actually has done, what
   sin rendered necessary to be done, before a sinner could have a
   well-grounded hope of forgiveness. For wisdom does nothing in vain. The
   death of the Son of God would have been in vain (Galatians 2:21) if the
   great design in favour of sinful men could have been effected by
   inferior means. But as He, in the office of Mediator, was the hope of
   mankind from the beginning; so the great work He has accomplished and
   the characters He sustains, when made known to the conscience, are, in
   fact, sufficient to relieve in every case, to answer every charge, and
   to satisfy the believer in Jesus, that there is now no condemnation to
   fear. There are many (as we have observed) ready to accuse, but it is
   in vain; the charge may be true, but it is overruled. Who shall dare to
   condemn, if things be as the Apostle states them in this passage?
   Whoever would impeach the hope of a true believer, must prove (if he
   can) that Christ did not die; or that He did not rise from the dead; or
   that He was not admitted into the presence of God on our behalf; or
   that He is unmindful of His promise, to make intercession for all who
   come unto God by Him. For if these points are indubitable and sure, it
   is impossible that the soul, which has trusted in Jesus, and put its
   cause into His hands, can miscarry.

   The word the Apostle uses here, and in Hebrews 7:25 -- seeing He ever
   lives to make intercession, occurs likewise in Acts 25:24, where Festus
   speaks of the process managed by the Jews against Paul; and also Romans
   11:24, of Elijah's making intercession to God against Israel. From
   these passages compared together, we may observe, that the word is to
   be taken in a large sense. He pleas our cause, He manages our concerns,
   He answers our enemies. Who then shall condemn those for whom the Lord
   Jesus thus employs His power and His love? He is our Advocate (I John
   2:1) . He takes upon Him our whole concern. He pleads as a Priest, and
   manages as a King, for those who come unto God by Him.

   I.

   He pleads as a Priest. His office of intercession has a plain reference
   to His great instituted type [prophetic symbol], the High Priest under
   the Levitical dispensation [order] ; who, according to the appointment
   of God, entered within the veil, to present the blood of the sacrifice
   before the mercy seat (Leviticus 16:2) . We have a clear and infallible
   explanation of the design of this institution. " Now when these things
   were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle,
   accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high
   priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for
   himself, and for the errors of the people: The Holy Ghost this
   signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made
   manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing: Which was a
   figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and
   sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as
   pertaining to the conscience; Which stood only in meats and drinks, and
   divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time
   of reformation. But Christ being come an high priest of good things to
   come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands,
   that is to say, not of this building; Neither by the blood of goats and
   calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
   having obtained eternal redemption for us." (Hebrews 9:6-12) . Thus
   Jesus is passed into the heavens, entered into the holy of holies with
   His own blood. His presence there, in our nature, with the marks of His
   sufferings for us as the Lamb that has been slain, is an unceasing,
   virtual intercession on our behalf. I meddle not with the curious
   questions on this subject, as to the manner in which His intercession
   is carried on: it is sufficient to know that He is there, and for us,
   as our representative. This consideration is of continual use to
   animate and encourage sinners in their approach to God. There are three
   cases particularly, in which the heart that knows its own bitterness
   must sink, were it not for the relieving thought that there is an
   Advocate with the Father , a High Priest, who by His intercession is
   able to save to the uttermost.

   (1.)

   When the mind is burdened with guilt. Great is the distress of an
   awakened conscience. The sinner now is sensible of wants, which God
   alone can supply, and of miseries, from which he cannot be extricated,
   but by an Almighty arm. But when he thinks of the majesty and holiness
   of God, he is troubled, and adopts the language of the Prophet, Woe is
   me, I am undone (Isaiah 6:5) . He dares not draw near to God, nor does
   he dare to keep at a distance from Him any longer. But when such a one
   is enabled to look to Jesus as the Intercessor, what light and comfort
   does he receive! For the Gospel speaks inviting language. Let not the
   weary and heavy laden sinner fear to approach. Your peace is already
   made in the Court above, and your Advocate is waiting to introduce you.
   Lift up your heart to Him, and think you hear Him, in effect, saying,
   Father, there is another sinner, who has heard of my name, and desires
   to trust in me. Father, I will that he also may be delivered from going
   down into the pit, and interested in the ransom that I have provided.'

   (2.)

   When we are deeply conscious of our defects in duty. If we compare our
   best performances, with the demands of the law, the majesty of God, and
   the unspeakable obligations we are under; if we consider our
   innumerable sins of omission, and that the little we can do is polluted
   and defiled by the mixture of evil thoughts, and the working of selfish
   principles, aims, and motives, which, though we disapprove we are
   unable to suppress, we have great reason to confess, To us belong shame
   and confusion of face (Daniel 9:7) . But we are relieved by the thought
   that Jesus, the High Priest, bears the iniquity of our holy things,
   perfumes our prayers with the incense of His mediation, and washes our
   tears' [sic] in His own blood. This inspires a confidence, that though
   we are unworthy of the least of His mercies, we may humbly hope for a
   share in the greatest blessings He bestows, because we are heard and
   accepted not on the account of our own prayers and services, but in the
   beloved Son of God, who makes intercession for us.

   Thus the wisdom and love of God have provided a wonderful expedient
   which, so far as it is rightly understood and cordially [sincerely]
   embraced, while it lays the sinner low as the dust in point of
   humiliation and self-abasement, fills him, at the same time, with a
   hope full of glory, which, with respect to its foundation, cannot be
   shaken; and, with respect to its object, can be satisfied with nothing
   less than all the fulness of God. There are favoured seasons, in which
   the believer, having a lively impression of the authority and love of
   the Intercessor, can address the great Jehovah as his Father with no
   less confidence than if he was holy and spotless as the angels before
   the throne, at the very moment that he has abundant cause to say,
   Behold I am vile! I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes! (Job
   40:4 ; 41:6)

   (3.)

   This powerful and prevalent intercession abundantly compensates for the
   poverty and narrowness of our prayers. Experience confirms what the
   Scripture declares of our insufficiency to order our own cause before
   the Lord, to specify our various wants, and to fill our mouths with
   such arguments as may engage the attention, and enliven the affections
   of our hearts. We know not how to pray as we ought (Romans 8:26) . And
   though the Holy Spirit teaches believers to form petitions, which in
   the main are agreeable to the will of God, yet we often mistake and ask
   amiss; we often forget what we ought to ask, and we are too often cold,
   negligent, weary, distracted and formal in prayer. How prone are we to
   enter by prayer into the Lord's presence, as the thoughtless horse
   rushes into the battle! (Jeremiah 8:6) to speak to God, as if we were
   only speaking into the air, and to have our thoughts dissipated and
   wandering to the ends of the earth, while His holy name is upon our
   polluted lips! It is well for us, that God is both able and gracious to
   do more than we can ask or think; but that He actually does so, for
   such unworthy creatures, is owing to our Intercessor. He knows all our
   wants, and pleads and provides accordingly. He is not negligent, though
   we too frequently are. He prayed for Peter's safety (Luke 22:31, 32)
   before Peter himself was aware of his danger. Have we not sometimes
   been, as it were, surprised and shamed by the Lord's goodness, when He
   has condescended to bestow special and needful mercies upon us, before
   we thought of asking for them? These are affecting proofs of our
   Intercessor's attention and care, and that He is always mindful of us.
   But --

   II.

   Jesus, the High Priest is upon a throne. He is a King, King of saints,
   and King of nations. He is not only a righteous advocate, but He
   possesses all authority and power. And it belongs to His office as
   King, effectually to manage for those in whose behalf He intercedes. I
   have already observed, that the original word, includes this sense.

   (1.)

   He is the source and fountain of the supplies. All their springs are in
   Him. The fulness of wisdom, grace, and consolation, out of which they
   are invited to receive, resides in Him. And therefore He says, If you
   ask anything in my name, I will do it' (John 14:14) . Not merely I will
   present your petitions, but I will fulfill them myself. For all things
   are committed into His hands, and it is He with whom we have to do
   (Hebrews 4:13) . He therefore enjoins [urges] us, If we believe, or
   trust in God, to believe also in Him (John 14:1) . His invitations, If
   any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink,' (John 7:37) and
   Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life, freely' (Revelation
   22:17) ; equally express His sovereignty and His munificence
   [liberality]. On Him the eyes of all who know Him, wait from age to
   age, and are not disappointed. He opens His hand, and satisfies them
   with good (Psalm 145:16) . Nor is the store of His bounty diminished by
   all that He has distributed, for it is unsearchable and inexhaustible;
   like the light of the sun, which gladdens the eyes of millions at once,
   has done so from the beginning and will continue to do so to the end of
   time.

   (2.)

   He appoints and adjusts their various dispensations [happenings;
   experiences] with an unerring suitableness to their several states,
   capacities, and circumstances. If a skilful gardener had the command of
   the weather, he would not treat all his plants, nor the same plant at
   all times, exactly alike. Continual rain, or continual sunshine, would
   be equally unfavourable to their growth and fruitfulness. In His
   Kingdom of Providence, He so proportions the rain and the sunshine to
   each other, that the corn is usually brought forward, from the seed to
   the blade, the ear, and the full ripe ear. And I believe it would be
   always so, were it not for the prevalence of sin, which sometimes makes
   the heavens over our head, brass; the earth under our feet, iron
   (Deuteronomy 28:23) , and turns a fruitful land into barrenness. So, in
   His Kingdom of grace He trains His people up by various exercises. He
   delights in their prosperity, and does not willingly grieve them. But
   in their present state, afflictions are necessary, and His blessing
   makes them salutary. But this is their great privilege, that their
   comforts and their crosses are equally from His hand, are equally
   tokens of His love, and alike directed to work together for their good.
   He appoints the bounds of their habitations, numbers the hairs of their
   heads, and is their guide and guard, their sun and shield, even unto
   death. Here they meet with many changes, but none that are unnoticed by
   Him, none that can separate them from His love, and they all concur, in
   leading them on to a state of unchangeable and endless joy (II
   Corinthians 4:17)

   (3.)

   He is the Captain of their salvation (Hebrews 2:10) . They are His
   soldiers, and fight under His eye; yet the battle is not theirs, but
   His. Israel, of old, were to muster their forces, to range themselves
   for the fight, to use every precaution and endeavour, as though success
   depended entirely upon themselves. Yet, they obtained not the victory
   by their own sword, but it was the Lord who fought for them; and they
   had little more to do than to pursue the vanquished, and to divide the
   spoil. And thus it is in the warfare which true Christians maintain,
   not against flesh and blood only, but against principalities and powers
   (Ephesians 6:12) ; against the spirit of the world, and against Satan
   and his legions. They fight in His cause, but He upholds them and
   conquers for them. Their enemies are too many and too mighty for them
   to grapple with in their own strength. But He rebukes them, and pleads
   the cause of His people. His gracious interposition in their favour is
   beautifully set forth, together with its effects, in the vision which
   the Prophet saw, when he was sent to encourage the rulers and people of
   the Jews, against the difficulties they met with when rebuilding the
   temple. He saw Joshua the high priest, who, in that character,
   represented the collective body of the people, standing before the
   Lord, clothed in filthy garments, and Satan standing at his right hand
   to resist him (Zechariah 3:1-4 ) . Such is our attire as sinners, all
   our righteousness are as filthy rags; and such are the attempts of our
   enemy, to deter us from approaching to Him who alone can relieve us, or
   to distress us when we appear before Him. But when Joshua could not
   speak for himself, the Lord spoke for him, claimed him for His own, as
   a brand plucked out of the fire, silenced his adversary, clothed him
   with change of raiment, and set a fair mitre upon his head. Thus David
   acknowledged the Lord's goodness, in providing him a table in the midst
   of his enemies (Psalm 23:5) ; who saw, with envy, his privileges, but
   were not able to prevent his enjoyment of them. Many a time, the Lord
   thus comforts and feeds His people, while they are waiting on Him in
   secret, or attending His public ordinances: and were our eyes opened,
   like the eyes of Elisha's servant, to behold what is very near, though
   unseen, we should feel the force of the Psalmist's observation. The
   powers of darkness surround us, their malice against us is heightened
   by the favour of our good Shepherd towards us; they rage, but in vain;
   for though they could presently deprive us of peace, and fill us with
   anguish, they are under a restraint, and can do nothing without His
   permission. When He is pleased to give quietness, who then can make
   trouble? (Job 34:29) . He preserves and provides for His sheep, in the
   midst of wolves!

   We may close this part of our subject, with two or three reflections
   which, though I may have offered you the substance of them before, are
   always seasonable and suitable, when we are speaking of the power and
   grace of MESSIAH.

   (1.)

   How precious is this Saviour! How justly is He entitled to the chief
   place in the hearts of those who know Him! In the work of salvation,
   from the first step to the last, He is all in all. If He had not died
   and risen again, we must have died forever. If He had not ascended into
   heaven, there to appear in the presence of God for us, we must have
   been thrust down into the lowest hell. If He did not plead for us, we
   could not, we durst not, offer a word in our own behalf. If He was not
   on our part, engaged to keep us night and day, our enemies would soon
   be too hard for us. May we, therefore, give Him the glory due to His
   name, and cleave to Him, and trust in Him, alone.

   (2.)

   How safe are the people, of whom he undertakes the care! While His eye
   is upon them, His ear open to their prayer, and His arm of power
   stretched out for their protection; while He remembers that word of
   promise, which, encouraged them to commit their souls to Him, it is
   impossible that any weapon or stratagem formed against them can
   prevail. There are many, it is true, who will rise up against them; but
   God is for them, and with them, a very present help in trouble (Psalm
   46:1) . They are full of wants and fears, and, in themselves, liable to
   many charges; but since Jesus is their Head, their Security, their
   Intercessor, no needful good shall be withheld from them, no charge
   admitted against them, none shall condemn them, for it is God, Himself,
   who justifies the believer in Jesus.

   (3.)

   If these things be so, how much are they to be pitied, who hear of
   them, without being affected or influenced by them! Will you always be
   content with hearing? Oh taste and see, that the Lord is good! (Psalm
   34:8) . Should you at last be separated from those with whom you now
   join in public worship; should you see them admitted into the Kingdom
   of God, and you yourselves be thrust out; your present advantages would
   then prove an aggravation of your guilt and misery. As yet, there is
   room. Strive to enter, while the gate of mercy remains open. Think of
   the solemnities of that great day. Many will then be condemned, though
   they who believe in the Son of God will be justified. Consider who will
   condemn them, God Himself (Psalm 50:6) . From His inquisition there can
   be no retreat; from His sentence there can be no appeal. And consider
   what the condemnation will be! A final exclusion from His favour; a
   never-ceasing sense of His awful displeasure! A state of eternal horror
   and despair, without mitigation, without the smallest ray of hope. Can
   you deliberately give up all claim to happiness, and determine to rush
   upon the thick ^* bosses of God's buckler (Job 15:26) , to defy His
   power and to dare His threatenings, rather than forego the transitory
   and delusive pleasures of sin? [ ^* bosses are the projecting parts of
   a shield]. And can you do this, with the Gospel sounding in your ears?
   May the Lord prevent it! However, observe, you are once more warned,
   once more invited. If now at last, after so many delays, so much
   perverseness, on your part, you will honestly and earnestly seek Him,
   He will be found of you. But if you persist in your obstinacy your
   condemnation will be inevitable and sure.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLVIII.

   The Song of the Redeemed

   Revelation 5:9

   And they sung a new song, saying,

   Thou ... hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood,

   out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation ...

   T he extent, variety, and order of the creation, proclaim the glory of
   God. He is likewise, ^* Maximus in Minimis . The smallest of the works,
   that we are capable of examining, such for instance as the eye or the
   wing of a little insect, the creature of a day, are stamped with an
   inimitable impression of His wisdom and power. Thus in His written
   Word, there is a greatness considering it as a whole, and a beauty and
   accuracy in the smaller parts, analogous to what we observe in the
   visible creation, and answerable to what an enlightened and humble mind
   may expect in a book, which bears the character of a divine revelation.
   A single verse, a single clause, when viewed (if I may so speak) in the
   microscope of close meditation, is often found to contain a fulness, a
   world of wonders. And though a connected and comprehensive acquaintance
   with the whole Scripture, be desirable and useful, and is no less the
   privilege, than the duty, of those who have capacity and time at their
   disposal, to acquire it; yet, there is a gracious accommodation to the
   weakness of some persons, and the circumstances of others. So that in
   many parts of Scripture, whatever is immediately necessary to confirm
   our faith, to animate or regulate our practice, is condensed into a
   small compass, and comprised in a few verses: yea, sometimes a single
   sentence, when unfolded and examined, will be found to contain all the
   great principles of duty and comfort. Such is the sentence which I have
   now read to you. In the Messiah Oratorio, it is inserted in the grand
   chorus taken from the 12 ^th and 13 ^th verses of this chapter. And as
   it may lead us to a compendious recapitulation of the whole subject,
   and, by the Lord's blessing, may prepare us to join in the following
   ascription of praise to Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb;
   I purpose to consider it in its proper connection, as a part of the
   leading song of the redeemed before the Throne, in which the angels
   cannot share. Though the angels, from their love to redeemed sinners,
   and from their views of the manifold wisdom and glory of God, in
   visiting such sinners with such a salvation, cheerfully take a part in
   the general chorus. ^* Maximus, means Greatness' ; Minimis, means
   Tiniest

   The redemption spoken of is suited to the various cases of sinners of
   every nation, people and language. And many sinners of divers
   descriptions and from distant situations scattered abroad into all
   lands, through a long succession of ages, will, by the efficacy of this
   redemption, be gathered together into one (John 11:52) They will
   constitute one family united in one great Head (Eph. 3:14, 15) . When
   they shall attain the end of their hope and encircle the Throne, day
   without night, rejoicing, their remembrance of what they once were,
   their sense of the happiness they are raised to, and of the great
   consideration to which they owe their deliverance, and their
   exaltation, will excite a perpetual joyful acknowledgment to this
   purport. They were once lost, but could contribute nothing to their own
   recovery. Therefore they ascribe all the glory to their Saviour. They
   strike their golden harps and sing, in strains, loud as from numbers
   without number, sweet as from blest voices, Thou art worthy -- for Thou
   wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood, out of every
   kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

   But though this song, and this joy, will only be consummated in heaven,
   the commencement takes place on earth. Believers, during their present
   state of warfare, are taught to sing it; in feebler strains indeed, but
   the subject of their joy and the object of their praise are the same
   which inspire the harps and songs in the world of light. May I not say,
   that this life is the time of their rehearsal? They are now learning
   their song and advancing in meetness [fitness] to join in the chorus on
   high, which, as death successively removes them, is continually
   increasing by the accession of fresh voices. All that they know, or
   desire to know, all that they possess or hope for, is included in this
   ascription.

   I take the last clause of the verse into the subject. The words suggest
   three principal points, to our consideration.

   I. The benefit, Redemption, to God.

   II. The redemption price, by the Blood.

   III. The extent of the benefit --to a people out of every kindred, and
   tongue, and nation.

   I.

   Thou hast redeemed us to God . Redemption or ransom, is applicable to a
   state of imprisonment for debt, and to a state of bondage or slavery.
   From these ideas taken together, we may form some estimate of the
   misery of our fallen state; a theme, which, if I cannot insist upon at
   large in every discourse, I would never wholly omit. For we can neither
   understand the grace, nor enjoy the comfort of the Gospel, but [except]
   in proportion as we have a heart-felt and abiding conviction of our
   wretched condition as sinners, without it They who think themselves
   whole, know not their need of a physician (Matthew 9:12) , but to the
   sick He is welcome.

   If a man, shut up in prison for a heavy debt which he is utterly
   incapable of discharging, should obtain his liberty, in consideration
   of payment made for him by another, he might be properly said, to be
   redeemed from imprisonment. This supposition will apply to our subject.
   The law and justice of God have demands upon us, which we cannot
   answer. We are therefore shut up under the law, in unbelief, helpless
   and hopeless, till we know and can plead the engagement of a surety for
   us. For a time, like Peter, we are sleeping in our prison (Acts
   12:6-10) , regardless [unaware] of danger. The first sensible effect of
   the grace of God is to awaken us from this insensibility. Then we begin
   to feel the horrors of our dungeon, and the strength of our chains, and
   to tremble under the apprehension of an impending doom. But grace
   proceeds to reveal the Saviour and Friend of sinners, and to encourage
   our application to Him. In a good hour the chains fall off, the bars of
   iron and brass are broken asunder, and the prison-doors fly open. The
   prisoner understands that all his great debt is forgiven, blesses his
   Deliverer, obtains his liberty, and departs in peace.

   We are likewise in bondage. The servants, the slaves of a harder
   task-master than Pharaoh was to Israel. Satan, though not by right, yet
   by a righteous permission, tyrannizes over us till Jesus makes us free
   (John 8:34, 36). The way of transgressors is hard (Proverbs 13:15)
   Though the solicitations and commands of that enemy, who works in the
   children of disobedience (Ephesians 2:2) are, in some respects, suited
   to our depraved inclinations, yet the consequences are grievous. A
   burdened conscience, a wasting constitution, a ruined fortune and
   character, swiftly and closely, follow the habits of intemperance and
   lewdness. And they who seem to walk in a smoother path are deceived,
   mortified and disappointed daily. If persons, who openly and habitually
   live in a course that is contrary to the rule of God's Word, speak
   swelling words of vanity (II Peter 2:18, 19) , and boast of their
   liberty, believe them not. We are sure they carry that in their bosom,
   which, hourly, contradicts their assertions. Yea, sometimes their
   slavery is so galling that they attempt to escape, but in vain. They
   are soon retaken, and their bonds made stronger. The issue of their
   short-lived reformation, which they defer as long as possible, and at
   last set about with reluctance, usually is, that their latter end
   proves worse than their beginning. At most, they only exchange one
   sinful habit for another, sensuality for avarice, or prodigality for
   pride. The strong one armed will maintain his dominion, till the
   stronger than he interposes and says, Loose him, and let him go, for I
   have found a ransom. Then, by virtue of the redemption price the prey
   is taken from the mighty, and the captive is delivered (Isaiah 49:24,
   25) . Then the enslaved sinner, like the man out of whom the legion was
   cast, sits at the feet of Jesus, in peace, and in his right mind (Mark
   5:15) . He becomes the Lord's freedman.

   For he is not only delivered from guilt and thrall [enslavement]; he is
   redeemed to God. He is now restored to his original state, as an
   obedient and dependant creature, devoted to his Creator, conformed to
   His will and image, and admitted to communion with Him in love. These
   are blessings which alone can satisfy the soul, and without which it is
   impossible for man to be happy. While he is ignorant of his proper
   good, and seeks it in creatures, he is, and must be, wretched. Madness
   is in his heart, a deceived, disordered imagination turns him aside,
   and he feeds upon ashes, and upon the wind (Isaiah 44:20) . But by
   grace he is renewed to a sound judgment, his mind receives a right
   direction, and he is turned from darkness to light, from the power of
   Satan to God (Acts 26:18)

   II.

   What unspeakably and beyond conception, enhances the value of this
   deliverance, is the consideration of the means by which it is effected.
   For it is not merely a deliverance, but a redemption. It is not an act
   of mere mercy, but of mercy harmonizing with justice. It is not an act
   of power only, but of unexampled, and expensive love. Thou has redeemed
   us by Thy blood!

   The sentence, denounced by the law against transgressors, was death.
   And therefore when MESSIAH became our surety, to satisfy the law for
   us, He must die. The expression of His blood' is often used
   figuratively for His death; perhaps to remind us how He died. His was a
   bloody death. When He was in agony in Gethsemane, His sweat was as
   great drops of blood, falling down to the ground (Luke 22:44) . His
   blood flowed when He gave His back to the smiters, under the painful
   strokes of the scourging He endured, previous to His crucifixion. It
   flowed from His head when the soldiers, having mocked His character of
   King by crowning Him with thorns, by their rude blows forced the thorns
   into His temples. His blood streamed from the wounds made by the spikes
   which pierced His hands and His feet, when they fastened Him to the
   cross. When He hung upon the cross, His body was full of wounds and
   covered with blood. And, after His death, another large wound was made
   in His side, from which issued blood and water. Such was the redemption
   price He paid for sinners -- His blood, the blood of His heart. Without
   shedding of blood there could be no remission (Hebrews 9:22) . Nor
   could any blood, but His, answer the great design. Not any -- not all
   the bloody sacrifices appointed by the law of Moses, could take away
   sin as it respects the conscience, nor afford a plea with which a
   sinner could venture to come before the high God (Micah 6:6) . But the
   blood of MESSIAH , in whom were united the perfections of the divine
   nature and the real properties of humanity, and, which, the Apostle
   therefore styles the blood of God (Acts 20:28) , this precious blood
   cleanses from all sin. It is exhibited as a propitiation of perpetual
   efficacy, by which God declares His righteousness, not less than His
   mercy, in forgiving iniquities (Romans 3:25, 26) , and shows Himself
   just to the demands of His holiness, and the honour of His government,
   when He accepts and justifies the sinner who believes in Jesus.

   If these things were understood and attended to, would it be thought
   wonderful that this Saviour is very precious to those who believe in
   Him, and who obtain redemption by His blood? How can it possibly be
   otherwise? Grace like this, when known, must captivate and fix the
   heart! Not only to save; but to die, and to die for His enemies! Such
   costly love, productive of such glorious consequences, and to such
   unworthy creatures! Surely the Apostle's mind was filled and fixed with
   these considerations when authenticating an epistle with his own hand,
   he subjoined this emphatic close, If any man love not the Lord Jesus
   Christ, let him be ^* Anathema Maranatha! (I Cor. 16:22) ^* Anathema:
   accursed' ; Maranatha: The Lord is coming!' or O Lord, come!'

   Do you think, my brethren, that the Apostle took pleasure in denouncing
   so severe a sentence against all those who did not see (as we say) with
   his eyes? Had he so little affection for sinners, that he could thus
   consign them to destruction by multitudes, for differing from him in
   what some persons only deem an opinion? Rather, consider him not as
   breathing out his own wishes, but as speaking in the name, and on the
   behalf of God. He knew it must be, and he declared it would be so. It
   was no pleasure to him to see them determined to perish. On the
   contrary, He had great grief and sorrow of heart for them, even for the
   Jews who had treated him with the greatest cruelty. Even for their
   sakes, he could have been content to be made an Anathema himself
   (Romans 9:3) that they might be saved. But upon the whole, he
   acquiesced in the will of God, and acknowledged it to be just, right
   and equal, that if any man would not love the Lord Jesus Christ, after
   all He had done and suffered for sinners, he should be accursed. By
   this comparison of the Apostle's severe language, with his
   compassionate temper, I am led to digress a little farther. It suggests
   an apology [defence; extenuation] for ministers of the Gospel in
   general. When we declare the terrors of the Lord, when we assure you
   that there is but one solid foundation for hope, and that, unless you
   love the Lord Jesus Christ, you must perish; some of our hearers
   account us bigoted, uncharitable and bitter. But if you could see what
   passes in secret, how faithful ministers mourn over those who reject
   their message, how their disobedience cuts them to the heart, and
   abates the comfort they would otherwise find in your service; if you
   could believe us when we say (I trust truly) that we are ready to
   impart unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but our own souls also,
   because you are dear to us (I Thessalonians 2:8) , and we long for your
   salvation, then, you would think more favourably of us. But after all,
   we cannot, we dare not, soften our message to please men. What we find
   in the Word of God, we must declare. It would be at the peril of our
   souls to speak smooth things, to prophecy deceits (Isaiah 30:10) to
   you; and, so far as we preach the truth, it will be at the peril of
   your souls, if we are disregarded.

   III.

   The benefits of this redemption extend to a numerous people, who are
   said to be redeemed out of every kindred, tongue and nation. I have,
   upon a former occasion, offered you my sentiments concerning the extent
   of the virtue of that blood, which takes away the sin of the world
   (Volume I, Sermon XVI) . But the clause now before us, invites me to
   make a few additional observations, upon a subject which, I conceive,
   it much concerns us rightly to understand.

   The redeemed of the Lord, are those who actually experience the power
   of His redemption, who are delivered from the dominion of sin and
   Satan, and brought into a state of liberty, peace and holiness. That
   the people of every kindred, nation and tongue are not redeemed, in
   this sense, universally, is as certain as evidence of faith and express
   declarations of Scripture can make it. Without holiness no man shall
   see the Lord. Multitudes, thus disqualified, will be found trembling,
   on the left hand of the Judge, at the great day. But, a remnant will be
   saved, according to the election of grace. For they who differ, who are
   redeemed to the service of God, while others live and die in the love
   and service of sin, do not make themselves to differ (I Corinthians
   4:7) . It becomes the potsherds of the earth, to ascribe to their Maker
   the glory of His sovereignty, and to acknowledge that if they have a
   good hope, it is because it pleased the Lord to make them His people,
   who once were not His people (I Corinthians 4:7) . Yet, a way of
   conceiving of the doctrines of the divine sovereignty [Yet, an
   understanding of the doctrine of divine sovereignty] , and of a
   personal election unto life, has often obtained [has often been held],
   which seems to have a tendency to render the mind narrow, selfish and
   partial, and to strengthen the exercise of that philanthropy, which the
   genius and spirit of the Gospel powerfully inculcate [powerfully
   impress upon the mind]. The best of us, perhaps, are more prone than we
   are aware of, to assimilate the great God to ourselves, and to frame
   our ideas of Him, too much according to our own image. So that, often
   much of man's natural disposition may be observed in the views he forms
   of the divine perfections and conduct; as on the other hand, his
   conceptions of the character of God, strengthen and confirm him in his
   own tempers and habits. There are persons, who being persuaded in their
   minds (we would hope upon sure grounds) that they, themselves are of
   the elect, appear to be little concerned what may become of others.
   Their notions of God's sovereignty, and His right to do what He will
   with His own, though often insufficient to preserve them from repining
   and impatience under common events of human life, raise them above all
   doubts and difficulties, on a subject which the Apostle speaks of as
   unsearchable and untraceable. Where he acknowledges depths which he was
   unable to fathom (Romans 11:33) , all appear to them quite plain and
   easy. Where he admires and adores, they arrogantly dispute, and
   determine ex cathedra [from the chair of authority] , and harshly
   censure all who are not so eagle-sighted as themselves. Methinks they
   who know the worth of a soul, from its vast capacity for happiness and
   misery, and its immortal duration, cannot justly be blamed for allowing
   no limits, to their benevolent wishes for the salvation of mankind but
   the will of God, as it is plainly made known to us in His Word. To this
   we are to submit, not as of necessity only, but cheerfully, assured
   that His will is wise, holy and good; that the Judge of all the world
   will do right; and to wait for the day, when He will condescend to
   clear up every difficulty and give us that satisfaction, which in our
   present state of ignorance and weakness, we are incapable of receiving.
   Shall mortal man be more just, or can he be more merciful, than God? It
   is a false compassion, founded in a blameable disregard of what is due
   to the glory of His great name, that prompts us to form a wish, that
   His unerringly wise appointments could be otherwise than they are. Yet
   it is a comfort to think that His mercy, in which He delights, in which
   He is peculiarly said to be rich, and which is higher than the heavens,
   will, in its exercise, far exceed the bounds which some fallible
   mortals would peremptorily assign to it. We must not indulge conjecture
   and hypothesis farther than the Scripture will warrant; but while we
   humbly depend upon this infallible light, we need not be afraid to
   follow it, though it should, in some particulars, lead us a little
   beyond the outlines of some long-received and, in the main, very
   valuable human systems of divinity.

   I have repeatedly expressed my belief, that many prophecies, respecting
   the spread and glory of the Kingdom of MESSIAH upon earth, have not yet
   received their full accomplishment, and that a time is coming when many
   (perhaps the greater part of mankind), of all nations, and people, and
   languages, shall know the joyful sound of the Gospel, and walk in the
   light of the Redeemer's countenance. At present, I would confine myself
   to consider, what ground the Scripture affords us to hope that there
   are many of every nation, people and tongue, even now, singing this
   song before His Throne.

   The Revelations vouchsafed [graciously granted] to the beloved Disciple
   in Patmos, exhibit a succession of great events, extending (I suppose)
   from the spotless days, to the end of time. But while only the learned
   can so much as attempt to ascertain, from history, the dates and facts
   to which the prophecies already fulfilled refer; or to offer probable
   conjectures concerning the events, as yet future (in which the most
   judicious commentators are far from being agreed); there are passages,
   interspersed, which seem designed to administer consolation to plain
   believers, by representations suited to raise their thoughts to the
   state of the Church triumphant. Though they are unable to explain the
   particulars of what they read, there is a glory resulting from the
   whole, which animates their hope and awakens their joy. Of this kind I
   think is that vision - Revelation 7:9 ad finem , in which the Apostle
   saw the servants of God, who were sealed in their foreheads, in number
   a hundred and forty-four thousand. And besides these, a great multitude
   which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people,
   and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with
   white robes, and palms in their hands, and cried with a loud voice,
   saying, Salvation to our God, who sits upon the throne, and to the
   Lamb, etc. I confess myself unable to expound this sublime passage, and
   to give full, or even the principal sense of it, with certainty. But
   that it has some reference to what is now passing, within the veil,
   which hides the unseen world from our view, I cannot doubt. I propose
   my thoughts upon it with caution and diffidence. I dare not speak with
   that certainty, which I feel myself warranted to use when I set before
   you, from Scripture, the great truths which are essential to a life of
   faith in the Son of God. Yet, I hope to advance nothing that is
   contrary to Scripture, or, to any deductions fairly and justly drawn
   from it.

   Having premised this acknowledgment of my incompetence to decide
   positively, I venture to say, that by the hundred and forty-four
   thousand sealed in their foreheads (a definite for an indefinite
   number, which is frequent in Scripture language) I understand, those,
   who, living to mature age and where the Gospel is afforded, are enabled
   to make a public and visible profession of religion, and are marked, as
   it were, in their foreheads, and known to whom they belong, by their
   open and habitual separation, from the spirit and customs of the world
   which lies in wickedness. And the exceeding great multitude,
   contradistinguished from these, I conceive to be those, who are
   elsewhere styled the Lord's hidden ones; and that these, are a great
   multitude indeed, gathered by Him, who knows them that are His, out of
   all nations, and kindreds, and peoples and tongues. I may distribute
   them into the following classes:

   (1.)

   Infants. I think it, at least highly probable, that when our Lord says,
   Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
   such is the kingdom of heaven (Matthew 19:14) , He does not only
   intimate the necessity of our becoming like little children, in
   simplicity, as a qualification without which (as He expressly declares
   in other places) we cannot enter into His Kingdom; but informs us of a
   fact that the number of infants, who are effectually redeemed to God by
   His blood, so greatly exceeds the aggregate of adult believers, that,
   comparatively speaking, His Kingdom may be said to consist of little
   children. The Apostle speaks of them as having sinned after the
   similitude of Adam's transgression (Romans 5:14) , that is, with the
   consent of their understanding and will. And when he says, We must all
   appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, he adds, that every man may
   give an account of what he has done in the body, whether it be good or
   bad (II Corinthians 5:10) . But children who die in their infancy have
   not done anything in the body, either good or bad. It is true, they are
   by nature evil, and must, if saved, be the subjects of a supernatural
   change. And though we cannot conceive how this change is to be wrought,
   yet, I suppose, few are so rash as to imagine it impossible that any
   infants can be saved. The same power that produces this change in some,
   can produce it in all. And therefore I am willing to believe, till the
   Scripture forbids me, that infants of all nations and kindreds, without
   exception, who die before they are capable of sinning after the
   similitude of Adam's transgression, who have done nothing in the body
   of which they can give an account, are included in the election of
   grace. They are born for a better world than this. They just enter this
   state of tribulation, they quickly pass through it, their robes are
   washed white in the blood of the Lamb, and they are admitted, for His
   sake, before the Throne. Should I be asked to draw the line, to assign
   the age at which children begin to be accountable for actual sin, it
   would give me no pain to confess my ignorance. The Lord knows.

   (2.)

   A people hidden among the most degenerate communities, civil or
   ecclesiastical, that bear the name of Christian; where ignorance and
   superstition, or errors, which, though more refined, are no less
   contrary to the Gospel, have prevailing dominion and influence. What
   can be more deplorable, in the view of an enlightened and benevolent
   mind, than the general state of the Roman and Greek churches! Where the
   traditions, inventions and doctrines of men, a train of pompous and
   burdensome ceremonies, a dependence upon masses, penance and
   pilgrimages, upon legends and fictitious saints, form the principal
   features of the public religion. Many nations are involved in this
   gross darkness, but they are not wholly destitute of the Scripture;
   some portions of it, are interwoven with their authorized forms of
   worship; and we cannot, with reason, doubt, but a succession of
   individuals among them, have been acquainted with the life and power of
   true godliness, notwithstanding the disadvantages and prejudices of
   their education. There are likewise amongst Protestants, schemes of
   doctrine supported by learning, and by numbers, which are not more
   conformable to the standard of the New Testament, than the grossest
   errors of Popery; and yet, here and there, persons may be met with,
   who, by the agency of the Holy Spirit enabling them to understand the
   Scriptures, are made wiser than their teachers; and who, though still
   fettered by some mistakes and prejudices, give evidence in the main,
   that their hopes are fixed upon the only Atonement, that they are
   redeemed to God, and are partakers of that faith which works by love,
   purifies the heart, and overcomes the world.

   (3.)

   I will go one step farther. The inferences that have been made, by some
   persons, from the Apostle Peter's words, That God is no respecter of
   persons, but in every nation, he that fears Him, and works
   righteousness, is accepted with Him (Acts 10:34, 35) , are,
   undoubtedly, rash and unscriptural. They would conclude from this
   verse, that it is of little importance what people believe, provided
   they are sincere in their way. That the idolatrous heathens, even the
   most savage of them, whose devotion is cruelty, who pollute their
   worship with human blood and live in the practice of vices disgraceful
   to humanity, are in a very safe state because they act, as it is
   supposed, according to their light. But if the light which is in them
   be darkness, how great is that darkness! Such a lax candour as this
   tends to make the Gospel unnecessary; if they who have it not, are
   therefore excusable, though they neither love nor fear God, and live in
   open violation of the law of their nature. The declaration, that
   without holiness no man shall see the Lord (Hebrews 12:14) , holds
   universally, and without a single exception. But if we suppose a
   heathen, destitute of the means of grace by which conversion is usually
   wrought, to be brought to a sense of his misery, of the emptiness and
   vanity of worldly things, to a conviction that he cannot be happy
   without the favour of the great Lord of the world, to a feeling of
   guilt, and a desire of mercy; and that though he has no explicit
   knowledge of a Saviour, he directs the cry of his heart to the unknown
   Supreme, to this purport, Ens entium, miserere mei -- Father, and
   Source of beings, have mercy upon me! who will prove, that such views
   and desires can arise in the heart of a sinner, without the energy of
   that Spirit, which Jesus is exalted to bestow? Who will take upon him
   to say, that His blood has not sufficient efficacy to redeem to God a
   sinner who is thus disposed, though he has never heard of His name? Or
   who has a warrant to affirm that the supposition I have made is, in the
   nature of things, impossible to be realized? But I stop--I do not often
   amuse you with conjecture. And though, for want of express warrant from
   Scripture, I dare not give the sentiments I have now offered, a
   stronger name than, probable' or conjectural,' I hope I do not propose
   them for your amusement. They will prove to your advantage and my own,
   if they are helpful to guard us against a narrow, harsh, and dogmatic
   spirit; and if, without abating our reverent submission to the revealed
   will of God, they have a tendency to confirm our views of His goodness,
   and the power and compassions of the great Redeemer.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLIX.

   The Chorus of Angels

   Revelation 5:12

   Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and
   wisdom, and strength, and honour and glory, and blessing!

   I t was a good report which the queen of Sheba heard, in her own land,
   of the wisdom and glory of Solomon. It lessened her attachment to home,
   and prompted her to undertake a long journey to visit this greater
   King, of whom she had heard so much. She went, and she was not
   disappointed. Great as the expectations were, which she had formed from
   the relation made her by others, they fell short of what she saw and
   heard herself when she was admitted into his presence. Good, likewise,
   is the report of the Gospel. It has a powerful effect upon those who
   receive it by faith. It is abundantly sufficient to convince them of
   the comparative insignificance of all that they most admired and
   esteemed in this world. From that hour, they become strangers and
   pilgrims upon earth. They set out in the way which God has prescribed,
   in hopes of seeing Him who is greater than Solomon; and the report they
   have heard of Him is their subject, their song, and their joy, while
   they are on their journey, and their great support, under the
   difficulties they meet with on the road. What then will it be to see
   Him as He is? As yet, the one half is not told them. Or, at least, they
   are not yet capable of conceiving the half, or the thousandth part, of
   what they read in the Scripture, concerning His wisdom, His glory, and
   His grace. We weaken, rather than enlarge, the sense of such a passage
   as this, by our feeble comments. We must die before we can understand
   it. To the bulk of mankind, ^* Wait the great teacher, Death,' is cold,
   is dangerous advice. If they are not taught by the Gospel while they
   live, the teaching of death will be too late. Dreadful will be the
   condition of those who cannot be convinced of their mistakes, till
   repentance and amendment will be impracticable. But death will be a
   great teacher, indeed, to a believer; he will then know more by a
   glance, and in a moment, of the happiness he is now expecting, than by
   all he could collect, from the enquiry and experience of a long course
   of years, in this world.

   ^* From "Essay on Man"   by Alexander Pope

   The scenery of this chapter, if attentively considered, is sufficient
   to snatch our thoughts from the little concernments of time, and to
   give us some anticipation of the employments and enjoyments of heaven.
   Come, all ye that are wearied and burdened with afflictions and
   temptations, look up, and for a while, at least, forget your sorrows!
   The Lamb is upon His Throne, surrounded by a multitude of His redeemed
   people, who once were afflicted and burdened like yourselves; but now
   all tears are wiped from their eyes. They have a song, peculiarly their
   own, and are represented as taking the first and leading part in
   worship and praise. The angels cannot sing their song, they were not
   redeemed to God by His blood; but they are interested in the subject.
   Their highest views, of the manifold wisdom of God, are derived from
   the wonders of redemption. Therefore they join in the chorus, Worthy is
   the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom and
   strength, and honour and glory, and blessing. If you have a humble hope
   of bearing a part in this immortal song, will you hang down your heads
   like a bulrush, because you have the honour of following your Lord,
   through many tribulations, to His Kingdom?

   The number of angels is expressed, indefinitely, ten thousand times ten
   thousand, and thousands of thousands; myriads and millions; to intimate
   to us that, with respect to our capacities and conceptions, they are
   innumerable. Their number is known to Him who tells the number of the
   stars, and calls them all by their names (Psalm 147:4) ; and to Him
   only. The Scripture intimates a diversity of ranks and orders among
   them, Thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers; but as to
   particulars, there is little said that might gratify our curiosity. It
   is enough for us to know that the highest of them, and that all of
   them, worship Him who is clothed in our nature. My text expressly
   informs us that the object of their worship is the Lamb that was slain.
   Not that the humanity of Christ, which is but a creature, is simply and
   formally the object of their worship. But they worship Him who has
   assumed the human nature into personal union with Himself -- God
   manifest in the flesh --God in Christ. Though the world censure or
   despise us for honouring the Son as we honour the Father (John 5:23) ,
   we have here a good precedent, as we have the warrant of an express
   command in many places of Scripture. Whether men are pleased or not, we
   will, we must, worship the Lamb that was slain. To animate our
   devotion, let us thankfully consider: Why He was slain, and How He was
   slain.

   I.

   WHY HE WAS SLAIN. The redeemed say, For us. He loved us, and washed us
   from our sins in His own blood (Revelation 1:5) . They were sinners and
   enemies. They were slaves to sin and Satan, yet He loved them and died
   to redeem them. It is by virtue of His blood and death that they are
   now before the Throne. Nothing less than His death could have made them
   duly sensible of their misery; nothing less could have relieved them
   from it. He was lifted up upon the cross, that by the powerful
   magnetism of His dying love, He might, in the hour of His grace, draw
   their hearts to Himself (John 12:32) . This was the design. This was
   the effect of His sufferings. A crucified Saviour, though a
   stumbling-block to the self-righteous, and foolishness to vain
   reasoners, was to them the power and the wisdom of God for salvation.
   They looked unto Him and were enlightened, they trusted in Him and were
   not ashamed. By faith in His name they obtained peace with God, they
   renounced the ways of sin, they warred the good warfare, they overcame
   the world, and were at length made more than conquerors. For His sake
   they endured the cross and despised the shame. They met with bad
   treatment from the world, but it was from the world that crucified Him.
   While they were here, their characters were obscured by their own
   imperfections, and by the misrepresentations and reproaches of their
   enemies. But now their reproach is removed, and they shine, each one
   like the sun, in the Kingdom of their Father (Matthew 13:43) . What an
   immense constellation of suns! This, their full salvation, was the joy
   set before Him, for the sake of which He became obedient unto death,
   even the death of the cross. And now they see Him as He is, they
   ascribe all their victories and honours to Him, and unite in one song
   of endless praise to the Lamb that was slain.

   II.

   Their praises are heightened when they consider, HOW HE WAS SLAIN. He
   did not die a natural death. He was slain. Nor did He fall, like a
   hero, by an honourable wound in the field of battle. The impression
   which the death of the late General Wolfe [see footnote in chapter
   XLIV] made upon the public, is not yet quite forgotten. He conquered
   for us, but it cost him his life. But he died honourably, and was
   lamented by his country. Not so, the Lamb of God. He died the death of
   a slave, of a malefactor. Cruelty, malice, and contempt combined to
   give His sufferings every possible aggravation. And after He was slain,
   very few laid it to heart. The world went on as it did before, as
   though nothing extraordinary had happened. But on this dark ground, the
   perfections of God were displayed in their fullest lustre. And they are
   the perfections of the great Redeemer, and therefore distinctly
   ascribed to Him, by the angels, in the words which follow-- Power, and
   wisdom, and riches, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.

   Though each of these words have a distinct sense, a nicety [an
   exactness] in defining them, and stating their precise meaning, is of
   less importance than to feel the combined efficacy of them all, to
   impress our hearts with sentiments of reverence, confidence, and love.
   The fulness of expression may teach us that every kind of excellence,
   is the indubitable right and possession of the Lamb that was slain. He
   is worthy to have them all attributed to Him, in the most absolute
   sense, and consequently worthy of our adoration, dependence, and
   praise.

   (1.)

   POWER --It is spoken once, yea twice we have heard the same, that power
   belongs to God (Psalm 62:11) . It belongs to Him eminently and
   exclusively. All the power of creatures is derived from Him. Such is
   the power of the Lamb. He styles Himself Alpha kai omega -- Alpha and
   Omega (Revelation 1:8, 11) , the Omnipotent, the Upholder and Possessor
   of all things. He exercises this power in the human nature (Matthew
   28:18) He does what He pleases in the armies of heaven, and among the
   inhabitants of the earth (Daniel 4:35) ; and none can stay His hand, or
   say unto Him, what doest Thou? He has, therefore, all-sufficiency, and
   uncontrollable authority, for the discharge of His office, as the
   Mediator and Head of His Church. The divine perfections, being
   infinite, are not distinct in themselves, though the Scripture, in
   condescension to our weakness, authorizes us to speak of them as
   distinguishable. God is One. And the Power which can preserve and
   govern the world involves, in the idea of it, every other excellence,
   which are separately mentioned in this passage.

   (2.)

   WISDOM --He is the only wise God, and our Saviour (Jude 25) . His
   knowledge is perfect, His plan is perfect. In Himself He is essentially
   the wisdom of God (Proverbs 8:23) , and He is our wisdom (I Corinthians
   1:30) . It is life eternal to know the only true God (John 17:3) , and,
   therefore, it is life eternal to know Jesus Christ whom He has sent .
   For He is the only way, and the only door to this knowledge; no one can
   come unto God, or attain to any just conceptions of Him, but in and by
   the Son of His love, who so perfectly represents God to us, is so
   completely the brightness of His glory, and the express image of His
   person, that whoever has seen Him has seen the Father (John 14:9) . By
   Him is opened to us, the unsearchable wisdom of the divine counsels,
   particularly, in the great work of redemption. No one has seen God at
   any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He
   has revealed Him (John 1:18 ; 15:15) . It is by wisdom communicated
   from Him that His people are made wise unto salvation. Though there are
   few scholars and philosophers among them, and many of them are despised
   for their ignorance and weakness, yet in truth, they have all a good
   understanding, for they know the Lord and His will; they know wherein
   their proper happiness consists, and how it is to be obtained. They are
   instructed how to walk and to please God, how to bear afflictions with
   patience, and to meet death with composure. This wisdom is far superior
   to that of the schools. But He bestows and maintains it. The eyes of
   their mind are opened, and they see by His light, but they have no
   light of their own, or in themselves. They wait upon Him for direction
   in every difficulty, for the solution of every hard question which
   perplexes their spirits; and He makes the crooked strait, teaches them
   to avoid the snares that are laid for them, or extricates them when
   entangled. Therefore in time, and to eternity, they will admire and
   adore His wisdom.

   (3.)

   RICHES --All the stores of mercy, grace, and comfort, are in Him, as
   light in the sun, or water in the ocean. The Apostle, speaking of the
   unsearchable riches of Christ (Ephesians 3:8) , gives us the idea of a
   mine, the height, length, depth, and breadth of which cannot be
   investigated, nor the immense wealth it contains exhausted. Of this
   fulness the poor are invited to receive freely, and multitudes from age
   to age have been enriched, and the treasure is still undiminished. None
   are sent away empty. And when all have been supplied, it will be as
   full as at first.

   (4.)

   STRENGTH --That energy and efficacy of His power, by which He
   accomplishes His holy purposes. Who can conceive of this? How just is
   the Psalmist's reasoning: He that formed the eye, shall not He see? He
   that planted the ear, shall not He hear? (Psalm 94:9) . So we may say:
   How strong is He, from whom all created strength is derived, and before
   whom the strength of all creatures, if collected into one effort, would
   be as chaff before the whirlwind! The Lord of all power and might
   speaks, and it is done. He commands and it stands fast. Though the
   waves of the stormy sea toss themselves, they cannot prevail (Psalm
   93:3, 4) ; He checks them in the height of their rage, setting bounds
   to their violence which they cannot pass, saying Hitherto shalt thou
   come and no farther, and here shall thy proud billows be stayed (Job
   38:10, 11) . With equal sovereignty, certainty, and ease, He rules over
   moral agents. He formed the heart of man, and He can fill it with
   terror or with comfort in a moment, in any assignable circumstances. He
   can make it happy in a dungeon (Acts 16:25) , or impress it with dismay
   and despair upon a throne (Daniel 5:5, 6) . All hearts are thus
   incessantly under His influence. And the hedge of His promise and
   protection surrounds those who trust in Him, as with mountains and
   walls of brass and fire, impenetrable to the assaults of the powers of
   darkness, unless so far as He, for wise and holy ends, is pleased to
   give permission. With the arm of His strength He upholds them that are
   falling, and raises up them that are bowed down (Psalm 145:14) , and,
   is, in one and the same instant, a present and immediate help in
   trouble to all who call upon Him (Psalm 46:4) . Therefore they that
   abide under His shadow are safe; they pass, unhurt, through floods and
   flames, because their Redeemer is strong. And when, in defiance of all
   their enemies, He has brought them together in His heavenly Kingdom,
   they will, with one consent, ascribe unto the Lord glory and strength.

   (5.)

   HONOUR --He is the fountain of it. All the honour of His creatures, and
   of His people, is from Him; as the sun beautifies and gilds the objects
   he shines upon, which, without him, are opaque and obscure. Because His
   people are precious in His sight, they are honourable. He clothes them
   with garments of salvation, covers them with a robe of righteousness,
   as a bridegroom decks himself with ornaments, as a bride adorns herself
   with jewels (Isaiah 61:10) ; but who can speak of His own inherent
   honour, as God-man and Mediator! We must wait till we see Him without a
   cloud or veil, receiving the homage and adoration of angels and men.
   For, as yet, the one half cannot be told us! Then, however, it will be
   universally known, that He who possesses the fulness of wisdom and
   power, riches, and strength, is worthy to receive all honour. Ah! how
   different will He then appear, from that humble form He once assumed,
   when, for our sakes, He was a man of sorrows, despised, rejected, and
   nailed to the ignominious cross!

   (6.)

   GLORY --The manifestation of God, that by which He is known and
   magnified, in the view of finite intelligence; the result, the combined
   effulgence of His holiness, grace, wisdom, truth, and love: this is His
   glory, and this glory is revealed and displayed in Christ. He is
   glorious in His works of Creation and Providence, but these do not
   fully exhibit His character. But in the Lamb upon the throne, His glory
   shines, full-orbed. And all in heaven, and all in earth, who behold it,
   take up the song of Moses and the Lamb (Exodus 15:11) , Who is like
   unto Thee, O Lord? Who is like unto Thee? Glorious in holiness, fearful
   in praises, doing wonders! Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord God
   Almighty! Just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of saints! (Revelation
   15:3)

   (7.)

   BLESSING --He is the author of all blessings, of all the happiness and
   good which His people receive, and He is the deserved object of their
   universal praise. The different senses in which we use the word
   blessing,' taken together, may express that intercourse or communion
   which is between the Head and the mystical members of His Body. He
   blesses them effectually, with the light of His countenance, with
   liberty, grace, and peace. He blesses them daily. His mercies are
   renewed to them every morning. He will bless them eternally. Blessed
   are the people who have this Lord for their God. They can make Him no
   suitable returns, yet, in their way, they bless Him. They admire,
   adore, and praise Him. They call upon all the powers of their souls to
   bless Him. They proclaim His goodness, and that He is worthy to receive
   the ascription of power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
   honour, and glory and blessing. In proportion to their attainments in
   this delightful exercise of worship, love, and gratitude, they enjoy a
   heaven upon earth; and to stand before Him continually to behold His
   glory, to live under the unclouded beams of His favour, and to be able
   to bless and praise Him as they ought, without weariness, abatement,
   interruption, or end, is what they mean, when they speak of the heaven
   they hope for hereafter. Such is the blessedness of those who have
   already died in the Lord. They see His face, they drink of the rivers
   of pleasure which are at His right hand, they cast down their crowns
   before Him, and say, Thou art worthy -- Let us not be slothful (Hebrews
   6:12) , but followers of them, who through faith and patience, have
   finished their course, and are entered into the joy of their Lord.

   The Scripture declares the Lamb that was slain, to be worthy of all
   this glory and honour. Wisdom, riches, and strength are His. His power
   is infinite, His authority supreme. He is the Author and Giver of all
   good. He has life in Himself, and He is the life of all that live; the
   Lord and Head of the Church, and of the Universe. Can language express,
   or can heart conceive, a higher ascription and acknowledgement than
   this? Can all this be due to a creature, to one of a derived and
   dependent character? Then surely the Scripture would have a direct
   tendency to promote idolatry. Far be the thought from us! The Scripture
   teaches us the knowledge of the true God, and the worship due to Him.
   Therefore MESSIAH , the Lamb that was slain, is the true God, the
   proper and immediate object of the worship of angels and men.

   Let us, therefore, take up a lamentation for those who slight the
   glorious Redeemer, and refuse Him the honour due to His name. Their
   mistake should excite our pity and prayers, not our anger or scorn. Are
   there any such amongst us? Alas, my fellow-sinners, you know not what
   you do! Alas, you know Him not, nor do you know yourselves. I am well
   aware that a thousand arguments of mine will not persuade you. But I
   can simply tell you what would soon make you, at least, desirous of
   adopting our sentiments upon this subject. If He, who has that power
   over the heart which I have been speaking of, was pleased to give you,
   this moment, a sense of the holiness and authority of God, and of your
   conduct towards Him, as His creatures; your strongest objections to the
   high honours we attribute to the Saviour, would, this moment, fall to
   the ground. And you would be immediately convinced, that either Jesus
   Christ is the true God and eternal life, or that you must perish. You
   would no longer expect mercy; but in a way perfectly consonant with the
   righteousness and truth of God, declared in His Word, and with the
   honour and purity of His moral government [sic] . This would lead you
   to perceive the necessity of an atonement, and the insufficiency of any
   atonement, but that, which the Lamb of God has made by the sacrifice of
   Himself (Hebrews 9:26) , and that the efficacy even of His mediation
   depends upon His divine character. The scriptural doctrines of the
   depravity of man, the malignity of sin, the eternal power and Godhead
   of the Saviour, the necessity and efficacy of His mediation, and the
   inevitable, extreme, and endless misery of those who finally reject
   Him, are so closely connected, that if the first be rightly understood,
   it will open the mind to the reception of the rest. But till the first
   be known and felt, the importance and certainty of the others will be
   suspected, if not openly denied.

   Though the doctrines I have enumerated, are, in these sceptical days,
   too generally disputed and contradicted, I am fully confident that it
   is impossible to demonstrate them to be false. Upon the lowest
   supposition, therefore, they possibly may be true; and the
   consequences, depending upon them, if they should be found true at
   last, are so vastly momentous, that even the peradventure, the
   possibility of their truth, render them deserving of your most serious
   consideration. Trifle with yourselves no longer. If they be truths,
   they are the truths of God. Upon the same authority stands the truth of
   that gracious promise, that He will give His Holy Spirit to them that
   ask Him. Let me entreat you to make the experiment. This is the proper
   point to begin with. Instead of indulging reasonings and speculations,
   humble yourselves before the Lord, and pray for the light and
   influence, which He has said He will afford to them who are willing to
   be taught. Read the Scripture with deliberation, and do not labour to
   fortify yourselves against conviction. Break off from those practices
   which your own consciences admonish you, cannot be pleasing to Him who
   is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. Then shall you know, if you
   will sincerely follow on, to know the Lord (Hosea 6:3) . But if not, if
   you will, in a spirit of levity, presume to decide upon points which
   you will not allow yourselves seriously to examine, should you, at
   last, perish in your obstinacy and unbelief, your ruin will be of
   yourselves. You have been faithfully warned, and we shall be clear of
   your blood.

   ---- O ----
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon L.

   The Universal Chorus

   Revelation 5:13

   And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
   earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I
   saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto Him that
   stteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

   M en have generally agreed to dignify their presumptuous and arrogant
   ^* disquisitions on the works and ways of God, with the name of wisdom
   ; though the principles upon which they proceed, and the conclusions
   which they draw from them, are, for the most part, evident proofs of
   their depravity and folly. Instead of admiring the effects of His
   wisdom and power in the creation, they have rashly endeavoured to
   investigate the manner of its production. A variety of hypotheses have
   been invented, to account for the formation of the world, and to state
   the laws by which the frame of nature is governed; and these different
   and inconsistent accounts have been defended, with a magisterial tone
   of certainty, and an air of demonstration by their respective authors,
   as though they had been bystanders and spectators when God spoke all
   things into being, and produced order out of confusion by the Word of
   His power. They have, however, been much more successful in showing the
   absurdity of the schemes proposed by others, than in reconciling their
   own, to the sober dictates of plain, common sense. ^* disquisition - an
   elaborate analytical or explanatory essay or discussion

   But, if by indulging their speculations on the creation of the world,
   the causes of the deluge, and similar subjects, their employment has
   been no better than weaving spiders webs , the result of their
   reasoning on morals has been much worse. Here they have, with much
   industry, hatched cockatrice eggs (Isaiah 59:5) ; and their labours
   have been not only fallacious, but mischievous. Their metaphysical
   researches, while they refuse the guidance of revelation, if pursued to
   their just consequences, will always lead into the labyrinths of
   scepticism, weaken the sense of moral obligation, rob the mind of the
   most powerful motives of right conduct, and of the only consolations
   which can afford it solid support, in an hour of trouble. One
   insuperable difficulty which they will undertake to solve, though it
   does not properly lie in their way, is concerning the origin of evil.
   That evil is in the world, is felt and confessed universally. The
   Gospel points out an effectual method of deliverance from it; but,
   alas, the simple and infallible remedy is neglected, and men weary
   themselves with vain enquiries,

   and find no end, in wandring mazes lost. [Milton]

   The more they reason, the more they involve themselves in uncertainty
   and error, till at last they make lies their refuge, and adopt, with
   implicit credulity, as so many undoubted axioms, opinions which are
   equally dishonourable to God, and contradictory to truth and experience
   (II Thess. 2:11) . Thus much is certain, that by the occasion of evil,
   the character of God is manifested with superior glory, to the view of
   angels and men, who are in a state of holiness and allegiance, and an
   higher accent is thereby given to their praises. For now His justice
   and His mercy, which could not have been otherwise known, are revealed
   in the strongest light; and the redemption of sinners, affords the
   brightest display of His wisdom and love.

   The redeemed are represented as taking the first part in this sublime
   song, verses 8-10. The angels join in the chorus, verses 11, 12 which
   now becomes universal. All the angels, all the saints upon the earth,
   in the state of the dead, or Hades, whether their bodies are buried
   under the earth, or in the sea, with one heart, aim and voice, unite in
   worship and praise. In the preceding verse, Blessing, and honour, and
   glory and power, are ascribed unto the Lamb; but here, the ascription
   is unto Him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. I shall not
   add to what I have already observed to you from the words of the
   doxology. A few remarks, which offer from this verse, taken in
   connection with the former, will bring me to a conclusion of the whole
   subject. And oh! for a coal of fire from the heavenly altar, to warm
   your hearts and mine; that our love, joy and gratitude may be awakened
   into lively exercise, and that the close of our meditations on the
   Messiah may leave us deeply impressed with desires, and well-grounded
   hopes, of meeting ere long before the Throne, to join with the angels
   and the redeemed, in singing the praise of God and the Lamb!

   I.

   The Lord Jesus is not only the Head of the Church redeemed from among
   men, but of the whole intelligent creation, that is in willing
   subjection to God. It belonged to His great design to gather in one
   (Ephesians 1:20) , (to reduce under one head, as the Greek expression
   is) even in Himself, all things that are in heaven, and upon earth. He
   is the Lord and the life both of angels, and of men. Mutability and
   dependence are essential to the state of creatures, however exalted;
   and the angels in glory owe their preservation and confirmation, in
   holiness and happiness, to Him. Hence they are styled the elect angels
   (I Timothy 5:21) , in distinction from those who left their first
   habitation, and sunk into sin and misery. Angels, therefore, constitute
   a branch of that great family, which is named of Him in heaven and
   earth. And having made peace by the blood of His cross, He has effected
   a reconciliation, not only between God and sinners, but also between
   angels and men. How these inhabitants of light are disposed to sinful
   men, considered as sinful, we may learn from many passages of
   Scripture. They are devoted to God, filled with zeal for His honour,
   and wait but for His command to execute vengeance upon His enemies.
   When Herod, infatuated by his pride, and by the flattery of the
   multitude, received their idolatrous compliment with complacence, an
   angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory (Acts
   12:23) . The pestilence which destroyed the people, towards the end of
   David's reign, was under the direction of an angel (II Samuel 24:16,
   17) , and David saw him with his arm stretched out against Jerusalem.
   And in this prophecy, angels are spoken of as employed in pouring forth
   the vials of wrath upon the earth. And still they are ready, we may
   believe, to avenge their Maker's cause upon the wicked, when they are
   commissioned. And if the history of modern times was written by an
   inspired pen, and events, as in the Scriptures, were assigned to their
   proper causes, perhaps the death of many a haughty worm would be
   recorded in words to this effect -- and an angel of the Lord smote him,
   because he gave not God the glory. But, viewing sinners as the subjects
   of redemption, the angels copy from their Lord. They regard them with
   benevolence, and rejoice over every one that repents (Hebrews 1:14) .
   They willingly attend on them, and assist them, in ways beyond our
   conception. They esteem believers in Jesus as their fellow-servants
   (Revelation 22:9) . We have reason to think that they are present in
   our worshipping assemblies; and, perhaps, always so present, that they
   could discover themselves to us in a moment, were it consistent with
   the rules of the divine government, established in this lower world,
   suited to the state of those who are to walk by faith, not by sight.
   Thus far, however differing in other respects, the angels and the
   redeemed, are united and related in one common Head, and have
   fellowship in worship and service. When sinners are enabled, by grace,
   to renounce this world, they are admitted to an honourable alliance,
   with a better.

   II.

   From hence, we may form some judgment of the true nature and high
   honour of that spiritual worship, which is the privilege and glory of
   the Church of God, under the Gospel dispensation [order]. When we meet
   in the name of Jesus, as His people, and with a due observance of His
   institutions, we come to the innumerable company of angels, and to the
   general assembly and church of the first born (Hebrews 12:22, 23) , the
   first born ones, (for the expression is plural). We draw nigh, by
   faith, to the very gate of heaven, to the holiest of all. Men,
   unacquainted with spirituality, are soon weary even of the form of
   worship, unless their minds are amused by a splendid ceremonial. The
   first rise, and subsequent increase, of that pomp and pageantry, which
   in some countries has quite obscured the simplicity and beauty of
   Gospel worship, is to be ascribed to this indisposition of the human
   mind. Our thoughts, while we are in a natural state, are too weak and
   wavering, and too gross, to be pleased with a worship in which there is
   nothing suited to affect the imagination by sensible objects. And,
   therefore, when men think themselves wise, and profess to despise the
   pageantry which captivates the vulgar, their wisdom affords them no
   real advantage, if they have nothing better to substitute, in the room
   of what they reject as insignificant. The very appearance of devotion
   will languish, they will grow remiss, and neglect the Sabbath and
   public assemblies, for want of something to keep up their attention. We
   have abundant proof of this in our own land, and at this time.
   Protestants pride themselves in not being Papists, but, when the
   Protestant religion is understood to mean no more than a renunciation
   of the superstitious ceremonies of the church of Rome, it is, with
   respect to individuals, little, if at all better than popery itself.
   Among us enlightened Protestants, no expedient but preaching the Gospel
   of Christ, will be found sufficient to retain people in a stated
   observance of the Lord's day. But true believers, who understand and
   love the Gospel, do indeed draw nigh to God; and they account a day in
   His courts better than a thousand (Psalm 84:10) , because they can take
   a part in the songs of heaven, and, in spirit and in truth, worship Him
   that sits upon the throne, and the Lamb who redeemed them to God by His
   blood. They know by happy experience, that His promise to be in the
   midst of those who assemble in His name, is truth. Their worship is not
   a mere bodily service, a lifeless form, a round of observances, which
   neither warm the heart nor influence the conduct; but they are
   instructed, comforted and strengthened by waiting upon God. Their
   spiritual senses are exercised; they behold His glory in the glass
   [mirror] of the Gospel, they hear His voice, they feel an impression of
   His power and presence, they taste His goodness, and the virtue of that
   name which is as ointment poured forth, perfumes their tempers and
   conversation.

   III.

   Though the Lamb is worthy of all blessing, and honour, and glory, and
   power; there is a distinct ascription of praise to Him that sits upon
   the Throne.

   The Scripture, which alone can teach us to form right conceptions of
   God and to worship Him acceptably, guides us in a medium, between
   opposite errors and mistakes. Too many persons, ignorant of their own
   state as sinners, and of the awful majesty and holiness of the Most
   High, presume to think of Him, to speak of Him, and, in their way, to
   speak to Him, without being aware of the necessity of a Mediator. But
   they who are without Christ, who is the only door and way to the
   Father, are without God, atheists in the world (Ephesians 2:12) . There
   is a mistake likewise on the other hand, when, though the Deity of the
   Saviour be acknowledged, yet, what we are taught of the ineffable
   distinction in the Godhead, is not duly attended to. It is written, In
   the beginning, . . . the Word was God (John 1:1) . This latter
   expression undoubtedly has a meaning, which, though perfectly
   consistent, is not coincident with the former. The truth contained in
   it, is proposed, not to our curiosity, as a subject of speculation, but
   to our faith. I do not attempt to explain it. But, what God expressly
   declares, we are bound, upon the principles of right reason, to
   believe. For He is Truth, and cannot deceive us. There are three that
   bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit (I
   John 5:7) . These three are frequently spoken of in the Scripture--to
   each of them a distinct part in the economy of salvation is ascribed;
   to each of them the perfections and honours of Deity are attributed.
   Yet there are not three Gods, but one. Consequently, these three are
   one God. This doctrine may be above our comprehension, but cannot be
   contrary to our reason, if it be contained in a revelation from God. If
   it be simply received, upon the authority of the Revealer, it approves
   itself to be true, for it is found to be a key to the whole Scripture,
   which renders the general sense, and scope, everywhere consistent and
   plain. They who proudly reject it, and yet admit the Bible to be a
   divine revelation, are involved in difficulties from which all their
   sagacity and learning cannot free them. In vain they labour by singular
   interpretations, by the minutiae [minor details] of criticism, and by
   an appeal to various readings, and ancient versions, which, in a few
   passages, differ from the copies more generally received --in vain they
   endeavour, by these refinements, to relieve themselves, when pressed by
   the obvious and natural sense of a thousand texts, which confirm the
   faith and hope of plain Christians. The Gospel is designed for the
   poor. But the poor and unlearned would be at a great disadvantage, if
   the Scripture could not be rightly understood without the assistance of
   such learning and such criticism as we often see pressed into service.
   But the Holy Spirit graciously leads those who pray for His teaching,
   into such views of this high subject, as are sufficient to comfort
   their hearts, and to animate their obedience. The faith of those who
   are taught of God, is exercised in their approaches to Him, under two
   different modifications. Both are scriptural, and therefore both are
   safe, and witnessed to by His gracious acceptance and blessing.

   (1.)

   They come to God by Christ. They have access through Him (Ephesians
   2:18) . Unworthy to speak for themselves, they bow their knees in His
   name (Philippians 2:10) . Christians are sufficiently distinguished and
   described by saying, They come to God by Him (Hebrews 7:25) . They come
   to God, they cannot live without Him in the world, as they once did.
   They are now conscious of wants and desires, which only God can
   satisfy. But they are conscious likewise that they are sinners, and
   therefore they durst not approach Him, if they had not the invitation
   of His promise, and an assurance of an Advocate with the Father ( I
   John 2:1)

   (2.)

   They come to God in Christ. He is the great temple in whom the
   all-fullness dwells (Colossians 1:19 and 2:9) ; and they are not afraid
   of idolatry when they worship and honour the Son, even as the Father.
   This distinct application to God, in the person of the Son of His love,
   perhaps, becomes more frequent and familiar as they advance in the
   knowledge of their Lord and Saviour (II Peter 3:18) . They, who seek to
   Him for deliverance from sin and misery, at first, I believe, chiefly
   consider Him as the Advocate and High Priest, who, by the virtue of His
   atonement, and the prevalence of His intercession, is able to save to
   the uttermost. But when the Apostle distributes Christians, according
   to their growth in grace, into the state of babes, young men, and
   fathers (I John 2:13) , he speaks of a more distinct and appropriate
   knowledge of Him, who is from the beginning, as the peculiar privilege,
   and distinguishing attainment of the fathers. He speaks of Him that is
   from the beginning, so often, that we can be at no loss to determine
   whom he intends by the expression. He applies it to Him who was in the
   beginning with God (John 1:1) , and whom he and the other Apostles had
   heard, had seen with their eyes, and touched with their hands (I John
   1:1-3) . An eminent divine (clergyman, John Owen (1616-1683), in his
   Christologia ) points out some especial seasons in the Christian life,
   in which, he thinks, the peculiar pressures of the soul may obtain the
   most sensible and immediate relief, by direct application to the
   Saviour. But there are some believers who find themselves, almost
   continually, in one or other of the situations which he marks as
   occasional. However this may be, I am ready to take it for granted,
   that they who really and cordially [sincerely] believe the Deity of
   Christ, do, at least at some seasons, and upon some occasions,
   expressly direct their prayers to Him. If precedents be required to
   warrant this practice, the New Testament will furnish them in
   abundance. I shall select but a few. The Apostle Paul bowed his knees
   to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, but he often prayed to the
   Lord Jesus. He prayed to Him in the temple (Acts 22:17-21) , and when
   he obtained that answer, My grace is sufficient for thee (II
   Corinthians 12:9) . The prayer of the Apostles and Disciples was
   addressed to Him, previous to the lot, which was to determine a
   successor to Judas (Acts 1:24) . And Stephen committed his departing
   spirit to Him (Acts 7:59) , an act of trust and worship of the highest
   kind, and at the most solemn season. In short, it is a strange
   inconsistence, of any who acknowledge His Deity question the propriety
   of praying to Him. What is it, more or less, than to question the
   propriety of praying to God?

   IV.

   This solemn worship and praise, is referred, ultimately, to Him who
   sits upon the Throne. To the great and glorious God, thus known and
   manifested, in and by, and with the Lamb that was slain.

   The mediatorial Kingdom of Christ will have a period. He will reign as
   Mediator until He has subdued all enemies under His feet, and perfected
   His whole work. Then His Kingdom in this sense will cease; He will
   deliver it up to the Father, That God may be all in all (I Corinthians
   15:28) . This passage is difficult, that is, the subject is too great
   for our faculties, in their present state of imperfection, fully to
   comprehend. For the difficulties we meet with in Scripture are, more
   properly, to be ascribed to our ignorance. The Son, as man, is even now
   subject to the Father. And God is undoubtedly all in all, at present,
   and from everlasting to everlasting. But His Kingdom, here, is to be
   taken figuratively, for the subjects of His Kingdom, His people whom He
   received as a trust and a treasure. These He will deliver up, and the
   form of His administration and government over them will be changed.
   They will then have no more sins to confess, there will be no more
   dangers requiring the care and tenderness of a Shepherd, no enemies to
   be controlled, and the ordinances and means of grace, accommodated to
   their wants and weakness while in this world, will be no longer
   necessary. But MESSIAH, the Lamb that was slain, will ever be the Head,
   and Lord of the creation, the medium of communication of the light and
   love of God to His people; and God in Him, the object of their eternal
   adoration and praise.

   Then the grand, ultimate, final cause of all the manifestations of God
   will be completely obtained. The glory of the great Creator and
   Lawgiver, the splendour of all His perfections, will forever shine,
   without a veil or cloud, and with a brightness which could not have
   been known by creatures, had not the entrance of evil given occasion
   for a display of His wisdom and love, in overruling it to the praise of
   His glorious grace.

   Thus, according to the measure of my ability and experience, I have
   endeavoured to point out to you the meaning and importance of the
   well-chosen series of scriptural passages, which are set to music in
   the Oratorio of the Messiah. Great is the Lord MESSIAH, and greatly to
   be praised! I have attempted to set before you a sketch of what the
   Scripture teaches us, concerning His person, undertakings and success;
   the misery of those whom He came to save, the happiness to which He
   raises them, and the wonderful plan and progress of redeeming love. But
   who is sufficient for these things? Alas! how small a portion of His
   ways are we able to trace! But I would be thankful, that the desire of
   attempting this great subject was put into my heart, and that having
   obtained help of God, I have been preserved and enabled to finish my
   design. Imperfect as my execution of it has been, I cannot doubt that
   the various topics I have been led to insist on, are the great truths
   of God. For what is properly my own, the defects and weaknesses, which
   mix with my best services, I entreat His forgiveness, and request your
   candour. But I do not hesitate to say, that the substance of what I
   have advanced, deserves and demands your very serious attention.

   It is probable, that those of my hearers who admire this Oratorio, and
   are often present when it is performed, may think me harsh and singular
   in my opinion: that of all our musical compositions, this is the most
   improper for a public entertainment. But while it continues to be
   equally acceptable, whether performed in a church, or in the theatre,
   and while the greater part of the performers and of the audience, are
   the same at both places, I can rate it no higher than as one of the
   many fashionable amusements which mark the character of this age of
   dissipation. Though the subject be serious and solemn, in the highest
   sense, yea, for that very reason, and though the music is, in a
   striking manner, adapted to the subject, yet, if the far greater part
   of the people who frequent the Oratorio, are evidently unaffected by
   the Redeemer's love, and uninfluenced by His commands, I am afraid it
   is no better than a profanation of the name and truths of God, a
   crucifying of the Son of God afresh. You must judge for yourselves. If
   you think differently from me, you will act accordingly. --Yet, permit
   me to hope and to pray, that the next time you hear the Messiah, God
   may bring something that you have heard in the course of these sermons,
   nearly connected with the peace and welfare of your souls, effectually
   to your remembrance.

   I would humbly hope, that some persons, who were strangers to the power
   and grace of MESSIAH when I entered upon this service, are now desirous
   of seeking Him with their whole hearts. Yes, I trust I have not
   laboured wholly in vain. The Gospel is the rod of His strength (Psalm
   110:2) , which, when accompanied by the power of His Spirit, produces
   greater effects than the wonder-working rod of Moses. It causes the
   blind to see, the deaf to hear, and the dead to live. A faithful
   minister, will account a single instance of success, a rich recompense
   for the labour of a life. May this joy be mine! May the Lord encourage
   you to go on seeking Him. Then He will surely be found of you. An open
   door is set before you (Revelation 3:8) , and if you are truly willing
   to enter, none shall be able to shut it.

   But may I not fear, that I am still speaking to others, who, to this
   hour, have no cordial admiring thoughts of the great Saviour? Alas!
   should you die in your present frame of mind, let me once more entreat
   you to consider what your situation and employment will be, when all
   His redeemed people, and all His holy angels, shall join in worshipping
   and praising Him, in the great day of His appearance. Unless you
   repent, lay down your arms, and submit to His golden sceptre, your doom
   is already pronounced. Awful are the words of the Lord, by the Prophet,
   and very applicable to your case, if (which may His mercy prevent!) you
   should die in your sins. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, Behold my
   servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall
   drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but
   ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart,
   but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of
   spirit (Isaiah 65:13, 14) . If the Scribes and Pharisees were filled
   with envy and grief when the children in the temple sang, Hosanna to
   the Son of David (Matthew 21:15) ; what must be their anguish and
   remorse, their rage and despair, when the whole creation shall join in
   His praise? If your thoughts of Him now, are like theirs, tremble at
   your danger; for unless you repent, your lot must be with them
   hereafter.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:31   [2]2:17   [3]3:15   [4]3:15   [5]3:18   [6]19:16   [7]45:4
   [8]45:5

   Exodus

   [9]9:16   [10]15   [11]15:11   [12]18:11

   Leviticus

   [13]16:2

   Numbers

   [14]10:35   [15]16:32   [16]35:19   [17]35:21

   Deuteronomy

   [18]28:23

   Joshua

   [19]10:1-4

   Judges

   [20]5:4   [21]5:5

   Ruth

   [22]4:1-3

   1 Samuel

   [23]4:21   [24]18:6   [25]18:7

   2 Samuel

   [26]15:31   [27]24:16   [28]24:17

   1 Kings

   [29]8:27   [30]12:15   [31]19:10   [32]20:11

   2 Kings

   [33]6:16

   Esther

   [34]6:1

   Job

   [35]1:10   [36]3:17   [37]9:4   [38]9:12   [39]15:26   [40]19:25
   [41]19:26   [42]34:29   [43]38:10   [44]38:11   [45]40:4   [46]41:6

   Psalms

   [47]2:1-3   [48]2:3   [49]2:4   [50]2:4   [51]2:9   [52]2:9   [53]8:2
   [54]9:17   [55]12:4   [56]17:15   [57]19:1   [58]19:1   [59]19:6
   [60]23   [61]23:5   [62]24:7-10   [63]34:5   [64]34:8   [65]35:20
   [66]37:13   [67]44:3   [68]45:3   [69]46:1   [70]46:4   [71]50:6
   [72]50:21   [73]57:4   [74]62:11   [75]68:11   [76]68:18   [77]76:10
   [78]84:7   [79]84:10   [80]93:3   [81]93:4   [82]94:9   [83]97:2
   [84]103:20   [85]104:24   [86]104:25   [87]110:2   [88]110:4
   [89]113:6   [90]115:1   [91]115:1   [92]116:15   [93]119:49
   [94]126:5   [95]139:14   [96]145:14   [97]145:16   [98]147:4

   Proverbs

   [99]8:22   [100]8:23   [101]8:31   [102]11:4   [103]11:30
   [104]13:15   [105]14:9   [106]16:23   [107]23:29

   Isaiah

   [108]2:2-4   [109]2:4   [110]2:11   [111]6:1   [112]6:2   [113]6:3
   [114]6:5   [115]10:15   [116]11:6-9   [117]11:13   [118]12:1
   [119]12:2   [120]14:27   [121]25:8   [122]25:9   [123]25:9
   [124]28:16   [125]30:10   [126]30:20   [127]34:4   [128]37:33
   [129]40:15   [130]42:3   [131]42:8   [132]43:13   [133]44:20
   [134]45:1-5   [135]48:4   [136]49:24   [137]49:25   [138]51:11
   [139]52:7   [140]53:1   [141]54:5   [142]54:13   [143]54:17
   [144]55:10   [145]55:11   [146]57:15   [147]57:15   [148]59:5
   [149]60:12   [150]60:18-22   [151]60:20   [152]60:20   [153]61:10
   [154]63:3   [155]65:1   [156]65:13   [157]65:14

   Jeremiah

   [158]8:6   [159]23:24   [160]44:16   [161]44:17

   Ezekiel

   [162]33:11   [163]34:23-26   [164]36:25-27   [165]36:26

   Daniel

   [166]3:27   [167]4:35   [168]4:35   [169]5:5   [170]5:6   [171]6:23
   [172]9:7   [173]12:2

   Hosea

   [174]3:4   [175]3:5   [176]6:3   [177]6:3

   Amos

   [178]3:3

   Micah

   [179]6:6

   Zechariah

   [180]2:5   [181]2:5   [182]2:10   [183]2:10   [184]2:11   [185]3:1-4

   Malachi

   [186]1:6   [187]4:1

   Matthew

   [188]3:9   [189]3:12   [190]3:17   [191]5:28   [192]7:22   [193]7:23
   [194]8:22   [195]9:12   [196]9:38   [197]10:30   [198]11:20-24
   [199]13:24   [200]13:30   [201]13:43   [202]13:47   [203]16:17
   [204]16:26   [205]17:20   [206]19:14   [207]20:15   [208]21:15
   [209]22:21   [210]23:8-10   [211]23:30   [212]23:31   [213]25:1-12
   [214]25:24   [215]25:32   [216]25:34   [217]25:46   [218]26:24
   [219]28:18   [220]28:18   [221]28:19   [222]28:20

   Mark

   [223]4:26   [224]4:39   [225]5:7   [226]5:15   [227]6:20   [228]9:7
   [229]9:44   [230]9:45   [231]9:48

   Luke

   [232]1:35   [233]1:74   [234]1:75   [235]2:13   [236]2:14   [237]4:18
   [238]4:28   [239]4:29   [240]6:24   [241]6:25   [242]6:25   [243]7:47
   [244]8:13-15   [245]12:4   [246]12:20   [247]12:20   [248]13:25
   [249]13:26   [250]13:27   [251]16:22   [252]16:25   [253]17:26-30
   [254]19:5   [255]19:14   [256]22:31   [257]22:32   [258]22:44
   [259]24:51

   John

   [260]1:1   [261]1:1   [262]1:1   [263]1:18   [264]1:48   [265]1:48
   [266]3:3   [267]3:16   [268]3:16   [269]3:18   [270]3:19   [271]3:19
   [272]3:35   [273]4:22   [274]4:29   [275]5:23   [276]5:24   [277]5:29
   [278]5:39   [279]6:44   [280]7:18   [281]7:37   [282]8:56   [283]8:58
   [284]11:25   [285]11:48   [286]12:26   [287]12:32   [288]12:41
   [289]12:41   [290]13:22-25   [291]14:1   [292]14:9   [293]14:14
   [294]14:19   [295]14:21   [296]15:5   [297]15:15   [298]15:19
   [299]15:19   [300]16   [301]16:7   [302]16:8   [303]16:33   [304]17:3
   [305]17:3   [306]17:24   [307]20:25   [308]20:28

   Acts

   [309]1:9   [310]1:24   [311]2:1-4   [312]2:4-37   [313]3:11
   [314]5:24   [315]5:29   [316]5:29   [317]5:31   [318]5:38
   [319]7:56-60   [320]7:59   [321]7:60   [322]8:8   [323]9   [324]9:1
   [325]10:34   [326]10:35   [327]10:38   [328]11:18   [329]12:6-10
   [330]12:23   [331]12:23   [332]13:26   [333]13:32   [334]13:33
   [335]13:39   [336]15:9   [337]16:14   [338]16:25   [339]16:31
   [340]17:11   [341]17:18   [342]17:18   [343]17:28   [344]17:30
   [345]17:31   [346]17:32   [347]19:28   [348]20:28   [349]20:28
   [350]20:29   [351]20:30   [352]22:17-21   [353]23:7   [354]24:25
   [355]25:19   [356]25:24   [357]26:11   [358]26:18   [359]26:27

   Romans

   [360]1:4   [361]1:20   [362]3:19   [363]3:19   [364]3:19   [365]3:20
   [366]3:23   [367]3:24   [368]3:25   [369]3:25   [370]3:25   [371]3:26
   [372]4:4   [373]4:5   [374]5:1   [375]5:6   [376]5:8   [377]5:12
   [378]5:14   [379]5:20   [380]7:12-23   [381]8:26   [382]8:26
   [383]8:30   [384]8:31   [385]8:33   [386]8:34   [387]8:37   [388]9:3
   [389]9:5   [390]9:18   [391]10:4   [392]10:4   [393]10:15
   [394]10:18   [395]11:24   [396]11:25   [397]11:25   [398]11:26
   [399]11:33   [400]11:33-36   [401]12:18   [402]13:7   [403]14:9

   1 Corinthians

   [404]1:23   [405]1:23   [406]1:24   [407]1:30   [408]1:30   [409]1:30
   [410]1:31   [411]2:3   [412]2:9   [413]2:10   [414]2:14   [415]3:4
   [416]3:6   [417]3:9   [418]3:21   [419]4:7   [420]4:7   [421]6:9-11
   [422]6:19   [423]9:27   [424]15:5-8   [425]15:19   [426]15:20
   [427]15:21   [428]15:22   [429]15:28   [430]15:51-53   [431]15:54
   [432]15:55   [433]15:56   [434]15:57   [435]16:22

   2 Corinthians

   [436]1:8   [437]1:24   [438]4:4   [439]4:4   [440]4:4   [441]4:17
   [442]4:17   [443]5:10   [444]5:10   [445]5:17   [446]5:19   [447]6:16
   [448]6:18   [449]11:14   [450]12:9

   Galatians

   [451]2:20   [452]2:21   [453]3:1   [454]4:1   [455]4:2   [456]4:4
   [457]4:15   [458]4:19   [459]4:29   [460]5:1   [461]5:6   [462]6:14

   Ephesians

   [463]1:6   [464]1:10   [465]1:20   [466]2:1   [467]2:2   [468]2:3
   [469]2:6   [470]2:12   [471]2:12   [472]2:18   [473]2:20-22
   [474]3:8   [475]3:8   [476]3:14   [477]3:15   [478]3:17   [479]4:8
   [480]4:21   [481]6:12   [482]6:24

   Philippians

   [483]1:11   [484]1:23   [485]2:9   [486]2:9   [487]2:10   [488]2:15
   [489]3:21

   Colossians

   [490]1:13   [491]1:18   [492]1:19   [493]1:27   [494]2:6   [495]2:15
   [496]3:1   [497]3:3   [498]3:4

   1 Thessalonians

   [499]2:8   [500]2:12   [501]3:8   [502]4:15   [503]4:16   [504]5:13

   2 Thessalonians

   [505]2:11

   1 Timothy

   [506]3:16   [507]5:6   [508]5:21   [509]5:21   [510]6:16

   2 Timothy

   [511]1:7   [512]1:12   [513]3:12   [514]3:12   [515]3:12   [516]4:5

   Titus

   [517]2:11   [518]2:12   [519]2:12   [520]3:3   [521]3:3

   Hebrews

   [522]1:3   [523]1:3   [524]1:4   [525]1:5   [526]1:6   [527]1:6
   [528]1:14   [529]1:14   [530]2:10   [531]2:11   [532]3:13   [533]4:13
   [534]4:13   [535]4:14   [536]5:13   [537]5:14   [538]6:12   [539]6:20
   [540]7:25   [541]7:25   [542]7:25   [543]8:12   [544]9:6-12
   [545]9:16   [546]9:22   [547]9:24   [548]9:26   [549]10:26
   [550]10:27   [551]11:1   [552]11:13   [553]11:38   [554]12:6-8
   [555]12:11   [556]12:14   [557]12:14   [558]12:15   [559]12:22
   [560]12:23   [561]13:7   [562]13:8   [563]13:16

   James

   [564]1:13   [565]2:19   [566]3:18

   1 Peter

   [567]2:6   [568]2:11   [569]5:8

   2 Peter

   [570]2:18   [571]2:19   [572]3:11   [573]3:18

   1 John

   [574]1:1-3   [575]2:1   [576]2:1   [577]2:13   [578]2:28   [579]3:2
   [580]3:14   [581]5:4   [582]5:4   [583]5:7   [584]5:7   [585]5:10
   [586]5:19   [587]5:20

   Jude

   [588]1:25

   Revelation

   [589]1:5   [590]1:5   [591]1:5   [592]1:7   [593]1:8   [594]1:11
   [595]1:18   [596]2:11   [597]3:8   [598]3:20   [599]5:9   [600]5:12
   [601]5:12   [602]5:13   [603]6:13   [604]6:14   [605]6:15   [606]6:16
   [607]6:16   [608]6:17   [609]7:9   [610]7:13   [611]9:6   [612]11:15
   [613]11:15   [614]15:3   [615]16:21   [616]18:21   [617]19:6
   [618]19:15   [619]19:16   [620]20:11   [621]21:15   [622]21:21
   [623]22:9   [624]22:17

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [625]5:1-5   [626]5:4   [627]5:5
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xvii-p11.8
   2. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xvii-p18.6
   3. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xv-p8.20
   4. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xxi-p22.12
   5. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xvii-p18.10
   6. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=16#xx-p53.10
   7. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=4#v-p10.4
   8. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=5#v-p10.5
   9. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=9&scrV=16#xi-p30.8
  10. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vi-p10.13
  11. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=11#xxv-p39.4
  12. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=11#xi-p17.11
  13. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=2#xxiii-p16.6
  14. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=10&scrV=35#vi-p10.4
  15. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=32#xix-p9.8
  16. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=19#xv-p19.19
  17. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=21#xv-p19.20
  18. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=23#xxiii-p36.6
  19. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=1#xxi-p41.45
  20. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vi-p10.7
  21. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi-p10.8
  22. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xv-p19.21
  23. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v-p50.29
  24. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=6#vi-p10.16
  25. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vi-p10.17
  26. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=31#xiv-p34.35
  27. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=16#xxvi-p20.17
  28. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=17#xxvi-p20.18
  29. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=27#xv-p39.18
  30. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=15#xiv-p34.54
  31. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iv-p8.12
  32. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=11#xv-p31.9
  33. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=16#iv-p8.24
  34. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xiv-p34.57
  35. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xiv-p39.10
  36. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xix-p27.8
  37. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=4#x-p13.4
  38. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=12#xxii-p50.16
  39. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=26#xxiii-p50.19
  40. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#xv-p5.1
  41. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=26#xv-p5.2
  42. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=34&scrV=29#xxiii-p39.23
  43. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=10#xxv-p33.12
  44. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=11#xxv-p33.13
  45. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=4#xxiii-p24.4
  46. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=6#xxiii-p24.5
  47. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=1#ix-p5.1
  48. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xiv-p25.22
  49. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=4#x-p5.1
  50. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xiv-p25.23
  51. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xi-p5.1
  52. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xi-p9.26
  53. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=2#xx-p43.6
  54. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=17#xiv-p48.4
  55. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=4#xi-p17.7
  56. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#xv-p42.9
  57. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#ii-p35.43
  58. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#viii-p9.4
  59. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=6#viii-p11.6
  60. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=0#ii-p47.3
  61. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=5#xxiii-p39.19
  62. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=7#ii-p5.1
  63. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#x-p18.17
  64. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#xxiii-p50.4
  65. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=20#ix-p25.27
  66. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=13#xix-p30.14
  67. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=3#xx-p50.6
  68. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=3#xiv-p21.5
  69. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=1#xxiii-p47.3
  70. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=4#xxv-p33.27
  71. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=6#xxiii-p50.8
  72. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=21#xx-p19.10
  73. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=4#vii-p34.3
  74. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=11#xxv-p24.4
  75. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=11#vi-p5.1
  76. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=18#v-p5.1
  77. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=10#xiv-p34.18
  78. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=7#xv-p37.18
  79. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#xxvi-p22.11
  80. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=93&scrV=3#xxv-p33.7
  81. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=93&scrV=4#xxv-p33.8
  82. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=9#xxv-p33.4
  83. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=2#ii-p35.51
  84. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=20#iv-p12.3
  85. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=24#ii-p35.46
  86. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=25#ii-p35.47
  87. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=2#xxvi-p46.5
  88. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#xv-p19.60
  89. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=6#xiv-p42.4
  90. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=1#xx-p50.10
  91. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=1#xxi-p31.32
  92. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#xxi-p52.6
  93. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=49#xx-p45.5
  94. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=5#xix-p24.18
  95. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=14#xi-p33.6
  96. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=14#xxv-p33.24
  97. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=16#xxiii-p33.26
  98. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=4#xxv-p14.4
  99. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=22#iii-p27.8
 100. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=23#xxv-p27.7
 101. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iii-p27.9
 102. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=4#xix-p35.34
 103. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=30#vi-p27.6
 104. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=15#xi-p20.11
 105. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=9#xxiii-p11.5
 106. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vi-p35.11
 107. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=29#xi-p20.17
 108. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xiii-p19.11
 109. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xiii-p39.4
 110. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xviii-p40.9
 111. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#ii-p30.8
 112. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv-p12.9
 113. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iv-p12.10
 114. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=5#xxiii-p19.16
 115. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=15#xiv-p31.13
 116. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xiii-p19.17
 117. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=13#xiii-p34.4
 118. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vii-p19.9
 119. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=12&scrV=2#x-p18.25
 120. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=27#x-p38.14
 121. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=8#xix-p13.3
 122. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=9#iv-p21.11
 123. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=9#xvii-p44.8
 124. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#xiii-p9.4
 125. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=10#xxiv-p36.27
 126. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=20#vii-p34.6
 127. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=4#xi-p9.7
 128. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=33#xxi-p48.3
 129. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=15#xi-p9.16
 130. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=3#xv-p28.27
 131. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iii-p11.9
 132. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=13#x-p38.4
 133. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=20#xxiv-p28.5
 134. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=1#xiii-p11.3
 135. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=4#v-p39.6
 136. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=24#xxiv-p26.36
 137. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=25#xxiv-p26.37
 138. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=11#xix-p30.32
 139. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=7#vii-p13.13
 140. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#vii-p21.7
 141. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#ii-p30.5
 142. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=13#iii-p9.10
 143. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=17#xxii-p73.4
 144. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=10#vi-p21.11
 145. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=11#vi-p21.12
 146. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#v-p52.6
 147. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#xxii-p56.4
 148. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=5#xxvi-p10.6
 149. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=12#xiii-p45.9
 150. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=18#xiii-p19.29
 151. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=20#xi-p40.6
 152. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=20#xix-p30.26
 153. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=10#xxv-p36.3
 154. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=3#ii-p32.7
 155. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=1#xxi-p22.20
 156. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=13#xxvi-p48.6
 157. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=14#xxvi-p48.7
 158. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=6#xxiii-p27.19
 159. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#ii-p53.3
 160. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=16#xxi-p56.4
 161. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=17#xxi-p56.5
 162. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#viii-p25.8
 163. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=23#xiii-p19.37
 164. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#xiii-p19.41
 165. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#v-p39.10
 166. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=27#xxi-p50.6
 167. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=35#xxv-p24.15
 168. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=35#xiv-p21.16
 169. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xxv-p33.19
 170. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xxv-p33.20
 171. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=23#xxi-p50.3
 172. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xxiii-p22.4
 173. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xvii-p42.11
 174. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=4#viii-p34.5
 175. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=5#viii-p34.6
 176. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xxv-p48.6
 177. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xv-p37.4
 178. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xxi-p22.26
 179. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xxiv-p32.17
 180. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v-p50.8
 181. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xii-p20.4
 182. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v-p50.9
 183. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xiii-p19.57
 184. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xiii-p19.58
 185. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxiii-p39.16
 186. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xx-p25.5
 187. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#x-p45.8
 188. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#x-p35.16
 189. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xii-p30.4
 190. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxi-p25.5
 191. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#xx-p28.20
 192. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vi-p46.3
 193. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vi-p46.4
 194. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#ix-p25.23
 195. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#xxiv-p22.14
 196. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=38#vi-p38.10
 197. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=30#xiv-p39.7
 198. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=20#viii-p36.6
 199. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=24#xii-p30.7
 200. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=30#xix-p35.21
 201. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=43#xxv-p16.13
 202. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=47#xii-p30.8
 203. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#iii-p9.5
 204. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#xix-p35.31
 205. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=20#xv-p28.23
 206. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=14#xxiv-p50.5
 207. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#xxii-p50.8
 208. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xxvi-p48.11
 209. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=21#ix-p25.11
 210. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=8#xii-p38.4
 211. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=30#ix-p20.4
 212. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=31#ix-p20.5
 213. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#xxii-p75.11
 214. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=24#xxii-p58.3
 215. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=32#xi-p38.17
 216. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#xviii-p47.4
 217. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#xix-p11.12
 218. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=24#xix-p11.16
 219. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#xxv-p24.12
 220. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#xii-p14.31
 221. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#iii-p21.8
 222. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vi-p12.10
 223. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=26#xxii-p71.23
 224. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=39#xv-p19.12
 225. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=7#ii-p49.8
 226. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=15#xxiv-p26.41
 227. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=20#ix-p16.11
 228. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xv-p37.14
 229. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=44#xix-p35.16
 230. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=45#xix-p35.17
 231. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=48#xix-p35.18
 232. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iii-p32.5
 233. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=74#xxi-p28.23
 234. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=75#xxi-p28.24
 235. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv-p12.21
 236. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv-p12.22
 237. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vii-p11.9
 238. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=28#xxii-p36.7
 239. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=29#xxii-p36.8
 240. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=24#xix-p35.6
 241. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=25#xi-p38.23
 242. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=25#xix-p35.7
 243. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#xix-p18.22
 244. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vii-p11.15
 245. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=4#xxi-p52.3
 246. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xiv-p48.8
 247. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xviii-p40.15
 248. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=25#xviii-p40.23
 249. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=26#xii-p30.16
 250. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=27#xii-p30.17
 251. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#xvii-p39.8
 252. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=25#xix-p35.12
 253. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=26#xviii-p40.5
 254. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=5#vi-p25.7
 255. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=14#v-p35.15
 256. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#xxiii-p27.28
 257. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=32#xxiii-p27.29
 258. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#xxiv-p32.7
 259. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=51#ii-p19.6
 260. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxvi-p27.7
 261. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxvi-p33.33
 262. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii-p35.74
 263. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xxv-p27.28
 264. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#x-p18.30
 265. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vi-p25.10
 266. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv-p27.3
 267. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p23.11
 268. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xxii-p29.13
 269. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xxii-p63.39
 270. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#viii-p25.4
 271. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xxii-p58.10
 272. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#xii-p14.27
 273. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iii-p11.13
 274. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=29#vi-p25.13
 275. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xxv-p14.14
 276. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xxii-p68.8
 277. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=29#xvii-p42.7
 278. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#xxii-p63.13
 279. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#xxii-p36.4
 280. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vii-p29.8
 281. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=37#xxiii-p33.16
 282. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#xv-p8.35
 283. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#xv-p19.48
 284. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xvii-p27.6
 285. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=48#ix-p30.7
 286. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=26#v-p28.6
 287. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=32#xxv-p16.9
 288. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#ii-p30.16
 289. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#iv-p12.14
 290. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=22#xvii-p39.13
 291. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#xxiii-p33.12
 292. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#xxv-p27.20
 293. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=14#xxiii-p33.4
 294. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=19#ii-p41.8
 295. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii-p37.4
 296. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#xxii-p68.11
 297. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#xxv-p27.29
 298. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#xix-p30.18
 299. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#xxii-p53.3
 300. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v-p43.4
 301. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v-p41.4
 302. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#xxii-p45.5
 303. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#xix-p30.7
 304. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#xxv-p27.14
 305. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#ii-p35.79
 306. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#ii-p41.11
 307. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#xvi-p25.5
 308. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iii-p11.6
 309. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#ii-p19.9
 310. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=24#xxvi-p33.86
 311. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi-p12.6
 312. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v-p41.7
 313. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vii-p29.5
 314. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=24#x-p25.5
 315. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=29#ix-p25.6
 316. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=29#xx-p25.9
 317. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#xxi-p25.16
 318. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=38#xvi-p37.3
 319. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=56#xxi-p52.9
 320. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#xxvi-p33.89
 321. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#xx-p34.3
 322. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii-p11.3
 323. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#x-p25.11
 324. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=1#xxii-p42.3
 325. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=34#xxiv-p56.20
 326. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=35#xxiv-p56.21
 327. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#ix-p10.8
 328. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=18#xxi-p25.12
 329. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xxiv-p24.3
 330. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=23#xxvi-p20.14
 331. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=23#x-p25.8
 332. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=26#viii-p36.3
 333. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=32#iii-p35.5
 334. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iii-p35.6
 335. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=39#xxii-p63.35
 336. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#xv-p28.8
 337. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#xxii-p45.8
 338. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=25#xxv-p33.16
 339. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=31#ix-p18.4
 340. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#vii-p44.4
 341. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=18#xviii-p28.12
 342. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=18#xxii-p36.9
 343. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#xx-p19.4
 344. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#xxii-p33.4
 345. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=31#xxii-p33.5
 346. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=32#vii-p21.10
 347. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=28#ix-p16.14
 348. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#xxiv-p32.22
 349. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#xii-p27.32
 350. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=29#v-p50.38
 351. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=30#v-p50.39
 352. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=17#xxvi-p33.79
 353. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=7#xiv-p34.51
 354. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=25#viii-p36.9
 355. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=19#iv-p8.46
 356. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=24#xxiii-p13.8
 357. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=11#xxii-p42.7
 358. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#xxiv-p28.9
 359. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=27#xvi-p42.5
 360. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii-p35.12
 361. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#viii-p9.34
 362. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xxii-p63.30
 363. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xvii-p11.13
 364. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xxii-p58.6
 365. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#xxii-p63.31
 366. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#xxii-p26.3
 367. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#xxii-p33.8
 368. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#xxiv-p32.28
 369. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v-p16.6
 370. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#xxii-p33.9
 371. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#xxiv-p32.29
 372. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xxii-p63.51
 373. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#xxii-p63.52
 374. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xxii-p63.43
 375. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xxii-p29.16
 376. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xxii-p29.17
 377. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xvii-p11.4
 378. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#xxiv-p50.9
 379. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#x-p9.6
 380. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=12#xvii-p32.4
 381. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xxiii-p27.15
 382. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv-p24.10
 383. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=30#xxii-p63.17
 384. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=31#xxi-p5.1
 385. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=33#xxii-p5.1
 386. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#xxiii-p5.1
 387. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=37#xx-p9.30
 388. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#xxiv-p36.6
 389. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#x-p18.13
 390. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=18#xxii-p50.12
 391. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#xxii-p63.47
 392. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#xv-p8.30
 393. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=15#vii-p5.1
 394. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=18#viii-p5.1
 395. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=24#xxiii-p13.11
 396. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#x-p38.10
 397. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#viii-p34.10
 398. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=26#viii-p34.11
 399. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#xxiv-p41.20
 400. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#viii-p30.10
 401. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xxi-p41.49
 402. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=7#ix-p25.19
 403. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi-p23.11
 404. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi-p21.6
 405. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#xvi-p34.7
 406. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi-p21.7
 407. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#xxv-p27.10
 408. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#vi-p23.4
 409. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#xix-p18.8
 410. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xxi-p31.8
 411. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii-p40.6
 412. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xix-p35.24
 413. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xviii-p33.4
 414. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi-p35.4
 415. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xii-p33.13
 416. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi-p44.7
 417. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xiii-p9.7
 418. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xiv-p45.9
 419. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xxiv-p41.11
 420. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xxiv-p41.15
 421. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=9#xxii-p39.6
 422. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v-p48.4
 423. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#vi-p46.8
 424. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#xvi-p22.5
 425. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=19#xix-p30.22
 426. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=20#xvi-p5.1
 427. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#xvii-p5.1
 428. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#xvii-p5.2
 429. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#xxvi-p38.8
 430. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=51#xviii-p5.1
 431. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#xix-p5.1
 432. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=55#xx-p5.1
 433. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=56#xx-p5.2
 434. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=57#xx-p5.3
 435. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=22#xxiv-p34.15
 436. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi-p41.4
 437. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii-p44.7
 438. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii-p21.3
 439. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xxi-p43.8
 440. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xxii-p36.3
 441. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxiii-p36.14
 442. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xix-p30.29
 443. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiv-p50.15
 444. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xi-p38.6
 445. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#xxii-p53.7
 446. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#xxi-p22.16
 447. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v-p48.14
 448. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#xiv-p45.5
 449. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#xix-p27.5
 450. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#xxvi-p33.83
 451. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v-p48.18
 452. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=21#xxiii-p11.20
 453. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii-p9.29
 454. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xxii-p68.15
 455. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xxii-p68.16
 456. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii-p32.9
 457. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii-p9.17
 458. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vii-p40.3
 459. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=29#v-p37.4
 460. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xii-p38.8
 461. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xv-p28.4
 462. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi-p23.7
 463. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxi-p31.4
 464. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv-p12.37
 465. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=20#xxvi-p20.4
 466. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xvii-p21.5
 467. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xxiv-p26.18
 468. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxii-p39.3
 469. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v-p28.9
 470. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxvi-p27.3
 471. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii-p11.17
 472. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xxvi-p30.5
 473. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#xiii-p9.8
 474. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xxv-p30.4
 475. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xxi-p9.30
 476. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xxiv-p12.26
 477. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xxiv-p12.27
 478. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v-p48.7
 479. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v-p16.3
 480. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=21#vi-p27.10
 481. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#xxiii-p39.10
 482. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=24#xii-p33.8
 483. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xxii-p75.8
 484. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#xxi-p9.20
 485. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii-p35.18
 486. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiv-p18.14
 487. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxvi-p30.8
 488. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xxi-p28.80
 489. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xv-p44.4
 490. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xxii-p68.4
 491. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xii-p27.5
 492. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#xxvi-p33.11
 493. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v-p48.10
 494. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=6#xxi-p25.20
 495. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=15#ii-p32.11
 496. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xvii-p30.17
 497. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xix-p24.26
 498. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ii-p51.8
 499. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xxiv-p36.21
 500. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxi-p28.76
 501. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii-p27.49
 502. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=15#xx-p34.4
 503. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xi-p38.13
 504. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vii-p13.30
 505. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxvi-p14.18
 506. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xviii-p23.8
 507. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xix-p24.12
 508. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=21#xxvi-p20.10
 509. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p12.41
 510. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#ii-p35.25
 511. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xii-p40.4
 512. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxii-p71.29
 513. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#x-p31.43
 514. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v-p37.12
 515. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxi-p41.57
 516. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vi-p27.3
 517. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxi-p28.56
 518. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#ix-p12.4
 519. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxi-p28.57
 520. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xi-p20.21
 521. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xix-p24.6
 522. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii-p35.70
 523. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#x-p18.9
 524. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii-p39.6
 525. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p5.1
 526. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii-p32.13
 527. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv-p5.1
 528. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxvi-p20.27
 529. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv-p12.28
 530. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxiii-p39.4
 531. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv-p21.3
 532. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xi-p30.13
 533. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xxiii-p33.8
 534. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv-p24.7
 535. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=14#ii-p51.4
 536. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xxii-p23.5
 537. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=14#xxii-p23.6
 538. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=12#xxv-p42.14
 539. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=20#ii-p41.4
 540. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#xxiii-p13.3
 541. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#xxvi-p30.12
 542. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#ii-p44.5
 543. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=12#xxii-p63.55
 544. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xxiii-p16.11
 545. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=16#xv-p23.14
 546. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#xxiv-p32.12
 547. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v-p16.10
 548. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=26#xxv-p46.5
 549. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=26#xix-p11.24
 550. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=27#xix-p11.25
 551. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iv-p8.27
 552. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=13#xv-p8.24
 553. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=38#x-p29.7
 554. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xix-p30.10
 555. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#xvii-p34.4
 556. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xxiv-p56.49
 557. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xv-p34.4
 558. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v-p50.32
 559. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#xxvi-p22.4
 560. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#xxvi-p22.5
 561. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#vii-p37.3
 562. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#xv-p19.44
 563. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=16#vii-p44.11
 564. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xiv-p28.4
 565. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xi-p23.5
 566. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xi-p20.7
 567. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#xxi-p25.8
 568. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#ix-p25.15
 569. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xxi-p43.4
 570. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xxiv-p26.22
 571. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xxiv-p26.23
 572. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=11#xviii-p49.5
 573. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xxvi-p33.28
 574. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxvi-p33.35
 575. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxiii-p13.14
 576. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxvi-p30.17
 577. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xxvi-p33.31
 578. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=28#xvii-p44.4
 579. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xv-p42.5
 580. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xxi-p41.14
 581. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xv-p28.12
 582. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xxi-p41.61
 583. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xxvi-p27.11
 584. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii-p17.17
 585. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi-p35.8
 586. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#x-p29.3
 587. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#ii-p30.21
 588. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=25#xxv-p27.4
 589. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xxv-p16.6
 590. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xiv-p25.16
 591. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xix-p18.16
 592. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xi-p38.9
 593. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xxv-p24.8
 594. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xxv-p24.9
 595. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xv-p19.31
 596. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xix-p11.9
 597. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xxvi-p46.8
 598. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#ii-p49.4
 599. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xxiv-p5.1
 600. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xxv-p5.1
 601. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv-p12.18
 602. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xxvi-p5.1
 603. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=13#xi-p9.11
 604. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xi-p9.12
 605. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iv-p21.15
 606. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=16#iv-p21.16
 607. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xvii-p44.12
 608. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xvii-p44.13
 609. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#xxiv-p45.4
 610. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=13#xix-p15.4
 611. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xx-p31.9
 612. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=15#x-p38.7
 613. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=15#xiii-p5.1
 614. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=3#xxv-p39.8
 615. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=21#xi-p20.25
 616. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=21#xix-p9.11
 617. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=6#xii-p5.1
 618. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=15#xi-p14.8
 619. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#xiv-p5.1
 620. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=11#xviii-p45.8
 621. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xiii-p17.6
 622. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=21#xiii-p17.7
 623. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=9#xxvi-p20.30
 624. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=17#xxiii-p33.20
 625. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv-p21.20
 626. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xxii-p73.8
 627. file:///ccel/n/newton/messiah2/cache/messiah2.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xxii-p73.9
