     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Life of Dr Owen
      Creator(s): Thomson, Andrew
     Print Basis: The Banner of Truth Trust, Edinburgh, 1965.
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Biotarget=owen; Biography;
      LC Call no: BX5207 .O88
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Anglican Communion

                  Church of England

                  Dissent and nonconformity
     __________________________________________________________________

   Life of Dr Owen

   by Rev. Andrew Thomson, B.A.,
   Edinburgh

     "Semper quidem operæ pretium fuit illustres sanctorum describere
     vitas, ut sint in speculum et exemplum et quoddam veluti condimentum
     vitæ hominum super terram. Per hoc enim quodammodo apud nos etiam
     post mortem vivunt, multosque ex iis qui vivntes mortui sunt, ad
     veram vitam provocant et revocant."

   Bernard
     __________________________________________________________________

                                His Student-Life

   It is matter of just regret and complaint that no elaborate
   contemporary memoir of this great Puritan was ever written. Twenty
   years after his death, Cotton Mather, in his "Magnalia Americana
   Christi," declared "that the church of God was wronged, in that the
   life of the great John Owen was not written;" and it was only when
   twenty years more had elapsed that a life of Owen at length appeared,
   from the pen of Mr Asty, a respectable Independent minister in London;
   which, though written under the eye of Sir John Hartopp, a particular
   friend of Owen, and for many years a member of his church, is
   chargeable with numerous inaccuracies, and so scanty withal, as "not to
   contain so many pages as Owen has written books." [1] In addition to
   this, an equally brief anonymous memoir has fallen into our hands,
   professing to have been written by one who "had the honour to know this
   eminent person well, and to hear him frequently; though he must confess
   that he had not then years and experience enough to conceive a suitable
   idea of the Doctor's great worth." But the student who should wish to
   search for voluminous contemporary records and early reminiscences of
   Owen, will look in vain for such full and accurate memorials as Dr
   Edmund Calamy has given us of Howe; for such an inexhaustible
   storehouse of incident, and almost redundance of mental portraiture, as
   Richard Baxter has given us of himself. The sources from which the
   modern biographer must draw his notices of Owen, besides those already
   named, are to some extent the representations of adversaries, who could
   not be silent on so great a name, or withhold reluctant praise; the not
   infrequent allusions to Owen in the lives of his contemporaries; the
   statements of general history and biography, -- such as are to be found
   in the page of Neal, Calamy, Middleton, Palmer, and others; and,
   perhaps the most valuable and interesting of all, the many unconscious
   touches of autobiography which may be found in his prefaces to his
   various works. Of all of these Mr Orme has made excellent use in his
   Life of Owen; which is a remarkable specimen of untiring research,
   solid judgment and ability in the disposal of his materials, and,
   making some allowance for honest bias, of biographical fidelity: and
   from all of these, and especially from Mr Orme himself, we shall gather
   the details of our biographical sketch and estimate of Owen.

   The genealogy of the subject of our memoir leads us back to a family of
   high rank and reputation in Wales, whose remoter links connect it with
   the five regal tribes. In the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., and
   Queen Mary, we meet with the name of Lewis Owen as Vice-chamberlain and
   Baron of the Exchequer in North Wales, and High Sheriff of the county
   of Merioneth; as honoured by correspondence with those monarchs in
   reference to the affairs of Wales and as going forth on a commission to
   clear the country of those felons and outlaws who had sought refuge in
   great numbers among its mountains, during the turbulence and relaxed
   authority that had arisen from the long wars between the houses of York
   and Lancaster. At a later period this honoured ancestor fell a
   sacrifice to his fidelity as a magistrate; for, on his return from the
   assizes in Montgomeryshire, he fell into the hands of a band of
   outlaws, who had taken a vow of revenge against him on account of the
   capture of their companions, and, deserted by all but one faithful
   friend, was murdered by them in the woods of Monthrey. [2]

   Humphrey Owen, a branch of this same family, married Susan, a
   granddaughter of Lewis Owen; and to him there were born in succession
   fifteen sons, the youngest of whom was Henry Owen. Henry was dedicated
   by his parents to office in the church, and having received an
   education, in language, philosophy, and divinity, at Oxford, in the
   course of time became vicar of Stadham, in Oxfordshire. Here he proved
   himself so "painful a labourer in the vineyard of the Lord," and so
   uncompromising an advocate for reformation in the church, as to receive
   testimony to his fidelity in the jealousy and displeasure of the
   dominant ecclesiastical powers, and to be branded with the name of
   "Puritan." To this worthy vicar there was born, at Stadham, in the year
   1616, a second son, John Owen, the subject of this memoir, who was
   destined to shed a new renown on their ancient house, and to eclipse,
   by the more substantial glory of his virtues, learning, and genius, the
   dim lustre of their regal lineage. [3]

   Little is known regarding the childhood of Owen; and no records
   whatever have descended to tell us of the mother to whom was committed
   the training of his most susceptible years, and who was to be the
   Monnica to this future Augustine. There is reason to think that he
   received the elements of a common education from the good vicar
   himself, under the domestic roof at Stadham; while, after a few years
   of home education, he was transferred to a private academy at Oxford,
   where he entered on his classical studies under the superintendence of
   Edward Sylvester, a tutor of eminence, several of whose pupils rose to
   the highest distinction, and even won for themselves at no distant date
   an undying fame. A comparison of dates makes it unlikely that the two
   were playmates; but it is interesting to notice, that the same quiet
   institution, in the parish of All-Saints, which now received within its
   walls the future great theologian of the Puritans, was also the place
   in which was initiated into the Greek and Roman tongues the immortal
   Chillingworth, -- of whose great work, "The Religion of Protestants,"
   it is not too much to say, that it is sufficient to shed honour, not on
   a university merely, but on an age. [4] One fact will suffice to show
   the energy with which the young pupil applied himself to his studies,
   as well as the unusually early development of his faculties, that, at
   the age of twelve, he was found to have outgrown the instructions of
   Sylvester and to be ripe for the university. He was, accordingly,
   entered a student at Queen's College at this age, which, in the case of
   most youths, would have been most injudiciously premature, and, even at
   this period, must have seemed strangely early; for, in looking into the
   lives of some of the most eminent of his contemporaries, we meet with
   no instance of similar precocity. Bishop Hall, for example, enrolled
   himself at Cambridge at fifteen, [5] while his great Puritan
   contemporary, John Howe, did not enter Oxford until he had reached the
   riper age of seventeen. [6]

   Few men of great eminence appear to have occupied the chairs of the
   university at this period; but Owen was fortunate enough to have his
   studies in mathematics and philosophy superintended by a tutor of solid
   attainments and subsequent high distinction, -- Thomas Barlow, then a
   fellow of Queen's College, afterwards its provost, and who, in course
   of time, was elevated to the see of Lincoln. [7] The boy-student
   devoted himself to the various branches of learning with an intensity
   that would have unhinged most minds, and broken in pieces any bodily
   constitution except the most robust. For several years of his
   university curriculum he allowed himself only four hours of the night
   for sleep, though he had the wisdom so far to counteract the injurious
   influence of sedentary habits and excessive mental toil, by having
   recourse to bodily recreation in some of its most robust and even
   violent forms. Leaping, throwing the bar, bell-ringing, and similar
   amusements, occasionally allured him from his books; and it may perhaps
   surprise some, who conceive of the men of that age as unsocial and
   unfriendly to all the lighter graces and accomplishments, to learn that
   Owen received lessons in music from Dr Thomas Wilson, a celebrated
   performer on the flute, and the favourite preceptor in the same elegant
   and delightful art of Charles I. It may perhaps have been from grateful
   recollections of these youthful and fascinating exercises, in which the
   student had been accustomed to unbend from too protracted and severe
   studies, that Owen at a future period, when elevated to the
   vice-chancellorship of Oxford, appointed his early tutor professor of
   music in the university. [8]

   Still, the hours which are taken from needful rest are not redeemed,
   but borrowed, and must be paid back with double interest in future
   life; and Owen, when he began to feel his iron frame required to pay
   the penalty of his youthful enthusiasm, was accustomed to declare that
   he would willingly part with all the learning he had accumulated by
   such means, if he might but recover the health which he had lost in the
   gaining of it. And he was wont to confess with a far profounder sorrow,
   not unmixed with shame, that no holy oil at this time fed his midnight
   lamp; but that the great motive which had borne him up, during those
   days and nights of consuming toil, was an ambition to rise to
   distinction and power in the church. We can well believe that the
   severity of this self-condemnation would, by a judge more tender than
   himself, have so far been mitigated by the knowledge of another motive,
   which must have had considerable influence upon his mind, arising from
   the fact that his father had been unable to render him any adequate
   pecuniary assistance, and that he had hitherto been indebted for his
   support to the liberality of an uncle in Wales. But still, when more
   amiable motives have been allowed their full force, a mere earthly
   ambition must be acknowledged to have been the mainspring of all his
   past efforts; and we cannot doubt that, when he returned to the
   university at a future period, these condemnatory reminiscences arose
   strongly in his mind, and that, like Philip Henry in similar
   circumstances, while thanking God that his course had been unstained by
   vices, he could insert in his book, "A tear dropped over my university
   sins." [9]

   And here let us pause for a moment, to look at the circumstances of
   another student, who was destined at a future day to shine with Owen in
   the same bright constellation. While Owen was walking amid the majestic
   structures and academic shades of Oxford, or bending over the midnight
   page, Richard Baxter might have been seen amid the enchanting scenery
   of Ludlow Castle, or, later still, in the small village of Wroxeter,
   with little help or guidance from man, but, under the promptings of an
   indomitable will, and with an omnivorous appetite for knowledge,
   allowing no difficulties or discouragements to damp the ardour of his
   pursuits. Without the advantage of the systematic training of a
   university, or the command of the rich stores of its libraries, this
   was almost compensated to his athletic soul by the more discursive and
   varied range which both his tastes and his necessities thus gave to his
   studies. In the writings of Thomas Aquinas, Anselm, and Duns Scotus,
   which to most minds would have been dry and barren as the sands of the
   desert, his acute intellect found high exercise and real delight, and
   rejoiced in whetting and exercising on them its dialectic powers, until
   he could rival in subtle and shadowy distinctions those ghostly
   schoolmen. Two years the senior of Owen, he was also "in Christ" before
   him; and while the Oxford student was still feeding the fires of an
   earth-born ambition, Baxter had learned from Sibbs' Bruised Reed, and
   from his Bible, the art of holy meditation; and, even in the later
   years of his student-life, might have been seen at that hour when it
   was too dark to read and too early to light his lamp, devoting its
   sacred moments to thinking of heaven and anticipations of the "saints'
   everlasting rest." [10] But the same grace was soon to descend upon the
   soul of Owen, and, cooperating with providential occurrences, to
   withdraw him forever from the poor daydreams of a mere earthly
   ambition. While he was measuring out for himself a course which, if
   successful, would probably have made him a secular churchman, and even
   an intolerant persecutor, Christ had said of him, "I will show him how
   great things he must suffer for my name's sake." Let us now trace the
   influences and events which brought about in the mind and outward
   circumstances of Owen this mighty change.

   We have no minute information regarding the means by which his mind was
   first turned with serious personal interest to the supreme subject of
   religion. Perhaps the dormant seeds of early instruction that had been
   lodged in his mind under the roof of the humble vicarage now began to
   live; perhaps some of those truths which he was storing in his mind as
   matter of mere intellectual furniture and accomplishment had
   unexpectedly reached his heart; or the earnest struggles on religious
   questions that were beginning to agitate the kingdom had, in some
   measure, arrested the sympathy of the young recluse; or thoughts of a
   more serious kind than he had yet entertained had arisen in his mind,
   he knew not how, like invisible and life-awakening spring-breezes; or
   all these things combined may have been employed as influences in
   bringing him at length to "seek first the kingdom of God, and his
   righteousness." At all events, we have Owen's own testimony to the
   fact, that in the later years of his university life, the Divine Spirit
   began to work in his soul a new class of thoughts and emotions; and
   though it was not until a later period that he entered upon the full
   peace and holy liberty of the kingdom of God, he was brought even then
   to submit his life to the supreme control of religious principle, and
   to ask, "What wilt thou have me to do?"

   While his mind was undergoing this great change, events were occurring
   in the government of the university which were fitted to put his
   religious principle to the test, and to try it, as it were, by fire.
   William Laud having, by a succession of rapid advancements, been raised
   to the chancellorship of Oxford, hastened to introduce into it those
   Romish innovations which, as the privy councillor and principal adviser
   of Charles, and the intimate associate of Strafford, he had already
   done much to infuse into the general ecclesiastical policy of the
   nation. The naturally arrogant and domineering spirit of this
   narrow-minded ecclesiastic, whom even Clarendon describes as "rough of
   temper, impatient of contradiction, and arbitrary," [11] had far more
   to do with those oppressive measures which marked his fatal
   ecclesiastical supremacy, than those mistaken views of the rights of
   conscience which at this period dragged so many better and more amiable
   men into the ranks of persecutors. Accordingly, we find him requiring
   the adoption, by the university, of many of those rites and ceremonials
   which savoured the most strongly of Popish superstitions, and in some
   instances were identical with them, and which the Reformers of England
   had soonest renounced and most severely condemned; the penalty of
   resistance to this demand being nothing less than expulsion from the
   university.

   This bold innovation at once dragged Owen from the privacy of his
   student-life into all the stern struggles of a public career. And his
   mind, delivered by the fear of God from every other fear, was not slow
   in resolving on resistance to the bigoted prelate's intolerant
   statutes. Many of the rites which Laud imposed were such as he in
   conscience believed to be divinely forbidden; and even things which, if
   left unimposed, might have been borne with as matters of indifference,
   when authoritatively enjoined as of equal obligation with divine
   appointment, he felt ought to be resisted as an invasion of the divine
   prerogative and the rights of conscience, -- "a teaching for doctrines
   of the commandments of men." This was the ground that had been occupied
   by the Puritans from the days of Elizabeth, when Ridley and Latimer had
   "played the man in the fire;" and though we have no record of Owen's
   mental exercise at this period, yet, with the course that was actually
   taken by him before us, we cannot doubt that he now unconsciously felt
   his way to this first Puritan standing-point, and that the following
   passage, written by him long afterwards, expressed the principles which
   animated his mind and decided his movements:--

     "They [believers] will receive nothing, practise nothing, own
     nothing in His worship, but what is of His appointment. They know
     that from the foundation of the world he never did allow, nor ever
     will, that in any thing the will of the creatures should be the
     measure of his honour, or the principle of His worship, either as to
     matter or manner. It was a witty and true sense that one gave of the
     Second Commandment, Non imago, non simulachrum prohibetur, sed, non
     facies tibi;' -- it is a making to ourselves, an inventing, a
     finding out ways of worship, or means of honouring God, not by him
     appointed, that is so severely forbidden. Believers know what
     entertainment all will-worship finds with God. Who has required this
     at your hand?' and, In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines
     the traditions of men,' is the best it meets with. I shall take
     leave to say what is upon my heart, and what (the Lord assisting) I
     shall willing endeavour to make good against all the world, --
     namely, that that principle, that the church has power to institute
     and appoint any thing or ceremony belonging to the worship of God,
     either as to matter or to manner, beyond the orderly observance of
     such circumstances as necessarily attend such ordinances as Christ
     himself has instituted, lies at the bottom of all the horrible
     superstition and idolatry, of all the confusion, blood, persecution,
     and wars, that have for so long a season spread themselves over the
     face of the Christian world; and that it is the design of a great
     part of the Book of the Revelation to make a discovery of this
     truth.

     "And I doubt not but that the great controversy which God has had
     with this nation for so many years, and which he has pursued with so
     much anger and indignation, was upon this account, that, contrary to
     the glorious light of the Gospel, which shone among us, the wills
     and fancies of men, under the name of order, decency, and authority
     of the church (a chimera that none knew what it was, not wherein the
     power did consist, nor in whom reside), were imposed on men in the
     ways and worship of God. Neither was all that pretence of glory,
     beauty, comeliness, and conformity, that then was pleaded, any thing
     more or less than what God does so describe in the Church of Israel,
     Ezek. xvi. 25, and forwards. Hence was the Spirit of God in prayer
     derided, -- hence was the powerful preaching of the gospel despised,
     -- hence was the Sabbath-day decried, -- hence was holiness
     stigmatized and persecuted. To what ends that Jesus Christ might be
     deposed from the sole power of lawmaking in his church, -- that the
     true husband might be thrust aside, and adulterers of his spouse
     embraced, -- that taskmasters might be appointed in and over his
     house, which he never gave to his church, Eph. iv. 11, -- that a
     ceremonious, pompous, outward show-worship, drawn from Pagan,
     Judaical, and Antichristian observances, might be introduced; of all
     which there is not one word, tittle, or iota in the whole book of
     God. This, then, they who hold communion with Christ are careful of,
     -- they will admit nothing, practise nothing, in the worship of God,
     private or public, but what they have his warrant for. Unless it
     comes in his name, with Thus saith the Lord Jesus,' they will not
     hear an angel from heaven." [12]

   While the well-informed conscience of Owen thus distinctly forbade
   conformity, every consideration of seeming worldly interest strongly
   pleaded for pliant acquiescence in the statutes of Laud. To abandon
   Oxford, was to dash from him at once all those fair prospects which had
   hitherto shone before him in his career as a student, -- to shut
   against himself the door, not only of honourable preferment, but, as it
   probably at this time appeared to his mind, of Christian usefulness, --
   to incur the inevitable displeasure of that prelate, whose keen and
   sleepless efforts to search out all who were opposed to his policy had
   already subjected every corner of the realm to a vigilant and minute
   inspection, and whose cruel and malignant spirit was already finding
   desolating scope in the unconstitutional measures and atrocities of the
   Star Chamber and the High Commission. And even though these latter
   perils might seem to be remote as yet from his head, yet could he not
   be blind to the fact, that, by such a step, he might incur the
   implacable displeasure of his Royalist uncle in Wales, who had hitherto
   supplied him with the principal means of support at Oxford, and
   expressed his intention, in case of continued satisfaction with his
   conduct, of making him heir to his estates. Yet all these probable
   consequences of non-compliance Owen was willing to incur, rather than
   violate his sense of duty, "esteeming the reproach of Christ greater
   riches than all the treasures of Egypt;" and, at the age of twenty-one,
   might have been seen leaving behind him all the daydreams and cherished
   associations of more than ten youthful years, and passing through the
   gates of Oxford self-exiled for conscience' sake. God was now educating
   him in a higher school than that of Oxford, and subjecting him to that
   fiery discipline by which he tempers and fashions his most chosen
   instruments. But "there is no man that has left house, or parents, or
   brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who
   shall not receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world
   to come life everlasting." Ten years afterwards the banished student,
   who had thus nobly followed the light of conscience, lead where it
   might, was to be seen returning through those very gates to receive its
   highest honours, -- to have intrusted to him the administration of its
   laws, and almost to occupy the very seat of power from which Laud had,
   in the interval, been ignominiously hurled.

   Owen had "commenced master of arts" in his nineteenth year, and not
   long before leaving Oxford, had been admitted to orders by Bishop
   Bancroft. He now found a home unexpectedly opened to him in the house
   of Sir Philip Dormer of Ascot, who invited him to become chaplain to
   his family, and tutor to his eldest son; "in both which respects," says
   one of the oldest notices of Owen, "he acquitted himself with great
   satisfaction to Sir Robert and his family." [13] After some time, he
   accepted the situation of chaplain in the family of Lord Lovelace of
   Hurly, in Berkshire, where he appears to have enjoyed much kindness,
   and to have been duly appreciated. [14] But meanwhile the rent between
   Charles and his Parliament was widening apace. His frequent invasion of
   the constitutional rights of the other estates of the realm, his
   attempts to rule without a Parliament and to raise money by illegal
   means, his systematic violation of his most solemn pledges, his
   connivance at the innovating superstitions of Laud, and wanton
   violation of religious liberty, at length roused an impatient kingdom
   to resistance, drove the Parliament to the last resort of arms, and
   shook the land with the discord of civil war. [15] At such a crisis it
   is impossible for any man to remain neutral, and it found Owen and his
   patron of opposite sentiments. Lord Lovelace took up arms on the side
   of Charles, and of royal prerogative; all the convictions and
   sympathies of Owen were naturally with the army of the Parliament, and
   the cause of public liberty. Two consequences immediately followed from
   this to Owen, -- his leaving the family of Lord Lovelace, and the
   complete estrangement of his Royalist uncle in Wales, who now finally
   disinherited him, and bestowed his estates and wealth upon another.

   Leaving Berkshire, Owen now removed to London, and took up his
   residence in Charter-House Yard. Here he continued to suffer from that
   mental depression which had begun with his earliest religious anxieties
   at Oxford; and which, though partially relieved at intervals, had never
   yet been completely removed. Some influence is no doubt to be ascribed
   to the discouraging outward circumstances in which his uncle's conduct
   had placed him, in deepening the gloom of those shadows which now cast
   themselves across his spirit; but the chief spring of his distress lay
   deeper, -- in his perplexities and anxieties about his state with God.
   For years he had been under the power of religious principle, but he
   had not yet been borne into the region of settled peace; and at times
   the terrors of the Lord seemed still to compass him about. We have no
   means of ascertaining with certainty what were the causes of these
   dreadful conflicts in Owen's mind; whether an overwhelming sense of the
   holiness and rectitude of God; or perverse speculations about the
   secret purposes of God, when he should have been reposing in his
   revealed truths and all embracing calls; or a self-righteous
   introversion of his thoughts upon himself, when he should have been
   standing in the full sun-light of the cross; or more mysterious deeps
   of anguish than any of these; -- but we are disposed to think that his
   noble treatise on the "Forgiveness of Sin," written many years
   afterwards, is in a great degree the effect as well as the record of
   what he suffered now. Nothing is more certain than that some of the
   most precious treasures in our religious literature have thus come
   forth from the seven-times-heated furnace of mental suffering. The
   wondrous colloquies of Luther, in his "Introduction to the Galatians,"
   reflect the conflicts of his own mighty spirit with unbelief; the
   "Pilgrim's Progress" is in no small degree the mental autobiography of
   Bunyan; and there is strong internal evidence that Owen's "Exposition
   of the 130^th Psalm" -- which is as full of Christian experience as of
   rich theology, and contains some of the noblest passages that Owen ever
   penned -- is to a great extent the unconscious transcript of his
   present wanderings, and perplexities, and final deliverances.

   But the time had come when the burden was to fall from Owen's
   shoulders; and few things in his life are more truly interesting than
   the means by which it was unloosed. Dr Edmund Calamy was at this time
   minister in Aldermanbury Chapel, and attracted multitudes by his manly
   eloquence. Owen had gone one Sabbath morning to hear the celebrated
   Presbyterian preacher, and was much disappointed when he saw an unknown
   stranger from the country enter the pulpit. His companion suggested
   that they should leave the chapel, and hasten to the peace of worship
   of another celebrated preacher; but Owen's strength being already
   exhausted, he determined to remain. After a prayer of simple
   earnestness, the text was announced in these words of Matt. viii. 26,
   "Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?" Immediately it arrested the
   thoughts of Owen as appropriate to his present state of mind, and he
   breathed an inward prayer that God would be pleased by that minister to
   speak to his condition. The prayer was heard, for the preacher stated
   and answered the very doubts that had long perplexed Owen's mind; and
   by the time that the discourse was ended, had succeeded in leading him
   forth into the sunshine of a settled peace. The most diligent efforts
   were used by Owen to discover the name of the preacher who had thus
   been to him "as an angel of God," but without success. [16]

   There is a marked divine selection visible in the humble instrument
   that was thus employed to bring peace to Owen's mind. We trace in it
   the same wisdom that sent a humble Ananias to remove the scales from
   the eyes of Saul, and made the poor tent-maker and his wife the
   instructors of the eloquent Apollos. And can we doubt that when the
   fame of Owen's learning and intellectual power had spread far and wide,
   so that even foreign divines are said to have studied our language in
   order that they might read his works the recollection of the mode of
   his own spiritual deliverance would repress all self-dependence and
   elation, and make him feel that the highest form of success in
   preaching was in no respect the monopoly of high intellectual gifts;
   but that in every instance it was, "not by might, nor by power, but by
   my Spirit, saith the Lord?"
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Orme's Memoirs of Owen, p. 2.

   [2] Asty's Memoir, p. ii. Anonymous Memoir, p. v.

   [3] Ibid.

   [4] Wood's Athenæ Oxoniensis, p. 97. Orme, p. 7.

   [5] Hamilton's Memoir of Bishop Hall, p. viii.

   [6] Urwick's Life of Howe, p. vi.

   [7] We have additional authority for many of the above facts in one of
   the larger epitaphs on Owen by his friend the Rev. T. Gilbert of
   Oxford; some lines of which we subjoin:--

   "Literis natus, literis innutritus, totusque deditus;

   Donec animata plane evasit bibliotheca:

   Authoribus classicis, qua Græcis, qua Latinis,

   Sub Edv. Sylvestro, scholæ privitæ Oxonii moderatore

   Operam navavit satis felicem:

   Feliciorem adhuc studiis philosophicis,

   Magno sub Barlovi, coll. reginalis, id tempus, socio."

   [8] Asty, p. iii. Orme, p. 9.

   [9] Bogue and Bennet's History of Dissenters, ii. 211, 226.

   [10] Jenkyn's Essay on the Life of Baxter, pp. iii.-v.

   [11] Heylin's Life of Laud, p. 252.

   [12] Owen on Communion with God, pp. 309, 310, fol. ed.

   [13] Anon. Mem., p. ix.

   [14] Wood's Athen. Oxen., p. 97.

   [15] Vaughen's Memorials of the Stuart Dynasty, I., ch. vii.-xi.

   [16] Asty, p. v. Anon. Mem., p. x.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 His Pastorate

   The mind of Owen, now effectually relieved from the burden of spiritual
   distress, soon recovered its elasticity and vigour; and in March 1642
   he gave to the world his first literary production, -- "The Display of
   Arminianism." In all likelihood he had been silently labouring at this
   work while in the families of Sir Philip Dormer and Lord Lovelace; more
   especially as his mental distress may have had some connection with a
   misunderstanding of certain of those points of which the Arminian
   controversy touches, and have led to their more full examination. But
   we may discover the principal occasion of the work in the
   ecclesiastical policy of the period, and in the strain of doctrinal
   sentiment which that policy had long aimed to foster and to propagate.
   Laud and his party had shown themselves as zealous for the peculiar
   dogmas of Arminianism, as for Romish rites and vestment and for passive
   obedience; and the dogmas had been received into royal favour because
   of their association with the advocacy of superstitious ceremonies and
   the defence of despotic rule. Arminianism having thus been constituted
   the exclusive way to preferment, had become the fashionable creed; and
   a current of doctrine had flowed into the church which was rapidly
   changing the character of its ministration, and bearing it away from
   those safe moorings at which its own articles and its Reformers had
   fixed it.

   A remark by Owen, in his address to the reader, correctly describes the
   Laudean policy: "Had a poor Puritan offended against half so many
   canons as they opposed articles, he had forfeited his livelihood, if
   not endangered his life." And in another passage he explains the
   progress of Arminianism in England: "The chief cause I take to be that
   which Æneas Sylvius gave, why more maintained the pope to be above the
   council than the council above the pope; -- because the popes gave
   archbishoprics and bishoprics, &c, but the councils sued in forma
   pauperis,' and therefore could scarce get an advocate to plead their
   cause. The fates of our church having of late devolved the government
   of it on men tainted with this poison, Arminianism became backed with
   the powerful arguments of praise and preferment, and quickly beat poor
   naked Truth into a corner."

   Owen's "Display" is a barrier raised against prevailing opinions. Each
   chapter contains a statement of the Arminian doctrine on the point
   discussed, with Owen's answer; while at the end of each chapter the
   Arminian doctrine is more briefly stated, in the language of some
   Arminian writer, and confronted in opposite columns by passages of
   Scripture. Undoubtedly there are some things charged upon the
   Arminianism of those times which belong rather to the family of
   Pelagian errors, and which the pious Arminian of our own day would at
   all events repudiate. Nor is it to be denied that the work is not free,
   in some parts, of the fault which clings to so much theological
   controversy, -- that of making individuals responsible, not only for
   the opinions they avow, but for all the consequences that you may
   deduce from them; yet, withal, it is rich in matter which must have
   staggered the courtly theologians of the age, -- is hung all round with
   massive Calvinistic armour; and, though written in a more scholastic
   form than most of Owen's subsequent works, gives indication of that
   spirit which was so characteristic of the Puritans, and pre-eminently
   of Owen, and which gave such a depth to their piety, -- the spirit
   which connected all events with God, and bent with lowly and awe-struck
   feeling before the divine sovereignty.

   Owen dedicated his work to "The Lords and Gentlemen of the committee
   for Religion;" who appointed it to be printed by the Committee of the
   House of Commons for regulating the printing and publishing of books.
   Its publication is interesting on another account, -- as having been
   the means of introducing him to his first pastoral charge. The
   incumbent of Fordham in Essex having been ejected from his living by
   the committee for purging the church of scandalous ministers, Owen was
   invited by the same committee to occupy the vacant parish. Not long
   after his removal to Fordham, he was married to a lady of the name of
   Rooke. But nearly all the information that here descended to us
   regarding this union, from the earlier biographies, amounts to this, --
   that the lady bore to him eleven children, all of whom, except one
   daughter, died in early youth. This only daughter became the wife of a
   Welsh gentleman; but the union proving unhappy, she "returned to her
   kindred and to her father's house," and soon after died of consumption.

   This period of Owen's early pastorate appears to have been one of the
   happiest of his life. Fordham is a secluded village, overhanging the
   fertile and pleasing valley of the Stour, which divides Suffolk from
   Essex. Its inhabitants, at the present day, number about seven hundred;
   but in the days of Owen they could not have been by any means so
   numerous. In this retreat, and surrounded by a not very dense rural
   population, [17] he was allowed to pursue in peace the quiet duties of
   a country parish, and knew nothing as yet of those more public and
   distracting responsibilities which he ever undertook with reluctance,
   and which he appears to have usually renounced with satisfaction. The
   spiritual interests of the parish having been neglected by his
   predecessor, he set himself with earnest system to break up the fallow
   ground, and to preach those truths which had still to his mind all the
   freshness of first love. The good Puritan practice of visiting and
   catechising from house to house gave him a large place in the
   affections of his people, as well as revealed to him the measure of
   their Christian intelligence; while his solid preaching soon gathered
   around him the inhabitants of his own parish, and even allured
   multitudes across the borders of the neighbouring parishes to listen to
   his weighty words. Like Baxter at Kidderminster, he was ere long
   cheered by witnessing one of those widespread and enduring reformations
   which have never followed on any agency save the earnest preaching of
   "Christ crucified."

   The productions of his pen at this period indicate the current of his
   thoughts, and the liveliness of his evangelic zeal. The first of these
   is entitled, "The Duty of Pastors and People Distinguished," and was
   published in 1643. Its main design is to "describe the means to be used
   by the people of God, distinct from church officers, for the increasing
   of divine knowledge in themselves and others," and to show how "the
   sacred calling may retain its ancient dignity, though the people of God
   be not deprived of their Christian liberty." [18] It bears internal
   evidence of having been drawn from him by the unscriptural assumptions
   of those ecclesiastics who thought to place their interdict on every
   thing like the agency of private members in the church, though there
   are particular passages aimed at those fiery persons who sought to
   introduce into the church the spirit of a wild democracy, and whose
   mode of making "all the Lord's people prophets," was to dispense with
   the inestimable benefits of a stated ministry. As it is the earliest,
   so it is one of the most useful of Owen's smaller treatises, and is
   remarkable for its skilful harmonizing of authority with liberty. How
   much of his axiomatic sagacity there is in the following sentence:
   "Truth revealed to any, carries with it an immovable persuasion of
   conscience that it ought to be published and spoken to others!" [19]
   And how much of wise restraint and rebuke in this: "Let not them who
   despise a faithful, painful minister in public, flatter themselves with
   hope of a blessing in private. Let them pretend what they will, they
   have not equal respect unto all God's ordinances!" [20] If Burnet's
   "Pastoral Care" and Baxter's "Reformed Pastor" may be named as the
   guides and counsellors of the ministers of that age, this, tractate
   might well have been placed beside them as the handbook of the people.
   [21]

   We still trace the signs of the busy pastor in his next publication,
   which is entitled, "The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ Unfolded,
   in Two Short Catechisms;" the first being intended for young persons,
   the second for adults, and as an aid to parents in domestic
   instruction. We are reminded, as we look on the stalworth Puritan, who
   is soon to mingle in the great theological discussions of the day, thus
   preparing "milk for babes," of Johnson's admiring sentence on Isaac
   Watts: "Providing instruction for all ages, from those who were lisping
   their first lessons, to the enlightened readers of Malebranche and
   Locke." [22]

   During these years of his laborious and unostentatious pastorate, the
   solid reputation of Owen was extending, and on April 29, 1646, he was
   appointed to preach before Parliament, on occasion of its monthly fast.
   The discourse is founded on Acts xvi. 9, " A vision appeared to Paul in
   the night: there stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come
   over into Macedonia, and help us;" and is written in a style of popular
   eloquence by no means characteristic of the usual strain of Owen's
   writings. The thanks of the House were conveyed to Owen by Mr Fenner
   and Sir Philip Wentworth, and the discourse commanded to be printed.
   The evangelic zeal of the pastor of Fordham breaks forth, towards the
   close, in behalf of those parts of the empire which were destitute of
   religious instruction, and especially in behalf of his ancestral
   country, Wales: "When manna fell in the wilderness from the hand of the
   Lord, every one had an equal share. I would there were not now too
   great an inequality when secondarily in the hand of man, whereby some
   have all, and others none; some sheep daily picking the choice flowers
   of every pasture, -- others wandering upon the barren mountains,
   without guide or food." [23] The glowing terms in which he dedicates
   his sermon to the Long Parliament, as "most deservedly celebrated
   through the whole world, and to be held in everlasting remembrance by
   all the inhabitants of this island," have drawn forth the
   disapprobation of some. But what contemporary opinion has been more
   justified by the calm judgment of later history? What English
   Parliament ever bore upon its roll such a list of patriots, or
   surrounded the immunities of the people with such constitutional
   guards? Even the grudging concession of Hume goes so far as to say that
   their conduct, with one exception, was such as "to entitle them to
   praise from all lovers of liberty." [24]

   Not long after this, Owen's pastoral connection with Fordham was
   brought to a close. The "sequestered incumbent" whose place he had
   occupied died, and the right of presenting to the living having in this
   way reverted to the patron, it was given to another. The event became
   the occasion of introducing him to a wider sphere. The people of
   Coggeshall, an important market-town of Essex, about five miles
   distant, no sooner received the tidings of his deprivation than they
   sent a pressing invitation to him to become their minister, -- an
   invitation which the patron, the Earl of Warwick, immediately
   confirmed. Unlike Fordham, this new charge had previously been
   diligently cultivated by a succession of faithful ministers; so that
   his work was not so much to lay the foundation as to build. He soon
   beheld himself surrounded by a congregation of nearly two thousand
   people, whose general religious consistency and Christian intelligence
   were a delight to his heart, and whose strong attachment to him
   subsequent events gave them abundant opportunities of testifying. [25]

   Contemporaneously with these outward changes in Owen's position,
   considerable changes also took place in his opinions on church
   government. His removal to Coggeshall is named as the period at which
   he renounced Presbytery; and the order of his church there is said to
   have been brought into a closer conformity with the Independent or
   Congregational model.

   There were principles, however, retained by Owen, both on the subject
   of the ruling elder and of synods, -- as we shall have occasion to show
   in noticing some of his later writings, -- which prove that his
   Congregationalism was of a somewhat modified character, and which a
   moderate Presbyterian of our own times, though not vaunting as
   identical with his views, would yet hail as evidence that the gulf
   between himself and the Congregationalist is not impassable. But the
   Presbyterians of Owen's early days in general went much farther than
   those of the present age; and we deem it not the least of his honours
   that he refused to follow in their course. Not that we have any
   sympathy with those terms of unqualified censure with which the
   Presbyterians of that age have too often been characterized. During the
   period of their brief supremacy, they accomplished much for England. In
   proportion as we value those noble statements of doctrine, the
   Westminster Confession and Catechisms, must we be grateful to the
   Presbyterians, who took so prominent and cordial a part in those
   deliberations which produced them. Well-informed and candid men of
   other religious parties have not been slow to admit that those
   districts of England which were brought under a Presbyterian pastorate
   and polity, made visible progress in Christian intelligence and piety;
   and many of those measures which were adopted by them in opposition to
   Cromwell, and which have often been ascribed to hostility to liberty,
   were, in fact, honest endeavours on their part to restore a
   constitutional government. But the intolerant spirit which animated
   them at this particular juncture is neither to be extenuated nor
   denied.

   Having recently risen to power, they had become dazzled by the dream of
   an impracticable uniformity, and, as Baxter, himself a Presbyterian,
   complains, had shown too great a readiness to invoke to their aid in
   realizing this ambitious dream the arm of secular power. The endless
   diversity of opinion which the growing liberty and the general ferment
   at the public mind had occasioned was regarded by them as evidence of
   the dangers of unlimited toleration, and they imagined that amid such
   discordant sounds truth must be indistinguishable, and even perish from
   the earth. Owen's mind had, meanwhile, far advanced beyond these narrow
   views, and risen above these imaginary fears. He had boundless
   confidence in the vitality of truth, -- strong convictions of the power
   of its own spiritual weapons, and of the utter impotence of every
   other: and while so many of those with whom he hitherto been associated
   saw only, in the mingled light and darkness, the approach of night, he
   hailed in them the hopeful twilight which was to grow into perfect day.
   In a "Country essay for the practice of church government," prefixed to
   his sermon before Parliament, he repeatedly condemns all enforced
   conformity and punishment of heretical opinions by the sword. "Heresy,"
   says he, "is a canker, but it is a spiritual one; let it be prevented
   by spiritual means: cutting off men's heads is no proper remedy for
   it." [26] That Owen should have renounced Presbytery, in the intolerant
   and repulsive form in which it was at this time presented to him, is
   not to be wondered at; but that he recoiled equally far at every point
   from all the essential and distinctive principles of that form of
   church government is a statement which many have found it more
   difficult to believe. At the same time, no reasonable doubt can be
   entertained that the government of Owen's church at Coggeshall was
   decidedly Congregational; and if that church in any degree corresponded
   with the counsels which Owen addressed to it in his next publication,
   it must have been pre-eminently one of those to which Baxter alludes in
   that honourable testimony, "I saw a commendable care of serious
   holiness and discipline in most of the Independent churches." The
   publication to which we refer is "Eshcol; or, Rules of Direction for
   the Walking of the Saints in Fellowship according to the order of the
   Gospel, 1647." The rules are arranged into two parts, -- those which
   relate to the duty of members to their pastors, and those which specify
   the duties of members to each other. They are designed to recall men
   from debates about church order to the serious, humble performance of
   those duties which grow out of their common fellowship in the gospels.
   Amid its maxims of holy wisdom it would he impossible to discover
   whether Owen was a Congregationalist or a Presbyterian.

   "Eshcol" was the work of Owen as a pastor; in the following year he was
   once more to appear as a theologian and Christian polemic, in a work on
   which he had long been secretly engaged, -- "Salus Electorum, Sanguis
   Iesu; or, the Death of Death in the Death of Christ." The great subject
   of this treatise is the nature and extent of the death of Christ, with
   especial reference to the Arminian sentiments on the latter subject. It
   is dedicated to the Earl of Warwick, the good patron who had introduced
   Owen to Coggeshall, and warmly recommended by two Presbyterian
   ministers as "pulling down the rotten house of Arminianism upon the
   head of those Philistines who would uphold it." [27] Owen himself makes
   no secret of having devoted to it immense research and protracted
   meditations. He had given it to the world after a more than seven-years
   serious inquiry, with a serious perusal of all that the wit of man, in
   former or latter days, had published in opposition to the truth. [28]
   It is not without good reason therefore, that he claims a serious
   perusal in return: "Reader, if thou art as many in this pretending age,
   a sign or title gazer, and comest into books as Cato into the theatre,
   to go out again, -- thou hast had thy entertainment: farewell." The
   characteristic excellencies of Owen's mind shine out in this work with
   great lustre, -- comprehension and elevation of view, which make him
   look at his subject in its various relations and dependencies, united
   with the most patiently minute examination of its individual parts, --
   intellectual strength, that delights to clear its way through impeding
   sophistries and snares, -- soundness of judgment, often manifesting,
   even in his polemical writings, the presence and power of a heavenly
   spirit, and "expressing itself in such pithy and pregnant words of
   wisdom, that you both delight in the reading, and praise God for the
   writer." [29] Owen does not merely touch his subject, but travels
   through it with the elephant's grave and solid step, if sometimes also
   with his ungainly motion; and more than any other writer makes you
   feel, when he has reached the end of his subject, that he has also
   exhausted it.

   In those parts of the present treatise in which he exhibits the
   glorious union and co-operation of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in
   the work of redemption, and represents the death of Christ as part of
   the divine plan which infallibly secures the bringing of many sons unto
   glory, he has shown a mastery of argument and a familiarity with the
   subject-matter of revelation, that leave even the kindred treatise of
   Witsius far behind. Many modern Calvinists have, indeed, expressed a
   doubt whether, in thus establishing the truth, he has yet established
   the whole truth; and whether his masterly treatise would not have more
   completely exhibited the teaching of Scripture on the relations of the
   death of Christ, had it shown that, in addition to its more special
   designs, and in harmony with them, it gave such satisfaction to the
   divine justice as to lay a broad and ample foundation for the universal
   calls of the Gospel. It is quite true that the great object of the book
   is to prove that Christ died for the elect only; and yet there are
   paragraphs in which Owen, in common with all Calvinists worthy of the
   name who hold the same view, argues for the true internal perfection
   and sufficiency of the sacrifice of Christ, as affording a ground for
   the indiscriminate invitations of the Gospel, in terms as strong and
   explicit as the most liberal Calvinist would care to use. [30] This
   great work was the occasion of much controversy; and it is worthy of
   especial notice that it was the first production that turned towards
   Owen the keen eye of Richard Baxter, and brought the two great Puritans
   at length to measure arms. [31]

   Eventful and anxious years were now passing over the land, in which the
   long struggle between prerogative and popular right continued to be
   waged with various success; and at length Owen beheld war brought
   almost to his door. The friends of Charles, having suddenly risen in
   Essex, had seized on Colchester, and imprisoned a committee of
   Parliament that had been sent into Essex to look after their affairs.
   Lord Fairfax, the leader of the Parliament's forces, had in consequence
   been sent to recover Colchester and deliver the committee, and for
   nearly ten weeks maintained a strict siege before its walls.
   Coggeshall, being not far distant, was chosen as the head quarters of
   the general; and intercourse having been begun between him and Owen, it
   became the foundation of a lasting friendship, which, we shall soon
   find, was not without important fruits. At the close of the ten weeks'
   siege, of which Owen describes himself as having been an "endangered
   spectator," he preached two sermons; the one to the army at Colchester
   on a day of thanksgiving for its surrender, and the other at Rumford to
   the Parliamentary committee on occasion of their deliverance. These
   were afterwards published as one discourse on Hab. i. 1-9. [32]

   But in the course of a few months, Owen was called to officiate in
   circumstances unspeakably more critical. Charles I. had been brought to
   trial before the High Court of Justice, on the charge of being a
   traitor, tyrant, and murderer; and, in execution of its daring
   judgment, beheaded before the gates of Whitehall. On the day following
   this awful transaction, Owen preached by command before Parliament; and
   the manner in which he discharged this unsought and perilous duty, it
   has been not unusual to represent as one of the most vulnerable points
   in his public life. His sermon, which is entitled, "Righteous Zeal
   Encouraged by Divine Protection," is founded on Jer. xv. 19, 20, "I
   will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall; and they shall
   fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am
   with thee to save thee, and to deliver thee, saith the Lord," -- a
   passage which obviously gave him ample opportunity for commenting on
   recent events. It is remarkable, however, that there is throughout a
   systematic and careful confining of himself to general statements, the
   most explicit allusion to the event of which, doubtless, every mind at
   the moment was full, being in that two edged sentence, "To those that
   cry, give me a king, God can give him in his anger; and from those that
   cry, Take him away, he can take him away in his wrath;" and the charge
   founded on this constrained silence, from the days of Owen to our own,
   is that of selfish and cowardly temporizing. Even one eminent Scottish
   historian, dazzled, we presume, by the picture of his own Knox, with
   Bible in hand, addressing Mary, and of other stern presbyters rebuking
   kings, imagines one of these to have occupied the place of Owen, and
   with what fearless fidelity he would have addressed those august
   commoners, "even though every hair of their heads had been a spear
   pointed at his breast." [33]

   But is there not a considerable amount of undue severity in all this?
   In all likelihood those who had demanded this service of Owen blamed
   him for an opposite reason, and hoped that this theologian of high
   renown and untainted reputation would, in the hour of their extremity,
   have surrounded their daring act with something more than the dubious
   sanction of his ominous silence. But to ascribe his silence to
   cowardice, is to assume that he secretly regarded the destruction of
   Charles as an indefensible act of crime. And was this necessarily
   Owen's judgment? It was surely possible that, while believing that the
   party which had brought Charles to the scaffold had violated the letter
   of the constitution, he may also have believed that it was in righteous
   punishment of one whose whole career as a monarch had been one long
   conspiracy against it, and who had aimed, by fourteen years of force
   and perfidy, to establish despotism upon the ruins of popular liberty.
   He may have thought that treason was as possible against the
   constitution as against the crown, and to the full as criminal; and
   that where a king rejected all government by law, he could no longer be
   entitled to the shelter of irresponsibility. He may have looked upon
   the death of Charles as the last resource of a long-tried patience, --
   the decision of the question, Who shall perish? the one, or the
   million? We do not say that these were actually Owen's sentiments, but
   it is well known that they were the thoughts of some of the purest and
   loftiest minds of that earnest age; and if Owen even hesitated on these
   points, on which it is well known Milton believed, [34] then silence
   was demanded, not only by prudence, but by honesty, especially in a
   composition which he himself describes as, "like Jonah's gourd, the
   production of a night."

   Whatever opinion may be formed of Owen's conduct in the matter of the
   sermon, there are few, we imagine, that will not look on the
   publication of his "Discourse on Toleration," annexed to the sermon,
   and presented to the Parliament along with it, as one of the most
   honourable facts in the public life of this great Puritan. The leading
   design of this essay is to vindicate the principle, that errors in
   religion are not punishable by the civil magistrate, with the exception
   of such as in their own nature, not in some men's apprehensions,
   disturb the order of society. [35] To assert that this great principle,
   which is the foundation-stone of religious liberty, was in any sense
   the discovery of Owen, or of that great party to which he belonged, is
   to display a strange oblivion of the history of opinions. Even in the
   writings of some of the earliest Reformers, such as Zwingle, the
   principle may be found stated and vindicated with all the clearness and
   force with which Owen has announced it; [36] and Principal Robertson
   has satisfactorily proved, that the Presbyterian church of Holland was
   the first among the churches of the Reformation formally to avow the
   doctrine, and to embody and defend it in its authoritative documents.
   [37] Nor is it matter of mere conjecture, that it was on the hospitable
   shores of Holland, and in the bosom of her church, that English
   fugitives first learned the true principles of religious liberty, and
   bore them back as a precious leaven to their own land. [38] It is
   enough to say of Owen and his party, that in their attachment to these
   principles they were greatly in advance of their contemporaries; and
   that the singular praise was theirs, of having been equally zealous for
   toleration when their party had risen to power, as when they were a
   weak and persecuted sect. And when we consider the auspicious juncture
   at which Owen gave forth his sentiments on this momentous subject, his
   influence over that great religious party of which he was long the
   chief ornament and ruling spirit, as well as the deference shown to him
   by the political leaders and patriots of the age, it is not too much to
   say, that when the names of Jeremy Taylor and Milton, and Vane and
   Locke are mentioned, that of John Owen must not be forgotten, as one of
   the most signal of those who helped to fan and quicken, if not to
   kindle, in England, that flame which, "by God's help, shall never go
   out;" who, casting abroad their thoughts on the public mind when it was
   in a state of fusion and impressibility, became its preceptors on the
   rights of conscience, and have contributed to make the principles of
   religious freedom in England familiar, omnipresent, and beneficent, as
   the light or the air.

   On the 19^th of April we find Owen once more summoned to preach before
   Parliament, the chiefs of the army being also present; on which
   occasion he preached his celebrated sermon, "On the Shaking of Heaven
   and Earth," Heb. xii. 27. Oliver Cromwell was present, and probably for
   the first time heard Owen preach. Ere the sermon was completed,
   Cromwell had formed a resolution which the following day gave him an
   opportunity of executing. Owen having called at the house of General
   Fairfax, to pay his respects to him in remembrance of their recent
   intercourse at Colchester, was informed by the servants that the
   general was so indisposed that he had already declined to receive the
   visits of several persons of quality. The pastor of Coggeshall,
   however, sent in his name; and while waiting, Cromwell and many other
   officers entered the room. Owen's tall and stately figure soon caught
   the eye of Cromwell as the person whom he had heard preach with so much
   delight yesterday; and going up to him, he laid his hands upon his
   shoulders, and said to him familiarly, "Sir, you are the person I must
   be acquainted with." Owen modestly replied, "That will be much more to
   my advantage than yours." To which Cromwell returned, "We shall soon
   see that;" and taking Owen by the hand, led him into the garden, and
   made known to him his intention to depart for Ireland, and his wish
   that Owen should accompany him as chaplain, and also to aid him in
   investigating and setting in order the affairs of the University of
   Dublin. To this unexpected proposal Owen naturally objected the claims
   of his church at Coggeshall; but Cromwell reminding him that he was
   about to take his younger brother, whom he dearly loved, as
   standard-bearer in the same army, would not listen to a refusal. He
   even wrote to the church at Coggeshall urging their consent; and when
   they showed themselves even more averse to the separation than their
   pastor, Cromwell rose from entreaties to commands; and Owen, with the
   advice of certain ministers whom he consulted, was at length induced to
   make slow preparations for the voyage. [39]

   In the interval between these arrangements and his departure for
   Ireland, we discover Owen once more preaching before the officers of
   state and the House of Commons, on occasion of the destruction of the
   Levellers; [40] and about the middle of August we find the army ready
   to embark for Ireland. On the day before the embarkation it presented
   one of those characteristic pictures which are almost without a
   parallel in the history of nations. The entire day was devoted to
   fasting and prayer; -- three ministers in succession, among whom we
   cannot doubt was Owen, solemnly invoked the divine protection and
   blessing; after which Colonels Gough and Harrison, with Cromwell
   himself, expounded certain pertinent passages of Scripture. No oath was
   heard throughout the whole camp, the twelve thousand soldiers spending
   their leisure hours in reading their Bibles, in the singing of psalms,
   and in religious conferences. Thus was trained that amazing armament,
   to whom victory seemed entailed, -- whose soldiers combined the courage
   of the ancient Roman with the virtues of the private citizen, and have
   been well described as "uniting the most rigid discipline with the
   fiercest enthusiasm, and moving to victory with the precision of
   machines, while burning with the wildest fanaticism of crusaders." [41]
   There were elements at work here that have seldom gone to the
   composition of armies. "Does the reader look upon it all as madness?
   Madness lies close by, as madness does to the highest wisdom in man's
   life always; but this is not mad! This dark element, it is the mother
   of the lightnings and the splendours; it is very sure this?" [42]

   It is no task of ours to follow the course of Cromwell in his rapid and
   terrible campaign, in which he descended upon Ireland "like the hammer
   of Thor," and by a few tremendous and almost exterminating strokes, as
   before the walls of Drogheda, spread universal terror throughout the
   garrisons of Ireland, saving more blood than if he had adopted a more
   feeble and hesitating course. His policy in Ireland finds its
   explanation in two circumstances, -- the impression that he had come as
   the instrument of a just God to avenge the innocent blood of more than
   a hundred thousand Protestants, -- and the conviction that, in
   repressing a rebellion which threatened the existence of the infant
   Commonwealth, the "iron hand," though the least amiable, was the most
   merciful, and would save the necessity of a wider though more prolonged
   vengeance. [43] But our business is with Owen, whom we find meanwhile
   employed within the friendly walls of Dublin in preaching to "a
   numerous multitude of as thirsting people after the gospel as ever he
   conversed with," investigating the condition of the university, and
   devising measures for its extension and efficiency. His preaching was
   "not in vain," while his representations to Parliament led to measures
   which raised the university from its half-ruinous condition, and
   obtained for it some of its most valuable immunities. [44] In the
   course of nine months, Cromwell, whose career in Ireland had been that
   of the lightning followed by the shower, terrific yet beneficent,
   returned to England to receive the thanks of the Parliament and the
   people, and to be appointed General-in-chief of the armies of the
   Commonwealth; and Owen, mourning over the fact "that there was not one
   gospel preacher for every walled town in Ireland," [45] was restored to
   his rejoicing flock at Coggeshall.

   But the release which he was to enjoy was short. Cromwell had scarcely
   returned from Ireland, when the state of Scotland demanded his
   presence. That nation, which had begun the resistance to the tyranny of
   the Stuarts, and to the worse tyranny of Rome, had almost unanimously
   disapproved of the death of Charles, and now looked with jealousy and
   hostility upon the government of the Commonwealth. They had actually
   invited Charles from the midst of his debaucheries of Breda to become
   their king; and, deceived by his signing of the Covenant, were now
   meditating an attempt to restore him to his father's throne. In all
   this Cromwell saw, on the part of the best of the Scottish people, an
   honest and misguided zeal, which was aiming substantially at the same
   ends as himself; but he saw in it not the less the most imminent danger
   to the liberty, religion, and morality of England, and hastened to
   assert and establish in Scotland the authority of the Commonwealth.
   Simultaneously with this, an order passed the Commons requiring Joseph
   Caryl and John Owen to attend on the Commander-general as ministers;
   [46] and Owen was thus a second time torn away from his pastoral plans
   and studious toils to the society of camps, and the din and carnage of
   sieges and battlefields. Cromwell's motives for thus surrounding
   himself with the great preachers of his age have been variously
   represented, according to the general theory that has been formed of
   his character. Believing as we do in his religious sincerity, we cannot
   doubt that he felt, like other religious men, the powerful attraction
   of their intercourse. There was sound policy, besides, in seeking by
   this means to convince an age remarkable for its religious earnestness
   that he enjoyed the confidence and friendship of the chiefs of the
   religious world; and hence we find him at a later period securing the
   presence of John Howe at Whitehall, and aiming by repeated efforts to
   subdue the jealous penetration of Baxter. This latter motive, we cannot
   doubt, had its own influence in inducing him to take Caryl and Owen
   with him to Scotland; and it is very probable, moreover, that, with all
   his passion for theological polemics, he foresaw that, in his
   anticipated discussions with the Scottish clergy, he would be all the
   better of these Puritan chiefs to help him at times in untying the
   Gordian knots which they were sure to present to him.

   We are able to trace but a few of the steps of Owen in Scotland. He
   appears to have joined Cromwell at Berwick, where he preached from the
   text, Isa. lvi. 7, "For mine house shall be called an hour of prayer
   for all people;" and, as we conclude from a letter of Cromwell's, [47]
   assisted, with "some other godly ministers," in drawing up a reply to
   the Declaration of the General Assembly, which had already been sent to
   Cromwell ere he could cross the borders. We next find him writing from
   Musselburgh to Lisle, one of the commissioners of the Great Seal,
   describing a skirmish between some of Cromwell's troops and those of
   "cautious" Leslie. Next, the battle of Dunbar has been fought. Cromwell
   is in possession of Edinburgh, but the castle still holds out against
   him, and the ministers of the city have sought protection within its
   walls. The pulpits of Edinburgh are consequently in the hands of
   Cromwell's preachers. Owen preached repeatedly in old St. Giles', and
   is listened to at first with wonder and jealousy, which gradually melt
   into kindlier feelings, as the multitude trace in his words a sweet
   savour of Christ. [48] It is the opinion of many that Owen's hand is
   visible in the letters which passed between Cromwell and the governor
   of Edinburgh castle, on the offer of the Lord-General to allow the
   ministers to come out and occupy their pulpits on the Sabbath-day;
   when, on their somewhat suspicious and sulky refusal, Cromwell
   addressed them in that celebrated letter of which Carlyle says, that
   "the Scotch clergy never got such a reprimand since they first took
   ordination." [49] Undoubtedly there are striking resemblances to Owen's
   turn of thoughts especially in the paper of "Queries," which abounds in
   "lumbering sentences with noble meanings." We next follow him with
   Cromwell to Glasgow, where Zachary Boyd thunders against the
   Lord-General in the old cathedral, and Cromwell listens with calm
   forbearance, and where a discussion takes place between Owen and the
   Scottish ministers, of which the following anecdote is told:-- A young
   Scottish minister, named Hugh Binning, not yet twenty-six years of age,
   so managed the dispute as to confound Owen and the other English
   divines. Oliver, surprised and half-pleased, inquired, after the
   meeting was over, who this bold young man was; and being told that his
   name was Binning, -- "He has bound, well indeed," said he; "but,"
   laying his hand on his sword, "this will loose all again." The
   discussion, with Binning's victory, is not improbable; but the bad pun
   and the braggart threat are not like Oliver, and may safely be
   consigned to those other "anecdotes of Cromwell at Glasgow," of which
   Carlyle says, that "they are not to be repeated anywhere except in the
   nursery." [50]

   But long ere Cromwell's campaign in Scotland was over, and that last
   battle, in which he gained "Worcester's laureate wreath," had been
   fought, which drove Charles back to Breda, and reduced Scotland under
   the generous sway of the Commonwealth, Owen had been permitted to
   return to his books and to his quiet pastorate in Essex. It was only a
   short breathing-time, however, before his connection with Coggeshall
   was loosed for ever. One morning he read, to his surprise, in the
   newspapers of the day, the following order:-- "On the 18^th March 1651,
   the House, taking into consideration the worth and usefulness of John
   Owen, M.A., of Queen's College, ordered that he be settled in the
   deanery of Christ Church, in room of Dr Reynolds." [51] A letter soon
   after followed this from the principal students of Christ Church,
   expressing their great satisfaction at the appointment. Cromwell before
   this had been chosen Chancellor of Oxford. And on the 9^th of September
   of the following year, letters from Cromwell nominated Owen
   vice-chancellor of the university, and thus placed him at the head of
   that great and ancient seat of learning from which we have seen him,
   ten years before, walk forth an exile for conscience' sake. [52]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [17] We are indebted for this information regarding the first scene of
   Owen's ministry to the Rev. Alexander Anderson, pastor of a Baptist
   Church, Colchester; who also informs us that the signature of Owen is
   still to be seen in the parochial parish register at Fordham (four
   miles distant), and that it has this peculiarity attached to it, that
   whilst all preceding it, and also succeeding, so far as he continued
   his examination, sign themselves "Parson," the usual designation of the
   time, his signature has the word "Pastor" invariably attached to it;
   showing that he deliberately, and from the first, "preferred the more
   scriptural term of pastor,' to the presuming designation of parson,
   more especially if we accept its common derivation, Persona
   ecclesiæ.'?"

   [18] Preface, p. 10, ed. 1644.

   [19] P. 38.

   [20] P. 49.

   [21] Owen quotes with approbation (p. 54) the judgment and practice of
   the Church of Scotland, as expressed in their Act of Assembly at
   Edinburgh, anno 1641. "Our Assembly also commandeth godly conference at
   all occasional meetings, or as God's providence shall dispose, as the
   Word of God commandeth, providing none invade the pastor's office, to
   preach the Word, who are not called thereunto by God and his church."

   [22] Lives of the Poets, iv. 164.

   [23] Owen's Sermons, fol. ed., p. 214.

   [24] Hume's History of England, vi. ch. li. Vaughn's Stuart Dynasty,
   ii. 74.

   [25] Wood's Athen. Oxon., iv. 100.

   [26] Owen's Sermons, fol. ed., p. 229.

   [27] The names of these ministers are, Stanley Gower and Richard
   Byfield.

   [28] Address to the Reader.

   [29] Gower's Attestation.

   [30] Book iv. ch. i. sect. 1.

   [31] The controversy was protracted through many treatises,
   particularly on the side of Baxter, in the appendix to his "Aphorisms
   on Justification," in his "Confession of Faith," and in his "Five
   Disputations of Right to the Sacrements;" and, on Owen's part, in a
   small treatise, "Of the Death of Christ," &c., and in the close of his
   "Vindicæ Evangelicæ." Various technical distinctions were introduced in
   the progress of the discussion, -- such as, whether the death of Christ
   was, "solutio ejusdem, or only tantundem." The frequent bandying of
   this and similar scholastic phrases, in the theological controversies
   of the age, caught the ear of the author of "Hudibras," and served him
   at times as matter for ridicule:--

   "The question, then, to state it first,

   Is, Which is better, or which is worst, --

   Synod or bears? Bears I avow

   To be the worst, and synods thou;

   But to make good th' assertion,

   Thou say'st th' are really all one.

   If so, not worst; for if th' are idem,

   Why then tantundem dat tantidem."
   Canto iii.

   [32] Neal, iii. 407. Asty, p. viii.

   [33] M'Crie's Miscellaneous Works, p. 502.

   [34] Milton's Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, Defence of the People of
   England.

   [35] Owen's Sermons, fol. ed., p. 291.

   [36] Hess, Life of Zwingle, pp. 148, 159-161. M'Crie's Miscellaneous
   Works, p. 473.

   [37] Robertson's Charles I., iv. 131.

   [38] M'Crie's Miscellaneous Works, p. 474.

   [39] Asty, pp. ix., x.

   [40] The title of the sermon was, "Human Power Defeated," Ps. lxxvi. 5.

   [41] Whitelock, p. 434. Neal, iv. 4-6. Macaulay's History of England,
   i. p. 121.

   [42] Carlyle's Cromwell, i. p. 341.

   [43] D'Aubigné's Protector, ch. vi.

   [44] Orme, p. 88.

   [45] Sermon on the Steadfastness of Promises, and the Sinfulness of
   Staggering, preached before Parliament after his return from Ireland,
   on a day of humiliation, Rom. iv. 20.

   [46] Wood's Athen. Oxon., iv. 98.

   [47] Carlyle's Cromwell, ii. 18.

   [48] His second sermon, on Isa. lvi. 7, was preached at Edinburgh.

   [49] Carlyle's Cromwell, ii. 59.

   [50] Ibid., ii. 79.

   [51] Asty, p. x.

   [52] His preaching before Parliament, about the period of these
   appointments, appears to have been frequent. On October 24, 1651, being
   the day of thanksgiving of the victory of Worcester, we find him
   preaching his sermon entitled, "The Advantage of the Kingdom of Christ
   in the Shaking of the Kingdoms of the World," Ezek. xvii. 24. Next,
   February 6, 1652, in the Abbey Church of Westminster, on the occasion
   of the funeral of Henry Ireton, Lord-Deputy of Ireland, and Cromwell's
   son-in-law, he preached his sermon on Dan. xii. 13, -- "The Labouring
   Saint's Dismission to Rest." Once more, October 13, 1652, on "Christ's
   Kingdom and the Magistrate's Power," from Dan. vii. 15, 16.
     __________________________________________________________________

                            His Vice-Chancellorship

   The office of dean of Christ Church involved in it the duty of
   presiding at all the meetings of the college, and delivering lectures
   in divinity; while that of vice-chancellor virtually committed to the
   hands of Owen the general government of the university. A charge of
   inconsistency has sometimes been brought against him, as an
   Independent, for accepting such offices, especially that of dean; and
   even some sentences of Milton have been adduced to give sanction to the
   complaint. But the whole charge proceeds on a mistake. It should be
   remembered that the University of Oxford during the Commonwealth shared
   in those changes which befell so many other institutions, and had
   ceased to be a mere appendage and buttress of Episcopacy, and that the
   office as held by Owen was separated from its ecclesiastical functions,
   and retained nothing, in fact, of Episcopacy except the name. It is
   quite true that the emoluments of the deanery were still drawn from the
   same sources as at an earlier period; but Owen, in common with many of
   the Independents and all the Presbyterians of his times, was not in
   principle opposed to the support of the teachers of religion by
   national funds. [53]

   His scruples in accepting office in Oxford, and especially in
   consenting to be raised to the high position of vice-chancellor, arose
   from other causes; and it needed all the authority of Cromwell, and all
   the influence of the senate, completely to overcome them. It required
   him to do violence to some of his best affections and strongest
   predilections to tear himself away from the studious days and the happy
   pastorate of Coggeshall; and perhaps it demanded a higher pitch of
   resolution still to undertake the government of a university which had
   been brought to the very brink of ruin by the civil wars, and from
   which, during the intervening years, it had very partially recovered.
   During those years of commotion, learning had almost been forgotten for
   arms; and Oxford, throwing itself with a more than chivalrous loyalty
   into the cause of Charles, had drained its treasury, and even melted
   its plate, in order to retrieve his waning fortunes. The consequence
   had been, that at the end of the civil war, when the cause of the
   Parliament triumphed, many of its halls and colleges were closed;
   others of them had been converted into magazines for stores and
   barracks for soldiers; the studious habits of its youth had been
   completely disturbed, and the university burdened with a debt of almost
   hopeless magnitude. Some of the worst of these evils still remained, --
   others of them were only partially diminished; and when we add to this
   the spirit of destructive Vandalism with which a noisy party began to
   regard those ancient seats of learning, the licentiousness and
   insubordination which the students had borrowed from the armies of the
   Royalists, as well as the jealousy with which Owen was regarded by the
   secret friends of Episcopacy, and by Presbyterians who had been
   displaced by Cromwell from high positions in order to give place to
   Independents, it is easy to see that it required no common courage to
   seize the helm at such a moment, to grapple with such varied and
   formidable difficulties, and to reduce such discordant elements to
   peace. [54] Such was the work to which Owen now betook himself.

   It is only too evident that even at the present day it requires, in the
   case of many, something like a mental effort against early prejudice,
   to conceive of this Puritan pastor occupying the lofty eminence to
   which he was now raised with a suitable amount of dignity and grace.
   Not only the author of "Hudibras," but even Clarendon and Hume, have
   written of the Puritans in the style of caricature, and cleverly
   confounding them under a common name with ignorant and extravagant
   sectaries whom the Puritans all along condemned and disowned, have too
   long succeeded in representing the popular type of the Puritans as that
   of men of affected sanctity, pedantic and piebald dialect, sour temper,
   and unpolished manner. Those who indulge these ignorant mistake forget
   that if the Puritan preachers were thus utterly deficient in matters of
   taste and refinement, they had received their training at Oxford and
   Cambridge, and that the reflection must, therefore, in all fairness, be
   extended to those seminaries. They forget, moreover, as has been well
   remarked, that "it is more reasonable, and certainly much more
   generous, to form our judgment with regard to religious parties from
   the men among them who make their bequests to posterity, than from such
   as constitute the weakness of a body rather than its strength, and who
   die, as a matter of course, in the obscurity in which they have lived."
   [55]

   But it is remarkable, that all the leading men among the Puritan clergy
   were such as, even in the matter of external grace and polish, might
   have stood before kings. The native majesty of John Howe, refined by
   intercourse with families of noble birth, and his radiant countenance,
   as if formed meliore luto, linger even in his portraits. Philip Henry,
   the playmate of princes, bore with him into his country parish that
   "unbought grace of life," which, in spite of his sterner qualities,
   attracted towards him the most polished families of his neighbourhood.
   Richard Baxter was the chosen associate of Sir Matthew Hale; and,
   contrary even to the popular notions of those whose sympathies are all
   on the side of Puritanism, Owen bore with him into public life none of
   the uncouth and lumbering pedantry of the recluse, but associated with
   his more solid qualities all the lighter graces of courtesy and taste.
   He is described by one contemporary as "of universal affability, ready
   presence and discourse, liberal, graceful, and courteous demeanour,
   that speak him certainly (whatsoever he be else) one that was more a
   gentleman than most of the clergy." [56] And Dodwell says, "His
   personage was proper and comely, and he had a very graceful behaviour
   in the pulpit, an eloquent elocution, a winning and insinuating
   deportment, and could, by the persuasion of his oratory, in conjunction
   with some other outward advantages, move and wind the affections of his
   auditory almost as he pleased." [57] It is with such a manner that we
   can conceive him to have addressed the assembled heads of colleges,
   when he assumed the helm at Oxford with tremulous hand, yet with firm
   determination to do his utmost to discharge his high stewardship.

     "I am well aware," said he, "gentlemen of the university, of the
     grief you must feel that, after so many venerable names, reverend
     persons, depositaries and preceptors of the arts and sciences, the
     fates of the university should have at last placed him as leader of
     the company who almost closes the rear. Neither, indeed, is this
     state of our affairs, of whatever kind it be, very agreeable to
     myself, since I am compelled to regard my return, after a long
     absence, to my beloved mother as a prelude to the duties of a
     laborious and difficult situation. But complaints are not remedies
     of any misfortune. Whatever their misfortune, groans become not
     grave and honourable men. It is the part of an undaunted mind boldly
     to bear up under a heavy burden. For, as the comic poet says, --


   "?The life of man

   is like a game at tables. If the cast

   Which is most necessary be not thrown,

   That which chance sends, you must correct by art.' [58]

     "The academic vessel, too long, alas! tossed by storms, being almost
     entirely abandoned by all whose more advanced age, longer
     experience, and well-earned literary titles, excited great and just
     expectations, I have been called upon, by the partiality and too
     good opinion of him whose commands we must not gainsay, and with
     whom the most earnest entreaties to be excused were urged in vain,
     and also by the consenting suffrage of this senate; and, therefore
     although there is perhaps no one more unfit, I approach the helm. In
     what times, what manners, what diversities of opinion (dissensions
     and calumnies everywhere raging in consequence of party spirit),
     what bitter passions and provocations, what pride and malice, our
     academical authority has occurred, I both know and lament. Nor is it
     only the character of the age that distracts us, but another
     calamity to our literary establishment, which is daily becoming more
     conspicuous, -- the contempt, namely, of the sacred authority of
     law, and of the reverence due to our ancestors; the watchful envy of
     Malignants; the despised tears and sobs of our almost dying mother,
     the university (with the eternal loss of the class of gownsmen, and
     the no small hazard of the whole institution); and the detestable
     audacity and licentiousness, manifestly Epicurean beyond all the
     bounds of modesty and piety, in which, alas! too many of the
     students indulge. Am I, then, able, in this tottering state of all
     things, to apply a remedy to this complication of difficulties, in
     which so many and so great heroes have, in the most favourable
     times, laboured in vain? I am not, gentlemen, so self-sufficient.
     Were I to act the part of one so impertinently disposed to flatter
     himself, nay, were the slightest thought of such a nature to enter
     my mind, I should be quite displeased with myself. I live not so far
     from home, nor am such a stranger to myself, I use not my eyes so
     much in the manner of witches, as not to know well how scantily I am
     furnished with learning, prudence, authority, and wisdom. Antiquity
     has celebrated Lucullus as a prodigy in nature, who, though
     unacquainted with even the duty of a common soldier, became without
     any difficulty an expert general; so that the man whom the city sent
     out inexperienced in fighting, him the army received a complete
     master of the art of war. Be of good courage, gentlemen. I bring no
     prodigies; from the obscurity of a rural situation, from the din of
     arms, from journeys for the sake of the gospel into the most distant
     parts of the island, and also beyond sea, from the bustle of the
     court, I have retreated unskilful in the government of the
     university; unskilful, also, I am come hither.

     "?What madness is this, then?' you will say. Why have you undertaken
     that which you are unable to execute, far less to adorn? You have
     judged very ill for yourself, for the university, and for this
     venerable senate.' Softly, my hearers; neither hope nor courage
     wholly fails one who is swayed by the judgment, the wishes, the
     commands, the entreaties of the highest characters. We are not
     ourselves the sources of worthy deeds of any kind. He who
     ministereth seed to the sower,' and who from the mouths of infants
     has ordained strength, is able graciously to supply all defects,
     whether caused from without or felt within. Destitute, therefore, of
     any strength and boldness of my own, and of any adventitious aid
     through influence with the university, so far as I know or have
     deserved, it nevertheless remains to me to commit myself wholly to
     Him who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.' He has
     appointed an eternal fountain of supply in Christ, who furnisheth
     seasonable help to every pious endeavour, unless our littleness of
     faith stand in the way; thence must I wait and pray for light, for
     strength, and for courage. Trusting, therefore, in his graciously
     promised presence, according to the state of the times, and the
     opportunity which, through divine Providence we have obtained, --
     conscious integrity alone supplying the place of arts and of all
     embellishments, -- without either a depressed or servile spirit, I
     address myself to this undertaking." [59]

   The facts that have been preserved by Owen's biographers sufficiently
   prove that this inaugural address was no mere language of dignified
   ceremony. By infusing that tolerant spirit into his administration
   which he had often commended in his days of suffering, but which so
   many in those times forgot when they rose to power, -- by a generous
   impartiality in the bestowal of patronage, -- by an eagerness to detect
   modest merit, and to help struggling poverty, -- by a firm repression
   of disorder and licentiousness, and a steadfast encouragement of
   studious habits and good conduct, -- he succeeded, during the few years
   of his vice-chancellorship, in curing the worst evils of the
   university, and restoring it to such a condition of prosperity as to
   command at length even the reluctant praise of Clarendon.

   Among other honourable facts, it is recorded that he allowed a society
   of Episcopalians to meet every Lord's day over against his own door,
   [60] and to celebrate public worship according to the forms of the
   liturgy, though the laws at that period put it in Owen's power to
   disperse the assembly; and there were not wanting those of a less
   enlarged and unsectarian spirit to urge him to such a course. In the
   same wise and conciliatory spirit he won the confidence of the
   Presbyterians, by bestowing upon their ablest men some of the vacant
   livings that were at his disposal, and taking counsel of them in all
   difficulties and emergencies. Many a poor and promising student was
   aided by him with sums of money, and with that well-timed encouragement
   which is more gratifying than silver and gold, and which, in more than
   one instance, was found to have given the first impulse on the road to
   fame. Foreign students of hopeful ability were admitted through his
   influence to the use of the libraries and to free commons; and one poor
   youth, in whose Latin epistle, informing Owen of his necessities, he
   had discovered an unusual "sharpness of wit," was at once received by
   him as tutor into his own family. [61]

   But, amid these generous and conciliatory measures, Owen knew how, by
   acts of wholesome severity, to put a curb upon licentiousness, and to
   invigorate the whole discipline of the university. At a public Act,
   when one of the students of Trinity College was Terræ filius, he stood
   up before the student began, and told him in Latin that he was at
   liberty to say what he pleased, on condition that he abstained from all
   profane and obscene expressions and personal reflections. The student
   began, but soon violated all the conditions that had been laid down to
   him. Owen repeatedly warned him to desist from a course so dishonouring
   to the university; but the youth obstinately persisting in the same
   strain, he at length commanded the beadles to pull him down. This was a
   signal for the students to interpose; on which Owen, determined that
   the authority of the university should not be insolently trampled on,
   rose from his seat, in the face of the remonstrances of his friends,
   who were concerned for his personal safety, drew the offender from his
   place with his own hand, and committed him to Bocardo, the prison of
   the university, -- the students meanwhile standing aloof with amazement
   and fear at his resolution. [62] Was there not something, in this
   scene, of that robust physical energy which had distinguished Owen at
   Oxford in earlier days in bell-ringing and the leaping of bars?

   But the aims of the vice-chancellor rose far above the mere attempt to
   restrain licentiousness within moderate bounds; -- his whole
   arrangements were made with the anxious desire of awakening and
   fostering among the students the power of a living piety. His own
   example, as well as the pervading spirit of his administration, would
   contribute much to this; and there are not wanting individual facts to
   show with what earnestness he watched and laboured for the religious
   well-being of the university. It had been customary for the Fellows to
   preach by turn on the afternoon of the Lord's day in St. Mary's Church;
   but, on its being found that the highest ends of preaching were often
   more injured than advanced by this means, he determined to undertake
   this service alternately with Dr Goodwin, the head of Magdalen College,
   and in this way to secure to the youth of Oxford the advantage of a
   sound and serious ministry. It is interesting to open, nearly two
   hundred years afterwards, the reminiscences of one of the students, and
   to read his strong and grateful testimony to the benefits he had
   derived from these arrangements of the Puritan vice-chancellor. We have
   this privilege in the "Memoir of Philip Henry, by his son." "He would
   often mention, with thankfulness to God," says the quaint and pious
   biographer, "what great helps and advantages he had then in the
   university, -- not only for learning, but for religion and piety.
   Serious godliness was in reputation; and, besides the public
   opportunities they had, many of the scholars used to meet together for
   prayer and Christian conference, to the great confirming of one
   another's hearts in the fear and love of God, and the preparing of them
   for the service of the church in their generation. I have heard him
   speak of the prudent method they took then about the university sermons
   on the Lord's day, in the afternoon, which used to be preached by the
   fellows of colleges in their course; but that being found not so much
   for edification, Dr Owen and Dr Goodwin performed that service
   alternately, and the young masters that were wont to preach it had a
   lecture on Tuesday appointed them." [63]

   But the combined duties of his two onerous offices at Oxford did not
   absorb all the energies of Owen. His mind appears to have expanded with
   his position, and to have shown resources that were literally
   inexhaustible. The few years which saw him the chief agent in raising
   the university from the brink of ruin, were those in which he was most
   frequently summoned by Cromwell to his councils, and in which he gave
   to the world theological works which would have been sufficient of
   themselves in the case of most men, to occupy and to recompense the
   energies of a lifetime. We now turn with him, then, for a little to the
   platform of public life, and to the toils of authorship.

   On the 25^th of August 1653 we again find him preaching, by command,
   before Parliament, on occasion of that celebrated victory over the
   Dutch fleet which established the reputation of the arms of the
   Commonwealth by sea, and paved the way for an honourable and
   advantageous peace with Holland. In October of the same year he was
   invited by Cromwell to London, to take part, along with some other
   ministers, in a conference on Christian union. The matter is stated in
   such interesting terms in one of the newspapers of the day, and,
   besides, affords such a valuable incidental glimpse of Cromwell's
   administration, that we prefer giving it in the words of that
   document:-- "Several ministers were treated with by his Excellency the
   Lord-General Cromwell, to persuade them that hold Christ, the head, and
   so are the same fundamentals, to agree in love, -- that there be no
   such divisions among people professing godliness as has been, nor
   railing or reviling each other for difference only in forms. There were
   Mr Owen, Mr Marshall (Presbyterian), Mr Nye (Independent), Mr Jessey
   (Baptist), Mr Harrison, and others; to whom the advice and counsel of
   his Excellency were so sweet and precious, and managed with each
   judgment and graciousness, that it is hoped it will much tend to
   persuade those that fear the Lord in spirit and truth to labour for the
   union of all God's people." [64]

   It does not appear that any immediate practical measures resulted from
   this conference. The mistake, by which many such laudable attempts were
   defeated, was that of attempting too much incorporation was sought,
   when they should have been satisfied with mutual Christian recognition
   and co-operation up to the point of agreement; and sometimes a
   constrained silence on matters of difference, where there should rather
   have been a generous forbearance. But it is wrong to speak of such
   conferences and communing, when they failed of their immediate object,
   as either useless or fruitless. To the good men who mingled in them, it
   must have deepened the feeling of unity even where it did not increase
   its manifestation, and even unconsciously to themselves must have
   lowered the walls of division. Nor is it without interest and
   instruction to remark, that the best men of that age and of the next
   were ever the readiest to give themselves to movements that had this
   aim. Owen, by the reproaches which he brought upon himself on this
   account from weaker brethren, showed himself to be before his age. The
   pure spirit of Howe, which dwelt in a region so far above the petty
   passions of earth, has expressed its longings to see the church made
   "more awful and more amiable" by union, in his essay "On Union among
   Protestants," and "On the Carnality of Religious Contentions." Baxter,
   with all his passion for dialectics, felt and owned the power of these
   holy attractions and longed the more for the everlasting rest, that he
   would there at length see the perfect realization of union. [65] And
   the saintly Usher, prompted in part by the sublime seasonings of Howe,
   actually proposed a scheme of comprehension, of which, though defective
   in some of its provisions, and not permitted to be realized, God
   doubtless said, "It was good that it was in thine heart to do it." The
   Puritans did more than make unsuccessful experiments of union: they
   expounded in their writings many of the principles on which alone it
   can be accomplished; and it seems now only to need a revival of
   religion from on high in order to accomplish what they so eagerly
   desired. They were the Davids who prepared the materials of the temple,
   -- shall the Christian of this age be the sons of peace who shall be
   honoured to build?

   It was in all likelihood while Owen was attending in London on the
   meetings of this conference, that the senate embraced the opportunity
   of diplomating him Doctor of Divinity. For we find it recorded by Wood
   in his "Fasti Oxoniensis," that, "On Dec 23, John Owen, M.A., dean of
   Ch. Ch., and vice-chancellor of the university, was then (he being at
   Lond.) diplomated doct. of div." He is said in his diploma to be "in
   palæstra theologia exercitatissimus, in concionando assiduus et potens,
   in disputando strenuus et acutus." [66] Owen's friend, Thomas Goodwin,
   president of Magdalen College, was diplomated on the same occasion; and
   the honoured associates are sneeringly described by Wood, after his
   manner, as "the two Atlases and Patriarchs of Independency." [67]

   In the midst of these engagements, Dr Owen produced and published, in
   Latin, one of his most abstruse dissertations, -- "Diatriba de Divina
   Justitia, etc.; or, the Claims of Vindicatory Justice Asserted." The
   principle which it is the design of this treatise to explain and
   establish is, that God, considered as a moral governor, could not
   forgive sin without an atonement, or such provision for his justice as
   that which is made by the sacrifice of Christ. It had fallen to his lot
   some months before, in certain theological discussions to which he was
   called by his office, "to discourse and dispute on the vindicatory
   justice of God, and the necessity of its exercise on the supposition of
   the existence of sin;" and his hurried treatment of the subject, in the
   brief hour which was allowed him, had the rare success of bringing many
   over to his views. Owen was convinced that his principle "struck its
   roots deep through almost the whole of theology." [68] He saw plainly
   that its effect, if established, was to raze the very foundations of
   Socinian error; -- yet he was grieved to find that many excellent
   divines, who held views in common with him on all the great truths of
   the evangelical system, wavered on this, and that some honoured names
   had lately given a new sanction to the opposite opinion; among whom
   were Dr Twisse of Newbury, prolocutor of the Westminster Assembly, in
   his "Vindicicæ Gratiæ, Potestatis, ac Providentiæ divinæ," and the
   venerable Samuel Rutherford of St Andrew, in his "Disputatio
   Scholastica de divina Providentia." [69] This made him the more readily
   accede to the wishes of those who had received benefit and confirmation
   from his verbal exposition of the subject, that he would enter on its
   more orderly and deliberate investigation. We do not wonder that the
   future expositor of the Epistle to the Hebrews should have been
   strongly prompted to contend for this principle, since it seems wrought
   up with more than one part of that colossal argument of inspired
   theology.

   In pursuing his argument, he evidently felt himself dazzled at times by
   the lustre of those interior truths to which his thoughts were turned.
   "Those points," he remarks, "which dwell in more intimate recesses, and
   approach nearer its immense fountain, the Father of light, darting
   brighter rays by their excess of light, present a confounding darkness
   to the minds of the greatest men, and are as darkness to the eyes
   breaking forth amidst so great light. For what we call darkness in
   divine subjects is nothing else than their celestial glory and
   splendour striking on the weak ball of our eyes, the rays of which we
   are not able in this life, which is but a vapour and shineth but a
   little, to bear." [70]

   In other places we can trace indications, that when he was rising to
   the height of his great argument, his fertile mind was revolving new
   treatises, which he afterwards gave to the world, and longing for the
   hour when he would descend from his present altitudes to those truths
   which bear more directly and powerfully on the spiritual life: "There
   are, no doubt, many other portions and subjects of our religion, of
   that blessed trust committed to us for our instructions on which we
   might dwell with greater pleasure and satisfaction of mind. Such, I
   mean, as afford a more free and wider scope of ranging through the most
   pleasant meads of the holy Scripture, and contemplating in these the
   transparent fountains of life and rivers of consolation; -- subjects
   which, unencumbered by the thickets of scholastic terms and
   distinctions, unembarrassed by the impediments and sophisms of an
   enslaving philosophy or false knowledge, sweetly and pleasantly lead
   into a pure, unmixed, and delightful fellowship with the Father and
   with his Son, shedding abroad in the heart the inmost loves of our
   Beloved, with the odour of his sweet ointment poured forth." [71]

   The usual number of replies followed the appearance of this treatise,
   in which Baxter once more stood forth equipped in his ready armour.

   In the following year Dr Owen gave to the world another work, of much
   greater magnitude, extending over nearly five hundred folio pages. He
   has himself supplied its best description and analysis in its ample
   title-page, -- "The Doctrine of the Saints' Perseverance Explained and
   Confirmed; or, the certain permanency of their acceptation with God and
   sanctification from God manifested and proved, from the eternal
   principles, the effectual causes, and the external means thereof; in
   the immutability of the nature, decrees, covenant, and promises of God;
   the oblation and intercession of Jesus Christ; the promises,
   exhortations, and threats of the Gospel: improved in its genuine
   tendency to obedience and consolation." The work was immediately called
   forth by the "Redemption Redeemed" of John Goodwin, an Arminian writer,
   to whom Owen allows nearly all the most brilliant qualities of a
   controversialist, except a good cause. He describes him as not only
   clothing every conception of his mind with language of a full and
   choice significance, but also trimming and adorning it with all manner
   of signal improvements that may render it keen or pleasant, according
   to his intendment and desire, and happily applies to him the words of
   the Roman poet:--


   "Monte decurrens velut amnis, imbres

   Quem super notas aluêre ripas,

   Fervet, immensusque ruit profundo

   Pindarus ore."

   The treatise, however, would be almost as complete were every part of
   it that refers to Goodwin expunged, and undeniably forms the most
   masterly vindication of the perseverance of the saints in the English
   tongue. Even Goodwin, with all his luxuriant eloquence, is sadly
   shattered when grasped by the mailed hand of the great Puritan.


   "Luxuriant artus, effusaque sanguine laxo

   Membra natant."

   The style of argument is much more popular than that of the former
   treatise; partly because of the insinuating rhetoric of his adversary,
   and also because Owen knew that Arminian sentiments had found their way
   into many of the churches, and that if he was to convince the people,
   he must write for the people. The following weighty sentence refers to
   his avoidance of philosophical terms and scholastic forms of argument,
   and is worthy of Owen's sanctified wisdom: "That which we account our
   wisdom and learning may, if too rigorously attended, be our folly: when
   we think to sharpen the reason of the Scripture, we may straiten the
   efficacy of the spirit of it. It is oftentimes more effectual in its
   own liberty, than when restrained to our methods of arguing; and the
   weapons of it keener in their own soft breathing, than when sharpened
   in the forge of Aristotle." [72]

   No part of this elaborate work is more characteristic of Dr Owen than
   his preface to the reader, which extends over forty folio pages, until
   you begin to fear that "the gate shall become wider than the city." It
   contains an account of the treatment which the doctrine had received
   from the first Christian century to his own; and in its pages, which
   are literally variegated with Greek and Latin citations, displays an
   immense research. But what most surprises the reader, is to find the
   Doctor, when about the middle of his way, deliberately turning aside to
   discuss with Dr Hammond the genuineness of the Epistles of Ignatius,
   and to weigh the evidence which they would afford, on the supposition
   of their genuineness, for a primitive Episcopacy. One is tempted to
   trace a resemblance between the theological writing of those times and
   their modes of journeying. There was no moving in those days with all
   possible directness and celerity to the goal. The traveller stopped
   when he pleased, diverged where he pleased, and as often as he pleased,
   whenever he wished to salute a friend or to settle a controversy. --
   The work is dedicated to Cromwell. The strong language in which Owen
   speaks of his religious sincerity is interesting, as showing the
   estimate which was formed of the Protector's character by those who had
   the best opportunities of judging regarding it. [73]

   The mention of Cromwell's name naturally brings us back to public
   events, and to an occurrence which, more than almost any other in
   Owen's life, laid him open to the reproaches of his enemies. Cromwell
   having dissolved the Long Parliament in the end of 1653, had a few
   months after issued writs for a new election. The university of Oxford
   was empowered to return one member to this Parliament, and Dr Owen was
   elected. That he did not evince any decided unwillingness to accept
   this new office may be presumed for the fact that he at once took his
   seat in the House, and continued to sit until the committee of
   privileges, on account of his being a minister of religion, declared
   his election annulled. His systematic detractors have fastened on this
   part of his conduct with all the instinct of vultures, and even his
   friends have only ventured, for the most part, on a timid and
   hesitating defence. Cawdrey and Anthony Wood, not satisfied with
   commenting on the fact of his seeming eagerness to grasp at civil
   power, accuse him, on the authority of public rumour, of refusing to
   say whether he was a minister or not, -- a charge which he left at
   first to be answered by its own absurdity, but which, on finding some
   actually crediting it, he repelled with a pardonable amount of vehement
   indignation, declaring it to be "so remote from any thing to give a
   pretence or colour to it, that I question whether Satan have impudence
   enough to own himself its author." [74]

   But there have been others, who, while disowning all sympathy with
   these birds of evil omen that haunted the path of the noble Puritan,
   have questioned the propriety and consistency of one in Owen's
   circumstances, and with all his strongly-professed longings for the
   duties of a tranquil pastorate, so readily "entangling himself with the
   affairs of this life;" and this is certainly a more tenable ground of
   objection. And yet, to judge Owen rightly, we must take into view all
   the special elements of the case. All except those who see in
   ordination a mysterious and indissoluble spell, and hold the Romish
   figment of "once a priest, always a priest," will admit that
   emergencies may arise in a commonwealth when even the Christian
   minister may, for the sake of accomplishing the highest amount of good,
   place in abeyance the peculiar duties of his office, and merge the
   pastor in the legislator. Persons had sat with this conviction in the
   immediately previous Parliament; and in the last century, Dr
   Witherspoon, one of the purest and most conscientious of Scottish
   ecclesiastics, after emigrating to America, united the duties of pastor
   and president of Jersey College with those of a member of Congress, and
   was only second to Washington and Franklin in laying the foundations of
   the infant republic. [75] Dr Owen, in all likelihood, acted on
   principles similar to those which swayed the Scottish divine; and when
   we consider the avowed and fanatical animosity with which Oxford was
   regarded by a turbulent party in the state, as well as the active
   interest which Cromwell and his, Parliament took in the religious
   condition of the nation, it is easy to conceive how Owen felt that he
   was only placing himself in a better position for watching over the
   well-being of the university, and for promoting the interests of
   religion and of religious liberty, by being there to bear his part in
   the deliberations regarding it. At the same time, with all these facts
   before us to qualify our censure, we cannot help thinking that when
   Owen saw the validity of his election so vehemently questioned, he
   would have consulted his dignity more had he declined to sit.

   In the "Instrument of Government" presented by Cromwell to this
   Parliament, it was proposed that all who professed faith in God by
   Jesus Christ should be protected in their religion. In the debates
   which took place on this part of the instrument, its language was
   interpreted as recommending toleration to those only who were agreed on
   the fundamentals of Christian doctrine, -- an interpretation which,
   there is reason to think, injuriously restricted the Protector's
   meaning. But the question immediately arose, what were fundamentals?
   and a committee of fourteen was appointed to prepare a statement for
   the House on this subject; who, in their turn, committed the work to
   fourteen divines of eminence. Owen was on this committee; and,
   according to Baxter, had the principal share in "wording the articles."
   He has been blamed for seeking to limit the blessings of toleration, on
   the now generally-admitted principle, that a man's religious belief
   ought not to be made the condition of his civil privileges. But the
   censure is misplaced. Owen was responsible for the correctness of his
   answers, -- not for the use which the Parliament might make of them;
   but the abrupt dissolution of the Parliament which, disappointed
   Cromwell's expectations, prevented their being embodied in any
   legislative measure. [76]

   About the same period Dr Owen was invited by the Protector and his
   Council to form part of a committee, from whose labours the cause of
   religion in England reaped great and permanent advantage. We refer to
   the commission appointed to examine candidates for ordination; whose
   powers soon after included the ejection of ministers and schoolmasters
   of heretical doctrine and scandalous life. Cromwell has been condemned
   for thus invading the proper functions of the church; and undoubtedly
   he did in this measure boldly overstep the province of the legislator;
   at the same time, he was right in thinking that the true greatness of
   his kingdom, and the stability of his government, depended on the
   pervading influence of religion among the people; and that it was
   better that the church should in this irregular manner be purged of its
   hirelings and moneychangers, than left to sink into inefficiency and
   corruption.

   About forty ministers, "the acknowledged flower of Puritanism," were
   united with a few Puritan laymen, and appointed to this most delicate
   office. Undoubtedly, the power committed to them was tremendous, and,
   in the hands of unscrupulous men, might have been turned to purposes
   the most inquisitorial and vile. But seldom has power been less abused,
   or the rare and incidental mischief arising from its exercise, more
   immeasurably outweighed by its substantial benefits. It afforded,
   indeed, a tempting theme for the profane genius of Hudibras, to
   represent the triers, in their inquiries regarding the spiritual life
   of candidates, as endeavouring --


   "To find, in lines of beard and face,

   The physiognomy of grace;

   And, by the sound of twang and nose,

   If all be sound within disclose;"

   and high Royalists and partisans like Bishop Kennet, who had probably
   smarted under their investigations, in their eagerness to find matter
   of accusation against them, might blunder out unconscious praise. But
   the strong assertion of the historian of the Puritans has never been
   disproved, -- that not a single instance can be produced of any who
   were rejected for insufficiency without being first convicted either of
   immorality, of obnoxious sentiments in the Socinian or Pelagian
   controversy, or of disaffection to the present government. Cromwell
   could, before his second Parliament, refer to the labours of the
   commissioners in such strong terms as these: "There has not been such a
   service to England since the Christian religion was perfect in England!
   I dare be bold to say it." And the well-balanced testimony of Baxter,
   given with all his quaint felicity, may be held, when we consider that
   he had looked on the appointment of the triers with no friendly eye, as
   introducing all the shadings necessary to truth: "Because this assembly
   of triers is most heavily accused and reproached by some men, I shall
   speak the truth of them; and suppose my word will be taken, because
   most of them took me for one of their boldest adversaries. The truth
   is, though some few over-rigid and over-busy Independents among them
   were too severe against all that were Arminians, and too particular in
   inquiring after evidences of sanctification in those whom they
   examined, and somewhat too lax in admitting of unlearned and erroneous
   men that favoured Antinomianism or Anabaptism; yet, to give them their
   due, they did abundance of good in the church. They saved many a
   congregation from ignorant, ungodly, drunken teachers, -- that sort of
   men who intend no more in the ministry then to read a sermon on Sunday,
   and all the rest of the week go with the people to the alehouse and
   harden them in sin; and that sort of ministers who either preached
   against a holy life, or preached as men who were never acquainted with
   it. These they usually rejected, and in their stead admitted of any
   that were able, serious preachers, and lived a godly life, of what
   tolerable opinion soever they were; so that, though many of them were a
   little partial for the Independents, Separatists, Fifth-monarchy Men,
   and Anabaptists, and against the Prelatists and Arminians, yet so great
   was the benefit above the hurt which they brought to the church, that
   many thousands of souls blessed God for the faithful ministers whom
   they let in, and grieved when the Prelatists afterwards cast them out
   again." [77]

   Every student of the Puritan history is familiar with the magnanimous
   act of Howe, in recommending Fuller the historian for ordination,
   though a Royalist, because he "made conscience of his thoughts;" [78]
   and an equally high-minded and generous act of impartiality is recorded
   of Owen. Dr Pocock, professor of Arabic in Oxford, and one of the
   greatest scholars in Europe, held a living in Berks, and was about to
   have hard measure dealt to him by the commissioners for that county. No
   sooner did Owen hear of this than he wrote to Thurloe, Cromwell's
   secretary, imploring him to stay such rash and disgraceful procedure.
   Not satisfied with this, he hastened into Berkshire in person, warmly
   remonstrated with the commissioners on the course which they seemed
   bent on pursuing, and only ceased when he had obtained the honourable
   discharge of the menaced scholar from farther attendance. [79]

   Owen's wisdom in council involved the natural penalty of frequent
   consultation; and, accordingly, we find him in the following year again
   invited to confer with Cromwell on a subject which, in addition to its
   own intrinsic interest, acquires a new interest from recent agitation.
   Manasseh Ben Israel, a learned Jew from Amsterdam, had asked of
   Cromwell and his government permission for the Jews to settle and trade
   in England, from which they had been excluded since the thirteenth
   century. Cromwell, favourable to the proposal himself, submitted the
   question to a conference of lawyers, merchants, and divines, whom he
   assembled, and whom he wished to consider it in relation to the
   interests which they might be held respectively to represent. The
   lawyers saw nothing in the admission of the Jews contrary to the laws
   of England, some of the merchants were friendly, and some opposed; and
   though a living historian has described the theologians as unanimous in
   their opposition, they were, in fact, divided in their opinion too;
   some, like Mr Dury, being fierce in their opposition, even to
   fanaticism; and others, of whom there is reason to think Dr Owen was
   one, being prepared to admit them under certain restrictions. Cromwell,
   however, was on this subject in advance of all his counsellors, and
   indeed of his age, "from his shoulders and upward he was higher than
   any of the people," and displayed a faith in the power of truth, and an
   ingenuity in turning the timid objections of his advisers arguments by
   which they might at once have been instructed and rebuked. "Since there
   is a promise in holy Scripture of the conversion of the Jews," he said,
   "I do not know but the preaching of the gospel, as it is now in
   England, without idolatry or superstition, may conduce to it." "I never
   heard a man speak so well," was the future testimony of Sir Paul
   Ricaut, who had pressed into the crowd. The good intentions of the
   Protector were defeated; but, as an expression of his respect for the
   rabbi he ordered £200 to be paid to him out of the public treasury.
   [80]

   In the midst of these public events, Owen's pen had once more been
   turned to authorship by the immediate command of the Council of State.
   The catechisms of Biddle, the father of English Socinianism, had given
   vogue to the errors of that school; and though various writers of
   ability, such as Poole and Cheynel in England, and Cloppenburg, Arnold,
   and Maretz on the continent, had already remarked on them, it was
   deemed advisable that they should obtain a more complete and sifting
   exposure; and Owen was selected, by the high authority we have named,
   to undertake the task. His "Vindiciæ Evangelicæ," a work of seven
   hundred quarto pages, embracing all the great points of controversy
   between the Socinian and the Calvinist, was the fruit of this command;
   and was certainly a far more suitable and efficient way of
   extinguishing the poor heresiarch, than the repeated imprisonments to
   which he was subjected. Dr Owen, however, does not confine himself to
   the writings of Biddle, but includes in his review the Racovian
   catechism, which was the confession of the foreign Socinians of that
   age; and the Annotations of Grotius, -- which, though nowhere directly
   teaching Socinian opinions, are justly charged by him with explaining
   away those passages on which the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel lean
   for their support, and thus, by extinguishing one light after another,
   leaving you at length in midnight darkness. An accomplished modern
   writer has pointed out a mortifying identity between the dogmas of our
   modern Pantheists and those of the Buddhists of India. [81] It would be
   easy to show that the discoveries of our modern Neologists and
   Rationalists are in truth the resurrection of the errors of Biddle,
   Smalcius, and Moscorovius. [82] Again and again, in those writings,
   which have slumbered beneath the dust of two centuries, the student
   meets with the same speculations, supported by the same reasonings and
   interpretations, that have startled him in the modern German treatise,
   by their impious hardihood.

   You pass into the body of this elaborate work through one of those
   learned porticoes in which our author delights, and in which the
   history of Socinianism is traced through its many forms and phases,
   from the days of Simon Magus to his own. No part of this history in of
   more permanent value than his remarks on the controversial tactics of
   Socinians; among which he especially notices their objection to the use
   of terms not to be found in Scripture; and to which he replies, that
   "though such terms may not be of absolute necessity to express the
   things themselves to the minds of believers, they may yet be necessary
   to defend the truth from the opposition and craft of seducers;" their
   cavilling against evangelical doctrines rather than stating any
   positive opinions of their own, and, when finding it inconvenient to
   oppose, or impossible to refute a doctrine, insisting on its not being
   fundamental. How much of the secret of error in religion is detected in
   the following advice: "Take heed of the snare of Satan in affecting
   eminency by singularity. It is good to strive to excel, and to go
   before one another in knowledge and in light, as in holiness and
   obedience. To do this in the road is difficult. Many, finding it
   impossible to emerge into any consideration by walking in the beaten
   path of truth, and yet not able to conquer the itch of being accounted
   tines megaloi, turn aside into by-ways, and turn the eyes of men to
   them by scrambling over hedge and ditch, when the sober traveller is
   not at all regarded." [83] And the grand secret of continuing in the
   faith grounded and settled, is expressed in the following wise
   sentences: "That direction in this kind which with me is instar omnium,
   is for a diligent endeavour to have the power of the truths professed
   and contended for abiding upon our hearts; -- that we may not contend
   for notions, but what we have a practical acquaintance with in our own
   souls. When the heart is cast indeed into the mould of the doctrine
   that the mind embraceth, -- when the evidence and necessity of the
   truth abides in us, -- when not the sense of the words only is in our
   heads, but the sense of the things abides in our hearts, when we have
   communion with God in the doctrine we contend for, -- then shall we be
   garrisoned by the grace of God against all the assaults of men." [84]

   This secret communion with God in the doctrines contended for was the
   true key to Owen's own steadfastness amid all those winds of doctrine
   which unsettled every thing but what was rooted in the soil. We have an
   illustration of this in the next treatise, which he soon after gave to
   the world, and in which he passes from the lists of controversy to the
   practical exhibition of the Gospel as a life-power. It was entitled,
   "On the Mortification of Sin in Believers;" and contains the substance
   of some sermons which he had preached on Rom. viii. 13. He informs us
   that his chief motives for this publication were, a wish to escape from
   the region of public debate, and to produce something of more general
   use, that might seem a fruit "of choice, not of necessity;" and also,
   "to provide an antidote for the dangerous mistakes of some that of late
   years had taken upon them to give directions for the mortification of
   sin, who, being unacquainted with the mystery of the gospel and the
   efficacy of the death of Christ, have anew imposed the yoke of a
   self-wrought-out mortification on the necks of their disciples, which
   neither they nor their forefathers were ever able to bear." [85] We
   have no means of knowing what were the treatises to which Owen here
   refers; but it is well known that Baxter's mind at an early period
   received an injurious legal bias from a work of this kind; nor is even
   Jeremy Taylor's "Holy Living" free from the fault of minute
   prescription of external rules and "bodily exercise, which profiteth
   little," instead of bringing the mind into immediate contact with those
   great truths which inspire and transform whatever they touch. Nor have
   there been wanting teachers, in any age of the church, who


   "-- do but skin and film the ulcerous place,

   While rank corruption, mining all within,

   Infects unseen."

   Owen's work is a noble illustration of the Gospel method of
   sanctification, as we believe it to be a living reflection of his own
   experience. In his polemical works he was like the lecturer on the
   materia medica; but here he is the skilful physician, applying the
   medicine to the cure of soul-sickness. And it is interesting to find
   the ample evidence which this work affords, that, amid the din of
   theological controversy, the engrossing and perplexing activities of a
   high public station, and the chilling damps of a university, he was yet
   living near God, and, like Jacob amid the stones of the wilderness,
   maintaining secret intercourse with the eternal and invisible.

   To the affairs of Oxford we must now return for a little. In the midst
   of his multifarious public engagements, and the toils of a most
   ponderous authorship, Owen's thoughts had never been turned from the
   university, and his efforts for its improvement, encouraged by the
   Protector and his council, as well as by the co-operation of the heads
   of colleges, had been rewarded by a surprising prosperity. Few things,
   indeed, are more interesting than to look into the records of Oxford at
   this period, as they have been preserved by Anthony Wood and others,
   and to mark the constellation of great names among its fellows and
   students; some of whom were already in the height of their renown, and
   others, with a strangely varied destiny awaiting them, were brightening
   into a fame which was to shed its lustre on the coming age. The
   presiding mind at this period was Owen himself, who, from the combined
   influence of station and character, obtained from all around him
   willing deference; [86] while associated with him in close friendship,
   in frequent conference, and learned research, which was gradually
   embodied in many folios, was Thomas Goodwin, the president of Magdalen
   College. Stephen Charnock had already carried many honours, and given
   token of that Saxon vigour of intellect and ripe devotion which were
   afterwards to take shape in his noble treatise on the "Divine
   Attributes." Dr Pocock sat in the chair of Arabic, unrivalled as an
   Orientalist; and Dr Seth Ward taught mathematics, already noted as an
   astronomer, and hereafter to be less honourably noted as so supple a
   timeserver, that, "amid all the changes of the times he never broke his
   bones." Robert Boyle had fled hither, seeking in its tranquil shades
   opportunity for undisturbed philosophic studies, and finding in all
   nature food for prayer; and one more tall and stately than the rest
   might be seen now amid the shady walks of Magdalen College, musing on
   the "Blessedness of the Righteous," and now in the recesses of its
   libraries, "unsphering the spirit of Plato," and amassing that learning
   and excogitating that divine philosophy which were soon to be
   transfigured and immortalized in his "Living Temple." Daniel Whitby,
   the acute annotator on the New Testament, and the ablest champion of
   Arminianism -- now adorned the roll of Oxford; Christopher Wren, whose
   architectural genius has reared its own monument in the greatest of
   England's cathedrals; William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania, and
   the father of the gentlest and most benignant of all our Christian
   sects; John Locke, the founder of the greatest school of English
   metaphysics, to whom was to belong the high honour of basing toleration
   on the principles of philosophy; William South, the pulpit satirist,
   whom we alternately admire for his brawny intellect and matchless
   style, and despise for their prostration to the lowest purposes of
   party; Thomas Ken, the future bishop of Bath and Wells, whose holiness
   drew forth the willing homage of the Puritans, and whose
   conscientiousness as a nonjuror was long after to be proved by his
   sufferings in the Tower; Philip Henry, now passing to the little
   conference of praying students, and now receiving from Dr Owen praises
   which only make him humbler, already delighting in those happy
   alliterations and fine conceits which were to be gathered from his lips
   by his admiring son, and embalmed in the transparent amber of that
   son's immortal Commentary; and Joseph Alleine, who, in his "Alarm to
   the Unconverted," was to produce a work which the church of God will
   not willingly let die, and was to display the spirit of a martyr amid
   the approaching cruelties of the Restoration, and the deserted hearths
   and silent churches of St. Bartholomew's Day. [87]

   But events were beginning to transpire in the political world which
   were to bring Owen's tenure of the vice-chancellorship to a speedy
   close. He had hitherto befriended Cromwell in all his great measures,
   with the strong conviction that the liberties and general interests of
   the nation were bound up with his supremacy. He had even, on occasion
   of the risings of the Royalists under Colonel Penruddock in the west,
   busied himself in securing the attachment of the university, and in
   raising a troop of horse for the defence of the county, until one of
   his Royalist revilers, enraged at his infectious zeal, described him as
   "riding up and down like a spiritual Abaddon, with white powder in his
   hair and black in his pocket." [88] But when a majority of the
   Parliament proposed to bestow upon Cromwell the crown and title of
   king, and when the Protector was evidently not averse to the entreaties
   of his Parliament, Owen began to suspect the workings of an ambition
   which, if not checked, would introduce a new tyranny, and place in
   jeopardy those liberties which so much had been done and suffered to
   secure. He therefore joined with Colonel Desborough, Fleetwood, and the
   majority of the army, in opposing these movements, and even drew up the
   petition which is known to have defeated the measure, and constrained
   Cromwell to decline the perilous honour. [89]

   Many circumstances soon made it evident, that by this bold step Dr Owen
   had so far estranged from himself the affection of Cromwell. Up to this
   time he had continued to be, of all the ministers of his times, the
   most frequently invited to preach on those great occasions of public
   state which it was usual in those days to grace with a religious
   service. But when, soon after this occurrence, Cromwell was inaugurated
   into his office as Protector, at Westminster Hall, with all the pomp
   and splendour of a coronation, those who were accustomed to watch how
   the winds of political favour blew, observed that Lockyer and Dr Manton
   were the divines who officiated at the august ceremonial; and that Owen
   was not even there as an invited guest. [90] This was significant, and
   the decisive step soon followed. On the 3^rd of July Cromwell resigned
   the office of chancellor of the university; on the 18^th day of the
   same month, his son Richard was appointed his successor; and six weeks
   afterwards Dr Owen was displaced from the vice-chancellorship, and Dr
   Conant, a Presbyterian, and rector of Exeter College, nominated in his
   stead. [91]

   Few things in Owen's public life more became him than the manner in
   which he resigned the presidency of Oxford, and yielded up the academic
   fasces into the hands of another. He "knew both how to abound, and how
   to be abased." There is no undignified insinuation of ungracious usage;
   no loud assertion of indifference, to cover the bitterness of chagrin;
   no mock humility; but a manly reference to the service which he was
   conscious of having rendered to the university, with a generous
   appreciation of the excellencies of the friend to whom the government
   was now to be transferred. In his parting address to the university,
   after stating the number of persons that had been matriculated and
   graduated during his administration, he continues: "Professors'
   salaries, lost for many years, have been recovered and paid; some
   offices of respectability have been maintained; the rights and
   privileges of the university have been defended against all the efforts
   of its enemies; the treasury is tenfold increased; many of every rank
   in the university have been promoted to various honours and benefices;
   new exercises have been introduced and established; old ones have been
   duly performed; reformation of manners has been diligently studied, in
   spite of the grumbling of certain profligate brawlers; labours have
   been numberless; besides submitting to the most enormous expense, often
   when brought to the brink of death on your account, I have hated these
   limbs, and this feeble body, which was ready to desert my mind; the
   reproaches of the vulgar have been disregarded, the envy of others has
   been overcome: in these circumstances I wish you all prosperity, and
   bid you farewell. I congratulate myself on a successor who can relieve
   me of this burden; and you on one who is able completely to repair any
   injury which your affairs may have suffered through our inattention...
   But as I know not whither the thread of my discourse might lead me, I
   here cut it short. I seek again my old labours, my usual watchings, my
   interrupted studies. As for you, gentlemen of the university, may you
   be happy, and fare you well." [92]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [53] Discourse of Toleration, Owen's Sermons, fol. ed. p. 308.

   [54] Neal, iii. 360, 361. Walker's Sufferings of the Clergy, pp. 122,
   123, 128. Owen's Oratio Quinta ad Academicos, anno 1657. "Per primum
   biennium vulgi fuimus et vulgaris fabula."

   [55] Vaughan's Modern Pulpit, p. 87.

   [56] "Authority of the Magistrate in Religion Discussed," &c., by J.
   H.; whom Anthony Wood (Athen. Oxon., iv. 101) supposes to be John
   Humphrey.

   [57] Wood's Athen. Oxon., ibid. -- We subjoin Wood's own caricature:
   "While he [Owen] did undergo the same office, he, instead of being a
   grave example to the university, scorned all formality, undervalued his
   office by going in quirpo like a young scholar, with powdered hair,
   snakebone bandstrings (or bandstrings with very large tassles), lawn
   bands, a very large set of ribbons pointed at his knees, and Spanish
   leather boots with large lawn tops, and his hat mostly cock'd." --
   Ibid. 98.

   [58] Terence, Adelph. iv. 7, 21.

   [59] Oratio prima, translated by Orme, pp. 128-131.

   [60] "At the house of Dr Willis the physician, not far from his own
   lodgings at Christchurch." -- Biograph. Dict., x. 103.

   [61] Asty, pp. xi., xii. Calamy's Noncon. Mem., i. 201. Wood's Fasti,
   ii. 788.

   [62] Asty, pp. xi., xii.

   [63] Life and Times of Philip Henry, p. 60.

   [64] Cromwelliana, Orme, p. 109.

   [65] His spirit is expressed in the following tender words, with which
   he closed one his debates: "While we wrangle here in the dark, we are
   dying, and passing to the world that will decide all our controversies;
   and the safest passage thither is by a peaceable holiness."

   [66] Wood's Fasti, ii. 179.

   [67] Wood's Athen. Oxon., iv. 98.

   [68] Preface, p. viii.

   [69] Orme, p. 153.

   [70] Many readers will be struck by the resemblance between this noble
   passage and that of Owen's greatest contemporary:--

   "Thee, Author of all being,

   Fountain of light, thyself invisible

   Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sittest

   Throned inaccessible; but when thou shadest

   The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud,

   Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine,

   Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear;

   Yet dazzle heaven, that brightest seraphim

   Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes."
   Par. Lost., book iii. 374-382.

   [71] Preface, p. xx.

   [72] Epistle Dedicatory to the Heads of Colleges, etc., at Oxford, p.
   8.

   [73] "In the midst of all the changes and mutations which the
   infinitely wise providence of God doth daily effect in the greater and
   lesser things of this world, as to the communication of his love in
   Jesus Christ, and the merciful, gracious distribution of the
   unsearchable riches of his grace, and the hid treasures thereof
   purchased by his blood, he knows no repentance. Of both these you have
   had full experience. And though your concernment in the former hath
   been as eminent as that of any person whatever in these later ages of
   the world, yet your interest in and acquaintance with the latter is, as
   of incomparably more importance in itself, so answerably of more value
   and esteem into you." --Dedication to His Highness, Oliver, Lord
   Protector.

   [74] Wood's Athen. Oxon., iv. 99. Pref. to Cotton's Defence, Orme, p.
   112.

   [75] Life of Dr Witherspoon, prefixed to works, pp. xix.-xxiii.

   [76] Baxter's own Life, p. 205. Neal, iv. 88-91.

   [77] Neal, iv. 92-97. Baxter's own Life, part i. p. 72. Orme, pp.
   116-119. Vaughan's Stuart Dynasty, pp. 247-250. D'Aubigné's
   Protectorate, pp. 231-236.

   [78] Calamy's Life of Howe, prefixed to works, p. v. Neal, iv. 97.

   [79] Biog. Dict., x. 103. Orme, p. 118.

   [80] Whitelock's Memorials, p. 673. Neal, iv. 126-128.

   [81] Vaughan's Age and Christianity, pp. 79-82.

   [82] Princeton Theol. Essays, First Series. Essay on the Doctrines of
   the Early Socinians.

   [83] Preface, pp. 64, 65, quarto ed.

   [84] Preface, p. 69.

   [85] Preface.

   [86] "He was reckoned the brightest ornament of the university in his
   time." -- Dr Calamy.

   [87] Wood's Fasti, part ii., pp. 169-197.

   [88] Orme, p. 120.

   [89] Burnet's Own Times, i. 98. Ludlow's Memoirs, p. 248. Neal, iv.
   151, 152.

   [90] Neal, iv. 157. Orme, p. 126.

   [91] Neal, iv. 165.

   [92] Conclusion of Oratio quinta, translated by Orme. -- Six Latin
   orations, delivered by Owen at Oxford while he presided over the
   university, have been preserved, and used to be printed at the end of
   the volume that contained his sermons and tracts. They will appear in
   the seventh volume of the present edition of Owen's works.
     __________________________________________________________________

                          His Retirement and Last Days

   A wish has sometimes been expressed, that men who, like Owen, have
   contributed so largely to the enriching of our theological literature,
   could have been spared the endless avocations of public life, and
   allowed to devote themselves almost entirely to authorship. But the
   wisdom of this sentiment is very questionable. Experience seems to
   testify that a certain amount of contact with the business of practical
   life is necessary to the highest style of thought and authorship; and
   that minds, when left to undisturbed literary leisure, are apt to
   degenerate into habits of diseased speculation and sickly
   fastidiousness. Most certainly the works that have come from men of
   monastic habits have done little for the world, compared with the
   writings of those who have ever been ready to obey the voice which
   summoned them away from tranquil studies to breast the storms and guide
   the movements of great social conflicts. The men who have lived the
   most earnestly for their own age, have also lived the most usefully for
   posterity. Owen's retirement from the vice-chancellorship may indeed be
   regarded as a most seasonable relief from the excess of public
   engagement; but it may be confidently questioned whether he would have
   written so much or so well, had his intellect and heart been, in any
   great degree, cut off from the stimulus which the struggles and stern
   realities of life gave to them. This is, accordingly, the course
   through which we are now rapidly to follow him, -- to the end of his
   days continuing to display an almost miraculous fertility of
   authorship, that is only equalled by that of his illustrious compeer,
   Richard Baxter; and, at the same time, taking no second part in the
   great ecclesiastical movements of that most eventful age.

   The next great public transaction in which we find Dr Owen engaged, was
   the celebrated meeting of ministers and delegates from the Independent
   Churches, for the purpose of preparing a confession of their faith and
   order, commonly known by the name of the Savoy Assembly or Synod. The
   Independents had greatly flourished during the Protectorate; and many
   circumstances rendered such a meeting desirable. The Presbyterian
   members of the Westminster Assembly had often pressed on them the
   importance of such a public and formal exposition of their sentiments.
   Their Independent brethren in New England had set them the example ten
   years before; and the frequent misrepresentations to which they were
   exposed, especially through their being confounded with extravagant
   sectaries who sheltered themselves beneath the common name of
   Independents, as well as the religious benefits that were likely to
   accrue from mutual conference and comparison of views, appeared
   strongly to recommend such a measure. "We confess," say they, "that
   from the very first, all, or at least the generality of our churches,
   have been in a manner like so many ships, though holding forth the same
   general colours, launched singly, and sailing apart and alone on the
   vast ocean of these tumultuous times, and exposed to every wind of
   doctrine, under no other conduct than that of the Word and Spirit, and
   their particular elders and principal brethren, without association
   among themselves, or so much as holding out common lights to others,
   whereby to know where they were." [93]

   It was with considerable reluctance, however, that Cromwell yielded his
   sanction to the calling of such a meeting. He remembered the anxious
   jealousy with which the proceedings of the Westminster Assembly had
   been watched, and probably had his own fears that what now began in
   theological discussion might end in the perilous canvassing of public
   measures. But his scruples were at length overcome, -- circulars were
   issued, inviting the churches to send up their pastors and delegates,
   and more than two hundred brethren appeared in answer to the summons.
   They met in a building in the Strand, which was now commonly devoted to
   the accommodation of the officers of Cromwell's court, but which had
   formerly been a convent and a hospital, and originally the palace of
   the Duke of Savoy, from whom it took its name. A committee, in which
   Owen and Goodwin evidently bore the burden of the duties, prepared a
   statement of doctrine each morning, which was laid before the Assembly,
   discussed, and approved. They found, to their delight, that "though
   they had been launched singly, they had all been steering their course
   by the same chart, and been bound for one and the same port; and that
   upon the general search now made, the same holy and blessed truths of
   all sorts which are current and warrantable among the other churches of
   Christ in the world, had been their lading." [94] It is an interesting
   fact, that, with the exception of its statements on church order, the
   articles of the Savoy Confession bear a close resemblance to those of
   the famous Confession of the Westminster divines, -- in most places
   retaining its very words. This was a high and graceful tribute to the
   excellence of that noble commend. And though Baxter, irritated by the
   form of some of its statements, [95] wrote severely against the Savoy
   Assembly, yet a spirit of extraordinary devotion appears to have
   animated and sustained its conferences. "There was the most eminent
   presence of the Lord," says an eyewitness, "with those who were then
   assembled, that ever I knew since I had a being." [96] And, as the
   natural consequence of this piety, there was an enlarged charity
   towards other churches "holding the Head." In the preface to the
   Confession, which Owen is understood to have written, and from which we
   have already made some beautiful extracts, this blessed temper shines
   forth in language that seems to have anticipated the standing-point to
   which the living churches of our own times are so hopefully pointing.
   We are reminded in one place that "the differences between
   Presbyterians and Independents are differences between
   fellow-servants;" and in another place, the principle is avowed, that
   "churches consisting of persons sound in the faith and of good
   conversation, ought not to refuse communion with each other, though
   they walk not in all things according to the same rule of church
   order." [97] It is well known that the Savoy Confession has never come
   into general use among the Independents; but there is reason to think
   that its first publication had the best effects; and in all likelihood
   the happy state of things which Philip Henry describes as
   distinguishing this period is referable, in part at least, to the
   assurance of essential unity which the Savoy Confession afforded.
   "There was a great change," says he, "in the tempers of good people
   throughout the nation, and a mighty tendency to peace and unity, as if
   they were by consent weary of their long clashings." [98]

   What would have been the effects of these proceedings upon the policy
   of the Protector, had his life been prolonged, we can now only surmise.
   Ere the Savoy Assembly had commenced its deliberations, Oliver Cromwell
   was struggling with a mortal distemper in the palace of Whitewall. The
   death of his favourite daughter, Lady Claypole, as well as the cares of
   his government, had told at length upon his iron frame; and on
   September 3, 1658, the night of the most awful storm that had ever
   shaken the island, and the anniversary of some of his greatest battles,
   Oliver Cromwell passed into the eternal world. It is no duty of ours to
   describe the character of this wonderful man; but our references to
   Owen have necessarily brought us into frequent contact with his
   history; and we have not sought to conceal our conviction of his
   religious sincerity and our admiration of his greatness. Exaggerate his
   faults as men may, the hypocritical theory of his character, so long
   the stereotyped representation of history, cannot be maintained. Those
   who refuse him all credit for religion must explain to us how his
   hypocrisy escaped the detection of the most religious men of his times,
   who, like Owen, had the best opportunities of observing him. Those who
   accuse him of despotism must tell us how it was that England, under his
   sway, enjoyed more liberty than it had ever done before. [99] Those who
   see in his character no qualities of generous patriotism, and few even
   of enlarged statesmanship, must reconcile this with the fact of his
   developing the internal resources of England to an extent which had
   never been approached by any previous ruler, -- raising his country to
   the rank of a first power in Europe, until his very name became a
   terror to despots, and a shield to those who, like the bleeding Vaudois
   in the valleys of Piedmont, appealed to his compassion.

   Owen, and other leading men among the Puritans, have been represented,
   by writers such as Burnet, as offering up the most fanatical prayers
   for the Protector's recovery; and after his death, on occasion of a
   fast, in the presence of Richard and the other members of his family,
   as almost irreverently reproaching God for his removal. It would be too
   much to affirm, that nothing extravagant or extreme was spoken, even by
   eminently good men, at a crisis so exciting; but there is every reason
   to think that Owen was not present at the deathbed of the Protector at
   all; and Burnet's statement, [100] when traced to its source, is found
   to have originated in an impression of Tillotson's, who was as probably
   mistaken as otherwise. Vague gossip must not be received as the
   material of biography. At the same time, it cannot be doubted that the
   death of Cromwell filled Owen and his friends with profound regret and
   serious apprehension. His life and power had been the grand security
   for their religious liberties; and now by his death that security was
   dissolved. Cromwell during his lifetime had often predicted, "They will
   bring all to confusion again;" and now that his presiding hand was
   removed, the lapse of a little time was sufficient to show that he had
   too justly forecast the future. Ere we glance, however, at the rapid
   changes of those coming years, we must once more turn to Owen's labours
   as an author.

   In 1657 he published one of his best devotional treatises, -- "Of
   Communion with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each Person
   distinctly, in Love, Grace, Consolation, etc." It forms the substance
   of a series of sermons preached by him at Oxford during his
   vice-chancellorship, and is another evidence of his "close walk with
   God" during the excitements and engagements of that high official
   position.

   There is, no doubt, some truth in the remark, that he carries out the
   idea of distinct communion between the believer and each of the persons
   of the Godhead to an extent for which there is no scriptural precedent;
   and this arises from another habit, observable in some degree even in
   this devotional composition, -- that of making the particular subject
   on which he treats the centre around which he gathers all the great
   truths of the Gospel; but, when these deductions have been made, what a
   rich treasure is this work of Owen's! He leads us by green pastures and
   still waters, and lays open the exhaustless springs of the Christian's
   hidden life with Christ in God. It is easy to understand how some parts
   of it should have been unintelligible, and should even have appeared
   incoherent to persons whose creed was nothing more than an outward
   badge; and therefore we are not surprised that it should have provoked
   the scoffing remarks of a Rational ecclesiastic twenty years
   afterwards; [101] but to one who possesses even a faint measure of
   spiritual life, we know few exercises more congenial or salutary than
   its perusal. It is like passing from the dusty and beaten path into a
   garden full of the most fragrant flowers, from which you return still
   bearing about your person some parts of its odours, that reveal where
   you have been. And those who read the book with somewhat of this
   spiritual susceptibility, will sympathize with the glowing words of
   Daniel Burgess regarding it: "Alphonsus, king of Spain, is said to have
   found food and physic in reading Livy; and Ferdinand, king of Sicily,
   in reading Quintus Curtius; -- but you have here nobler entertainment,
   vastly richer dainties, incomparably more sovereign medicines: I had
   almost said, the very highest of angel's food is here set before you;
   and, as Pliny speaks, Permista deliciis auxilia,' -- things that
   minister unto grace and comfort, to holy life and liveliness" [102]

   In the same year Owen was engaged in an important and protracted
   controversy on the subject of schism, which drew forth from him a
   succession of publications, and exposed him to the assaults of many
   adversaries. Foster has sarcastically remarked on the great convenience
   of having a number of words that will answer the purposes of ridicule
   or reprobation, without having any precise meaning attached to them;
   [103] and the use that has commonly been made of the obnoxious term,
   "Schism," is an illustration in point. Dominant religious parties have
   ever been ready to hurl this hideous weapon at those who have separated
   from them, from whatever cause; and the phrase has derived its chief
   power to injure from its vagueness. The Church of Rome has flung it at
   the Churches of the Reformation, and the Reformed Churches that stand
   at different degrees of distance from Rome, have been too ready to cast
   it at each other. Owen and his friends, now began to feel the injurious
   effects of this, in the frequent application of the term to themselves;
   and he was induced, in consequence, to write on the subject, with the
   view especially of distinguishing between the scriptural and the
   ecclesiastical use of the term, and, by simply defining it, to deprive
   it of its mischievous power. This led to his treatise, "Of Schism; the
   true nature of it discovered, and considered with reference to the
   present differences in region:" in which he shows that schism, as
   described in Scripture, consists in "causeless differences and
   contentions amongst the members of a particular church, contrary to
   that love, prudence, and forbearance, which are required of them to be
   exercised among themselves, and towards one another." [104] From this
   two consequences followed; -- that separation from any church was not
   in its own nature schism; and that those churches which, by their
   corruption or tyranny, rendered separation necessary, were the true
   schismatics: so that, as Vincent Alsop wittily remarked, "He that
   undertakes to play this great gun, had need to be very careful and
   spunge it well, lest it fire at home." [105] It is one of Dr Owen's
   best controversial treatises, being exhaustive, and yet not marked by
   that discursiveness which is the fault of some of his writings, and
   bringing into play some of his greatest excellencies as a writer, --
   his remarkable exegetical talent, his intimate knowledge of Scripture,
   and mastery of the stores of ecclesiastical history. Dr Hammond replied
   to him from among the Episcopalians, and Cawdrey from among the
   Presbyterians, -- a stormy petrel, with whose spirit, Owen remarks, the
   Presbyterians in general had no sympathy; but Owen remained
   unquestionable master of the field. [106]

   It was not thus with the controversy which we have next to describe.
   Owen had prepared a valuable little essay, -- "Of the Divine Original,
   Authority, Self-evidencing Light and Power of the Scriptures; with an
   answer to that inquiry, How we know the Scriptures to be the word of
   God?" the principal design of which, as its title so far indicates, was
   to prove that, independently altogether of its external evidence, the
   Bible contains, in the nature of its truths and in their efficacy on
   the mind, satisfactory evidence of the divine source from which it has
   emanated; -- an argument which was afterwards nobly handled by
   Halyburton, and which has recently been illustrated and illuminated by
   Dr Chalmers with his characteristic eloquence, in one of the chapters
   of his "Theological Institutes." [107] In this essay he had laid down
   the position, that "as the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were
   immediately and entirely given out by God himself, -- his mind being in
   them represented to us without the least interveniency of such mediums
   and ways as were capable of giving change or alteration to the least
   iota or syllable, -- so, by his good and merciful providential
   dispensation, in his love to his Word and church, his Word as first
   given out by him is preserved unto us entire in the original
   languages." [108] It happened that while this essay was in the press,
   the Prolegomena and Appendix of Walton's invaluable and immortal work,
   the "London Polyglott," came into Owen's hands. But when he glanced at
   the formidable array of various readings, which was presented by Walton
   and his coadjutors as the result of their collation of manuscripts and
   versions, he became alarmed for his principles, imagined the authority
   of the Scriptures to be placed in imminent jeopardy, and, in an essay
   which he entitled, "A Vindication of the Purity and Integrity of the
   Hebrew and Greek Texts of the Old and New Testaments, in some
   considerations on the Prolegomena and Appendix to the late Biblia
   Polyglotta," [109] rashly endeavoured to prove that Walton had greatly
   exaggerated the number of various readings, and insinuated his
   apprehension, that if Walton's principles were admitted, they would
   lead, by a very direct course, to Popery or Infidelity. It is needless
   to say how undeniable is the fact of various readings; how utterly
   groundless were the fears which Dr Owen expressed because of them; and
   how much the labours of learned biblicists, in the region which was so
   nobly cultivated by Walton and his associates, have confirmed, instead
   of disturbing our confidence in the inspired canon. [110] And yet it is
   not difficult to understand how the same individual, who was
   unsurpassed, perhaps unequalled, in his own age in his knowledge of the
   subject-matter of revelation, should have been comparatively uninformed
   on questions which related to the integrity of the sacred text itself.
   The error of Owen consisted in making broad assertions on a subject on
   which he acknowledged himself to be, after all, but imperfectly
   informed; and, from a mere a priori ground, challenging facts that were
   sustained by very abundant evidence, and charging those facts with the
   most revolting consequences. Let those theologians be warned by it,
   who, on the ground of preconceived notions and incorrect
   interpretations of Scripture, have called in question some of the
   plainest discoveries of science; and be assured that truth, come from
   what quarter it may, can never place the Word of God in jeopardy.

   Walton saw that he had the advantage of Owen, and in "The Considerator
   Considered, and the Biblia Polyglotta Vindicated," successfully
   defended his position, and did what he could to hold Owen up to the
   ridicule of the learned world. Though he was Owen's victor in this
   controversy, yet the arrogance of his bearing excites the suspicion
   that something more than learned zeal bore him into the contest, and
   that the exasperated feelings of the ecclesiastic made him not
   unwilling to humble this leader and champion of the Puritans in the
   dust. The respective merits of the two combatants in this contest,
   which excited so much commotion in the age in which it occurred, are
   admirably remarked on by Dr Chalmers: "The most interesting collision
   upon this question that I know of, between unlike men of unlike minds,
   was that between the most learned of our Churchmen on the one hand,
   Brian Walton, author, or rather editor of the London Polyglott,' and
   the most talented and zealous of our sectarians on the other, Dr John
   Owen. The latter adventured himself most rashly into a combat, and
   under a false alarm for the results of the erudition of the former; and
   the former retorted contemptuously upon his antagonist, as he would
   upon a mystic or enthusiastic devotee. The amalgamation of the two
   properties thus arrayed in hostile conflict, would have just made up a
   perfect theologian. It would have been the wisdom of the letter in
   alliance with the wisdom of the spirit; instead of which I know not
   what was most revolting, -- the lordly insolence of the prelate, or the
   outrageous violence of the Puritan. In the first place, it was
   illiterate in Owen, to apprehend that the integrity of the Scripture
   would be unsettled by the exposure, in all their magnitude and
   multitude, of its various readings; but in the second place, we stand
   in doubt of Walton's spirit and his seriousness, when he groups and
   characterizes as the new-light men and ranting enthusiasts of these
   days, those sectaries, many of whom, though far behind him in the lore
   of theology as consisting in the knowledge of its vocables, were as far
   before him in acquaintance with the subject-matter of theology, as
   consisting of its doctrines, and of their application to the wants and
   the principles of our moral nature." [111]

   About the time of his emerging from this unfortunate controversy, Owen
   gave to the world his work on Temptation, -- another of those masterly
   treatises in which he "brings the doctrines of theology to bear on the
   wants and principles of our moral nature," and from which whole
   paragraphs flash upon the mind of the reader with an influence that
   makes him feel as if they had been written for himself alone.

   In his preface to that work, Owen (no doubt reflecting his impressions
   of public events) speaks of "providential dispensations, in reference
   to the public concernments of these nations, as perplexed and
   entangled, -- the footsteps of God lying in the deep, where his paths
   are not known." And certainly the rapid and turbulent succession of
   changes that took place soon after the removal of Cromwell's presiding
   genius from the helm, might well fill him with deepening anxiety and
   alarm. These changes it is not our province minutely to trace.
   Richard's feeble hand, as is well known, proved itself unfit to control
   the opposing elements of the state; and a few months saw him return not
   unwillingly, to the unambitious walks of private life. [112] Owen has
   been charged with talking part in the schemes which drove Richard from
   the Protectorate; but the charge proceeded upon a mere impression of Dr
   Manton's, produced from hearing the fragment of a conversation, and was
   repeatedly and indignantly denied by Owen during his life. [113] Then
   followed the recalling of that remnant of the Long Parliament which had
   been dispersed by Cromwell, -- a measure which Owen advised, as, on the
   whole, the most likely to secure the continuance of an unrestricted
   liberty. But the Parliament, unwilling to obey the dictation of a
   dominant party in the Army, was once more dispersed by force, while the
   army itself began to be divided into ambitious factions. A new danger
   threatened from the north. General Monk, marking the state of things in
   England, and especially the divided condition of the army, was making
   preparations to enter England. What were his designs? At one period he
   had befriended the Independents, but latterly he had sided with the
   powerful body of the Presbyterians. Would he now, then, endeavour to
   set up a new Protectorate, favouring the Presbyterians and oppressing
   other sects or would he throw his sword into the scale of the
   Royalists, and bring back the Stuarts? A deputation of Independent
   ministers, consisting of Caryl and others, was sent into Scotland,
   bearing a letter to Monk that had been written by Owen, representing to
   him the injustice of his entering England, and the danger to which it
   would expose their most precious liberties. But the deputies returned,
   unable to influence his movements, or even to penetrate his ultimate
   designs. Owen and his friends next endeavoured to arouse the army to a
   vigorous resistance of Monk, and even offered to raise £100,000 among
   the Independents for their assistance; -- but they found the army
   divided and dispirited; and Monk, gradually approaching London, entered
   it at length, not only unresisted, but welcomed by thousands, the Long
   Parliament having again found courage to resume its sittings. In a
   short while the Long Parliament was finally dissolved by its own
   content, and soon after the Convention Parliament assembled. Monk at
   length threw off his hitherto impenetrable disguise, and ventured to
   introduce letters from Charles Stuart. It was voted, at his
   instigation, that the ancient constitution of King, Lords, and Commons,
   should be restored, and Charles invited back to the throne of his
   ancestors; and the great majority of the nation, weary of the years of
   faction and turbulence, hailed the change with joy. But in the
   enthusiasm of the moment, no means were taken to secure an adjustment
   of those vital questions which had been agitated between the people and
   the crown. The act, therefore, which restored the king, restored the
   laws, both civil and ecclesiastical, to the state in which they had
   been at the commencement of the war, re-established the hierarchy, and
   constituted all classes of separatists a proscribed class; and Owen and
   his party had little to trust to for the continuance of their religious
   liberties but the promise of Charles at Breda, that he "would have a
   respect to tender consciences." [114] A little time sufficed to show
   that the king's word was but a miserable security; and the beautiful
   words of Baxter now began to be fulfilled in their darkest part:
   "Ordinarily, God would have vicissitudes of summer and winter, day and
   night, that the church may grow externally in the summer of prosperity,
   and internally and radically in the winter of adversity; yet usually
   their night is longer than their day, and that day itself has its
   storms and tempests." The night was now coming to the Puritans.

   A few months before the restoration of Charles, Owen had been displaced
   from the deanery of Christ Church, and thus his last official
   connection with Oxford severed. He now retired to his native village of
   Stadham in the neighbourhood, where he had become the proprietor of a
   small estate. During his vice-chancellorship, it had been his custom to
   preach in this place on the afternoons of those Sabbaths in which he
   was not employed at St. Mary's; and a little congregation which he had
   gathered by this means now joyfully welcomed him among them as their
   pastor. It was probably while at Stadham that he finished the
   preparation of one of his most elaborate theological works, whose title
   will supply a pretty accurate idea at once of its general plan and of
   its remarkable variety of matter, -- "Theologoumena, etc.; or, six
   books on the nature, rise, progress, and study of true theology. In
   which, also, the origin and growth of true and false religious worship,
   and the more remarkable declensions and restorations of the church are
   traced from their first sources. To which are added digressions
   concerning universal grace, -- the origin of the sciences, -- notes of
   the Roman Church, -- the origin of letters, -- the ancient Hebrew
   letters, -- Hebrew punctuation, -- versions of the Scriptures, --
   Jewish rites," etc. It is matter of regret that the "Theologoumena" has
   hitherto been locked up in the Latin tongue; for though parts have been
   superseded by more recent works, there is no book in the English
   language that occupies the wide field over which Owen travels with his
   usual power, and scatters around him his learned stores. [115]

   In all likelihood Owen hoped that he would be permitted to remain
   unmolested in his quiet village, and that his very obscurity would
   prove his protection; but he had miscalculated the leniency of the new
   rulers. An act passed against the Quakers, declared it illegal for more
   than five persons to assemble in any unauthorized place for religious
   worship; and this act admitting of application to all separatists, soon
   led to the expulsion of Owen from his charge, and to the dispersion of
   his little flock. [116] In a little while he saw himself surrounded by
   many companions in tribulation. The Presbyterians, who had shown such
   eagerness for the restoration of Charles to his throne, naturally
   expected that such measures would be taken as would comprehend them
   within the establishment, without doing violence to their conscientious
   difficulties; and Charles and his ministers flattered the hope so long
   as they thought it unsafe to despise it; but it was not long ere the
   Act of Uniformity drove nearly two thousand of them from their churches
   into persecution and poverty, and brought once more into closer
   fellowship with Owen those excellent men whom he had continued to love
   and esteem in the midst of all their mutual differences.

   Sir Edward Hyde, the future Lord Clarendon, was now lord chancellor,
   and the most influential member of the government, and means were used
   to obtain an interview between Owen and him, with the view, it is
   probable, of inducing him to relax the growing severity of his measures
   against the Nonconformists. But the proud minister was inexorable. He
   insisted that Owen should abstain from preaching; but at the one time,
   not ignorant of the great talents of the Puritan, strongly urged him to
   employ his pen at the present juncture in writing against Popery. Owen
   did not comply with the first part of the injunction, but continued to
   preach in London and elsewhere, to little secret assemblies, and even
   at times more publicly, when the vigilance of informers was relaxed, or
   the winds of persecution blew for a little moment less fiercely. But
   circumstances soon put it in his power to comply with the latter part
   of it; and those circumstances are interesting, both as illustrative of
   the character of Owen and of the spirit and tendencies of the times.

   John Vincent Cane, a Franciscan friar, had published a book entitled,
   "Fiat Lux; or, a Guide in Differences of Religion betwixt Papist and
   Protestant, Presbyterian and Independent;" in which, under the guise of
   recommending moderation and charity, he invites men over to the Church
   of Rome, as the only infallible remedy for all church divisions. The
   work falling in to some extent with the current of feeling in certain
   quarters, had already gone through two impressions ere it reached the
   hands of Owen, and is believed to have been sent to him at length by
   Clarendon. Struck with the subtle and pernicious character of the work,
   whose author he describes as "a Naphtali speaking goodly words, but
   while his voice was Jacob's voice, his hands were the hands of Esau,"
   Owen set himself to answer it, and soon produced his "Animadversions on
   Fiat Lux, by a Protestant;" which so completely exposed its sophistries
   and hidden aims, as to make the disconcerted friar lose his temper. The
   friar replied in a "Vindication of Fiat Lux," -- in which he betrayed a
   vindictive wish to detect his opponent, and bring upon him the
   resentment of those in power; describing him as "a part of that dismal
   tempest which had borne all before it, -- not only church and state,
   but reason, right, honesty, and all true religion." [117] To which Owen
   rejoined, now manfully giving his name, and, according to his custom,
   not satisfied with answering his immediate opponent, entered largely
   into the whole Popish controversy. Few things are more remarkable in
   Owen than the readiness with which he could thus summon to his use the
   vast stores of his accumulated learning.

   But, even after this good service had been done to the common cause of
   Protestantism, there seemed a danger that this second work would not be
   permitted to be published; and it is curious to notice the nature of
   the objections, and the quarter whence they came. The power of
   licensing books in divinity was now in the hands of the bishops; and
   they were found to have two weighty objections to Owen's treatise.
   First, That in speaking of the evangelists and apostles, and even of
   Peter, he withheld from them the title of "saint;" and, secondly, That
   he had questioned whether it could be proved that Peter had ever been
   at Rome. Owen's treatment of these objections was every way worthy of
   himself. In reference to the former, he reminded his censors that the
   titles of evangelist and apostle were superior to that of saint,
   inasmuch as this belonged to all the people of God; at the same time,
   he expressed his willingness to yield this point. But the second he
   could only yield on one condition, -- namely, that they would prove
   that he had been mistaken. Owen's book at length found its way to the
   press; not, however, through the concessions of the bishops, but
   through the command of Sir Edward Nicolas, one of the principal
   secretaries of state, who interposed to overrule their scruples. [118]

   Dr Owen's reputation was greatly extended by these writings; and this
   led to a new interview with Clarendon. His lordship acknowledged that
   he had done more for the cause of Protestantism than any other man in
   England; and, expressing his astonishment that so learned a man should
   have been led away by "the novelty of Independency," held out to him
   the hope of high preferment in the church if he would conform. Owen
   undertook to prove, in answer to any bishop that he might appoint, that
   the Independent form of church order, instead of being a novelty, was
   the only mode of government in the church for the first two centuries;
   and as for his wish to bestow upon him ecclesiastical honours, what he
   had to ask for himself and his brethren was, not preferment within the
   church, but simple toleration without it. The dazzling bait of a mitre
   appears to have been set before all the leading Nonconformists; but not
   one of them yielded to its lure. [119] This led the chancellor to
   inquire what was the measure of toleration he had to ask; -- to which
   Owen is reported to have answered, "Liberty for all who assented to the
   doctrine of the Church of England." This answer has been remarked on by
   some at the expense of his consistency and courage; and the explanation
   has been suggested, that he now asked not all that he wished, but all
   that there was the most distant hope of receiving. It should be
   remembered, however, in addition, that many of the most liberal and
   enlightened men among the Nonconformists of those days objected to the
   full toleration of Papists; [120] not, indeed, on religious, but on
   political grounds; -- both because they were the subjects of a foreign
   power, and because of the bearings of the question on the succession of
   the Duke of York to the throne; and also, that Owen's plan would
   actually have comprehended in it almost the whole of the Protestant
   Nonconformists of that age.

   A more honourable way of deliverance from his troubles than conformity
   was, about the same time, presented to Dr Owen, in an earnest
   invitation from the first Congregational church of Boston, in New
   England, to become their pastor. They had "seen his labours, and heard
   of the grace and wisdom communicated to him from the Father of lights;"
   and when so many candles were not permitted to shine in England, they
   were eager to secure such a burning light for their infant colony. It
   does not very clearly appear what sort of answer Owen returned. One
   biographer represents him as willing to go, and as even having some of
   his property embarked in a vessel bound for New England, when he was
   stopped by orders of the court; others represent him as unwilling to
   leave behind him the struggling cause, and disposed to wait in England
   for happier days. [121]

   But neither the representations of Owen nor of others who were friendly
   to the Nonconformists, had any influence in changing the policy of
   those who were now in power. The golden age to which Clarendon and his
   associates sought to bring back the government and the country, was
   that of Laud, with all the tortures of the Star Chamber, the dark
   machinery of the High Commission, and the dread alternative of abject
   conformity, or proscription and ruin. And the licentious Charles, while
   affecting at times a greater liberality, joined with his ministers in
   their worst measures; either from a secret sympathy with them, or, as
   is more probable, from a hope that the ranks of Nonconformity would at
   length be so greatly swelled as to render a measure of toleration
   necessary that would include in it the Romanist along with the Puritan.
   Pretexts were sought after and eagerly seized upon, in order to
   increase the rigours of persecution; and new acts passed, such as the
   Conventicle Act, which declared it penal to hold meetings for worship,
   even in barns and highways, and offered high rewards to informers, --
   and whose deliberate intention was, either to compel the sufferers to
   conformity, or to goad them on to violence and crime.

   In the midst of these growing rigours, which were rapidly filling the
   prisons with victims, and crowding the emigrant ships with exiles, the
   plague appeared, sweeping London as with a whirlwind of death. Then it
   was seen who had been the true spiritual shepherds of the people, and
   who had been the strangers and the hirelings. The clerical oppressors
   of the Puritans fled from the presence of the plague, while the
   proscribed preachers emerged from their hiding-places, shared the
   dangers of that dreadful hour, addressed instruction and consolation to
   the perishing and bereaved, and stood between the living and the dead,
   until the plague was stayed. One thing, however, had been disclosed by
   these occurrences; and this was the undiminished influence of the
   Nonconformist pastors over their people, and the increased love of
   their people to them; nor could the pastors ever be cut off from the
   means of temporal support, so long as intercourse between them and
   their people was maintained. This led to the passing of another act,
   whose ingenious cruelty historians have vied with each other adequately
   to describe. In the Parliament at Oxford, which had fled thither in
   order to escape the ravages of the plague, a law was enacted which
   virtually banished all Nonconformist ministers five miles from any
   city, town, or borough, that sent members to Parliament, and five miles
   from any place whatsoever where they had at any time in a number of
   years past preached; unless they would take an oath which it was
   well-known no Nonconformist could take, and which the Earl of
   Southampton even declared, in his place in Parliament, no honest man
   could subscribe. This was equivalent to driving them into exile in
   their own land; and, in addition to the universal severance of the
   pastors from their people, by banishing them into remote rural
   districts, it exposed them not only to the caprice of those who were
   the instruments of government, and to all the vile acts of spies and
   informers, but often to the insults and the violence of ignorant and
   licentious mobs.

   Dr Owen suffered in the midst of all these troubles; and one anecdote,
   which most probably belongs to this period, presents us with another
   picture of the times. He had gone down to visit his old friends in the
   neighbourhood of Oxford, and adopting the usual precautions of the
   period, had approached his lodging after nightfall. But notwithstanding
   all his privacy, he was observed, and information given of the place
   where he lay. Early in the morning, a company of troopers came and
   knocked at the door. The mistress coming down, boldly opened the door,
   and asked them what they would have. -- "Have you any lodgers in your
   house?" they inquired. Instead of directly answering their question,
   she asked "whether they were seeking for Dr Owen?" "Yes," said they; on
   which she assured them he had departed that morning at an earlier hour.
   The soldiers believing her word, immediately rode away. In the meantime
   the Doctor, whom the woman really supposed to have been gone, as he
   intended the night before, arose, and going into a neighbouring field,
   whither he ordered his horse to be brought to him, hastened away by an
   unfrequented path towards London.

   A second terrible visitation of Heaven was needed, in order to obtain
   for the persecuted Puritans a temporary breathing-time: and this second
   visitation came. The fire followed quickly in the footsteps of the
   plague, and the hand of intolerance was for the moment paralysed, if,
   indeed, its heart did not for a time relent. The greater number of the
   churches were consumed in the dreadful conflagration. Large wooden
   houses called tabernacles were quickly reared, amid the scorched and
   blackened ruins; and in these, the Nonconformist ministers preached to
   anxious and solemnized multitudes. The long silent voices of Owen, and
   Manton, and Caryl, and others, awoke the remembrance of other times;
   and earnest Baxter


   "Preached as though he never should preach again;

   And like a dying man to dying men."

   There was no possibility of silencing these preachers at such a moment.
   And the fall of Clarendon and the disgrace of Sheldon soon afterwards
   helped to prolong and enlarge their precarious liberty.

   Many tracts, for the most part published anonymously, and without even
   the printer's name, had issued from Owen's pen during these distracting
   years, having for their object to represent the impolicy and injustice
   of persecution for conscience' sake. [122] He had also published "A
   Brief Instruction in the Worship of God and Discipline of the Churches
   of the New Testament, by way of question and answer," -- a title which
   sufficiently describes the book; [123] and some years earlier, a well
   compacted and admirably reasoned "Discourse concerning Liturgies and
   their Imposition," which illustrates the principle on which, when a
   student at Oxford, he had resisted the impositions of Laud, -- a
   principle which reaches to the very foundation of the argument between
   the High Churchman and the Puritan. And his publications during the
   following year show with what untiring assiduity, in the midst of all
   those outward storms, he had been plying the work of authorship, and
   laying up rich stores for posterity. Three of Owen's best works bear
   the date of 1668.

   First, there is his treatise "On the Nature, Power, Deceit, and
   Prevalence of Indwelling Sin in Believers;" on which Dr Chalmers has
   well remarked, that "there is no treatise of its learned and pious
   author more fitted to be useful to the Christian disciple; and that it
   is most important to be instructed on this subject by one who had
   reached such lofty attainments in holiness, and whose profound and
   experimental acquaintance with the spiritual life so well fitted him
   for expounding its nature and operations." [124] Next came his
   "Exposition of the 130^th Psalm," -- a work which, as we have already
   hinted, stood intimately connected with the history of Owen's own inner
   life; and which, conducting the reader through the turnings and
   windings along many of which he himself had wandered in the season of
   his spiritual distresses, shows him the way in which he at length found
   peace. When Owen sat down to the exposition of this psalm, it was not
   with the mere literary implements of study scattered around him, or in
   the spirit with which the mere scholar may be supposed to sit down to
   the explanation of an ancient classic; but, when he laid open the book
   of God, he laid open at the same time the book of his own heart and of
   his own history, and produced a book which, with all its acknowledged
   prolixity, and even its occasional obscurity, is rich in golden
   thoughts, and instinct with the living experience of "one who spoke
   what he knew, and testified what he had seen."

   Then appeared the first volume of Owen's greatest work, his "Exposition
   of the Epistle to the Hebrews," -- a work which it would be alike
   superfluous to describe or to praise. [125] For more than twenty years
   his thoughts had been turned to the preparing of this colossal
   commentary on the most difficult of all the Pauline epistles; and at
   length he had given himself to it with ripened powers, -- with the
   gathered treasures of an almost universal reading, and with the richer
   treasures still of a deep Christian experience. Not disdainful of the
   labours of those who had gone before him, he yet found that the mine
   had been opened, rather than exhausted; and, as he himself strongly
   expressed it, that "sufficient ground for renewed investigation had
   been left, not only for the present generation, but for all them that
   should succeed, to the consummation of all things." The spirit and
   manner in which he pursued his work is described by himself, and forms
   one of the most valuable portions of autobiography in all Owen's
   writings:--

     "For the exposition of the epistle itself, I confess, as was said
     before, that I have had thoughts of it for many years, and have not
     been without regard to it in the whole course of my studies. But yet
     I must now say, that, after all my searching and reading, prayer and
     assiduous meditation have been my only resort, and by far the most
     useful means of light and assistance. By these have my thought been
     freed from many an entanglement, into which the writings of others
     had cast me, or from which they could not deliver me. Careful I have
     been, as of my life and soul, to bring no prejudicate sense to the
     words, -- to impose no meaning of my own or other men's upon them,
     nor to be imposed on by the reasonings, pretences, or curiosities of
     any; but always went nakedly to the Word itself, to learn humbly the
     mind of God in it, and to express it as he should enable me. To this
     end, I always considered, in the first place, the sense, meaning,
     and import of the words of the text, -- their original derivation,
     use in other authors, especially in the LXX. of the Old Testament,
     in the books of the New, and particularly the writings of the same
     author. Ofttimes the words expressed out of the Hebrew, or the
     things alluded to among that people, I found to give much light to
     the words of the apostle. To the general rule of attending to the
     design and scope of the place, the subject treated of, mediums fixed
     on for arguments, and methods of reasoning, I still kept in my eye
     the time and season of writing this epistle; the state and condition
     of those to whom it was written; their persuasions, prejudices,
     customs, light, and traditions. I kept also in my view the covenant
     and worship of the church of old; the translation of covenant
     privileges and worship to the Gentiles upon a new account; the
     course of providential dispensations that the Jews were under; the
     near expiration of their church and state; the speedy approach of
     their utter abolition and destruction, with the temptations that
     befell them on all these various accounts; -- without which it is
     impossible for any one justly to follow the apostle, so as to keep
     close to his design or fully to understand his meaning." [126]

   The result has been, a work unequalled in excellence, except, perhaps,
   by Vitringa's noble commentary on Isaiah. It is quite true, that in the
   department of verbal criticism, and even in the exposition of some
   occasional passages, future expositors may have found Owen at fault, --
   it is even true that the Rabbinical lore with which the work abounds
   does far more to cumber than to illustrate the text; but when all this
   has been conceded, how amazing is the power with which Owen has
   unfolded the proportions, and brought out the meaning and spirit, of
   this massive epistle! It is like some vast monster filled with solemn
   light, on whose minuter details it might be easy to suggest
   improvement; but whose stable walls and noble columns astonish you at
   the skill and strength of the builder the longer you gaze; and there is
   true sublimity in the exclamation with which Owen laid down his pen
   when he had finished it: "Now, my work is done; it is time for me to
   die." Perhaps no minister in Great Britain or America for the last
   hundred and fifty years has sat down to the exposition of this portion
   of inspired truth without consulting Owen's commentary. The appalling
   magnitude of the work is the most formidable obstacle to its
   usefulness; and this the author himself seems to have anticipated even
   in his own age of ponderous and portly folios; for we find him modestly
   suggesting the possibility of treating it as if it were three separate
   works, and of reading the philological, or the exegetical, or the
   practical portion alone. [127] We are quite aware that one man of great
   eminence has spoken in terms of disparagement almost bordering on
   contempt of one part of this great work, -- "The Preliminary
   Exercitations;" [128] but we must remember Hall's love of literary
   paradoxes, in common with the great lexicographer whom he imitated; and
   those who are familiar with the writings of Owen -- which Hall
   acknowledges he was not, -- will be more disposed to subscribe to the
   glowing terms in which his great rival in eloquence has spoken of
   Owen's Exposition: "Let me again recommend your studious and sustained
   attention," says Dr Chalmers to his students, "to the Epistle to the
   Hebrews; and I should rejoice if any of you felt emboldened on my
   advice to grapple with a work so ponderous as Owen's commentary on that
   epistle, -- a lengthened and laborious enterprise, certainly, but now
   is your season for abundant labour. And the only thing to be attended
   to is, that, in virtue of being well directed, it shall not be wasted
   on a bulky, though at the same time profitless erudition. I promise you
   a hundredfold more advantage from the perusal of this greatest work of
   John Owen, than from the perusal of all that has been written on the
   subject of the heathen sacrifices. It is a work of gigantic strength as
   well as gigantic size; and he who has mastered it is very little short,
   both in respect to the doctrinal and the practical of Christianity, of
   being an erudite and accomplished theologian." [129]

   It has been remarked, that there is no lesson so difficult to learn as
   that of true religious toleration, for almost every sect in turn, when
   tempted by the power, has resorted to the practice of persecution; and
   this remark has seldom obtained more striking confirmation than in what
   was occurring at this time in another part of the world. While in
   England the Independents, and Nonconformists generally, were passing
   from one degree of persecution to another, at the hands of the restored
   adherents of Prelacy; the Independents of New England were perpetrating
   even greater severities against the Baptists and Quakers in that infant
   colony. Whipping, fines, imprisonment, selling into slavery, were
   punishments inflicted by them on thousands who, after all, did not
   differ from their persecutors on any point that was fundamental in
   religion. One of Owen's biographers has taken very unnecessary pains to
   show that the conduct of these churches had no connection with their
   principles as Independents; but this only renders their conduct the
   more inexcusable, and proves how deeply rooted the spirit of
   intolerance is in human nature. Owen and his friends heard of these
   events with indignation and shame, and even feared that they might be
   turned to their disadvantage in England; and, in a letter subscribed
   along with him by all his brethren in London, faithfully remonstrated
   with the New England persecutors. "We only make it our hearty request,"
   said they, "that you will trust God with his truth and ways, so far as
   to suspend all rigorous proceedings in corporeal restraints or
   punishments on persons that dissent from you, and practice the
   principles of their dissent without danger or disturbance to the civil
   peace of the place." Sound advice is here given, but we should have
   relished a little more of the severity of stern rebuke. [130]

   We have seen that the great fire of London led to a temporary
   connivance at the public preaching of the Nonconformist ministers; "it
   being at the first," as Baxter remarked, "too gross to forbid an undone
   people all public worship with too great rigour." [131] A scheme was
   soon after devised for giving to this liberty a legal sanction, and
   which might even perhaps incorporate many of the Nonconformists with
   the Established Church, -- such men as Wilkins, bishop of Chester,
   Tillotson, and Stillingfleet, warmly espousing the proposal. But no
   sooner did the scheme become generally known, as well as the
   influential names by which it was approved, than the implacable
   adversaries of the Nonconformists anew bestirred themselves, and
   succeeded in extinguishing its generous provisions. It became
   necessary, however, in the temper of the nation, to do something in
   vindication of these severities; and no readier expedient suggested
   itself than to decry toleration as unfriendly to social order, and
   still more to blacken the character of the Nonconformist sufferers. A
   fit instrument for this work presented himself in Samuel Parker, a man
   of menial origin, who had for a time been connected with the Puritans,
   but who, deserting them when they became sufferers, was now aspiring
   after preferment in the Episcopal Church, and whom Burnet describes as
   "full of satirical vivacity, considerably learned, but of no judgment;
   and as to religion, rather impious." [132] In his "Discourse of
   Ecclesiastical Polity," the "authority of the civil magistrate over the
   consciences of subjects in matters of external religion is asserted,
   the mischief and inconveniences of toleration are represented, and all
   pretences pleaded in favour of liberty of conscience are fully
   answered." Such is the atrocious title-page of his book, and to a
   modern reader, the undertaking to which it pledges him must seem rather
   bold; but the confident author is reported to have firmly believed in
   his own success. Holding out his book to the Earl of Anglesea, he said,
   "Let us see, my lord, whether any of your chaplains can answer it;" and
   the bigoted Sheldon, sympathizing with its spirit, naturally believed
   also in the exceeding force of its arguments. Dr Owen was chosen to
   reply to Parker; which he did, in one of the noblest controversial
   treatises that were ever penned by him, -- "Truth and Innocence
   Vindicated, in a Survey of a Discourse on Ecclesiastical Polity," etc.
   The mind of Owen seems to have been whetted by his deep sense of wrong,
   and he writes with a remarkable clearness and force of argument; while
   he indulges at times in a style of irony which is justified not more by
   the folly than by the baseness and wickedness of Parker's sentiments.
   There is no passage, even in the writings of Locke, in which the
   province of the civil magistrate is more distinctly defined than in
   some portions of his reply; [133] and it is curious to notice how, in
   his allusions to trade, he anticipates some of the most established
   principles of our modern political economy. [134] Owen's work greatly
   increased his celebrity among his brethren; -- even some of Parker's
   friends could with difficulty conceal the impression that he had found
   more than a match in the strong-minded and sturdy Puritan; and Parker,
   worsted in argument, next sought to overwhelm his opponent with a
   scurrility that breathed the most undisguised vindictiveness. He was
   "the great bell-wether of disturbance and sedition," -- "a person who
   would have vied with Mahomet himself both for boldness and imposture,"
   -- "a viper, so swollen with venom that it must either burst or spit
   its poison;" so that whoever wished to do well to his country, "could
   never do it better service than by beating down the interest and
   reputation of such sons of Belial." [135] On this principle, at least,
   Parker himself might have ranked high as a patriot.

   But the controversy was not over. Parker had not time to recover from
   the ponderous club of Owen, when he was assailed by the keen edged wit
   of Andrew Marvell. This accomplished man, the under-secretary and bosom
   friend of Milton, reviewed Parker's work in his "Rehearsal Transposed,"
   -- a work of which critics have spoken as rivalling in some places the
   causticity and neatness of Swift, and in others equalling the eloquent
   invective of Junius and the playful exuberance of Burke. [136] The
   conceited ecclesiastic was overwhelmed, and a number of masked
   combatants perceiving his plight, now rushed to his defence; in all
   whom, however, Marvell refused to distinguish any but Parker. In a
   second part of his "Rehearsal," he returned to the pen-combat, as Wood
   has called it; and transfixed his victim with new arrows from his
   exhaustless quiver. It is impossible to read many parts of it yet,
   without sharing with the laughers of the age in the influence of
   Marvell's genius. Ridiculing his self-importance, he says, "If he
   chance but to sneeze, he prays that the foundations of the earth be not
   shaken. Ever since he crept up to be but the weather-cock of a steeple,
   he trembles and cracks at every puff of wind that blows about him, as
   if the Church of England were falling." Marvell's wit was triumphant;
   and even Charles and his court joined in laughing at Parker's
   discomfiture. [137] "Though the delinquent did not lay violent hands on
   himself," says D'Israeli, "he did what, for an author, may be
   considered as desperate a course, -- withdraw from the town, and cease
   writing for many years," secretly nursing a revenge which he did not
   dare to gratify until he knew that Marvell was in his grave. [138]

   It was one thing, however, to conquer in the field of argument, and
   another thing to disarm the intolerance of those in power. The
   Parliament which met in 1671, goaded on by those sleepless
   ecclesiastics who were animated by the malign spirit of Parker,
   confirmed all the old acts against the Nonconformists, and even passed
   others of yet more intolerable rigour. [139] It is impossible to
   predict to what consequences the enforcement of these measures must
   soon have led, had not Charles, by his declaration of indulgence, of
   his own authority suspended the penal statutes against Nonconformists
   and Popish recusants, and given them permission to renew their meetings
   for public worship on their procuring a license, which would be granted
   for that purpose. This measure was, no doubt, unconstitutional in its
   form, and more than doubtful in the motives which prompted it; but many
   of the Nonconformists, seeing in it only the restoration of a right of
   which they ought never to have been deprived, -- and some of them, like
   Owen, regarding it as "an expedient, according to the custom in former
   times, for the peace and security of the kingdom, until the whole
   matter might be settled in Parliament," joyfully took shelter under its
   provisions. [140]

   The Nonconformists were prompt in improving their precarious
   breathing-time. A weekly lecture was instituted at Pinner's Hall by the
   Presbyterians and Independents, in testimony of their union of
   sentiment on fundamental truths, and as an antidote to Popish,
   Socinian, and Infidel opinions. [141] Owen began to preach more
   publicly in London to a regular congregation; and his venerable friend,
   Joseph Caryl, having died soon after the declaration of indulgence, the
   congregations of the two ministers consented to unite under the
   ministry of Owen, in the place of worship in Leadenhall Street. [142]
   Owen's church-book presents the names of some of the chiefs of
   Nonconformity as members of his flock, and "honourable women not a
   few." [143] Among others, there have been found the names of more than
   one of the heroes of the army of the Commonwealth, -- such as Lord
   Charles Fleetwood and Colonel Desborough; certain members of the Abney
   family, in whose hospitable mansion the saintly Isaac Watts in after
   times found shelter for more than thirty years; the Countess of
   Anglesea; and Mrs Bendish, the grand-daughter of Cromwell, in whom, it
   is said, may of the bodily and mental features of the Protector
   remarkably reappeared. Some of these might be able at times to throw
   their shield over the head of Owen in those changeful and stormy years.
   And there were other persons more powerful still, -- such as the Earl
   of Orrery, the Earl of Anglesea, Lord Berkeley, Lord Willoughby, Lord
   Wharton, and Sir John Trevor, one of the principal secretaries of
   state; who, though not members of Owen's church, were religiously
   disposed, and Owen's friends, and inclined, as far as their influence
   went, to mitigate the severities against the Nonconformists generally.
   [144]

   Owen's intimacy with these noblemen probably accounts for that
   interview to which he was invited by the King and the Duke of York, and
   which has been faithfully chronicled by all his biographers. Happening
   to be at Tunbridge Wells when his majesty and the duke were also there,
   he was introduced to the royal tent. The king freely conversed with him
   on the subject of religious liberty, and expressed his wish to see the
   Dissenters relieved of their disabilities. On his return to London, he
   invited Owen to repeated interviews, uttering the same sentiments as he
   had done during the first conversation, and at length intrusted him
   with a thousand guineas, to be employed by him in mitigating the
   sufferings of his poorer brethren. The general policy of Charles
   sufficiently accounts for these gleams of royal sunshine.

   But the importance of those friendships is not seen by us until we have
   marked the use which Owen made of them in the cause of his suffering
   brethren. It is well known that when the Parliament again assembled, it
   expressed its strong displeasure at the king's indulgence, and never
   ceased its remonstrances until the licenses to places of worship had
   been withdrawn. A disposition, it is true, began to show itself to
   distinguish between the Protestant Nonconformists and the Romanists,
   and to point restriction more particularly against the latter; but the
   act, which was professedly intended to bear against them was so
   clumsily constructed as to be capable of reaching all who did not
   conform, and Churchmen were not slow in giving it this direction. The
   Nonconformists were exposed anew to the persecuting storm; informers
   were goaded by increased rewards; and among thousands of less
   illustrious sufferers, Richard Baxter suffered joyfully the spoiling of
   his goods, and was condemned to what his ardent spirit did indeed feel
   bitterly, -- a year of almost unbroken silence. [145] Owen, however,
   appears to have been left comparatively unmolested, -- probably owing
   to the influences we have specified; and it is interesting to learn
   from an adversary with what zeal and constancy he employed his
   advantages to warn and succour the oppressed. "Witness his fishing out
   the king's counsels, and inquiring whether things went well to his
   great Diana, liberty of conscience? -- how his majesty stood affected
   to it? -- whether he would connive at it and the execution of the laws
   against it? -- who were or could be made his friends at court? -- what
   bills were like to be put up in Parliament? -- how that assembly was
   united or divided? And according to the disposition of affairs he did
   acquaint his under officers; and they, by their letters each post, were
   to inform their fraternity in each corner of the kingdom how things
   were likely to go with them, how they should order their business, and
   either for a time omit or continue their conventicles." [146] Surely
   this was being able to find nothing against him, except as concerning
   the law of his God.

   There was no sufferer in whose behalf Owen exerted his influence more
   earnestly than John Bunyan. It is well known that, as a preacher,
   Bunyan excited, wherever he went, an interest not surpassed even by the
   ministry of Baxter. When he preached in barns or on commons, he
   gathered eager thousands around him; and when he came to London, twelve
   hundred people would be found gathered together at seven on the dark
   morning of a winter working-day, to hear him expound the Word of God.
   Among these admiring multitudes Owen had often been discovered; -- the
   most learned of the Puritans hung for hours, that seemed like moments,
   upon the lips of this untutored genius. The king is reported to have
   asked Owen, on one occasion, how a learned man like him could go "to
   hear a tinker prate;" to which the great theologian answered "May it
   please your majesty, could I possess the tinker's abilities for
   preaching, I would willingly relinquish all my learning." [147] For
   some years Bunyan's confinement in the prison of Bedford had, through
   the kindness of his good jailer, been attended with many mitigations;
   but towards the latter part of it, its severities had been greatly
   increased, and Owen used every effort to engage the interest of his old
   friend and tutor, Dr Barlow, for his release. Some of the details of
   this matter have been questioned by Southey, and its date is uncertain;
   but the leading facts seem above reasonable suspicion, and it is
   pleasing to know, that after some perplexing delay, Owen's
   interposition was successful in obtaining Bunyan's enlargement. [148]

   During these chequered and anxious years, Owen's untiring pen had been
   as active as ever. In 1669 he had published "A brief Vindication of the
   Doctrine of the Trinity; as also, of the Person and Satisfaction of
   Christ;" a little treatise, containing the condensed substance of his
   great controversial work against Biddle and the Continental Socinians,
   -- the "Vindiciæ Evangelicæ." There was wisdom in thus supplying the
   church with a less controversial manual on those vital questions. Many
   of Owen's larger works remind us of some ancient castle, with its
   embrasures and port-holes, admirably fitting it for the purposes of
   defence, but in the same degree rendering it unsuitable as a peaceful
   habitation. In little more than forty years after Owen's death, this
   little work had passed through seven editions. [149] In 1672 he had
   published "A Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church Peace and
   Unity," etc.; a work combining enlarged and generous sentiment with
   wise discrimination, and in which Owen enters at great length into the
   question respecting the occasional attendance of Nonconformists on the
   parish churches, -- a question which found him and Baxter once more
   ranged on opposite sides.

   And there were other works whose origin dated from this period, in
   which we can trace the faithful watchman, piously descrying the coming
   danger, or seeking to rear bulwarks against the already swelling tide.
   Two of these were precious fragments broken off from his great work on
   the Epistle to the Hebrews, and enlarged to meet present exigencies.
   The first was his "Treatise on the Sabbath;" in which he joined with
   Baxter, and all the other great writers among the Puritans, in seeking
   to preserve this precious fence, which the goodness of God has drawn
   around the vineyard of his church, and which he found assailed on the
   one hand by fanatics, who denounced it as a mere ceremonial and carnal
   observance, and by the more numerous and noisy disciples of the "Book
   of Sports," who hated it for its spirituality. The reader will be
   struck with the contrast between the Puritan Sabbath, as it is depicted
   in its staid and solemn cheerfulness by a Puritan divine, and as he
   often beholds it caricatured by the modern popular writer; and as he
   finds Owen arguing with the same classes of antagonists, and answering
   the same argument and objections as are rife at the present day, he
   will be disposed to subscribe to the theory, that errors have their
   orbits in which they move, and that their return may be calculated at a
   given juncture. The other work of this class to which we refer was,
   "The Nature and Punishment of Apostasy Declared, in an Exposition of
   Hebrews vi. 4-6." [150] It was emphatically a book for the times; when
   the multitudes who had merely played a part in religion in Cromwell's
   days had long since thrown off the mask, and taken amends for their
   restraints in the most shameless excesses; when to be sternly moral was
   almost to incur the suspicion of disloyalty; when to be called a
   Puritan was, with many, more discreditable than to be called a
   debauchee; and when the noon-day licentiousness of Charles' court,
   descending through the inferior ranks of life, carried every thing
   before it but what was rooted and grounded in a living piety. [151]

   But the greatest work of Owen at this period was one which we leave its
   elaborate title to describe, -- "A Discourse concerning the Holy
   Spirit; in which an account is given of his name, nature, personality,
   dispensation, operations, and effects. His whole work in the Old and
   New Creation is explained; the doctrine concerning it vindicated from
   opposition and reproaches. The nature and necessity also of Gospel
   holiness, the difference between grace and morality, or a spiritual
   life to God in evangelical obedience and a course of moral virtues, is
   stated and explained." The better part of two centuries have elapsed
   since this work of Owen's was given to the world, and yet no English
   work on the same vital subject has approached it in exhaustive fulness.
   [152] Wilberforce owns his obligations to it as one of his great
   theological textbooks; and Cecil declares that it had been to him "a
   treasure-house" of divinity. [153] It was not merely the two common
   extremes of error that Owen grappled with in this masterly treatise, --
   that of the enthusiasts who talked of the inward light and of secret
   revelations, and that of the Socinians who did not believe that there
   was any Holy Ghost, and of whose scanty creed it has been severely
   said, that it is not likely often to become the faith of men of genius.
   There was a third class of writers at that time, from whom Owen
   apprehended more danger than either, -- men who, in their preaching,
   dwelt much upon the credentials of the Bible, but little upon its
   truths, -- who would have defended even the doctrine of the Holy Spirit
   as an article of their creed, and at the same time would have derided
   all reference to the actual work of divine grace upon a human heart as
   the "weak imagination of distempered minds." Much of Owen's treatise
   has reference to these accommodating and courtly divines, and is, in
   fact, a vindication of the reality of the spiritual life. He is not
   always able to repress his satire against these writers. Some of them
   had complained that they were reproached as "rational divines;" to
   which he replied, that if they were so reproached, it was, so far as he
   could discern, as Jerome was beaten by an angel for being a Ciceronian
   (in the judgment of some), very undeservedly. [154]

   Few glimpses are given us of Owen's domestic history; but it appears
   that, in January 1676, he was bereaved of his first wife. One of his
   early biographers says that she "was an excellent and comely person,
   very affectionate towards him, and met with suitable returns." [155] He
   remained a widower for about eighteen months, when he married a lady of
   the name of Michel, the daughter of a family of rank in Dorsetshire,
   and the widow of Thomas D'Oyley, Esq. of Chiselhampton, near Stadham.
   This lady brought Dr Owen a considerable fortune; which, with his own
   property, and a legacy that was left him about the same time by his
   cousin, Martyn Owen, made his condition easy, and even affluent, so
   that he was able to keep a carriage during his remaining years. On all
   which Anthony Wood remarks, with monkish spite, that "Owen took all
   occasions to enjoy the comfortable importances of this life." [156]

   Many symptoms were now beginning to make it evident that Owen's public
   career was drawing to a close. The excitements and anxieties of a most
   eventful life, and the fatigues of severe study, were making themselves
   visible in more than one disease. Asthma afflicted him with such
   severity as often to unfit him for preaching; and stone, the frequent
   and agonizing disease of studious men in those times, gave no uncertain
   signs of its presence. In these circumstances it became necessary to
   obtain assistants, both in the pastorate of the church in Leadenhall
   street, and also to act as his amanuenses in preparing his remaining
   works for the press among those who, for brief periods, were thus
   connected with him, we meet with the names of two persons of rather
   remarkable history, -- Robert Ferguson, who, beginning his life as a
   minister, became at length a political intriguer and pamphleteer, and,
   after undertaking some perilous adventures in the cause of William,
   ultimately became a Jacobite, and ended his eccentric and agitated
   course with more of notoriety than of honour; and Alexander Shields, a
   Scotchman, whose antipathy to Prelacy was surpassed by his piety, and
   whose name Scottish Presbyterians still venerate as the author of the
   "Hind let Loose." [157] These two probably laboured with Owen
   principally in the capacity of amanuenses; but the amiable and
   excellent David Clarkson shared with him the duties of the pastorate,
   and rejoiced to divide the anxieties and toils, and soothe the
   declining years, of the illustrious Puritan. Clarkson evidently won the
   generous admiration of Baxter; and Dr Bates beautifully spoke of him as
   "a real saint, in whom the living spring of grace in his heart diffused
   itself in the veins of his conversation. His life was a silent
   repetition of his holy discourses." [158]

   With the help of his amanuenses, Owen completed and published, in 1677,
   "The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, through the Imputation of the
   Righteousness of Christ, Explained, Confirmed, and Vindicated," -- a
   work in which all the ratiocinative strength and command of resources
   of his best controversial days appear undiminished. We concur, indeed,
   to a certain extent, in the censure which has been charged against that
   part of it which treats of the nature of justifying faith, as tending
   to perplex a subject whose very simplicity makes explanation equally
   impossible and unnecessary. The censure, however, ought not to be
   confined to Owen; for on the subject of faith the Puritan divines, with
   their scholastic distinctions, were far inferior to the theologians of
   the Reformation. The great difficulty about faith is not a metaphysical
   but a moral one; and there is truth in the observation, that elaborate
   attempts to describe it are like handling a beautiful transparency,
   whose lustre disappears whensoever it is touched.

   This great work was probably the ripened fruit of many years of thought
   But as we examine the productions of Owen during the few remaining
   years of his life, it is easy to discover that they belonged
   principally to three classes, and two of those especially, owed their
   origin to events that were occurring around him, and to dangerous
   tendencies which his ever-vigilant eye was quick to discover. First,
   there were his various writings against Popery, such as his "Church of
   Rome no Safe Guide;" his "Brief and Impartial Account of the Protestant
   Religion;" and, in some degree also, his "Humble Testimony to the
   Goodness of God in his Dealing with Sinful Churches and Nations." In
   all of these we hear the watchman answering, "What of the night?" He is
   alive to the sympathies of Charles and his court with Popery, -- to the
   readiness of not a few in the Church of England to move in the
   direction of Rome, -- to the avowed so Romanism of the Duke of York,
   and his possible succession to the throne, -- and to the dangers to
   religion, to liberty, and to every thing most dear to man, which these
   lowering evils portended. The wisdom and foresight of Dr Owen in many
   parts of these writings, which we now read in the light of subsequent
   events, strike us with surprise, often with admiration.

   In addition to beholding the Protestants duly inspirited and alarmed on
   the subject of Popery, Owen longed to see all alienations and divisions
   among them dispelled, and the various parts of the great Protestant
   community so united and mutually confiding, as to be prepared to resist
   their common adversary. Not that he was the less convinced of the
   necessity and duty of separation from the Episcopal Church; for in a
   controversy with Stillingfleet, into which an ungenerous assault of
   that able Churchman drew him, he had produced one of his best defences
   of Nonconformity; [159] but he felt a growing desire, both to see the
   real differences between the various branches of the Nonconformist
   family reduced to their true magnitude, and, in spite of the
   differences that might, after all, remain, to behold them banded
   together in mutual confidence and united action. His work on "Union
   among Protestants" was written with this wise and generous design; and
   this, we are persuaded, was one of the chief ends contemplated by
   another work, -- his "Inquiry into the Origin, Nature, Institution,
   Power, Order, and Communion of Evangelical Churches." [160] We are
   quite aware that some have represented this highly valuable treatise as
   a recantation of Dr Owen's views on church polity, and a return to
   those Presbyterian sentiments with which he had entered on his public
   life; but an examination of the treatise, we think, will make it
   evident that this was not in Owen's thoughts, and that his aim was
   rather to show how far he could come to meet the moderate Presbyterian,
   and to lay down a platform on which united action, in those times of
   trouble and of perils, which all division aggravated, could
   consistently take place. Accordingly we find him, while admirably
   describing the true nature of a Gospel church, as a society of
   professed believers, and refusing to any man or body of men "all power
   of legislation in or over the church," avowing it as his conviction,
   that "the order of the officers which was so early in the primitive
   church, -- viz. of one pastor or bishop in one church, assisted in rule
   and all holy ministrations with many elders, teaching or ruling only,
   -- does not so overthrow church order as to render its rule or
   discipline useless." And in reference to the communion of churches,
   while repudiating every thing like authoritative interference and
   dictation on the part of any church or assembly of rulers, he holds
   that "no church is so independent that it can always, and in all cases,
   observe the duties it owes to the Lord Christ and the church catholic,
   by all those powers which it is able to act in itself distinctly,
   without conjunction of others; and the church which confines its duty
   to the acts of its own assemblies, cuts itself off from the external
   communion of the church catholic." He holds that "a synod convened in
   the name of Christ, by the voluntary consent of several churches
   concerned in mutual communion, may declare and determine of the mind of
   the Holy Ghost in Scripture, and decree the observation of things true
   and necessary, because revealed and appointed in the Scripture." And
   farther, that "if it be reported or known, by credible testimony, that
   any church has admitted into the exercise of divine worship any thing
   superstitious or vain, or if the members of it walk, like those
   described by the apostle, Phil. iii. 18, 19, unto the dishonour of the
   Gospel and of the ways of Christ, the church itself not endeavouring
   its own reformation and repentance, other churches walking in communion
   therewith, by virtue of their common interest in the glory of Christ
   and honour of the Gospel, after more private ways for its reduction, as
   opportunity and duty may suggest unto their elders, ought to assemble
   in a synod for advice, either as to the use of farther means for the
   recovery of such a church, or to withhold communion from it in case of
   obstinacy in its evil ways." [161] We do not attempt to measure the
   distance between these principles and the Presbyterianism of Owen's
   day, or the diminished distance between them and the modified
   Presbyterianism of our own; but we state them, with one of Owen's
   oldest biographers, as an evidence of his "healing temper in this
   matter;" [162] and we even venture to suggest whether, at some future
   period of increased spirituality and external danger, they may not form
   the basis of a stable and honourable union among the two great
   evangelical sections of modern Nonconformists.

   But besides the outward dangers to Protestantism, which made Owen so
   eager for union among his friends, we discover another and more
   interesting explanation still in the increased occupation of his mind
   with the great central truths of the Gospel, and his growing delight in
   them. The minor distinctions among Christians come to be seen by us in
   their modified proportions, when we have taken our place within the
   inner circle of those great truths which constitute the peculiar glory
   and power of Christianity; and this inner and more radiant circle
   formed more and more the home of Dr Owen's heart. This is evident from
   the three great doctrinal and devotional works which were produced by
   him at this period, and which we have yet to name.

   First, there appeared his "Christologia, or Declaration of the Glorious
   Mystery of the Person of Christ, God and man, with the infinite wisdom,
   love, and power of God in the constitution thereof. As also, of the
   grounds and reasons of his incarnation; the nature of his ministry in
   heaven; the present state of the church above thereon; and the use of
   his person in religion," etc. The root from which the whole discourse
   springs, is the memorable declaration of our Lord to Peter, Matt. xvi.
   18, "And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock
   I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
   it:" -- a declaration in which Owen finds three great truths, whose
   illustration forms the substance of the volume; -- that the person of
   Christ is the foundation of his church; that opposition will be made by
   the powers of earth and hell to the church, as built on the person of
   Christ; and that the church built on the person of Christ shall never
   be separated from it or destroyed. It is easy to see what a rich field
   of doctrinal statement, learned illustration, and devout reflection, is
   opened for Owen's mind in these themes; and he expatiates in it with
   all the delight of a mind accustomed to high and heavenly communion. It
   is pleasing to mark how he casts off the cumbrous armour of a sometimes
   too scholastic style, that had kept him down in some of his earlier
   treatises; and, rising from the simply didactic into the devotional,
   aims to catch joyful glimpses of the glory that is soon to be revealed.

   Then followed his heart-searching, heart-inspiring treatise on "The
   Grace and Duty of being Spiritually-minded," first preached to his own
   heart, and then to a private congregation; and which reveals to us the
   almost untouched and untrodden eminences on which Owen walked in the
   last years of his pilgrimage, -- eminences for reaching which, it has
   been said by one of the humblest and holiest of men of our own times,
   "it would almost appear indispensable that the spiritual life should be
   nourished in solitude; and that, afar from the din, and the broil, and
   the tumult of ordinary life, the candidate for heaven should give
   himself up to the discipline of prayer and of constant watchfulness."
   [163]

   The last production of Owen's pen was his "Meditations and Discourses
   on the Glory of Christ." [164] It embodies the holy musings of his
   latest days, and in many parts of it seems actually to echo the presses
   of the heavenly worshippers. We may apply to Owen's meditations, as
   recorded in this book, the words of Bunyan in reference to his pilgrim,
   -- "Drawing near to the city, he had yet a more perfect view thereof."
   It is a striking circumstance, that each of the three great Puritan
   divines wrote a treatise on the subject of heaven, and that each had
   his own distinct aspect in which he delighted to view it. To the mind
   of Baxter, the most prominent idea of heaven was that of rest; and who
   can wonder, when it is remembered that his earthly life was little else
   than one prolonged disease? -- to the mind of Howe, ever aspiring after
   a purer state of being, the favourite conception of heaven was that of
   holy happiness; -- while to the mind of Owen, heaven's glory was
   regarded as consisting in the unveiled manifestation of Christ. The
   conceptions, though varied, are all true; and Christ, fully seen and
   perfectly enjoyed, will secure all the others. Let us now trace the few
   remaining steps that conducted Owen into the midst of this exceeding
   weight of glory.

   We have already mentioned Lord Wharton, as one of those noblemen who
   continued their kindness to the Nonconformists in the midst of all
   their troubles. His country residence at Woburn, in Buckinghamshire,
   afforded a frequent asylum to the persecuted ministers; just as we find
   the castles of Mornay and De Plessis in France opened by their noble
   owners as a refuge to the Huguenots.

   During his growing infirmities, Owen was invited to Woburn, to try the
   effect of change of air; and also that others of his persecuted
   brethren, meeting him in this safe retreat, might enjoy the benefit of
   united counsel and devotion. It appears that while here his infirmities
   increased upon him, and that he was unable to return to his flock in
   London at the time that he had hoped; and a letter written to them from
   this place, gives us so vivid a reflection of the anxieties of a period
   of persecution, and so interesting a specimen of Owen's fidelity and
   affection to his people, in the present experience of suffering, and in
   the dread of more, that we have peculiar delight in interweaving it
   with our narrative:--

     "Beloved in the Lord, -- Mercy, grace, and peace be multiplied to
     you from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, by the
     communication of the Holy Ghost. I thought and hoped that by this
     time I might have been present with you, according to my desire and
     resolution; but it has pleased our holy gracious Father otherwise to
     dispose of me, at least for a season. The continuance of my painful
     infirmities, and the increase of my weaknesses, will not allow me at
     present to hope that I should be able to bear the journey. How great
     an exercise this is to me, considering the season, he knows, to
     whose will I would in all things cheerfully submit myself. But
     although I am absent from you in body, I am in mind, affection, and
     spirit, present with you, and in your assemblies; for I hope you
     will be found my crown and rejoicing in the day of the Lord; and my
     prayer for you night and day is, that you may stand fast in the
     whole will of God, and maintain the beginning of your confidence
     without wavering, firm unto the end. I know it is needless for me,
     at this distance, to write to you about what concerns you in point
     of duty at this season, that work being well supplied by my brother
     in the ministry; you will give me leave, out of my abundant
     affections towards you, to bring some few things to your
     remembrance, as my weakness will permit.

     "In the first place, I pray God it may be rooted and fixed in our
     minds, that the shame and loss we may undergo for the sake of Christ
     and the profession of the Gospel is the greatest honour which in
     this life we can be made partakers of. So it was esteemed by the
     apostles, -- they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer
     shame for his name's sake. It is a privilege superadded to the grace
     of faith, which all are not made partakers of. Hence it is reckoned
     to the Philippians in a peculiar manner, that it was given to them,
     not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for him, -- that
     it is far more honourable to suffer with Christ than to reign with
     the greatest of his enemies. If this be fixed by faith in our minds,
     it will tend greatly to our encouragement. I mention these things
     only, as knowing that they are more at large pressed on you.

     "The next thing I would recommend to you at this season, is the
     increase of mutual love among yourselves; for every trial of our
     faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ is also a trial of our love
     towards the brethren. This is that which the Lord Christ expects
     from us, -- namely, that when the hatred of the world does openly
     manifest and act itself against us all, we should evidence an active
     love among ourselves. If there have been any decays, any coldness
     herein, if they are not recovered and healed in such a season, it
     can never be expected. I pray God, therefore, that your mutual love
     may abound more and more in all the effects and fruits of it towards
     the whole society, and every member thereof. You may justly measure
     the fruit of your present trial by the increase of this grace among
     you; in particular, have a due regard to the weak and the tempted,
     -- that that which is lame may not be turned out of the way, but
     rather let it be healed.

     "Furthermore, brethren, I beseech you, hear a word of advice in case
     the persecution increases, -- which it is like to do for a season. I
     could wish that, because you have no ruling elders, and your
     teachers cannot walk about publicly with safety, that you would
     appoint some among yourselves, who may continually, as their
     occasions will admit, go up and down, from house to house, and apply
     themselves peculiarly to the weak, the tempted, the fearful, --
     those that are ready to despond or to halt, and to encourage them in
     the Lord. Choose out those to this end who are endued with a spirit
     of courage and fortitude; and let them know that they are happy whom
     Christ will honour with this blessed work. And I desire the persons
     may be of this number who are faithful men, and know the state of
     the church; by this means you will know what is the frame of the
     members of the church, which will be a great direction to you, even
     in your prayers. Watch, now, brethren, that, if it be the will of
     God, not one soul may be lost from under your care. Let no one be
     overlooked or neglected; consider all their conditions, and apply
     yourselves to all their circumstances

     "Finally, brethren, that I be not at present farther troublesome to
     you, examine yourselves as to your spiritual benefit which you have
     received, or do receive, by your present fears and dangers, which
     will alone give you the true measure of your condition; for if this
     tends to the exercise of your faith, and love, and holiness, if this
     increases your valuation of the privileges of the Gospel, it will be
     an undoubted token of the blessed issue which the Lord Christ will
     give unto your troubles. Pray for me, as you do; and do it the
     rather, that, if it be the will of God, I may be restored to you, --
     and if not, that a blessed entrance may be given to me into the
     kingdom of God and glory. Salute all the church in my name. I take
     the boldness in the Lord to subscribe myself your unworthy pastor,
     and your servant for Jesus' sake,

     J. Owen.

     "P.S. -- I humbly desire you would in your prayers remember the
     family where I am, from whom I have received, and do receive, great
     Christian kindness. I may say, as the apostle of Onesiphorus, The
     Lord give to them that they may find mercy of the Lord in that day,
     for they have often refreshed me in my great distress.'?"

   His infirmities increasing, he soon after removed from London to
   Kensington, for country air; occasionally, however, he was able still
   to visit London; and an incident which happened to him on one of these
   visits presents us with another picture of the times. As he was driving
   along the Strand, his carriage was stopped by two informers, and his
   horses seized. Greater violence would immediately have followed, had it
   not been that Sir Edmund Godfrey, a justice of the peace, was passing
   at the time, and seeing a mob collected round the carriage, asked what
   was the matter? On ascertaining the circumstances, he ordered the
   informers, with Dr Owen, to meet him at the house of another justice of
   the peace on an appointed day. When the day came, it was found that the
   informers had acted so irregularly, that they were not only
   disappointed of their base reward, but severely reprimanded and
   dismissed. Thus once more did Owen escape as a bird from the snare of
   the fowler.

   Retiring still farther from the scenes of public life, Owen soon after
   took up his abode in the quiet village of Ealing, where he had a house
   of his own and some property. Only once again did persecution hover
   over him, and threaten to disturb the sacredness of his declining days,
   by seeking to involve him and some other of the Nonconformists in the
   Rye House plot; but the charge was too bold to be believed, and God was
   about, ere long, to remove him from the reach of all these evils, and
   to hide him in his pavilion, from the pride of man and from the strife
   of tongues. Anthony Wood has said of Owen that "he did very unwillingly
   lay down his head and die," but how different was the spectacle of
   moral sublimity presented to the eyes of those who were actual
   witnesses of the last days of the magnanimous and heavenly-minded
   Puritan! In one of his latest writings, when referring to the near
   approach of the daily expected and earnestly desired hour of his
   discharge from all farther service in this world, he had said, "In the
   continual prospect hereof do I yet live, and rejoice; which, among
   other advantages unspeakable, has already given me an inconcernment in
   those oppositions which the passions or interests of men engage them
   in, of a very near alliance unto, and scarce distinguishable from, that
   which the grave will afford." And all the exercises of his deathbed
   were the prolonged and brightening experience of what he here
   describes. In a letter to his beloved friend Charles Fleetwood, on the
   day before his death, he thus beautifully expresses his Christian
   affection, and his good hope through grace:--

     "Dear Sir, -- Although I am not able to write one word myself, yet I
     am very desirous to speak one word more to you in this world, and do
     it by the hand of my wife. The continuance of your entire kindness,
     knowing what it is accompanied withal, is not only greatly valued by
     me, but will be a refreshment to me, as it is, even in my dying
     hour. I am going to Him whom my soul has loved, or rather who has
     loved me with an everlasting love, -- which is the whole ground of
     all my consolation. The passage is very irksome and wearisome,
     through strong pains of various sorts, which are all issued in an
     intermitting fever. All things were provided to carry me to London
     today, according to the advice of my physicians; but we are all
     disappointed by my utter disability to undertake the journey. I am
     leaving the ship of the church in a storm; but whilst the great
     Pilot is in it, the loss of a poor under-rower will be
     inconsiderable. Live, and pray, and hope, and wait patiently, and do
     not despond; the promise stands invincible, that He will never leave
     us, nor forsake us. I am greatly afflicted at the distempers of your
     dear lady; the good Lord stand by her, and support and deliver her.
     My affectionate respects to her, and the rest of your relations, who
     are so dear to me in the Lord. Remember your dying friend with all
     fervency. I rest upon it that you do so, and am yours entirely,

     J. Owen."

   The first sheet of his "Meditations on the Glory of Christ" had passed
   through the press under the superintendence of the Rev. William Payne,
   a Dissenting minister at Saffron Waldon, in Essex; and on that person
   calling on him to inform him of the circumstance on the morning of the
   day he died, he exclaimed, with uplifted hands, and eyes looking
   upwards, "I am glad to hear it; but, O brother Payne! the long
   wished-for day is come at last, in which I shall see that glory in
   another manner than I have ever done, or was capable of doing, in this
   world." [165] Still it was no easy thing for that robust frame to be
   broken to pieces, and to let the struggling spirit go free. His
   physicians, Dr Cox and Sir Edmund King, remarked on the unusual
   strength of that earthly house which was about to be dissolved; while
   his more constant attendants on that consecrated hour were awe-struck
   by the mastery which his mighty and heaven-supported spirit maintained
   over his physical agonies. "In respect of sicknesses, very long,
   languishing, and often sharp and violent, like the blows of inevitable
   death, yet was he both calm and submiss under all." [166] At length the
   struggle ceased; and with eyes and hands uplifted, as if his last act
   was devotion, the spirit of Owen passed in silence into the world of
   glory. It happened on the 24^th of August 1683, the anniversary of St.
   Bartholomew's Day; -- a day memorable in the annals of the Church of
   Christ, as that in which the two thousand Nonconformist confessors had
   exposed themselves to poverty and persecution at the call of
   conscience, and in which heaven's gates had been opened wide to receive
   the martyred Protestants of France. Eleven days afterwards, a long and
   mournful procession, composed of more than sixty noblemen, in carriages
   drawn by six horses each, and of many others in mourning coaches and on
   horseback, silently followed the mortal remains of Owen along the
   streets of London, and deposited them in Bunhill-fields, -- the Puritan
   necropolis. [167]

   "We have had a light in this candlestick," said the amiable David
   Clarkson, on the Sabbath following; "we have had a light in this
   candlestick, which did not only enlighten the room, but gave light to
   others far and near: but it is put out. We did not sufficiently value
   it. I wish I might not say that our sins have put it out. We had a
   special honour and ornament, such as other churches would much prize;
   but the crown has fallen from our heads, -- yea, may I not add, Woe
   unto us, for we have sinned?'?" [168]

   Dr Owen had only reached the confines of old age when he died; but the
   wonder is, that a life of such continuous action and severe study had
   not sooner burned out the lamp. It may be remarked of him, as Andrew
   Fuller used to say of himself, that "he possessed a large portion of
   being." He is said to have stooped considerably during the later years
   of his life; but when in his full vigour, his person was tall and
   majestic, while there was a singular mixture of gravity and sweetness
   in the expression of his countenance. His manners were courteous; his
   familiar conversation, though never deficient in gravity, was
   pleasantly seasoned with wit; and he was admired by his friends for his
   remarkable command of temper under the most annoying provocations, and
   his tranquil magnanimity in the midst of all the changes of fortune to
   which, in common with all his great Puritan contemporaries, he was
   exposed. "His general frame was serious, cheerful, and discoursive, --
   his expressions savouring nothing of discontent, much of heaven and
   love to Christ, and saints, and all men; which came from him so
   seriously and spontaneously, as if grace and nature were in him
   reconciled, and but one thing." [169] Such is the portrait of Owen that
   has descended to us from those who best "knew his manner of life;" and
   our regret is all the greater, that we are constrained to receive the
   description in this general form, and that biography has opened to us
   so few of those glimpses of his domestic and social life which would
   have enabled us to "catch the living manners as they rose," and to fill
   up for ourselves the less strongly defined outlines of his character.

   Our business, however, is more with Dr Owen in his various public
   relations, and it seems to be a fit conclusion of this Memoir, that we
   should now attempt, in a few closing paragraphs, to express the
   estimate which a review of his conduct in these relations warrants us
   to form of his character. One of the most natural errors into which a
   biographer is in danger of being betrayed, is that of asserting the
   superiority of the individual who has been the subject of his memoir to
   all his contemporaries; and it would probably require no great stretch
   of ingenuity or eloquent advocacy to bring out Dr Owen as at least
   "primus inter pares." In finding our way, however, to such conclusions,
   almost every thing depends on the particular excellence on which we fix
   as our standard of judgment; and we are persuaded that were we allowed
   to select a separate excellence in each case our standard, we could
   bring out each of the three great Puritans as, in his turn, the
   greatest. Let impressive eloquence in the pulpit and ubiquitous
   activity out of it be the standard, and all this crowned with successes
   truly apostolical, and must not every preacher of his age yield the
   palm to Richard Baxter? Or let our task be to search for the man in
   that age of intellectual giants who was most at home in the philosophy
   of Christianity, whose imagination could bear every subject he touched
   upwards into the sunlight, and cover it with the splendours of the
   firmament, and would we not lay the crown at the feet of the greatly
   good John Howe? But let the question be, who among all the Puritans was
   the most remarkable for his intimate and profound acquaintance with the
   truths of revelations who could shed the greatest amount of light upon
   a selected portion of the Word of God, discovering its hidden riches,
   unfolding its connections and harmonies, and bringing the most abstruse
   doctrines of revelation to bear upon the conduct and the life who was
   the "interpreter, one amongst a thousand?" or let other excellencies
   that we are about to specify be chosen as the standard, and will not
   the name of Dr Owen, in this case, obtain an unhesitating and unanimous
   suffrage? Such a mode, therefore, of expressing our estimate is not
   only invidious, but almost certain to fail, after all, in conveying a
   distinct and accurate conception of the character we commend. We
   prefer, therefore, to contemplate Dr Owen in his principal relations
   and most prominent mental features, and to paint a portrait without
   fashioning an idol.

   The first excellence we have to name is one in regard to which, we are
   persuaded, the modern popular estimate has fallen considerably below
   the truth. We refer to the qualities of Owen as a preacher. No one who
   is familiar with his printed sermons, and has marked the rich ore of
   theology with which they abound, will refuse to him the praise of a
   great sermon-maker; but this gift is not always found united in the
   same person with that other excellence which is equally necessary to
   constitute the preacher, -- the power, namely, of expressing all the
   sentiment and feeling contained in the words by means of the living
   voice. And the general impression seems to be, that Dr Owen was
   deficient in this quality, and that his involved sentences, though
   easily overlooked in a composition read in secret, must, without the
   accompaniments of a most perfect delivery, have been fatal to their
   effect upon a public audience. It is even supposed that his
   intellectual habits must have been unfavourable to his readiness as an
   orator, and that while, like Addison, he had abundance of gold in the
   bank, he was frequently at a loss for ready money. But Owen's
   contemporaries report far differently; and the admiring judgment of
   some of them is the more to be relied on, that, as in the case of
   Anthony Wood, it was given with a grudge. Their descriptions, indeed,
   would lead us to conclude his eloquence was of the persuasive and
   insinuating, rather than, like Baxter's, of the impassioned kind, --
   the dew, and not the tempest; but in this form of eloquence he appears
   to have reached great success. His amiable colleague, Mr Clarkson,
   speaking of "the admirable facility with which he could discourse on
   any subject," describes him as "never at a loss for language, and
   better expressing himself extempore than others with premeditation;"
   and retaining this felicity of diction and mastery of his thoughts "in
   the presence even of the highest persons in the nation." We have
   already had occasion to quote Wood's representation of Owen's oratory,
   as "moving and winding the affections of his auditory almost as he
   pleased;" [170] and a writer of great judgment and discrimination, who
   had often heard Owen preach, speaks of him as "so great an ornament to
   the pulpit, that, for matter, manner, and efficacy on the hearers, he
   represented indeed an ambassador of the Most High, a teacher of the
   oracles of God. His person and deportment were so genteel and graceful,
   that rendered him when present as affecting, or more than his works and
   fame when absent. This advanced the lustre of his internal
   excellencies, by shining through so bright a lantern."

   Indeed, the sermons of Owen and his compeers, not only compel us to
   form a high estimate of the preachers, but of the hearers of those
   times, who could relish such strong meat, and invite its repetition.
   And seldom perhaps on earth has a preacher been called to address more
   select audiences than Owen. We do not now refer to the crowding
   multitudes that hailed his early ministry at Fordham and Coggeshall, or
   to those little secret audiences meeting in upper chambers, to whom
   truth was whispered rather than proclaimed, but to those high
   intellects that were wont to assemble around him at Oxford, and to
   those helmed warriors and heroes of the commonwealth, who, on days of
   public fasting and thanksgiving, or on high occasions of state, would
   stand in groups to hear the great Puritan discourse. Many of these
   earnest souls were no sciolists in divinity themselves, and had first
   drawn their swords to secure the liberty of prophesying and
   uncontrolled freedom of worship.

   We should form a very imperfect estimate of the character of Dr Owen,
   and of the beneficent influence which he exerted, did we not advert to
   his greatness as a man of affairs. In this respect we need have no
   hesitation in asserting his superiority to all the Puritans. Attached
   from principle to that great party whose noble mission it was to assert
   and to vindicate the rights of conscience and freedom of worship, he
   soon rose to be its chief adviser on all occasions of great practical
   exigency. He combined in a remarkable degree that clear perception and
   firm grasp of great abstract principles, that quick discernment of
   character and detection of hidden motive in others, which acts in some
   men with all the promptitude and infallibility of instinct, -- that
   fertility of resources, that knowledge of the times for vigorous action
   and of the times in which to economize strength, which, when found in
   great prominence and happy combination in the politician, fit him for
   the high duties of statesmanship. He was the man who, by common
   consent, was called to the helm in a storm. Baxter was deficient in
   more than one of those qualities which are necessary to such a post;
   while his ardent nature would, on some occasions, have betrayed him
   into practical excesses, and at other times his love of nice and subtle
   distinction would have kept him discussing when he should have been
   acting; -- while Howe's elevation above the affairs of daily life, his
   love of solitude, which made him almost wish even to die alone in some
   unfrequented wood, or on the top of some far remote mountain,
   disinclined, if it did not unfit him, for the conduct of public
   affairs. But Owen's singular excellence in this respect was early
   manifested, -- and to no eye sooner than to that of Cromwell. We have
   seen him inviting his counsels on the affairs of Dublin University;
   taking him with him to Scotland, not only as his chaplain, but as his
   adviser in the affairs of that campaign, when he found it more
   difficult to manage its theologians than to conquer its armies; and at
   length intrusting to him the arduous and almost desperate enterprise of
   presiding over Oxford, and raising it from its ruins. And throughout
   more than thirty years of the long struggle of the Puritans and
   Nonconformists, he was the counsellor and presiding mind, to whom all
   looked in the hour of important action and overwhelming difficulty.

   Some have accused Owen and other Nonconformists of his age as too
   political for their office. But who made them such? Was it not the men
   who were seeking to wrest from them their dearest civil rights, and to
   make it a crime to worship God according to their consciences? With
   such base ingenuity of reproach were the Huguenots of France accused of
   holding secret meetings, after they had been forbidden to meet in
   public. It was no small part of Owen's praise, that he saw and obeyed
   the necessity of his position; and that perhaps, of all the Puritans of
   his age, he was the most quick to "observe the signs of the times, and
   to know what Israel ought to do." This is the estimate we should be
   disposed to form from a simple retrospect of the facts of our
   narrative; but it appears to have been the judgment which some of the
   best of Owen's contemporaries were not slow to express. In that
   admirable letter to Baxter from which we have already quoted, referring
   more particularly to Owen's vice-chancellorship, the writer says, "And
   though his years, piety, principles, and strait discipline, with the
   interest he adhered to, affected many of the heads and students with
   contempt, envy, and enmity at the first; his personal worth, obliging
   deportment, and dexterity in affairs that concerned him in that
   station, so mastered all, that the university grew not only content
   with, but proud of such a vice-chancellor. And, indeed, such were his
   temper and accomplishments, that whatever station or sort of men his
   lot, choice, or interest, should place him in or among, it were no
   small wonder that he were not uppermost:-- that was his proper sphere,
   which those with whom he was concerned generally courted him into, and
   few envied or corrived." [171]

   But the aspect in which we most frequently think of Owen, and from
   which our highest estimate of him is formed, is that of a theological
   writer. Even the mere material bulk of his works fills us with
   surprise; and when we consider the intensely active life which Owen
   led, their production strikes us as almost incredible. In Russell's
   editions together with the edition of his "Exposition" by Wright, his
   works fill no fewer than twenty-eight goodly octavo volumes, though we
   almost sympathize with the feeling that the folio form, in which many
   of them originally appeared, more fitly represents their intellectual
   stature. "Hew down the pyramids," says Sir James Stephen, with a
   feeling which every lover of the old divinity will understand, -- "Hew
   down the pyramids into a range of streets! divide Niagara into a
   succession of water privileges! -- but let not the spirits of the
   mighty dead be thus evoked from their majestic shrines to animate the
   dwarfish structures of our bookselling generation."

   It is only, however, when we have acquired some considerable
   familiarity with the contents of these volumes, and when we remember
   that on almost every one of the great controversies, -- such as the
   Arminian, the Socinian, the Popish, and the Episcopalian, -- he has
   produced works which, after the lapse of nearly two centuries, are
   still regarded by unanimous consent as masterpieces on the themes on
   which they treat, that we feel unhesitating confidence in placing the
   name of Owen among the first names of that age of amazing intellectual
   achievement. In some of his controversies he had to do with men of
   inferior ability, of whom it might be said, as of some of Fuller's
   opponents, that "they scarcely served him for a breakfast;" but in
   other controversies, such as that with Goodwin on the perseverance of
   the saints, he was called to grapple with some of the best and most
   accomplished men of his age. But he never quailed before any opponent.
   More than one of his works put an end to the controversy by driving his
   adversaries to despair; and only once -- viz., in his rash encounter
   with Walton -- did he retire undeniably vanquished from the field. It
   is unnecessary to repeat observations that have been made in the
   narrative on Owen's various works; but this seems to be the place at
   which to indicate what seem to have been the most distinguishing
   qualities of Owen as a theological writer.

   Perhaps no better word could be found to express one of the most
   striking characteristics of Owen, than that which Mackintosh has used
   to describe the writings of Bentham, -- exhaustiveness. He goes through
   his subject "in the length thereof, and in the breadth thereof." It was
   his custom to read all the works that had been written on his
   particular subject, -- especially the writings of opponents, -- and
   then to pass deliberately from point to point of his theme, and bring
   the whole concentrated light of Scripture to bear upon its elucidation
   and establishment. He leaves nothing to be added by one who shall
   follow in the same path, not even little gleanings at the corners of
   the field. -- We venture to describe another feature of Owen's works by
   the phrase, Theological conservatism. In an age remarkable for its
   intellectual excitement, which gave birth to all manner of
   extravagances in opinion, like the ocean in a storm, bringing to the
   surface monsters, and hydras, and chimeras dire, and then producing in
   due season a reaction into the shallows of Rationalism, Owen displayed
   no disposition to change. There is no writer in whose opinions
   throughout life there is more of consistency and unity. There is
   everywhere visible strong intellect and profound thought; but it is
   intellect, not sporting itself with novelties, and expending itself in
   presumptuous speculation, but reasoning out and defending what apostles
   taught, and feeling that there is enough in this to fill an angel's
   grasp. Various causes combined to work out this quality in Owen,
   especially his profound reverence for the authority of Scripture,
   leading him to travel over its ample field, but restraining him from
   passing beyond it; the influence of the truth upon his own heart, as a
   living power writing its divine witness within him; and also his vast
   learning, which enabled him to trace opinions to their source, and to
   detect in that which the ignorant and half-learned looked upon as a
   dazzling discovery, the resurrection of an exploded error, whose only
   novelty was in its name.

   Allied to this, and in part accounting for it, was what we would style
   the devout Calvinism of Owen's cast of thought. Baxter and he held
   substantially the same truths, their views, even when they seemed the
   most divergent, differing in form and complexion more than in
   substance; but still it is evident that the two great men had each his
   distinct and favourite standing-point. With Baxter, the initial thought
   was man in need of a great restorative system; and this led him
   outwards and upwards, from step to step of the Christian salvation. The
   initial thought with Owen was God in the past eternity devising a
   scheme of salvation through a Mediator; which he unfolded in its
   wondrous arrangements and provisions from age to age of the world, and
   whose glorious results were to continue to be enjoyed for ever and
   ever. This gave a comprehensiveness and an elevation to Owen's whole
   theology, and accounts in part for the fact that Baxter seems greatest
   when bearing upon the duties of the sinner, and calling him to
   repentance, -- "now or never;" while Owen comes forth in his greatest
   strength when instructing and building up those who have already
   believed.

   And this suggests another of his most remarkable excellencies, -- the
   power, namely, of bringing the various doctrines of the Christian
   system, even the most abstruse, to bear, in the form of motive and
   consolation, upon the affections and active powers of our human nature.
   Great as Owen is when we see him as the gigantic polemic, putting forth
   his intellectual might in "earnestly contending for the faith once
   delivered unto the saints;" we have not seen him in all his greatness
   until, in such practical works as his treatise on the "Mortification of
   Sin in Believers," he brings the truth into contact, not so much with
   the errors of the heretic, as with the corruption and deceitfulness of
   the human heart. Then we have hesitated which most to admire, -- his
   intimate knowledge of the Word of God, or his profound acquaintance
   with the heart of man, or the skill with which he brings the one into
   vigorous and healing action upon the other; while all his great
   qualities, as the expositor of the Scriptures, as the defender of the
   faith, as the profound theologian, and as the wise practical
   instructor, have seemed to manifest themselves at once in single and
   united greatness, in that noble intellectual pyramid, his "Exposition
   of the Epistle to the Hebrews."

   Yet some of the excellencies that we have named stand closely connected
   with Owen's chief defect, -- which is to be found in his manner, rather
   than in his matter. His wish to exhaust his particular theme has made
   him say every thing on a subject that could be said, and betrayed him
   into an occasional prolixity and discursiveness, the absence of which
   would have made his works far more popular, and far more useful. He
   wants perspective in composition, and does not seem to know the secret
   of touching on themes, without laboriously handling them. This, with an
   occasionally involved and parenthetical style, has formed, as we
   conceive, the chief barrier to Owen's yet wider acceptance. The
   sentiment of Dr Vaughan is a just one, that had the fluency and
   elegance of Bates been united to the massive thoughts of Owen, we
   should have had a near approach to the perfect theological writer. But
   let us admit this occasional defect; and let us even farther concede,
   that in other qualities he is not equal to others of the Puritans, --
   that he is surpassed by Baxter in point and energy, by Flavel in
   tenderness, by Howe in majesty, by both the Henrys in proverb and
   epigram, by Bates in beautiful similitudes; -- still, where shall we
   find, in the theological writers of his own or of any age, so much of
   the accumulated treasures of a sanctified learning, -- of the mind of
   God clearly elucidated and invincibly defended, -- of profound and
   massive thought? His works are like a soil which is literally
   impregnated with gold, and in which burnished masses of the virgin ore
   are sure to reward him who patiently labours in it.

   John Owen belonged to a class of men who have risen from age to age in
   the church, to represent great principles, and to revive in the church
   the life of God. The supreme authority of the Scriptures in all matters
   of religion, -- the headship of Christ, -- the rights of conscience, --
   religion as a thing of spirit, and not of form, resulting from the
   personal belief of certain revealed truths, and infallibly manifesting
   itself in a holy life, -- the church as a society distinct from the
   world; -- these principles, often contended for in flames and blood,
   were the essence of that Puritanism which found one of its noblest
   examples in Owen. Puritanism, it has been finely said, was the feeling
   of which Protestantism was the argument. But even then, it was an old
   spirit under a new name, which, heaven-enkindled, has ever borne the
   two marks of its celestial origin, in blessing the world and being
   persecuted by it. It was the spirit which breathed in the Lollards of
   Germany; in the Hussites of Bohemia, -- in those saints, who


   "On the Alpine mountains cold,

   Kept God's truth so pure of old,

   When all our fathers worshipp'd stocks and stones;"

   in the Huguenots of France; and in the stern Scottish Covenanters; --
   and which God has sometimes sent down since, like a benignant angel,
   when the church at any time has begun to stagnate in a cold orthodoxy,
   to trouble the waters of the sanctuary, that the lame might be healed.
   It is a spirit which the inert orthodoxy and the superficial evangelism
   of the church even now greatly needs to have breathed into it from
   heaven. And the laborious and prayerful study of the writings of the
   Puritans might do much to restore it. Only let the same truths be
   believed with the same faith, and they will produce the same men, and
   accomplish the same intellectual and moral miracles. A due appreciation
   of the most pressing wants of our age, and a timely discernment of its
   most serious perils, would draw from us the prayer which is said to
   have once escaped the lips even of the cold and calculating Erasmus, --
   "O, sit anima mea cum Puritanis Anglicanis!"
     __________________________________________________________________

   [93] Confess. Pref., p. 6. Neal, iv. 173.

   [94] Ibid.

   [95] Baxter's Catholic Communion Defended, and Life, p. 104.

   [96] Letter from Rev. J. Forbes of Gloucester. Asty, p. xxi.

   [97] Of the Institution of Churches, and the Order Appointed in them by
   Jesus Christ.

   [98] Neal, iv. 178. One of the few letters of Dr Owen that have been
   preserved has reference to this Confession. A French minister of some
   eminence, the Rev. Peter du Moulin, wished to attempt a French
   translation of so valuable a document; but before doing so, he ventured
   some animadversions on certain of its sentiments and expressions.
   Owen's reply betrays some irritation, especially at Moulin's
   misunderstanding and consequent misrepresentation of the passages
   commented on. See Appendix.

   [99] Bishop Kennet has long since given the true statement of the case
   in reference to the ordinances against Episcopal worship during
   Cromwell's government. "It is certain," says he, "that the Protector
   was for liberty and the utmost latitude to all parties, so far as
   consisted with the peace and safety of his person and government; and
   even the prejudice he had against the Episcopal party was more for
   their being Royalists than for their being of the good old church." --
   Neal, iv. 125. In point of fact, the ordinances were not put in
   execution except against such clergymen as had become political
   offenders. -- Parr's Life of Usher, p. 75. Vaughan's Stuart Dynasty, i.
   246.

   [100] Burnet's Own Times, i. 116, 117. No fanatical words are directly
   charged upon Owen by any of is accusers, but his extravagance is freely
   surmised. -- Biog. Dict., x. 103. Goodwin is represented as complaining
   in these words, "Lord, thou hast deceived us, and we were deceived;" --
   words which Burnet characterizes as impudent and enthusiastic boldness;
   but which, if used at all, were evidently accommodated from Jer. xx. 7,
   and used in the sense in which the prophet himself had used them; q.d.,
   "Lord, thou hast permitted us to deceive ourselves." This may probably
   be taken as a specimen of the looseness of the other charges.

   [101] Dr Sherlock, in a treatise entitled, "Discourse concerning the
   Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our Union and Communion with Him," etc.,
   1674. To which Owen replied in "A Vindication of some Passages
   concerning Communion with God, from the Exceptions of Willian Sherlock,
   Rector of St George's, Buttolph Lane." The controversy drew a
   considerable number of other combatants into the field, and appears to
   have been protracted through a series of years. -- Wood's Athen. Oxon.,
   iv. 105, 106.

   [102] Preface to the reader.

   [103] Essay on the application of the epithet Romantic.

   [104] Owen's Works, xix. 132, 133, Russell's edition.

   [105] Melius Inquirend., p. 209. Orme, p. 199. Wood's description of
   Alsop makes one suspect that he had smarted from his wit: "A
   Nonconforming minister, who, since the death of their famous A.
   Marvell, hath been quibbler and punner in ordinary to the Dissenting
   party, though he comes much short of that person." -- Athen. Oxon., iv,
   106.

   [106] The other writings drawn from Owen in this controversy were
   provoked by Cawdrey. -- 1. A Review of the True Nature of Schism, with
   a Vindication of the Congregational Churches in England from the
   imputation thereof, unjustly charged on them by Mr Daniel Cawdrey,
   1657. 2. An Answer to a late Treatise of Mr Cawdrey about the Nature of
   Schism, 1658, prefixed to a Defence of Mr John Cotton, &c., against
   Cawdrey, written by himself, and edited by Owen.

   [107] Theological Institutes, x. b. iii. ch. 6.

   [108] P. 153, duod. ed.

   [109] Owen published a third tract in this little volume,
   "Exercitations adversus Fanaticos," in which he handled the Quakers
   with some severity.

   [110] Marsh's Michaelis, i. ch. vi. Taylor's History of the
   Transmission of Ancient Books; appendix.

   [111] Institutes of Theology, i. 287 -- On Scripture Criticism.

   [112] Owen's sermon, "A Gospel Profession, the Glory of a Nation," Isa.
   iv. 5, was preached before Richard's Parliament. Soon after, he
   preached before the Long Parliament; and this was the last occasion in
   which he was invited to officiate before such an assemblage. This
   sermon has not been preserved.

   [113] Dr Manton declared, that at Wallingford House he heard Dr Owen
   say with vehemence, "He must come down, and he shall come down;" and
   this was understood to refer to Richard; -- but it is material to
   notice that Dr Manton did not so understand it till after the event. --
   Palmer's note to Calamy's Life of Owen. Noncon. Mem., i. 201. Add to
   this Owen's solemn denial of the charge, Vindic. of Animadversions on
   Fiat Lux, p. 127; and the testimony of a "worthy minister," preserved
   by Asty, that Dr Owen was against the pulling down of Richard, and this
   his dissatisfaction at what they were doing at Wallingford House was
   such as to drive his into illness. -- Asty, p. xix.

   [114] Neal, iv. 191-220. Vaughan's Stuart Dynasty, ii. 266-271.

   [115] A portion of the "Theologoumena" was translated and published by
   the Rev. J. Craig of Avonbridge in Scotland; but the encouragement was
   not such as to induce him to persevere.

   [116] Wood's Athen. Oxon., iv. 100.

   [117] Vindic. of Animad. on Fiat Lux, p. 10.

   [118] Asty, pp. xxiii., xxiv.

   [119] "I am informed," says the author of the Anonymous Memoir, "by one
   of the Doctor's relations, that King Charles II. offered him a
   bishopric; but no worldly honour or advantage could prevail upon the
   Doctor to change his principles." -- P. xxii.

   [120] Owen's Discourse of Toleration, passim.

   [121] Anthony Wood is amusingly cynical in his account of this matter:
   "Upon this our author resolved to go to New England; but since that
   time, the wind was never in a right point for a voyage." -- Wood's
   Athen. Oxon., iv. 100.

   [122] Of these Mr Orme enumerates the following:-- 1. "An Account of
   the Grounds and Reasons on which the Protestant Dissenters Desire their
   Liberty." 2. "A Letter concerning the Present Excommunications." 3.
   "The Present Distresses on Nonconformists Examined." 4. "Indulgence and
   Toleration Considered, in a Letter to a Person of Honour." 5. "A
   Peace-offering, in an Apology and Humble Plea for Liberty of
   Conscience." -- P. 234.

   [123] The publication of this Catechism gave occasion to proposals for
   union among the Presbyterians and Independents, addressed by the
   sanguine Baxter to Dr Owen, and led to lengthened correspondence and
   negotiation. For reasons formerly adverted to, the scheme proved
   abortive. One of Owen's letters on this subject has been preserved, and
   appears in the Appendix. We are not sure that in every part we could
   vindicate the Doctor's consistency.

   [124] Introductory Essay to Owen on Indwelling Sin, pp. xviii., xix.

   [125] The second volume was published in 1674; the third in 1680; the
   forth was posthumous, but was left fit for the press, and appeared in
   1684.

   [126] Preface.

   [127] Address to the Christian Reader, vol. ii.

   [128] Miscellaneous Gleanings from Hall's Conversational Remarks, by
   the late Dr Balmer of Berwick-on-Tweed. Hall's Works, vi. 147.

   [129] Prelections on Hill's lectures. Chalmer's Posthumous Works, ix.
   282.

   [130] M'Crie's Miscelleneous Works, p. 509. Magnalia Americana, b. vii.
   p. 28. Orme p. 258.

   [131] Own Life, part iii. p. 20.

   [132] Burnet's Own Times, i. 382.

   [133] Duod. ed., p. 92.

   [134] Duod. ed., pp. 78-81.

   [135] Defence and Continuation of Eccleisast. Polity, and Preface to
   Bamhall. Orme, p. 261.

   [136] Campbell's Essay on English Poetry, p. 241. D'Israeli's
   Miscellanies of Literature, p. 238.

   [137] Burnet, referring to this controversy, speaks of Marvell as "the
   liveliest droll of his age, who writ in a burlesque strain, but with so
   peculiar and so entertaining a conduct, that, from the king down to the
   tradesman, his books were read with great pleasure." -- Own Times, i.
   382.

   [138] D'Israeli's Miscellanies, pp. 234, 239.

   [139] A paper entitled, "The State of the Kingdom with respect to the
   present Bill against Conventicles," was drawn up by Owen, and laid
   before the Lords by several eminent citizens; but without success.

   [140] Biographers make mention of letters addressed to Owen, inviting
   him to the presidency of Harvard College, New England; and also to a
   professorship in the United Provinces. But there is considerable
   vagueness in respect to details, as well as uncertainty about dates. A
   note, however, in Wood's Athen. Oxon., seems to place beyond reasonable
   doubt the general accuracy of the statement. He is said by the same
   authority to have been prevented from accepting the former invitation
   by an order from court.

   [141] Two lectures preached by Owen in this series appear among his
   works, -- the first entitled, "How we may Learn to Bear Reproofs," Ps.
   cxli. 5; the other, "The Chamber of Imagery in the Church of Rome Laid
   Open," 1 Pet. ii. 3.

   [142] Mr Orme supposes the place of worship to have been that in Bury
   Street, St Mary Axe; but the meeting-house was in Bury Street was not
   erected until 1708, when it was occupied by the same congregation under
   the ministry of Dr Isaac Watts. -- Wilson's History of Dissenting
   Churches, i. 252, 273.

   [143] Orme, pp. 277-285.

   [144] Asty, p. xxix. Noncon. Mem., i. 202.

   [145] Jenkyn's Essay on Life of Baxter, p. xx.

   [146] Letter to a Friend, p. 34. Orme, p. 274.

   [147] Hamilton's Life of Bunyan, p. xxix.

   [148] Asty, p. xxx. Southey's Life of Bunyan, p. lxiv.

   [149] Anon. Mem., p. xxix.

   [150] It is remarkable that in this treatise, p. 72-100, is to be found
   an explication of the last clause of the 6^th verse of the 6^th chapter
   of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which is strangely omitted in all
   editions of the "Exposition." The author has had this fact pointed out
   to him by his learned and venerated colleague, Dr Brown of Edinburgh.

   [151] Burnet's Own Times, i. 262-264.

   [152] An excellent posthumous work on the Holy Spirit, by the late Dr
   Jamieson of Edinburgh, edited with memoir by Rev. Andrew Sommerville,
   deserves to be better known. It displays more than one of the best
   qualities of Owen.

   [153] Cecil's Works, ii. 514 -- Remains.

   [154] Address to the readers, p. xli. The whole of Owen's comprehensive
   plan, however, was not completed in this central treatise. New
   treatises continued to appear at intervals, giving to some important
   branch of this subject a more full discussion. In 1677 appeared "The
   Reason of Faith; or, an answer to the inquiry, Wherefore we believe the
   Scriptures to be the Word of God?" In 1678, "The Causes, Ways and Means
   of Understanding the mind of God as Revealed in his Word; and a
   declaration of the perspicuity of the Scriptures, with the external
   means of the interpretation of them." In 1682, "The Work of the Holy
   Spirit in Prayer; with a brief inquiry into the nature and use of
   mental prayers and forms." At length, in 1693, two posthumous
   discourses, "On the Work of the Sprit as a Comforter, and as he is the
   Author of Spiritual Gifts." filled up Owen's elaborate outlines. --
   Orme, p. 293.

   [155] Anon. Mem., p. xxxiv. Her epitaph by Mr Gilbert helps to fill up
   the portrait:--

   "Prima ætatis virilis consors Maria,

   Rei domesticæ perite studiosa.

   Rebus Dei domus se totum addicendi;

   Copiam illi fecit gratissimam."
   There is a touching passage in a small work, remarkably well written,
   but little known, that leads us to think of Owen as an unusually tried
   parent. "His exercises by affliction were very great in respect of his
   children, none of whom he much enjoyed while living, and saw them all
   go off the stage before him." -- Vindication of Owen by a friendly
   Scrutiny into the merits and manner of Mr Baxter's opposition to Twelve
   Arguments concerning Worship by the Liturgy, p. 38.

   [156] Wood's Athen. Oxon., iv. 100, 101.

   [157] Orme, p. 301. Burnet sketches the character of Ferguson with his
   usual bold distinctness: "He was a hot and bold man, whose spirit was
   naturally turned to plotting," etc. -- Own Times, i. 542.

   [158] Funeral Sermon by Mr Bates on John xiv. 2, "In my Father's house
   are many mansions," &c. -- Reliquæ Baxterianæ, part iii. p. 97.

   [159] This was a bulky pamphlet, entitled, "A brief Vindication of
   Nonconformists from the Charge of Schism, as it was managed against
   them in a Sermon by Dr Stillingfleet." All the leading Nonconformists
   appear to have taken part in this controversy, from the grave Howe to
   witty Alsop. Stillingfleet replied in a clever work on the
   "Unreasonableness of Separation;" against which Owen brought his heavy
   artillery to bear with desolating effect, in "An Answer to the
   Unreasonableness of Separation,' and a Defence of the Vindication of
   the Nonconformists from the Guilt of Schism.'?"

   [160] A second part of this treatise, "The True Nature of a Gospel
   Church, and its Government," was posthumous, and did not appear till
   1689.

   [161] The True Nature of a Gospel Church, etc., chap. xi.

   [162] Anon. Mem., p. xxxiv. The same writer adds, in illustration of
   this healing temper, "I heard him say, before a person of quality and
   others, he could readily join with Presbytery as it was exercised in
   Scotland.

   [163] Introductory Essay to Owen on Spiritual-mindedness, by Dr
   Chalmers, p. xxiv.

   [164] "Weakness, weariness, and the near approaches of death, do call
   me off from any farther labour in this kind." -- Preface to reader.

   [165] Middleton, iii. p. 480.

   [166] Vindication of Owen by a friendly Scrutiny, etc., p. 38.

   [167] Stoughton's Spiritual Heroes.

   [168] "Funeral Sermon on the most lamented death of the late reverend
   and learned John Owen, D.D., preached the next Lord's day after his
   interment." By David Clarkson, B.D.

   [169] Vindication of Owen by a friendly Scrutiny, etc., p. 38.

   [170] The words seems to be Dodwell's, but they are quoted by Wood with
   approval.

   [171] "Corrived" is an obsolete English word for "rivalled."
     __________________________________________________________________

                        Appendix to the Life of Dr Owen
     __________________________________________________________________

Epitaph on his Monument
     __________________________________________________________________

  Epitaph inscribed on the Monument of Dr Owen in Bunhill-fields

   [172] Johannes Owen, S. T. P.
   Agro Oxoniensi Oriundus;
   Patre insigni Theologo Theologus Ipse Insignior;
   Et Seculi hujus Insignissimis annumerandus:
   Communibus Humaniorum Literarum Suppetiis,
   Mensura parum Communi, Instructus;
   Omnibus, quasi bene Ordinata Ancillarum Serie,
   Ab illo jussis Suæ Famulari Theolgiæ:
   Theologiæ Polemicæ, Practicæ, &, quam vocant, Casuum
   (Harum enim Omnium, quæ magis Sua habenda erat, ambigitur)
   In illa, Viribus plusquam Herculeis, Serpentibus tribus,
   Arminio, Socino, Cano, Venenosa Strinxit Guttera:
   In ista, Suo prior, ad Verbi Amussim, Expertus Pectore,
   Universam, Sp. S^cti. OEconomiam Aliis tradidit:
   Et missis Cæteris, Coluit Ipse, Sensitque,
   Beatam, quam Scripsit, cum Deo Communionem:
   In Terris Viator comprehensori in Coelis proximus:
   In Casuum Theologia, Singulis Oraculi instar habitus;
   Quibus Opus erat, & Copia, Consulendi:
   Scriba ad Regnum Coelorum usquequoque Institutus;
   Multis privatos infra Parietes, à Suggesto Pluribus,
   A Prelo Omnibus, ad eundem Scopum collineantibus,
   Pura Doctrinæ Evangelicæ Lampas Præluxit;
   Et sensim, no sine aliorum, suoque sensu,
   Sic prælucendo Periit,
   Assiduis Infirmitatibus Obsiti,
   Morbis Creberrimis Impetiti,
   Durisque Laboribus potissimum Attriti, Corporis
   (Fabricæ, donec ita Quassatæ, Spectabilis) Ruinas,
   Deo ultrà Serviendo inhabiles, Sancta Anima,
   Deo ultrà Fruendi Cupida, Deseruit;
   Die, à Terrenis Potestatibus, Plurimis facto Fatali;
   Illi, à Coelesti Numine, Felici reddito;

   Mensis Scilicet Augusti XXIVº. Anno à Partu Virgineo.
   MDCLXXXIIIº, Ætat. LXVIIº.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [172] This inscription is engraven on his tombstone.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Translation

   John Owen, D.D., born in the county of Oxford, the son of an eminent
   minister, himself more eminent, and worthy to be enrolled among the
   first divines of the age; furnished with human literature in all its
   kinds, and in its highest degrees, he called forth all his knowledge in
   an orderly train to serve the interests of religion, and minister in
   the sanctuary of his God. In divinity, practic, polemic, and
   casuistical, he excelled others, and was in all equal to himself. The
   Arminian, Socinian, and Popish errors, those hydras, whose contaminated
   breath and deadly poison infested the church, he, with more than
   Herculean labour, repulsed, vanquished, and destroyed. The whole
   economy of redeeming grace, revealed and applied by the Holy Spirit, he
   deeply investigated, and communicated to others, having first felt its
   divine energy, according to its draught in the holy Scriptures,
   transfused into his own bosom. Superior to all terrene pursuits, he
   constantly cherished, and largely experienced, that blissful communion
   with Deity he so admirably describes in his writings. While on the road
   to heaven, his elevated mind almost comprehended its full glories and
   joys. When he was consulted on cases of conscience, his resolutions
   contained the wisdom of an oracle. He was a scribe every way instructed
   in the mysteries of the kingdom of God. In conversation he held up to
   many, in his public discourses to more, in his publications from the
   press to all, who were set out for the celestial Zion, the effulgent
   lamp of evangelical truth, to guide their steps to immortal glory.
   While he was thus diffusing his divine light, with his own inward
   sensations, and the observations of his afflicted friends, his earthly
   tabernacle gradually decayed, till at length his deeply-sanctified
   soul, longing for the fruition of its God, quitted the body. In younger
   age, a most comely and majestic form; but in the latter stages of life,
   depressed by constant infirmities, emaciated with frequent diseases,
   and above all crushed under the weight of intense and unremitting
   studies, it became an incommodious mansion for the vigorous exertions
   of the spirit in the service of its God. He left the world on a day
   dreadful to the church by the cruelties of men, but blissful to himself
   by the plaudits of his God, August 24, 1683, aged 67. -- Translated by
   Dr Gibbons.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

Some Letters

   The following Letters embrace all the Correspondence of Dr Owen which
   has been preserved, and is of any importance:--
     __________________________________________________________________

  To M. Du Moulin

   Sir, -- I have received your strictures upon our Confession, wherein
   you charge it with palpable contradiction, nonsense, enthusiasm, and
   false doctrine, -- that is, all the evils that can be crowded into such
   a writing; and I understand, by another letter since, that you have
   sent the same paper to others, -- which is the sole cause of the return
   which I now make to you; and I beg your pardon in telling you, that all
   your instances are your own mistakes, or the mistakes of your friend,
   as I shall briefly manifest to you.

   First, you say there is a plain contradiction between chap. iii. art.
   6, and chap. xxx. art. 2. In the first place it is said, "None but the
   elect are redeemed;" but in the other it is said, "The sacrament is a
   memorial of the one offering of Christ upon the cross for all." I do
   admire to find this charged by you as a contradiction; for you know
   full well that all our divines who maintain that the elect only were
   redeemed effectually by Christ, do yet grant that Christ died for all,
   in the Scripture sense of the word, -- that is, some of all sorts, --
   and never dreamt of any contradiction in their assertion. But your
   mistake is worse; for in chap. xxx. art. 2, which you refer to, there
   is not one word mentioned of Christ's dying for all; but that the
   sacrifice which he offered was offered once for all, -- which is the
   expression of the apostle, to intimate that it was but once offered, in
   opposition to the frequent repetitions of the sacrifices of the Jews.
   And pray, if you go on in your translation, do not fall into a mistake
   upon it; for in the very close of the article it is said, "That
   Christ's only sacrifice was a propitiation for the sins of all the
   elect." The words you urge out of 2 Pet. ii. 1, are not in the text:
   they are, by your quotation, "Denied him that had redeemed them;" but
   it is, "Denied the sovereign Lord which had bought them;" -- which
   words have quite another sense.

   Something you quote out of chap. vi. art. 6, where I think you suppose
   we do not distinguish between the "reatus" and "macula" of sin; and do
   think that we grant the defilement of Adam's person, and consequently
   of all intermediate propagations, to be imputed unto us. Pray, sir,
   give me leave to say, that I cannot but think your mind was employed
   about other things when you dreamt of our being guilty of such a folly
   and madness; neither is there any one word in the Confession which
   gives countenance unto it. If you would throw away so much time as to
   read any part of my late discourse about justification, it is not
   unlikely but that you would see something of the nature of the guilt of
   sin, and the imputation of it, which may give you satisfaction.

   In your next instance, which you refer unto chap. xix. art. 3, by some
   mistake (there being nothing to the purpose in that place), you say,
   "It is presupposed that some who have attained age may be elected, and
   yet have not the knowledge of Jesus Christ; which is a pure enthusiasm,
   and is contrary to chap. xx. art. 2." Why, sir! that many who are
   eternally elected, and yet for some season -- some less, some longer --
   do live without the knowledge of Christ, until they are converted by
   the Word and Spirit, is not an enthusiasm; but your exception is
   contrary to the whole Scripture, contrary to the experience of all days
   and ages, overthrows the work of the ministry, and is so absurd to
   sense, and reason, and daily experience, that I know not what to say to
   it; only, I confess that if, with some of the Arminians, you do not
   believe that any are elected from eternity, or before they do actually
   believe, something may be spoken to countenance your exception: but
   that we cannot regard, for it was our design to oppose all their
   errors.

   Your next instance is a plain charge of false doctrine, taken out of
   chap. xi. art. 1, speaking, as you say, of the active obedience of
   Christ imputed to us, which is contrary to art. 3, where it is said
   that Christ acquits by his obedience in death, and not by his
   fulfilling of the law. Sir, you still give me cause of some new
   admiration in all these objections, and I fear you make use of some
   corrupt copy of our Confession; -- for we say not, as you allege, that
   Christ by his obedience in death did acquit us, and not by his
   fulfilling of the law; but we say that Christ, by his obedience and
   death, did fully discharge the debt of all those who are justified, --
   which comprehends both his active and passive righteousness. But you
   add a reason, whereby you design to disprove this doctrine of our
   concerning the imputation of the active righteousness of Christ unto
   our justification. Why, you say, it is contrary to reason; for that we
   are freed from satisfying God's justice by being punished by death, but
   not from the fulfilling of the law: therefore the fulfilling of the law
   by Christ is no satisfaction for us, -- we are not freed from active
   obedience, but from passive obedience. Pray, sir, do not mistake that
   such mistaken reasonings can give us any occasion to change our
   judgments in an article of truth of this importance. When you shall
   have been pleased to read my book of Justification, and have answered
   solidly what I have written upon this subject, I will tell you more of
   my mind. In the meantime I tell you, we are by the death of Christ
   freed from all sufferings as they are purely penal, and the effect of
   the curse, though they spring out of that root; only, sir, you and I
   know full well that we are not freed from pains, afflictions, and death
   itself, -- which had never been, had they not proceeded from the curse
   of the law. And so, sir, by the obedience of Christ we are freed from
   obedience to the law, as to justification by the works thereof. We are
   no more obliged to obey the law in order to justification than we are
   obliged to undergo the penalties of the law to answer its curse. But
   these things have been fully debated elsewhere.

   In the last place, your friend wishes it could be avoided, and declined
   to speak any thing about universal grace, for that it would raise some
   or most divines against it. I judge myself beholden to your friend for
   the advice, which I presume he judges to be good and wholesome; but I
   beg your pardon that I cannot comply with it, although I shall not
   reflect with any severity upon them who are of another judgment; and,
   to tell you the truth, the immethodical new method introduced to give
   countenance to universal grace, is, in my judgment, suited to draw us
   off from all due conceptions concerning the grace of God in Jesus
   Christ; which I shall not now stay to demonstrate, though I will not
   decline the undertaking of it, if God gives me strength, at any time.
   And I do wonder to hear you say that many, if not most divines, will
   rise against it, who have published in print that there were but two in
   England that were of that opinion, and have strenuously opposed it
   yourself. How things are in France, I know not; but at Geneva, in
   Holland, in Switzerland, in all the Protestant churches of Germany, I
   do know that this universal grace is exploded. Sir, I shall trouble you
   no farther. I pray be pleased to accept of my desire to undeceive you
   in those things, wherein either a corrupt copy of our Confession or the
   reasonings of other men have given you so many mistaken conceptions
   about our Confession. -- I am, Sir, yours,

   J. Owen.
     __________________________________________________________________

  To the Lady Hartopp

   Dear Madam, -- Every work of God is good; the Holy One in the midst of
   us will do no iniquity; and all things shall work together for good
   unto them that love him, even those things which at present are not
   joyous, but grievous; only his time is to be waited for, and his way
   submitted unto, that we seem not to be displeased in our hearts that he
   is Lord over us. Your dear infant is in the eternal enjoyment of the
   fruits of all our prayers; for the covenant of God is ordered in all
   things, and sure. We shall go to her; she shall not return to us. Happy
   she was in this above us, that she had so speedy an issue of sin and
   misery, being born only to exercise your faith and patience, and to
   glorify God's grace in her eternal blessedness. My trouble would be
   great on the account of my absence at this time from you both, but that
   this also is the Lord's doing; and I know my own uselessness wherever I
   am. But this I will beg of God for you both that you may not faint in
   this day of trial, -- that you may have a clear view of those spiritual
   and temporal mercies wherewith you are yet intrusted (all undeserved),
   -- that sorrow of the world may not so overtake your hearts as to
   disenable to any duties, to grieve the Spirit, to prejudice your lives;
   for it tends to death. God in Christ will be better to you than ten
   children, and will so preserve your remnant, and to add to them, as
   shall be for his glory and your comfort.

   Only consider that sorrow in this case is no duty, it is an effect of
   sin, whose cure by grace we should endeavour. Shall I say, Be cheerful?
   I know I may. God help you to honour grace and mercy in a compliance
   therewith. My heart is with you, my prayers shall be for you, and I am,
   dear madam, your most affectionate friend and unworthy pastor,

   J. Owen.
     __________________________________________________________________

  To Mrs Polhill

   Dear Madam, -- The trouble expressed in yours is a great addition to
   mine; the sovereignty of divine wisdom and grace is all that I have at
   this day to retreat unto; God direct you thereunto also, and you will
   find rest and peace. It adds to my trouble that I cannot possibly come
   down to you this week. Nothing but engaged duty could keep me from you
   one hour: yet I am conscious how little I can contribute to your
   guidance in this storm, or your satisfaction. Christ is your pilot; and
   however the vessel if tossed whilst he seems to sleep, he will arise
   and rebuke these winds and waves in his own time. I have done it, and
   yet shall farther wrestle with God for you, according to the strength
   he is pleased to communicate. Little it is which at this distance I can
   mind you of; yet some few things are necessary. Sorrow not too much for
   the dead: she is entered into rest, and is taken away from the evil to
   come. Take heed lest, by too much grief, you too much grieve that Holy
   Spirit, who is infinitely more to us than all natural relations. I
   blame you not that you so far attend to the call of God in this
   dispensation as to search yourself, to judge and condemn yourself:
   grace can make it an evidence to you that you shall not be judged or
   condemned of the Lord. I dare not say that this chastisement was not
   needful. We are not in heaviness unless need be; but if God be pleased
   to give you a discovery of the wisdom and care that is in it, and how
   needful it was to awaken and restore your soul in any thing, perhaps in
   many things, in due time you will see grace and love in it also. I
   verily believe God expects, in this dealing with you, that you should
   judge yourself, your sins and your decays; but he would not have you
   misjudge your condition. But we are like froward children, who, when
   they are rebuked and corrected, neglect other things, and only cry that
   their parents hate and reject them. You are apt to fear, to think and
   say, that you are one whom God regards not, who are none of his; and
   that for sundry reasons which you suppose you can plead. But, saith
   God, this is not the business; this is a part of your frowardness. I
   call you to quicken your grace, to amend your own ways; and you think
   you have nothing to do but to question my love. Pray, madam, my dear
   sister, child and care, beware you lose not the advantage of this
   dispensation; you will do so, if you use it only to afflictive sorrows,
   or questioning of the love of God, or your interest in Christ.

   The time will be spent in these things which should be taken up in
   earnest endeavours after a compliance with God's will, quickenings of
   grace, returns after backsliding, mortification of sin and love of the
   world, until the sense of it do pass away. Labour vigorously to bring
   your soul to this twofold resolution:-- 1. That the will of God is the
   best rule for all things, and their circumstances. 2. That you will
   bring yourself into a fresh engagement to live more to him: and you
   will find the reminder of your work easy; for it is part of the yoke of
   Christ. I shall trouble you no farther but only to give you the
   assurance that you are in my heart continually, which is nothing; but
   it helps to persuade me that you are in the heart of Christ, which is
   all. -- I am, dear madam, your very affectionate servant,

   J. Owen.
     __________________________________________________________________

  To Charles Fleetwood, Esq.

   Dear Sir, -- I received yours and am glad to hear of your welfare.
   There is more then ordinary mercy in every day's preservation. My wife,
   I bless God, is much revived, so that I do not despair of her recovery;
   but for myself, I have been under the power of various distempers for
   fourteen days past, and do yet so continue. God is fastening his
   instruction concerning the approach of that season wherein I must lay
   down this tabernacle. I think my mind has been too much intent upon
   some things which I looked on as services for the church; but God will
   have us know that he has no need of me nor them, and is therefore
   calling me off from them. Help me with your prayers, that I may,
   through the riches of his grace in Christ, be in some measure ready for
   my account. The truth is, we cannot see the latter rain in its season,
   as we have seen the former, and a latter spring thereon. Death, that
   will turn in the streams of glory upon our poor withering souls, is the
   best relief. I begin to fear that we shall die in this wilderness; yet
   ought we to labour and pray continually that the heavens would drop
   down from above, and the skies pour down righteousness, -- that the
   earth may open and bring forth salvation, and that righteousness may
   spring up together. If ever I return to you in this world, I beseech
   you to contend yet more earnestly than ever I have done, with God, with
   my own heart, with the church, to labour after spiritual revivals. Our
   affectionate service to your lady, and to all your family that are of
   the household of God. -- I am, dearest sir, yours most affectionately
   whilst I live,

   J. Owen.

   Stadham, July 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

  To Charles Fleetwood, Esq.

   Dear Sir, -- The bearer has stayed long enough with us to save you the
   trouble of reading an account of me in my own scribbling: a longer stay
   I could not prevail with him for, though his company was a great
   refreshment to me. Both you and your whole family, in all their
   occasions and circumstances, are daily in my thoughts; and when I am
   enabled to pray, I make mention of you all without ceasing. I find you
   and I are much in complaining. For my part I must say, And is there not
   a cause? So much deadness, so much unspirituality, so much weakness in
   faith, coldness in love, instability in holy meditations, as I find in
   myself, is cause sufficient of complaints. But is there not cause also
   of thanksgiving and joy in the Lord? Are there not reasons for them?
   When I begin to think of them, I am overwhelmed; they are great, they
   are glorious, they are inexpressible. Shall I now invite you to this
   great duty of rejoicing more in the Lord? Pray for me, that I may do
   so; for the near approach of my dissolution calls for it earnestly. My
   heart has done with this world, even in the best and most desirable of
   its refreshments. If the joy of the Lord be not now strength unto it,
   it will fail. But I must have done. Unless God be pleased to affect
   some person or persons with a deep sense of our declining condition, of
   the temptations and dangers of the day, filling them with compassion
   for the souls of men, making them fervent in spirit in their work, it
   will go but ill with us. It may be these thoughts spring from causeless
   fears, it may be none amongst us has an evil, a barren heart but
   myself: but bear with me in this my folly; I cannot lay down these
   thoughts until I die; nor do I mention them at present as though I
   should not esteem it a great mercy to have so able a supply as Mr C.,
   but I am groaning after deliverance; and being near the centre, do hope
   I feel the drawing of the love of Christ with more earnestness than
   formerly: but my naughty heart is backward in these compliances. My
   affectionate service to Sir John Hartopp, and his lady, and to the rest
   of your family, when God shall return them unto you. -- I am, dear sir,
   yours most affectionately in everlasting bonds,

   J. Owen.
     __________________________________________________________________

  To the Rev. Mr Robert Asty of Norwich

   Dear Sir, -- I received yours by Mr B., to whom I shall commit this
   return, and hope it will come safely to your hands; for although I can
   acknowledge nothing of what you are pleased out of your love to ascribe
   unto me, yet I shall be always ready to give you my thoughts in the way
   of brotherly advice, whenever you shall stand in need of it: and at
   present, as things are circumstanced, I do not see how you can waive or
   decline the call of the church either in conscience or reputation. For,
   to begin with the latter; should you do so upon the most Christian and
   cogent grounds in your own apprehensions, yet wrong interpretations
   will be put upon it; and so far as it is possible we ought to keep
   ourselves, not only "extra noxam," but "suspicionem" also. But the
   point of conscience is of more moment. All things concurring, -- the
   providence of God in bringing you to that place, the judgment of the
   church on your gifts and grace for their edification and example, the
   joint consent of the body of the congregation in your call, with
   present circumstances of a singular opportunity for preaching the word,
   I confess at this distance I see not how you can discharge that duty
   you owe to Jesus Christ (whose you are, and not your own, and must
   rejoice to be what he will have you to be, be it more or less) in
   refusing a compliance unto these manifest indications of his pleasure;
   only, remember that you sit down and count what it will cost you, --
   which I know you will not be discouraged by; for the daily exercise of
   grace and learning of wisdom should not be grievous unto us, though
   some of their occasions may be irksome. For the latter part of your
   letter, I know no difference between a pastor and a teacher but what
   follows their different gifts; -- the office is absolutely the same in
   both; the power the same, the right to the administration of all
   ordinances every way the same: and at that great church at Boston, in
   New England, the teacher was always the principal person; so was Mr
   Cotton and Mr Norton. Where gifts make a difference, there is a
   difference; otherwise there is none. I pray God guide you in this great
   affair; and I beg your prayers for myself in my weak, infirm condition.
   -- I am your affectionate friend and brother,

   J. Owen.

   London, March 16.
     __________________________________________________________________

  To Mr Baxter

   Sir, -- The continuance of my cold, which yet holds me, with the
   severity of the weather, have hitherto hindered me from answering my
   purpose of coming unto you at Acton; but yet I hope, ere long, to
   obtain the advantage of enjoying your company there for a season. In
   the meantime, I return you my thanks for the communication of your
   papers; and shall on every occasion manifest that you have no occasion
   to question whether I were in earnest in what I proposed, in reference
   to the concord you design. For the desire of it is continually upon my
   heart; and to express that desire on all occasion, I esteem one part of
   that profession of the Gospel which I am called unto. Could I
   contribute any thing towards the accomplishment of so holy, so
   necessary a work, I should willingly spend myself and be spent in it.
   For what you design concerning your present essay, I like it very well,
   both upon the reasons you mention in your letter, as also that all
   those who may be willing and desirous to promote so blessed a work may
   have copies by them, to prepare their thoughts in reference to the
   whole.

   For the present, upon the liberty granted in your letter (if I remember
   it aright), I shall tender you a few queries, which, if they are
   useless or needless, deal with them accordingly.

   As, -- 1. Are not the several proposed or insisted on too many for this
   first attempt? The general heads, I conceive, are not; but under them
   very many particulars are not only included, which is unavoidable, but
   expressed also which may too much dilate the original consideration of
   the whole.

   2. You expressly exclude the Papists, who will also sure enough exclude
   themselves, and do, from any such agreement; but have you done the same
   as to the Socinians, who are numerous, and ready to include themselves
   upon our communion? The Creed, as expounded in the four first councils,
   will do it.

   3. Whether some expressions suited to prevent future divisions and
   separations, after a concord is obtained, may not at present, to avoid
   all exasperation, be omitted, as seeming reflective on former actings,
   when there was no such agreement among us as is now aimed at?

   4. Whether insisting in particular on the power of the magistrate,
   especially as under civil coercion and punishment in cases of error or
   heresy, be necessary in this first attempt? These generals occurred to
   my thoughts upon my first reading of your proposals. I will now read
   them again, and set down, as I pass on, such apprehensions in
   particular as I have of the several of them.

   To the first answer, under the first question, I assent; so also to the
   first proposal, and the explanation; likewise to the second and third.
   I thought to have proceeded thus throughout, but I foresee my so doing
   would be tedious and useless; I shall therefore mention only what at
   present may seem to require second thoughts. As, --

   1. To propos. 9, by those instances [what words to use in preaching, in
   what words to pray, in what decent habit] do you intend homilies,
   prescribed forms of prayer, and habits superadded to those of vulgar
   decent use? Present controversies will suggest an especial sense under
   general expressions.

   2. Under pos. 13, do you think a man may not leave a church and join
   himself to another, unless it be for such a cause or reason as he
   supposes sufficient to destroy the being of the church? I meet with
   this now answered in your 18^th propos., and so shall forbear farther
   particular remarks, and pass on.

   In your answer to the second question, your 10^th position hath in it
   somewhat that will admit of farther consideration, as I think. In your
   answer to the third question, have you sufficiently expressed the
   accountableness of churches mutually, in case of offence from
   maladministration and church censures? This also I now see in part
   answered, -- proposition fifth. I shall forbear to add any thing as
   under your answer to the last question, about the power of the
   magistrate, because I fear that in that matter of punishing I shall
   somewhat dissent from you, though as to mere coercion I shall in some
   cases agree.

   Upon the whole matter, I judge your proposals worthy of great
   consideration, and the most probable medium for the attaining of the
   end aimed at that yet I have perused. If God give not a heart and mind
   to desire peace and union, every expression will be disputed, under
   pretence of truth and accuracy; but if these things have a place in us
   answerable to that which they enjoy in the Gospel, I see no reason why
   all the true disciples of Christ might not, upon these and the like
   principles, condescend in love unto the practical concord and
   agreement, which not one of them dare deny to be their duty to aim at.
   Sir, I shall pray that the Lord would guide and prosper you in all
   studies and endeavours for the service of Christ in the world,
   especially in this your desire and study for the introducing of the
   peace and love promised amongst them that believe, and do beg your
   prayers. -- Your truly affectionate brother, and unworthy
   fellow-servant,

   John Owen.

   Jan. 26, 1668.
     __________________________________________________________________

His Works

   A List of Dr Owen's Works, according to the years in which they appear
   to have been published.

   Display of Arminianism, 4to, 1642
   The Duty of Pastors and People Distinguished, 4to, 1643
   The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, in two Catechisms, 12mo, 1645
   A Vision of Unchangeable Mercy: a Sermon, 4to, 1646
   Eshcol; or, Rules for Church Fellowship, 12mo, 1647
   Salus Electorum: a treatise on Redemption, 4to, 1648
   Memorial of the Deliverance of Essex: two Sermons, 4to, 1648
   Righteous Zeal -- a Sermon; and Essay on Toleration, 4to, 1649
   The Shaking and Translating of Heaven and Earth: a sermon, 4to, 1649
   Human Power Defeated: a Sermon, 4to, 1649
   Of the Death of Christ, in answer to Baxter, 4to, 1650
   The Steadfastness of Promises: a Sermon, 4to, 1650
   The Branch of the Lord: two Sermons, 4to, 1650
   The Advantage of the Kingdom of Christ: a sermon, 4to, 1651
   The Labouring Saint's Dismission: a Sermon, 4to, 1652
   Christ's Kingdom and the Magistrate's Power: a Sermon, 4to, 1652
   De Divina Justitia: translated 1794, 12mo, 1653
   The Doctrine of the Saints' Perseverance, folio, 1654
   Vindicæ Evangelicæ: Reply to Biddle, 4to, 1655
   On the Mortification of Sin, 8vo, 1656
   Review of the Annotations of Grotius, 4to, 1656
   God's Work in Founding Zion: a Sermon, 4to, 1656
   God's Presence with his People: a Sermon, 4to, 1656
   On Communion with God, 4to, 1657
   A Discovery of the True Nature of Schism, 12mo, 1657
   A Review of the True Nature of Schism, 12mo, 1657
   Answer to Cawdrey about Schism, 12mo, 1658
   Of the Nature and Power of Temptation, 12mo, 1658
   The Divine Original of the Scriptures, 12mo, 1659
   Vindication of the Hebrew and Greek Texts, 12mo, 1659
   Exercitationes adversus Fanaticos, 12mo, 1659
   The Glory of Nations professing the Gospel: a Sermon, 4to, 1659
   On the Power of the Magistrate about Religion, 4to, 1659
   A Primer for Children, 12mo, 1660
   ThOLOGOUMENA PANTODAPA, 4to, 1661
   Animadversions on Fiat Lux, 12mo, 1662
   A Discourse on Liturgies, 4to, 1662
   Vindication of the Animadversions, 8vo, 1664
   Indulgence and Toleration Considered, 4to, 1667
   A Peace-offering, or Plea for Indulgence, 4to, 1667
   Brief Instruction in the Worship of God: a Catechism, 12mo, 1667
   On Indwelling Sin, 8vo, 1668
   Exposition of the 130^th Psalm, 4to, 1668
   Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews, vol. i., folio, 1668
   Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, 12mo, 1669
   Truth and Innocence Vindicated, 8vo, 1669
   On the Divine Institution of the Lord's Day, 8vo, 1671
   On Evangelical Love, 8vo, 1672
   Vindication of the Work on Communion, 12mo, 1674
   Discourse on the Holy Spirit, folio, 1674
   Exposition of the Hebrews, vol. ii., folio, 1674
   How we may Bring our Hearts to Bear Reproof, 4to, 1674
   On the Nature of Apostasy, 8vo, 1676
   The Reason of Faith, 8vo, 1677
   On the Doctrine of Justification, 4to, 1677
   The Ways and Means of Understanding the Mind of God, 8vo, 1678
   ChRISTOLOGIA, or the Person of Christ, 4to, 1679
   The Church of Rome no Safe Guide, 4to, 1679
   On Union among Protestants, 4to, 1680
   Vindication of the Nonconformists, 4to, 1680
   Exposition of the Hebrews, vol. iii., folio, 1680
   Defence of the Vindication, 4to, 1681
   Inquiry into Evangelical Churches, 4to, 1681
   Humble Testimony, 8vo, 1681
   On Spiritual-mindedness, 4to, 1681
   The Work of the Holy Spirit in Prayer, 4to, 1682
   The Chamber of Imagery, 4to, 1682
   An Account of the Protestant Religion, 4to, 1683
   Meditations on the Glory of Christ, part i., 8vo, 1684
   Exposition of the Hebrews, vol. iv., folio, 1684
   Of the Dominion of Sin and Grace, 8vo, 1688
   True Nature of a Gospel Church, 4to, 1689
   Meditations on the Glory of Christ, part ii., 8vo, 1691
   Two Discourses on the Work of the Spirit, 8vo, 1693
   Evidences of the Faith of God's Elect, 8vo, 1695
   Seventeen Sermons, 2 vols., 8vo, 1720
   An Answer to Two Questions; with Twelve Arguments against any
   Conformity to Worship not of Divine Institution, 8vo, 1720
   Sermons and Tracts, folio, 1721
   Thirteen Sermons, 8vo, 1756
   Twenty-five Discourses suitable to the Lord's Supper, 12mo, 1760
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Psalms

   [1]41:5   [2]76:5

   Isaiah

   [3]4:5   [4]56:7   [5]56:7

   Jeremiah

   [6]15:19   [7]15:20   [8]20:7

   Ezekiel

   [9]16:25   [10]17:24

   Daniel

   [11]7:15   [12]7:16   [13]12:13

   Habakkuk

   [14]1:1-9

   Matthew

   [15]8:26   [16]16:18

   John

   [17]14:2

   Acts

   [18]16:9

   Romans

   [19]4:20   [20]8:13

   Ephesians

   [21]4:11

   Philippians

   [22]3:18   [23]3:19

   Hebrews

   [24]6:4-6   [25]12:27

   1 Peter

   [26]2:3

   2 Peter

   [27]2:1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * [28]ThOLOGOUMENA PANTODAPA
     * [29]ChRISTOLOGIA
     * [30]Christologia
     * [31]tines megaloi
     * [32]Theologoumena
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * [33]Athenæ Oxoniensis
     * [34]Authoribus classicis, qua Græcis, qua Latinis,
     * [35]Biblia Polyglotta
     * [36]Copiam illi fecit gratissimam.
     * [37]De Divina Justitia
     * [38]Diatriba de Divina Justitia
     * [39]Disputatio Scholastica de divina Providentia
     * [40]Donec animata plane evasit bibliotheca:
     * [41]Exercitationes adversus Fanaticos
     * [42]Exercitations adversus Fanaticos
     * [43]Fasti Oxoniensis
     * [44]Feliciorem adhuc studiis philosophicis,
     * [45]Fervet, immensusque ruit profundo
     * [46]Fiat Lux
     * [47]Johannes Owen
     * [48]Literis natus, literis innutritus, totusque deditus;
     * [49]Luxuriant artus, effusaque sanguine laxo
     * [50]Magnalia Americana
     * [51]Magnalia Americana Christi
     * [52]Magno sub Barlovi, coll. reginalis, id tempus, socio.
     * [53]Membra natant
     * [54]Mensis Scilicet Augusti XXIVº. Anno à Partu Virgineo.
       MDCLXXXIIIº, Ætat. LXVIIº.
     * [55]Monte decurrens velut amnis, imbres
     * [56]Non imago, non simulachrum prohibetur, sed, non facies tibi
     * [57]O, sit anima mea cum Puritanis Anglicanis
     * [58]Operam navavit satis felicem:
     * [59]Oratio Quinta ad Academicos, anno 1657. "Per primum biennium
       vulgi fuimus et vulgaris fabula."
     * [60]Oratio prima
     * [61]Oratio quinta
     * [62]Permista deliciis auxilia
     * [63]Persona ecclesiæ
     * [64]Pindarus ore
     * [65]Prima ætatis virilis consors Maria,
     * [66]Quem super notas aluêre ripas,
     * [67]Rebus Dei domus se totum addicendi;
     * [68]Rei domesticæ perite studiosa.
     * [69]Reliquæ Baxterianæ
     * [70]Salus Electorum
     * [71]Salus Electorum, Sanguis Iesu
     * [72]Semper quidem operæ pretium fuit illustres sanctorum describere
       vitas, ut sint in speculum et exemplum et quoddam veluti
       condimentum vitæ hominum super terram. Per hoc enim quodammodo apud
       nos etiam post mortem vivunt, multosque ex iis qui vivntes mortui
       sunt, ad veram vitam provocant et revocant
     * [73]Sub Edv. Sylvestro, scholæ privitæ Oxonii moderatore
     * [74]Terræ filius
     * [75]Vindicæ Evangelicæ
     * [76]Vindiciæ Evangelicæ
     * [77]Vindicicæ Gratiæ, Potestatis, ac Providentiæ divinæ
     * [78]extra noxam
     * [79]in forma pauperis
     * [80]in palæstra theologia exercitatissimus, in concionando assiduus
       et potens, in disputando strenuus et acutus
     * [81]instar omnium
     * [82]macula
     * [83]materia medica
     * [84]meliore luto
     * [85]reatus
     * [86]solutio ejusdem
     * [87]suspicionem
     * [88]tantundem
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [89]XIX  [90]XX  [91]XXI  [92]XXII  [93]XXIII  [94]XXIV  [95]XXV
   [96]XXVI  [97]XXVII  [98]XXVIII  [99]XXIX  [100]XXX  [101]XXXI
   [102]XXXII  [103]XXXIII  [104]XXXIV  [105]XXXV  [106]XXXVI
   [107]XXXVII  [108]XXXVIII  [109]XXXIX  [110]XL  [111]XLI  [112]XLII
   [113]XLIII  [114]XLIV  [115]XLV  [116]XLVI  [117]XLVII  [118]XLVIII
   [119]XLIX  [120]L  [121]LI  [122]LII  [123]LIII  [124]LIV  [125]LV
   [126]LVI  [127]LVII  [128]LVIII  [129]LIX  [130]LX  [131]LXI
   [132]LXII  [133]LXIII  [134]LXIV  [135]LXV  [136]LXVI  [137]LXVII
   [138]LXVIII  [139]LXIX  [140]LXX  [141]LXXI  [142]LXXII  [143]LXXIII
   [144]LXXIV  [145]LXXV  [146]LXXVI  [147]LXXVII  [148]LXXVIII
   [149]LXXIX  [150]LXXX  [151]LXXXI  [152]LXXXII  [153]LXXXIII
   [154]LXXXIV  [155]LXXXV  [156]LXXXVI  [157]LXXXVII  [158]LXXXVIII
   [159]LXXXIX  [160]XC  [161]XCI  [162]XCII  [163]XCIII  [164]XCIV
   [165]XCV  [166]XCVI  [167]XCVII  [168]XCVIII  [169]XCIX  [170]C
   [171]CI  [172]CII  [173]CIII  [174]CIV  [175]CV  [176]CVI  [177]CVII
   [178]CVIII  [179]CIX  [180]CX  [181]CXI  [182]CXII  [183]CXIII
   [184]CXIV  [185]CXV  [186]CXVI  [187]CXVII  [188]CXVIII  [189]CXIX
   [190]CXX  [191]CXXI  [192]CXXII
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p83.1
   2. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p44.1
   3. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p32.1
   4. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p53.1
   5. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p55.1
   6. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p32.1
   7. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p32.1
   8. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p13.1
   9. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p23.1
  10. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p60.1
  11. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p60.3
  12. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p60.3
  13. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p60.2
  14. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p30.1
  15. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p31.1
  16. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p118.2
  17. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p109.1
  18. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p14.1
  19. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p50.1
  20. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p66.1
  21. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p23.2
  22. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p114.1
  23. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p114.1
  24. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p96.1
  25. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p41.1
  26. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p83.2
  27. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.i-p2.1
  28. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.39
  29. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.63
  30. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p118.1
  31. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p63.1
  32. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p36.1
  33. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p8.1
  34. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.7
  35. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p28.1
  36. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p104.9
  37. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.18
  38. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p31.1
  39. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p32.2
  40. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.5
  41. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.34
  42. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p26.1
  43. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p28.1
  44. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.13
  45. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p39.7
  46. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.41
  47. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.i.i-p2.1
  48. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.3
  49. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p40.3
  50. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p68.1
  51. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p1.2
  52. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.15
  53. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p40.5
  54. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.i.i-p3.1
  55. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p39.3
  56. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p22.1
  57. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p158.1
  58. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.11
  59. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p4.1
  60. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p14.1
  61. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p79.1
  62. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p16.1
  63. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p6.1
  64. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p39.9
  65. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p104.3
  66. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p39.5
  67. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p104.7
  68. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p104.5
  69. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p109.2
  70. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.6
  71. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p23.1
  72. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#i-p3.1
  73. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-p12.9
  74. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p19.1
  75. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-p2.21
  76. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-p94.1
  77. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p32.1
  78. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.vi-p1.2
  79. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p2.1
  80. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p28.2
  81. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p64.1
  82. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.i-p3.2
  83. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p68.1
  84. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-p7.1
  85. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.i-p3.1
  86. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p29.2
  87. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.vi-p1.3
  88. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-p29.3
  89. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#i-Page_XIX
  90. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#i-Page_XX
  91. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXI
  92. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXII
  93. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXIII
  94. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXIV
  95. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXV
  96. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXVI
  97. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXVII
  98. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXVIII
  99. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXIX
 100. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXX
 101. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#ii-Page_XXXI
 102. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXII
 103. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXIII
 104. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXIV
 105. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXV
 106. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXVI
 107. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXVII
 108. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXVIII
 109. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XXXIX
 110. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XL
 111. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XLI
 112. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XLII
 113. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XLIII
 114. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XLIV
 115. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XLV
 116. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iii-Page_XLVI
 117. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_XLVII
 118. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_XLVIII
 119. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_XLIX
 120. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_L
 121. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LI
 122. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LII
 123. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LIII
 124. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LIV
 125. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LV
 126. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LVI
 127. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LVII
 128. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LVIII
 129. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LIX
 130. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LX
 131. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXI
 132. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXII
 133. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXIII
 134. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXIV
 135. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXV
 136. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXVI
 137. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXVII
 138. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#iv-Page_LXVIII
 139. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXIX
 140. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXX
 141. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXI
 142. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXII
 143. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXIII
 144. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXIV
 145. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXV
 146. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXVI
 147. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXVII
 148. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXVIII
 149. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXIX
 150. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXX
 151. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXI
 152. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXII
 153. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXIII
 154. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXIV
 155. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXV
 156. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXVI
 157. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXVII
 158. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXVIII
 159. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_LXXXIX
 160. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XC
 161. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCI
 162. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCII
 163. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCIII
 164. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCIV
 165. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCV
 166. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCVI
 167. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCVII
 168. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCVIII
 169. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_XCIX
 170. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_C
 171. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CI
 172. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CII
 173. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CIII
 174. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CIV
 175. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CV
 176. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CVI
 177. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CVII
 178. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CVIII
 179. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CIX
 180. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CX
 181. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CXI
 182. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#v-Page_CXII
 183. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi-Page_CXIII
 184. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.i.i-Page_CXIV
 185. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.i-Page_CXV
 186. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.i-Page_CXVI
 187. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.ii-Page_CXVII
 188. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.iii-Page_CXVIII
 189. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.v-Page_CXIX
 190. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.vii-Page_CXX
 191. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.ii.vii-Page_CXXI
 192. file:///ccel/t/thomson/owenlife/cache/owenlife.html3#vi.iii-Page_CXXII
