     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: St. Paul the Traveler and the Roman Citizen
      Creator(s): Ramsay, W.M.
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BS2650
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  New Testament

                  Special parts of the New Testament

                  Pauline Epistles
     __________________________________________________________________

                  ST. PAUL THE TRAVELER AND THE ROMAN CITIZEN

    BY

W.M. RAMSAY, D.C.L., LL.D.

PROFESSOR OF THE HUMANITY, ABERDEEN
ORD. MITGLIED D. KAIS. DEUTSCH. ARCHÄOLOG. GESELLSCH. 1884
HON. MEMBER, ATHENIAN ARCHÆOLOG. SOC., 1895; FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF
CLASSICAL ARCHÆOLOGY AND FELLOW OF EXETER AND OF LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXFORD
LEVERING LECTURER IN JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY, 1894

TENTH EDITION
HODDER AND STOUGHTON
LONDON MCMVII
     __________________________________________________________________

   To

   ANDREW MITCHELL, Esq.,

   THE WALK HOUSE, ALLOA

   My Dear Uncle,

   In my undergraduate days, a residence in Göttingen during the Long
   Vacation of 1874 was a critical point in my life. Then for the first
   time, under the tuition of Professor Theodore Benfey, I came into close
   relations with a great scholar of the modern type, and gained some
   insight into modern methods of literary investigation; and my thoughts
   have ever since turned towards the border lands between European and
   Asiatic civilisation. That visit, like many other things, I owe to you;
   and now I send you the result, such as it is, the best that I can do,
   asking that you will allow it to go forth with your name attached to
   it.

   I remain always, your affectionate nephew,

   WILLIAM MITCHELL RAMSAY.

   King's college, Aberdeen,

   17th September, 1895
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE

   WHEN I was honoured by the invitation of Auburn Theological Seminary, I
   referred the matter to my friends, Dr. Fairbairn and Dr. Sanday, who
   knew what were my circumstances and other duties. On their advice the
   invitation was accepted; and it included the condition that the
   lectures must be published. In revising the printed sheets I have felt
   strongly the imperfections of the exposition; but I can feel no doubt
   about the facts themselves, which seem to stand out so clear and
   distance, that one has only to look and write. Hence I have not
   withdrawn from any of the positions maintained in my Church in the
   Roman Empire before 170 (apart from incidental imperfections). The
   present work is founded on the results for which evidence is there
   accumulated; but, in place of its neutral tone, a definite theory about
   the composition of Acts is here maintained (see p.383 f.). Many
   references were made, at first, to pages of that work, and of my Cities
   and Bishoprics of Phrygia (1895), where views here assumed were
   explained and defended; but they had an egotistic appearance, and, on
   the advice of a valued friend, have been cut out from the proof-sheets.

   I use in Acts the canons of interpretation which I have learned from
   many teachers (beyond all others from Mommsen) to apply to history; and
   I have looked at Paul and Luke as men among men. My aim has been to
   state the facts of Paul's life simply, avoiding argument and
   controversy so far as was possible in a subject where every point is
   controverted. I have sometimes thought of a supplementary volume of
   Elucidations of Early Christian History, in which reasons should be
   stated more fully.

   It is impossible to find anything to say about Acts that has not been
   said before by somebody. Doubtless almost everything I have to say
   might be supported by some quotation. But if a history of opinion about
   Acts had been desired, I should not have been applied to. Where I was
   conscious of having learned any special point from any special scholar
   I have mentioned his name; but that, of course does not exhaust half my
   debt. The interpretation of one of the great ancient authors is a long
   slow growth; one is not conscious where he learned most of his ideas;
   and, if he were, their genesis is a matter of no interest or value to
   others. Not merely the writers quoted, but also Schürer, Meyer-Wendt,
   Zöckler, Holtzmann, Clemen, Spitta, Zeller, Everett, Paley, Page, and
   many others, have taught me; and I thankfully acknowledge my debt. But
   specially Lightfoot, Lewin's Fatsi Sacri, and the two greatest editors
   of Acts, Wetstein and Blass, have been constant companions.

   Discussions with my wife, and with my friends, Professor W. P.
   Paterson, Rev. A. F. Findlay, and above all, Prof. Rendel Harris, have
   cleared my ideas on many points, beyond what can be distinctly
   specified. The book has been greatly improved by criticisms from Prof.
   Rendel Harris, and by many notes and suggestions from Rev. A. C.
   Headlam, which were of great value to me. Mr. A. Souter, Caius College,
   Cambridge, has aided me in many ways, and especially by compiling Index
   I. But it would be vain to try to enumerate all my obligations to many
   friends.

   I wish to mention two facts about the genesis of my studies in this
   subject: (1) Dr. Fairbairn proposed to me the subject of "St. Paul as a
   Citizen" long ago; and I long shrank from it as too great and too
   difficult; (2) Dr. Robertson Nicoll (mindful of early acquaintance in
   Aberdeen) urged me in 1884 to write, and gave me no peace, until I
   published a first article,Expositor, Oct., 1888.

   An apology is due for the variations, often harsh, from the familiar
   translation of Acts; but a little insertion or change often saved a
   paragraph.

   Lectures which I had the honour to give before the Harvard University,
   Johns Hopkins University (the Levering Lectures), and Union Seminary,
   New York, are worked up in this volume.

   Aberdeen, 23rd September, 1895

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

   There are many sentences and paragraphs which I should have liked to
   rewrite, had it been possible, not in order to alter the views
   expressed, but to improve the inadequate expression.

   In the new edition, however, it was not possible to introduce any
   alterations affecting the arrangement of the printed lines; but some
   corrections and improvements have been made through the aid of valued
   correspondents and critics, especially Rev. F. Warburton Lewis, Rev. G.
   W. Whitaker, and the Athenaeum reviewer. Slight, but not insignificant
   verbal changes have been made in p. 18, 1. 8, 10, 11; 19, 1. 10; 27, 1.
   14; 34, 1. 8; 62, 1. 15; 98, 1. 16; 1455, 1. 5; 146, 1. 6-7; 211, 1.
   11; 224, 1. 6; 227, 1. 3; 242, 1. 31; 263, 1. 12; 276, 1. 27; 282, 1. 1
   (footnote deleted); 307 n. 2 (Matt. XXVII 24, added); 330 1. 13-14;
   363, 1. 5. The punctuation has been improved in p. 28, 1. 19, 21; and
   an obscure paragraph p. 160, 1. 10-17 has been rewritten.

   Besides correcting p. 141, 1. 9, I must apologise for having there
   mentioned Dr. Chase incorrectly. I intended to cut out his name from
   the proof, but left it by accident, while hesitating between two
   corrections; and I did not know that it remained on that page, till he
   wrote me on the subject. On p. 27, 1. 14, I quoted his opinion about
   the solitary point on which we seem to agree; but, as he writes that my
   expression "makes him responsible for what he has never maintained," I
   have deleted the offending words. He adds, "may I very earnestly ask,
   if your work reaches a second edition, that, if you refer to me, you
   will give in some conspicuous place a reference to my papers in the
   Expositor, that those interested in the subject may have the chance of
   seeing what I have really said." See "The Galatia of the Acts,"
   Expositor, Dec., 1893, and May, 1894 the title shows deficient
   geographical accuracy on the part of my distinguished opponent, for
   Luke never mentions "Galatia," but only "the Galatic Territory," and
   there lies one of the fine points of the problem. After finishing the
   Church in the Roman Empire before 170, I had no thought of troubling
   the world with anything further on this subject; but Dr. Chase's
   criticism roused me to renewed work, and then came the Auburn
   invitation. With the Galatian question the date and authorship of Acts
   are bound up: the more I study, the more clearly I see that it is
   impossible to reconcile the "North-Galatian theory" with the
   first-century origin and Lukan authorship of Acts: that theory involves
   so many incongruities and inconsistencies, as to force a cool intellect
   to the view that Acts is not a trustworthy contemporary authority. But,
   on the "South-Galatian theory," the book opens to us a fresh chapter in
   the history and geography of Asia Minor during the first century.

   The form of Index II was suggested, and the details were collected in
   great part by Rev. F. Warburton Lewis (formerly of Mansfield College),
   and Indices III and IV were compiled, amid the pressure of his own
   onerous duties, by Rev. F. Wilfrid Osborn, Vice-Principal of the
   Episcopal College, Edinburgh; and my warmest gratitude is due for their
   voluntary and valuable help.

   I add notes on some contested points.

   1. Reading the Agricola before a college class in 1893-4, I drew a
   parallel between its method and that of Luke in respect of careful
   attention to order of events, and inattention to the stating of the
   lapse of time; but in each case knowledge acquired from other sources,
   and attention to the author's order and method, enable us to fix the
   chronology with great accuracy; on p. 18 my lecture on this topic is
   summarized in a sentence.

   2. The chronology established in this book is confirmed by the
   statement in an oration falsely ascribed to Chrysostom (Vol. VIII, p.
   621, Paris, 1836), that Paul served God thirty-five years and died at
   the age of sixty-eight. As there can be little doubt that his martyrdom
   took place about A. D. 67 this fourth century authority (which bears
   the stamp of truth in its matter of fact simplicity) proves that he was
   converted in 33 A. D., as wee have deduced from the statements of Luke
   and Paul (p. 376, and my article in Expositor, May, 1896). If Paul died
   in the year beginning 23rd Sept., 67, his birth was in 1 A.D. (before
   23rd Sept.). Now he evidently began public life after the Crucifixion,
   but before the death of Stephen; and he would naturally come before the
   public in the course of his thirtieth year; therefore his birth falls
   later than Passover A.D. 1.

   3. The punctuation of Gal. II 1-4, for which an argument was advanced
   in Expositor, July, 1895, p. 105 ff., is assumed in the free
   translation on p. 55. The view taken my me of Gal. II 1-14 is
   controverted by the high authority of Dr. Sanday in Expositor, Feb.,
   1896, and defended March, 1896. Mr. Vernon Bartlet informs me that Zhan
   dates Gal. II 11-14 between Acts XII 25 and XV 4 (as I do, p. 160), see
   Neue Kirchl. Zft., 1894, p. 435 f.

   4. The phrase "the God" (p. 118, 1. 5) refers, of course to v. 15.

   5. While grateful for the publication of such essays by Lightfoot as
   that quoted on p. 199, I cannot hold that great scholar (of whose
   spirit in investigation I should be satisfied if I dared hope to have
   caught a little) responsible for them in the same way as for works
   published by himself. (1) His lectures were not written out, but in
   great part spoken, and the notes taken by pupils are not a sufficient
   basis: a slight verbal change in the hurry of writing often seriously
   modifies the force of a lecturer's statement: moreover a speaker trusts
   to tone for many effects, which it requires careful study to express in
   written words. (2) Even those parts which were written out by himself,
   belong to an early stage in his career, and were not revised by himself
   in his maturity. (3) A writer often materially improves his work n
   proof: I know that some changes were made on the proofs even of the
   Ignatius, his maturest work. Hence the reader finds pages in
   Lightfoot's finest style side by side with some paragraphs, which it is
   difficult to believe that he expressed in this exact form, and
   impossible to believe that he would ever have allowed to go forth in
   print. The analogy with Acts I-V (see below, p. 370) is striking.

   6. It seems to me one of the strangest things that almost all
   interpreters reject the interpretation which Erasmus's clear sense
   perceived to be necessary in XVI 22 (p. 217). Some of the many
   difficulties involved in the interpretation that the praetors rent the
   clothes of Paul and Silas are exposed by Spitta, Apostelgesch., p. 218
   f. To discuss the subject properly would need a chapter. It is not
   impossible that the title "praetors" may have been even technically
   accurate; but I have not ventured to go beyond the statement that it
   was at least employed in courtesy.

   7. The short paragraph about the politarchs should be transferred from
   p. 227 to p. 229, 1. 6 ff.

   8. The fact that Paul's friends were permitted free access to him in
   Rome and Cæsareia (Acts XXVIII 30 and XXIV 23) cannot be taken as a
   proof of what would be the case in a convoy, which must have been
   governed with strict Roman discipline. The argument on P. 315 f. is
   consistent with the supposition that Julius learned that the two
   attendants of Paul were friends acting as slaves; but their presence in
   the convoy was legalized only under the guise of slavery.

   9. My friend and former pupil, Mr. A. A. G. Wright, sends me a good
   note on p. 329, confirming the interpretation (adopted from Smith) of
   chalasantes to skeuos from the practice of the herring boats in the
   Moray Firth; these boats, fitted with a large lug-sail, are a good
   parallels to the ancient sailing ships. In Paul's ship the sailors
   "slackened the sail-tackle," and thus lowered the yard some way,
   leaving a low sail, which would exercise less leverage on the hull (p.
   328).

   Aberdeen, 25th March, 1896

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

   I am partly glad, partly sorry, to have little change to make in this
   edition--glad, because the words printed, however inadequate I feel
   them to be, have on the whole, stood the test of further thought and
   growing knowledge--sorry, because so few of the faults which must exist
   have revealed themselves to me. On p. 275 a change is made in an
   important detail. The following notes are confirmatory of arguments in
   the text:--

   1. The examination of the development of Christianity in Phrygia,
   contained in Chapters XII and XVII of my Cities and Bishoprics of
   Phrygia (Part II, 1897), shows that Christianity spread with marvelous
   rapidity at the end of the first and in the second century after Christ
   in the parts of Phrygia that lay along the road from Pisidian Antioch
   to Ephesus, and in the neighborhood of Iconium, whereas it did not
   become powerful in those parts of Phrygia that adjoined North Galatia
   till the fourth century. Further, in a paper printed in Studia Biblica
   IV, I have pointed out that Christianity seems to have hardly begun to
   affect the district of North Galatia which lies on the side of Phrygia
   until the fourth century. The first parts of North Galatia to feel the
   influence was so strong as in some parts of Phrygia. These facts
   obviously are fatal to the theory that St. Paul's Galatian Churches
   were founded in the part of North Galatia adjoining Phrygia.

   2. On p. 43, 1. 1, it should be stated more clearly that Cornelius was
   a "God-fearing" proselyte.

   3. On p. 46, 1. 12 ff., the limits are stated beyond which Paul's work
   in the eight years (not ten), 35-43, was not carried; and the rather
   incautious words on p. 46, 1. 10, do not imply that he was engaged in
   continuous work of preaching during that time. It is probable that
   quiet meditation and self-preparation filled considerable part of these
   years. The words of XI 26 (compare Luke II 24) suggest that he was in
   an obscure position, and Gal. I 23 perhaps describes mere occasional
   rumors about a personage who was not at the time playing a prominent
   part as a preacher, as the Rev. C. E. C. Lefroy points out to me in an
   interesting letter (which prompts this note). But the facts, when
   looked at in this way, bring out even more strongly than my actual
   words do, that (as is urged on p. 46) Paul was not yet "fully conscious
   of his mission direct to the Nations, and that his work is rightly
   regarded in Acts as beginning in Antioch.

   4. On p. 212, as an additional example of the use of the aorist
   participle, Rev. F. W. Lewis quotes Heb. IX 12, eiselthen ephapax eis
   ta hagia aionian lutrosin heuramenos, "entered and obtained." I add
   from a Phrygian inscription quoted in my Cities and Bishroprics of
   Phrygia, Part II, 1897, p.790--

   hastesi d' en polloisin ithageneon lache teimas, leiphas kai kounrous
   ouden aphauroterous,

   "He was presented with the freedom of many cities, and left sons as
   good as himself."

   5. P. 264. The safe passage of the Jewish pilgrims from the west and
   north sides of the Aegean to Jerusalem was ensured by letters of many
   Roman officials, especially addressed to the cities of Cos and Ephesus.
   It is obvious that these cities lay on the line of the pilgrims'
   voyage; and as the pilgrims were the subject of so much correspondence
   they must have been numerous, and pilgrim ships must have sailed
   regularly at the proper season.

   6. P. 271. To illustrate the view that Paul used the School of Tyrannus
   in the forenoon and no later, Mr. A. Souter quotes Augustine Confess.,
   VI, 11,18, antemeridianis horis discipuli occupant (of the School of
   Rhetoric at Milan), while the scholars were free in the afternoon, and
   Augustine considers that those free hours ought to be devoted to
   religion.

   7. I have changed p. 275, 1. 2 ff. The words of 2 Cor. XII 14; XIII 1,
   would become, certainly, more luminous and more full of meaning if
   there had occurred an unrecorded visit of Paul to Corinth. The only
   time that is open for such a visit is (as Rev. F. W. Lewis suggests)
   after he left Ephesus and went to Troas; and the balance of probability
   is that such a visit was made, probably in March, 56 (as soon as the
   sailing season began), by ship from Philippi. The paragraph, XX, 1-4,
   is confessedly obscure and badly expressed; and it is probable that, if
   the book had been carried to its final stage by the author, both v. 4
   would have been added between vv. 1 and 2.

   8. P. 341. Mr. Emslie Smith, Aberdeen, sends me a valuable note, the
   result of personal inspection of St. Paul's Bay, in which he completely
   clears up the difficulty which I had to leave. It will, I hope, form
   the subject of an early article in the Expositor.

   9. P. 389, note 2. With the words of Eusebius compare the exactly
   parallel expression of Aristides, Seberos ton apo tes anothen Phrugias
   (Vol. 1, p. 505, ed. Dind.), which means that this Roman officer
   belonged to a Jewish family connected with Upper Phrygia (and also, as
   we know from other sources, with Ancyra in Galatia), but certainly does
   not imply that he was Phrygian by birth or training. It is practically
   certain that a Roman consul, with a career like that of Severus, must,
   at the period when he flourished, have been educated nearer to Rome,
   and probably in the metropolis. The scion of a Phrygian family, growing
   up amid Phrygian surroundings in the early part of the second century,
   would not have been admitted to the Roman senatorial career, as Severus
   was in his youth. His family, while retaining its Phrygian connection,
   had settled amid strictly Roman surroundings; and its wealth and
   influence procured for the heir immediate entry into the highest career
   open to a Roman. The quotation from Aristides shows that the
   interpretation of Eusebius's expression given on p. 389 is on the right
   lines. The history of Severus's family in Asia Minor is sketched in
   Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia, Pt. II, p. 649 f.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER I

  THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES

   1. TRUSTWORTHINESS.

   The aim of our work is to treat its subject as a department of history
   and of literature. Christianity was not merely a religion, but also, a
   system of life and action; and its introduction by Paul amid the
   society of the Roman Empire produced changes of momentous consequence,
   which the historian must study. What does the student of Roman history
   find in the subject of our investigation? How would an observant,
   educated, and unprejudiced citizen of the Roman Empire have regarded
   that new social force, that new philosophical system, if he had studied
   it with the eyes and the temper of a nineteenth century investigator?

   As a preliminary the historian of Rome must make up his mind about the
   trustworthiness of the authorities. Those which we shall use are:(1) a
   work of history commonly entitled the Acts of the Apostles (the title
   does not originate from the author), (2) certain Epistles purporting to
   be written by Paul. Of the latter we make only slight and incidental
   use; and probably even those who dispute their authenticity would admit
   that the facts we use are trustworthy, as being the settled belief of
   the Church at a very early period. It is, therefore, unnecessary to
   touch on the authenticity of the Epistles; but the question as to the
   date, the composition, and the author of the Acts must be discussed. If
   the main position of this book is admitted, it will furnish a secure
   basis for the Epistles to rest on.

   Works that profess to be historical are of various kinds and
   trustworthy in varying degrees. (1) There is the historical romance,
   which in a framework of history interweaves an invented tale. Some of
   the Apocryphal tales of the Apostles are of this class, springing
   apparently from a desire to provide Christian substitutes for the
   popular romances of the period. (2) There is the legend, in which
   popular fancy, working for generations, has surrounded a real person
   and real events with such a mass of extraneous matter that the
   historical kernel is hardly discernible. Certain of the Apocryphal
   tales of the Apostles may belong to this class, and many of the Acta of
   martyrs and saints certainly do. (3) There is the history of the second
   or third rate, in which the writer, either using good authorities
   carelessly and without judgment, or not possessing sufficiently
   detailed and correct authorities, gives a narrative of past events
   which is to a certain degree trustworthy, but contains errors in facts
   and in the grouping and proportions, and tinges the narrative of the
   past with the colour of his own time. In using works of this class the
   modern student has to exercise his historical tact, comparing the
   narrative with any other evidence that can be obtained from any source,
   and judging whether the action attributed to individuals is compatible
   with the possibilities of human nature. (4) There is, finally, the
   historical work of the highest order, in which a writer commands
   excellent means of knowledge either through personal acquaintance or
   through access to original authorities. and brings to the treatment of
   his subject genius, literary skill, and sympathetic historical insight
   into human character and the movement of events. Such an author seizes
   the critical events, concentrates the reader's attention on them by
   giving them fuller treatment, touches more lightly and briefly on the
   less important events, omits entirely a mass of unimportant details,
   and makes his work an artistic and idealised picture of the progressive
   tendency of the period.

   Great historians are the rarest of writers. By general consent the
   typical example of the highest class of historians is Thucydides, and
   it is doubtful whether any other writer would be by general consent
   ranked along with him. But all historians, from Thucydides downwards,
   must be subjected to free criticism. The fire which consumes the
   second-rate historian only leaves the real master brighter and stronger
   and more evidently supreme. The keenest criticism will do him the best
   service in the long run. But the critic in his turn requires high
   qualities; he must be able to distinguish the true from the false; he
   must be candid and unbiased and open-minded. There are many critics who
   have at great length stated their preference of the false before the
   true; and it may safely be said that there is no class of literary
   productions in our century in which there is such an enormous
   preponderance of error and bad judgment as in that of historical
   criticism. To some of our critics Herodotus is the Father of History,
   to others he is an inaccurate reproducer of uneducated gossip: one
   writer at portentous length shows up the weakness of Thucydides,
   another can see no fault in him.

   But, while recognising the risk, and the probable condemnation that
   awaits the rash attempt, I will venture to add one to the number of the
   critics, by stating in the following chapters reasons for placing the
   author of Acts among the historians of the first rank.

   The first and the essential quality of the great historian is truth.
   What he says must be trustworthy. Now historical truth implies not
   merely truth in each detail, but also truth in the general effect, and
   that kind of truth cannot be attained without selection, grouping, and
   idealisation.

   So far as one may judge from books, the opinion of scholars seems to
   have, on the whole, settled down to the conclusion that the author of
   Acts belongs either to the second- or the third-rate historians. Among
   those who assign him to the third rate we may rank all those who
   consider that the author clipped up older documents and patched
   together the fragments in a more or less intelligent way, making a
   certain number of errors in the process. Theories of this kind are
   quite compatible with assigning a high degree of trustworthiness to
   many statements in the book; but this trustworthiness belongs not to
   the author of the work, but to the older documents which he glued
   together. Such theories usually assign varying degrees of accuracy to
   the different older documents: all statements which suit the critic's
   own views on early Church history are taken from an original document
   of the highest character; those which he likes less belong to a less
   trustworthy document; and those which are absolutely inconsistent with
   his views. are the work of the ignorant botcher who constructed the
   book. But this way of judging, common as it is, assumes the truth of
   the critic's own theory, and decides on the authenticity of ancient
   documents according to their agreement with that theory; and the
   strangest part of this medley of uncritical method is that other
   writers, who dispute the first critic's theory of early Church history,
   yet attach some value to his opinion upon the spuriousness of documents
   which he has condemned solely on the ground that they disagree with his
   theory.

   The most important group among those who assign the author to the
   second rank of historians, consists of them that accept his facts as
   true, although his selection of what he should say and what he should
   omit seems to them strangely capricious. They recognise many of the
   signs of extraordinary accuracy in his statements; and these signs are
   so numerous that they feel bound to infer that the facts as a whole are
   stated with great accuracy by a personal friend of St. Paul. But when
   they compare the Acts with such documents as the Epistles of Paul, and
   when they study the history as a whole, they are strongly impressed
   with the inequalities of treatment, and the unexpected and puzzling
   gaps; events of great importance seem to be dismissed in a brief and
   unsatisfactory way; and, sometimes, when one of the actors (such as
   Paul) has left an account of an event described in Acts, they find
   difficulty in recognising the two accounts as descriptions of the same
   event. Bishop Lightfoot's comparison of Gal. II 1-10 with Acts XV may
   be quoted as a single specimen out of many: the elaborate process
   whereby he explains away the seeming discrepancies would alone be
   sufficient, if it were right, to prove that Acts was a second-rate work
   of history. We never feel on firm historical ground, when discrepancies
   are cleverly explained away: we need agreements to stand upon.
   Witnesses in a law court may give discrepant accounts of the same
   event; but they are half-educated, confused, unable to rise to
   historical truth. But when a historian is compared with the
   reminiscences of an able and highly educated actor in the same scenes,
   and when the comparison consists chiefly in a laboured proof that the
   discrepancies do not amount to positive contradiction, the conclusion
   is very near, that, if the reminiscences are strictly honest, the
   historian's picture is not of the highest rank.

   But there is a further difficulty. How does it come that a writer, who
   shows himself distinctly second-rate in his historical perception of
   the comparative importance of events, is able to attain such remarkable
   accuracy in describing many of them? The power of accurate description
   implies in itself a power of reconstructing the past, which involves
   the most delicate selection and grouping of details according to their
   truth and reality, i.e., according to their comparative importance.
   Acts, as Lightfoot pictures it, is to me an inconceivable phenomenon;
   such a mixture of strength and weakness, of historical insight and
   historical incapacity, would be unique and incredible. If the choice
   for an intelligible theory of Acts lay between Lightfoot's view and
   that which is presented in different forms by Clemen, Spitta, and other
   scholars, I could only adopt the same point of view as these critics.
   Lightfoot, with all his genius, has here led English scholarship into a
   cul de sac: we can make no progress, unless we retrace our steps and
   try a new path. But my belief is, that all the difficulties in which
   Lightfoot was involved spring from the attempt to identify the wrong
   events. In this attempt he naturally found discrepancies; but by a
   liberal allowance of gaps in the narrative of Acts, and the supposition
   of different points of view and of deficient information on Luke's
   part, it was possible to show why the eye-witness saw one set of
   incidents, while Acts described quite a different set.

   The historian who is to give a brief history of a great period need not
   reproduce on a reduced uniform scale all the facts which he would
   mention in a long history, like a picture reduced by a photographic
   process. If a brief history is to be a work of true art, it must omit a
   great deal, and concentrate the reader's attention on a certain number
   of critical points in the development of events, elaborating these
   sufficiently to present them in life-like and clearly intelligible
   form. True historical genius lies in selecting the great crises, the
   great agents, and the great movements, in making these clear to the
   reader in their real nature, in passing over with the lightest and
   slightest touch numerous events and many persons, but always keeping
   clear before the reader the plan of composition.

   The historian may dismiss years with a word, and devote considerable
   space to a single incident. In such a work, the omission of an event
   does not constitute a gap, but is merely a proof that the event had not
   sufficient importance to enter into the plan. A gap is some omission
   that offends our reason and our sense of harmony and propriety; and
   where something is omitted that bears on the author's plan, or where
   the plan as conceived by the author does not correspond to the march of
   events, but only to some fanciful and subjective view, there the work
   fails short of the level of history.

   I may fairly claim to have entered on this investigation without any
   prejudice in favour of the conclusion which I shall now attempt to
   justify to the reader. On the contrary, I began with a mind
   unfavourable to it, for the ingenuity and apparent completeness of the
   Tübingen theory had at one time quite convinced me. It did not lie then
   in my line of life to investigate the subject minutely; but more
   recently I found myself often brought in contact with the book of Acts
   as an authority for the topography, antiquities, and society of Asia
   Minor. It was gradually borne in upon me that in various details the
   narrative showed marvellous truth. In fact, beginning with the fixed
   idea that the work was essentially a second-century composition, and
   never relying on its evidence as trustworthy for first-century
   conditions,. I gradually came to find it a useful ally in some obscure
   and difficult investigations. But there remained still one serious
   objection to accepting it as entirely a first-century work. According
   to the almost universally accepted view, this history led Paul along a
   path and through surroundings which seemed to me historically and
   topographically self-contradictory. It was not possible to bring Paul's
   work in Asia Minor into accordance with the facts of history on the
   supposition that an important part of that work was devoted to a
   district in the northern part of the peninsula, called Galatia. It may
   appear at first sight a mere topographical subtlety whether Paul
   travelled through North Galatia or through Lycaonia; but, when you
   consider that any details given of his journeys must be false to the
   one side just in proportion as they are true to the other, you will
   perceive that, if you try to apply the narrative to the wrong side of
   the country, it will not suit the scene, and if it does not suit, then
   it must appear to be written by a person ignorant of what he pretends
   to know. The case might be illustrated from our own experience. Suppose
   that an unknown person came to Auburn from New York, and you wished to
   find out whether he was an impostor or not. In our country we are
   exposed to frequent attempts at imposition, which can often be detected
   by a few questions; and you would probably ask him about his
   experiences on his journey from New York to Auburn. Now suppose you had
   been informed that he had come not along the direct road, but by a long
   detour through Boston, Montreal, and Toronto, and had thus arrived at
   Auburn; and suppose that you by questioning elicited from him various
   facts which suited only a route through Schenectady and Utica, you
   would condemn the man as an impostor, because he did not know the road
   which he pretended to have travelled. But suppose further that it was
   pointed out by some third party that this stranger had really travelled
   along the direct road, and that you had been misinformed when you
   supposed him to have come by the round-about way, your opinion as to
   the stranger's truthfulness would be instantly affected. Precisely
   similar is the case of Acts as a record of travel; generations and
   centuries have been attempting to apply it to the wrong countries. I
   must speak on this point confidently and uncompromisingly, for the
   facts stand out so clear and bold and simple that to affect to hesitate
   or to profess any doubt as to one's judgment would be a betrayal of
   truth.

   I know the difficulties of this attempt to understand rightly a book so
   difficult, so familiar, and so much misunderstood as Acts. It is
   probable that I have missed the right turn or not grasped the full
   meaning in some cases. I am well aware that I leave some difficulties
   unexplained, sometimes from inability, sometimes from mere omission.
   But I am sustained by the firm belief that I am on the right path, and
   by the hope that enough of difficulties have been cleared away to
   justify a dispassionate historical criticism in placing this great
   writer on the high pedestal that belongs to him.

   2. DEVELOPMENT OF MODERN CRITICISM ON ACTS.

   With regard to the trustworthiness of Acts as a record of events, a
   change is perceptible in the tendency of recent criticism. Setting
   aside various exceptional cases, and also leaving out of sight the
   strictly "orthodox" view, which accepts Acts as truth without seeking
   to compare or to criticise (a view which in its simplicity and
   completeness needs neither defence nor examination), we may say that
   for a time the general drift of criticism was to conceive the book as a
   work composed in the second century with the intention of so
   representing (or rather misrepresenting) the facts as to suit the
   writer's opinion about the Church questions of his own time. All
   theories of this class imply that the atmosphere and surroundings of
   the work are of the second-century type; and such theories have to be
   rounded on a proof that the details are represented in an inaccurate
   way and coloured by second-century ideas. The efforts of that earlier
   school of critics were directed to give the required proof; and in the
   attempt they displayed a misapprehension of the real character of
   ancient life and Roman history which is often astonishing, and which
   has been decisively disproved in the progress of Roman historical
   investigation. All such theories belong to the pre-Mommsenian epoch of
   Roman history: they are now impossible for a rational and educated
   critic; and they hardly survive except in popular magazines and novels
   for the semi-religious order.

   But while one is occasionally tempted to judge harshly the assumption
   of knowledge made by the older critics where knowledge was at the time
   difficult or impossible, it is only fair also to emphatically
   acknowledge the debt we owe them for practising in a fearless and
   independent spirit the right and much needed task of investigating the
   nature and origin of the book.

   Warned by the failure of the older theories, many recent critics take
   the line that Acts consists of various first century scraps put
   together in the book as we have it by a second-century Redactor. The
   obvious signs of vivid accuracy in many of the details oblige these
   critics to assume that the Redactor incorporated the older scraps with
   no change except such as results from different surroundings and
   occasional wrong collocation. Some hold that the Redactor made
   considerable additions in order to make a proper setting for the older
   scraps. Others reduce the Redactor's action to a minimum; Spitta is the
   most remarkable example of this class. In the latter form the
   Redaction-theory is the diametrical opposite of the old tendency
   theories; the latter supposed that the second century author coloured
   the whole narrative and put his own views into every paragraph, while,
   according to Spitta, the Redactor added nothing of consequence to his
   first century materials except some blunders of arrangement. The older
   theories were rounded on the proof of a uniformity of later style and
   purpose throughout the book; the later theories depend on the proof of
   differences of style between the different parts. The old critics were
   impressed by the literary skill of the author, while the later critics
   can see no literary power or activity in him. Any argument in favour of
   the one class of theories tells against the other; and, if we. admit
   (as I think we must admit), that each view is rounded on a correct but
   one-sided perception of certain qualities in this remarkable book, we
   may fairly say that each disproves the other.

   Certain theorists, and especially Clemen in his extraordinarily
   ingenious and bold work Chronologie der Paulinischen Briefe, see
   clearly that such a bald scissors-and-paste theory as Spitta's is quite
   inadequate to explain the many-sided character of this history. Dr.
   Clemen supposes that three older documents, a history of the
   Hellenistic Jews, a history of Peter, and a history of Paul, were
   worked into one work by a Judaist Redactor, who inserted many little
   touches and even passages of considerable length to give a tone
   favourable to the Judaising type of Christianity; and that this
   completed book was again worked over by an anti-Judaist Redactor II,
   who inserted other parts to give a tone unfavourable to the Judaising
   type of Christianity, but left the Judaistic insertions. Finally, a
   Redactor III of neutral tone incorporated anew document (VI 1-6), and
   gave the whole its present form by a number of small touches.

   When a theory becomes so complicated as Clemen's, the humble scholar
   who has been trained only in philological and historical method finds
   himself unable to keep pace, and toils in vain behind this daring
   flight. We shall not at present stop to argue from examples in ancient
   and modern literature, that a dissection of this elaborate kind cannot
   be carried out. Style is seen in the whole rather than in single
   sentences, still less in parts of sentences; and a partition between
   six authors, clause by clause, sentence by sentence, paragraph by
   paragraph, of a work that seemed even to bold and revolutionary critics
   like Zeller and Baur in Germany and Renan in France to be a model of
   unity and individuality in style, is simply impossible. Moreover, the
   plan of this study is not to argue against other theories, but to set
   forth a plain and simple interpretation of the text, and appeal to the
   recognised principle of criticism that, where a simple theory of origin
   can be shown to hold together properly, complicated theories must give
   way to it.

   One feature in Dr. Clemen's theory shows true insight. No simple theory
   of gluing together can exhaust the varied character of the Acts: a very
   complex system of junctures is needed to explain its many-sidedness.
   But Dr. Clemen has not gone far enough. There is only one kind of cause
   that is sufficiently complex to match the many-sided aspects of the
   book, and that cause is the many-sided character of a thoughtful and
   highly educated man.

   Dr. Clemen seems to assume that every instance where Paul adopts an
   attitude of conciliation towards the Jews is added by a Judaistic
   Redactor, and every step in his growing estrangement from them is due
   to an anti-Judaistic Redactor. He does not, I venture to think, allow
   due scope to the possibility that an historian might record both
   classes of incidents in the interests of truth. It is admitted that a
   dislocation occurred in the early Church, and that the contention
   between the Judaising and the Universalising (to adopt a convenient
   designation) parties was keen for a time. It is natural that the
   estrangement should be gradual; and the historian sets before us a
   gradual process. He shows us Paul acting on the principle that the Jews
   had the first claim (XIII 46), and always attempting to conciliate
   them; but he also shows us that Paul did not struggle against the
   facts, but turned his back on the Jews when they rejected him (as their
   Whole history proves, even without the evidence of Acts, that they were
   sure to do}. It is hard to find a sufficient foundation for Dr.
   Clemen's theory without the preliminary assumption that an early
   Christian must necessarily be incapable of taking a broad and unbiased
   view of history as: a whole. Grant that assumption, and his theory is
   built up with marvellous skill, patience and ingenuity.

   3. WORKING HYPOTHESIS OF THE INVESTIGATION.

   Our hypothesis is that Acts was written by a great historian, a writer
   who set himself to record the facts as they occurred, a strong
   partisan, indeed, but raised above partiality by his perfect confidence
   that he had only to describe the facts as they occurred, in order to
   make the truth of Christianity and the honour of Paul apparent. To a
   Gentile Christian, as the author of Acts was, the refusal of the Jews
   to listen to Paul, and their natural hatred of him as untrue to their
   pride of birth, must appear due to pure malignity; and the growing
   estrangement must seem to him the fault of the Jews alone. It is not my
   object to assume or to prove that there was no prejudice in the mind of
   Luke, no fault on the part of Paul; but only to examine whether the
   facts stated are trustworthy, and leave them to speak for themselves
   (as. the author does). I shall argue that the book was composed by a
   personal friend and disciple of Paul, and if this be once established
   there will be no hesitation in accepting the primitive tradition that
   Luke was the author..

   We must face the facts boldly. If Luke wrote Acts, his narrative must
   agree in a striking and convincing way with Paul's: they must confirm,
   explain and complete one another. This is not a case of two
   commonplace, imperfectly educated, and not very observant witnesses who
   give divergent accounts of certain incidents which they saw without
   paying much attention to them. We have here two men of high education,
   one writing a formal history, the other speaking under every obligation
   of honour and conscience to be careful in his words: the subjects they
   speak of were of the most overpowering interest to both: their points
   of view must be very similar, for they were personal friends, and one
   was the teacher of the other, and naturally had moulded to some extent
   his mind during long companionship. If ever there was a case in which
   striking agreement was demanded by historical criticism between two
   classes of documents, it is between the writings of Paul and of Luke.

   There is one subject in particular in which criticism demands absolute
   agreement. The difference of position and object between the two
   writers, one composing a formal history, the other writing letters or
   making speeches, may justifiably be invoked to account for some
   difference in the selection of details. But in regard to the influence
   of the Divine will on human affairs they ought to agree. Both firmly
   believed that God often guided the conduct of His Church by clear and
   open revelation of His will; and we should be slow to believe that one
   of them attributed to human volition what the other believed to be
   ordered by direct manifestation of God (p. 140). We shall try to prove
   that there is a remarkable agreement between them in regard to the
   actions which they attribute to direct revelation..

   Further, we cannot admit readily that peculiarities of Luke's narrative
   are to be accounted for by want of information: in his case this
   explanation really amounts to an accusation of culpable neglect of a
   historian's first duty, for full information was within Luke's reach,
   if he had taken the trouble to seek it. We shall find no need of this
   supposition. Finally, it is hard to believe that Paul's letters were
   unknown to Luke; he was in Paul's company when some of them were
   written; he must have known about the rest, and could readily learn
   their contents in the intimate intercommunication that bound together
   the early Churches. We shall try to show that Luke had in mind the idea
   of explaining and elucidating the letters.

   In maintaining our hypothesis it is not necessary either to show that
   the author made no mistake, or to solve every difficulty. From them
   that start with a different view more may be demanded; but here we are
   making a historical and literary investigation. The greatest historians
   of other periods are not above error; and we may admit the possibility
   that a first-century historian has made errors. We shall not make much
   use of this proviso; but still the conditions of the investigation must
   be clearly laid down.

   Again, in almost every ancient writer of any value there remain
   unsolved problems by the score. Where would our philological scholars
   be, if every question were satisfactorily disposed of? The plan and the
   date of Horace's longest work, the Art of Poetry, are unsolved and
   apparently insoluble; every theory involves serious difficulties; yes
   that does not make its authenticity doubtful. That there remain some
   difficulties not explained satisfactorily in Acts does not disprove its
   first-century origin.

   Further, it is necessary to study every historian's method, and not to
   judge him according to whether or not he uses our methods. For example,
   Thucydides makes a practice of putting into the mouths of his character
   speeches which they never delivered; no modern historian would do this:
   the speeches of Thucydides, however, are the greatest and most
   instructive part of his history. They might be truly called
   unhistorical; but the critic who summed up their character in that
   epithet would only show his incapacity for historical criticism.
   Similarly the critic must study Luke's method, and not judge him
   according to whether he writes exactly as the critic considers a
   history ought to be written.

   Luke's style is compressed to the highest degree; and he expects a
   great deal from the reader. He does not, attempt to sketch the
   surroundings and set the whole scene like a picture before the reader;
   he states the bare facts that seem to him important, and leaves the
   reader to imagine the situation. But there are many cases in which, to
   catch his meaning properly, you must imagine yourself standing with
   Paul on the deck of the ship, or before the Roman official; and unless
   you reproduce the scene in imagination, you miss the sense. Hence,
   though his style is simple and clear, yet it. often becomes obscure
   from its brevity; and the meaning is lost, because the reader has an
   incomplete, or a positively false idea of the situation. It is always
   hard to recreate the remote past; knowledge, imagination, and, above
   all, sympathy and love are all needed. But Asia Minor, in which the
   scene is often laid, was not merely little known, but positively
   wrongly known.

   I know of no person except Bishop Lightfoot who has seriously attempted
   to test or revise or improve the traditional statements (often, the
   traditional blunders) about Asian antiquities as bearing on Acts; but
   the materials were not at his disposal for doing this successfully. But
   it is bad method to found theories of its composition on wrong
   interpretations of its meaning: the stock misconceptions should first
   be cleared away, and the book studied in relation to the localities and
   the antiquities.

   Luke was deficient in the sense for time; and hence his chronology is
   bad. It would be quite impossible from Acts alone to get a true idea of
   the lapse of time. That is the fault of his age; Tacitus, writing the
   biography of Agricola (about 98 A.D.), makes no chronological
   statement, until in the last paragraph he gives a series of statistics.
   Luke had studied the sequence of events carefully, and observes it in
   his arrangement minutely, but he often has to carry forward one thread
   of his narrative, and then goes back in time to take up another thread;
   and these transitions are sometimes rather harsh. Yet, in respect of
   chronology, he was, perhaps, less careless than would appear: see p.
   23.

   His plan leads him to concentrate attention on the critical steps.
   Hence he often passes lightly over a long period of gradual development
   marked by no striking incident; and from his bad chronological sense he
   gives no measure of the lapse of time implied in a sentence, a clause,
   or even a word. He dismisses ten years in a breathe and devotes a
   chapter to a single incident. His character as an historian, therefore,
   depends on his selection of topics. Does he show the true historian's
   power of seizing the great facts, and marking dearly the stages in the
   development of his subject? Now, what impresses me is the sense of
   proportion in Acts, and the skill with which a complex and difficult
   subject is grouped to bring out the historical development from the
   primitive Church (ch. I-V) through the successive steps associated with
   four great names, Stephen, Philip, Peter, Paul. Where the author passes
   rapidly over a period or a journey, we shall find reason to believe
   that it was marked by no striking feature and no new foundation. The
   axiom from which we start must be that which is assumed in all literary
   investigations--preference is to be given to the interpretation which
   restores order, lucidity, and sanity to the work. All that we ask in
   this place is the admission of that axiom, and a patient hearing, and
   especially that the reader, before condemning our first steps as not in
   harmony with other incidents, will wait to see how we can interpret
   those incidents.

   The dominant interpretation rests avowedly on the principle that Acts
   is full of gaps, and that "nothing is more striking than the want of
   proportion". Those unfortunate words of Bishop Lightfoot are worked out
   by some of his successors with that "illogical consistency" which often
   leads the weaker disciples of a great teacher to choose his errors for
   loving imitation and emphasis. With such a theory no historical
   absurdity is too gross to be imputed to Luke. But our hypothesis is
   that Luke's silence about an incident or person should always be
   investigated as a piece of evidence, on the principle that he had some
   reason for his silence; and in the course of this study we shall in
   several cases find that omission is a distinct element in the effect of
   his narrative.

   There is a contrast between the early chapters of Acts and the later.
   In the later chapters there are few sentences that do not afford some
   test of their accuracy by mentioning external facts of life, history,
   and antiquities. But the earlier chapters contain comparatively few
   such details; the subject in them is handled in a vaguer way, with a
   less vigorous and nervous grasp; the facts are rarely given in their
   local and historical surroundings, and sometimes seem to float in air
   rather than to stand on solid ground..

   This fundamental difference in handling must be acknowledged; but it
   can be fairly attributed to difference of information and of local
   knowledge. The writer shows himself in his later narrative to be a
   stranger to the Levant and familiar with the Aegean; he could not stand
   with the same confidence on the soil of Syria and Palestine, as on that
   of Asia Minor or Greece. Moreover, he was dealing with an earlier
   period; and he had not the advantage of formal historical narratives,
   such as he mentions for the period described in his First Book (the
   Gospel). Luke was dependent on various informants in the earlier
   chapters of Acts (among them Paul and Philip); and he put together
   their information, in many cases reproducing it almost verbatim.
   Sometimes the form of his record gives a clue to the circumstances in
   which he learned it. That line of investigation is liable to become
   subjective and fanciful; but modern historical investigation always
   tries to get behind the actual record and to investigate the ultimate
   sources of statements.

   4. THE AUTHOR OF ACTS AND HIS HERO.

   It is rare to find a narrative so simple and so little forced as that
   of Acts. It is a mere uncoloured recital of the important facts in the
   briefest possible terms. The narrator's individuality and his personal
   feelings and preferences are almost wholly suppressed. He is entirely
   absorbed in his work; and he writes with the single aim to state the
   facts as he has learned them. It would be difficult in the whole range
   of literature to find a work where there is less attempt at pointing a
   moral or drawing a lesson from the facts. The narrator is persuaded
   that the facts themselves in their barest form are a perfect lesson and
   a complete instruction, and he feels that it would be an impertinence
   and even an impiety to intrude his individual views into the narrative.

   It is, however, impossible for an author to hide himself completely.
   Even in the selection of details, his personality shows itself. So in
   Acts, the author shows the true Greek feeling for the sea. He hardly
   ever omits to name the harbors which Paul sailed from or arrived at,
   even though little or nothing in the way of incident occurred in them.
   But on land journeys he confines himself to missionary facts, and gives
   no purely geographical information; where any statements of a
   geographical character occur, they serve a distinct purpose in the
   narrative, and the reader who accepts them as mere geographical
   specifications has failed to catch the author's purpose (see p. 205
   f.).

   Under the surface of the narrative, there moves a current of strong
   personal affection and enthusiastic admiration for Paul. Paul is the
   author's hero; his general aim is to describe the development of the
   Church; but his affection and his interest turn to Paul; and after a
   time his narrative groups itself round Paul. He is keenly concerned to
   show that Paul was in perfect accord with the leaders among the older
   Apostles, but so also was Paul himself in his letters. That is the
   point of view of a personal friend and disciple, full of affection, and
   jealous of Paul's honour and reputation.

   The characterisation of Paul in Acts is so detailed and individualised
   as to prove the author's personal acquaintance. Moreover, the Paul of
   Acts is the Paul that appears to us in his own letters, in his ways and
   his thoughts, in his educated tone of polished courtesy, in his quick
   and vehement temper, in the extraordinary versatility and adaptability
   which made him at home in every society, moving at ease in all
   surroundings, and everywhere the centre of interest, whether he is the
   Socratic dialectician in the agora of Athens, or the rhetorician in its
   University, or conversing with kings and proconsuls, or advising in the
   council on shipboard, or cheering a broken-spirited crew to make one
   more effort for life. Wherever Paul is, no one present has eyes for any
   but him.

   Such a view could not have been taken by a second century author. The
   Church in the second century had passed into new circumstances and was
   interested in quite different questions. The catastrophe of the
   persecution of Domitian, and the effect produced for the time on the
   attitude of the Church by the deliberate attempt to suppress and
   destroy it on the part of the imperial government, made a great gulf
   between the first century and the second century of Christian history.
   [1] Though the policy of the great emperors of the second century came
   back to somewhat milder measures, the Church could not recover the same
   feeling that Paul had, so long as Christianity continued to be a
   proscribed religion, and a Christian was in theory at least an outlaw
   and a rebel. Many questions that were evidently vital to the author of
   Acts were buried in oblivion during the persecution of Domitian, and
   could not have been present in the mind of a later author. Our view
   classes Acts with 1 Peter, intermediate between the Pauline letters and
   the literature of the last decade of the century (such as Revelation).
   Luke shows the same attitude as Paul, but he aims at proving what Paul
   feels.

   The question must be fairly considered whether Luke had completed his
   history. There is one piece of evidence from his own hand that he had
   not completed it, but contemplated a third book at least. His work is
   divided into two books, the Gospel and the Acts, but in the opening
   line of the Acts he refers to the Gospel as the First discourse (protos
   Had he not contemplated a third book, we expect the term Former
   Discourse (proteros) In a marked position like the opening of a book,
   we must take the word first strictly. [2]

   We shall argue that the plan of Acts has been obscured by the want of
   the proper climax and conclusion, which would have made it clear, and
   also that the author did not live to put the final touches to his
   second book. Perhaps we may thus account for the failure of
   chronological data. In Book I there are careful reckonings of dates (in
   one case by several different eras) at the great steps of the
   narrative. In Book II there are no such calculations (except the vague
   "under Claudius" in XI 28, in itself a striking contrast to "the
   fifteenth year of Tiberius," Luke III 1). Tacitus, as we saw, appends
   the dates to his Agricola: Luke incorporates his dates, but they have
   all the appearance of being put into an already finished narrative. If
   other reasons prove that Acts wants the finishing touches, we may
   reckon among the touches that would have been added certain
   calculations of synchronism, which would have furnished a chronological
   skeleton for the narrative.

   If the work was left incomplete, the reason, perhaps,. lay in the
   author's martyrdom under Domitian.

   5. THE TEXTS OF ACTS.

   It was my wish to take no notice here of differences of reading, but
   simply to follow Westcott and Hort (except in two impossible cases, XI
   20, XII 25). This, however, proved impracticable; for there are some
   cases in which over-estimate of the two great MSS. (the Sinaitic and
   the Vatican) has led to the adoption of a reading that obscures
   history. In several places I have been driven back on the Received Text
   and the Authorised Version, and in others the Bezan Text either
   contains or gives the clue to the original text; and wherever the Bezan
   Text is confirmed by old Versions and by certain Greek MSS., it seems
   to me to deserve very earnest consideration, as at least pointing in
   the direction of an original reading subjected to wide-spread
   corruption.

   It is universally admitted that the text of Acts was exposed to very
   careless or free handling in the second century. This came about in
   various ways, for the most part unintentionally, but partly by
   deliberate action. At that time great interest was taken in gathering
   from trustworthy sources supplementary information, beyond what was
   contained in the Gospels and Acts. Eusebius, III 39, quotes a passage
   from Papias describing his eager inquiries after such information from
   those who had come into personal relations with the Apostles, and
   another, V 20, from Irenaeus, describing how Polycarp used to tell of
   his intercourse with John and the rest that had seen the Lord. Now
   there was a natural tendency to note on the margin of a MS. additional
   information obtained on good authority about incidents mentioned in the
   text; and there is always a danger that such notes may be inserted in
   the text by a copyist, who takes them for parts accidentally omitted.
   There is also a certain probability that deliberate additions might be
   made to the text (as deliberate excisions are said to have been made by
   Marcion). The balance of evidence is, on the whole, that Mark XVI 9-20
   is a later composition, designed to complete a narrative that had all
   the appearance of being defective. Again, explanatory notes on the
   margin of a MS. are often added by a reader interested in the text;
   there is no doubt that in some books such glosses have crept into the
   text through the errors of the copyist; and there are on our view three
   such cases at least in the generally accepted text of Acts.

   But, beyond this, when translations were made into Syriac and Latin
   (the former certainly, the later probably, as early as the middle of
   the second century), the attention of scholars was necessarily directed
   to the difficulties in interpretation of the text, with its occasional
   archaic expressions, obscure words, and harsh constructions; and the
   practical usefulness of a simplified and modernised text was thus
   suggested. Tatian's Harmony of the Four Gospels, and Marcion's doctored
   editions, show how attempts were made from different points of view and
   in different ways to adapt the sacred narrative for popular use: Tatian
   changed the order, Marcion altered the text by excision or worse. Thus
   the plan of a simplified text was quite in keeping with the custom of
   the second century; and the Bezan Text seems to be of that kind. As a
   whole it is not Lukan: it has a fatal smoothness, it loses the rather
   harsh but very individual style of Luke, and it neglects some of the
   literary forms that Luke observed. But it has a high value for several
   reasons: (1) it preserves with corruptions a second-century witness to
   the text, and often gives valuable, and sometimes conclusive, evidence
   of readings; (2) it shows what view was held as to the meaning of
   various passages in the second century; (3) it adds several pieces of
   information which probably rest on good evidence, though they were not
   written by Luke. Thus we can often gather from the Bezan comment what
   was the original reading commented on; and it vindicates the great MSS.
   in XVI 12 against Dr. Hort's conjecture. It reveals to us the first
   beginnings of Pauline legend (p. 106); and in this respect it stands on
   much the same level as the original text of the Acta of Paul and
   Thekla, where also it is hard to distinguish where history ends and
   romance begins. With the help of these two authorities, combined with
   early Christian inscriptions (which begin only about 190, but give
   retrospective evidence), we can recover some faint idea of the
   intellectual life of the second-century Christians in Asia Minor and
   North Syria.

   The Bezan Text will, indubitably, afford much study and some
   discoveries in the future. Its explanatory simplifications often show
   the influence of the translations which first suggested the idea of a
   simplified text. When the need for an explanation arose in connection
   with a rendering in Latin, or in Syriac, the simplification took a
   Latin or Syriac colour; but this was consciously adopted as a
   simplification, and not through mere blundering.

   While the Bezan Text has gone furthest from the original Lukan Text,
   there is no MS. which has not suffered seriously from the various
   causes of depravation. Several of the errors that have affected the two
   great MSS. look like changes made intentionally in order to suit a
   mistaken idea of the meaning of other passages; but there is always a
   possibility that in these cases an editor was making a choice between
   varieties of reading that had been produced unintentionally. Only in
   the Bezan Text can we confidently say that deliberate alterations were
   made in the text. I believe that the Bezan Reviser made many skillful
   changes in passages relating to Asia Minor and some foolish changes in
   European passages. In some of these cases, the view remains open that
   the Bezan reading is the original; but evidence is as yet not
   sufficient to give certainty. The home of the Revision is along the
   line of intercourse between Syrian Antioch and Ephesus, for the life of
   the early Church lay in intercommunication, but the Reviser was
   connected with Antioch, for he inserts "we" in XI 28.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Church in R. E. Ch. XIII

   [2] ton proton logon. The commentators universally regard this as an
   example of the misuse of protos; but they give no sufficient proof that
   Luke elsewhere misused that word. In Stephen's speech (VII 12) the
   adverb proton misused for proteron occurs, but a dispassionate
   consideration of the speeches in Acts must convince every reader that
   they are not composed by the author, but taken verbatim from other
   authorities (in this case from Philip at Cæsareia, XXI 8). Blass, p.
   16, points out with his usual power, that the character and distinction
   of the comparative and superlative degrees was decaying in the Greek of
   the N.T., and that in many adjectives one of the two degrees played the
   part of both. But such changes do not affect all words simultaneously;
   and the distinction between proteros and protos might be expected to
   last longer than that between most other pairs. We observe that Paul
   uses both, and distinguishes them correctly (though he blurs the
   distinction in other words): to proteron as the former of two visits
   Gal. IV 13, ten proteran anastrothen Eph. IV 22. Blass, with the
   grammarian's love for making absolute rules, conjectures the last
   example away, in order to lay down the law that the adjective proteros
   is not employed in N.T.; but we follow the MSS., and find in them the
   proof that the distinction was only in process of decay, and that the
   pair proteros -- protos still survived among the more educated writers
   in N.T. So long as Paul could distinguish proteros and protos, there is
   a probability that Luke would not utterly confuse them; and the fact
   that John uses protos in the most glaring way for proteros has no
   bearing on Luke, who was a far better master of Greek. We find several
   instances where Luke uses protos correctly in Acts XII 10 there were
   obviously three gates and three wards to pass (Peter was allowed to
   pass the first and the second, being taken presumably as a servant; but
   no servant would be expected to pass beyond the outermost ward at
   night, and a different course was needed there): in Luke II 2 a series
   of census are contemplated as having occurred, p. 386: in Luke XI 26
   the man is described as passing through several stages: cp. XIII 30,
   XIV 18, XVI 5, XIX 16, XX 29. And, if there survived in Luke the
   slightest idea of any difference between comparative and superlative,
   the opening of a book is the place where we should expect to find the
   difference expressed. We conclude, then, that the use of protos there
   is more easily reconcilable with the plan of three books, than of two;
   but certainty is not attainable, as proteros does not actually occur in
   his writings.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  THE ORIGIN OF ST. PAUL

   1. PAUL'S NATIONALITY.

   In the growth of Christianity we observe that all the threads of
   development which had been formed in the life of the great races of
   older history are gathered together into one complex whole. Hence we
   have just the same assurance of the truth of Christianity that we have
   of the trustworthiness of earlier history: the earlier works into the
   later, the later grows out of the earlier, in such a way that all must
   be taken together. The correspondence is in itself a guarantee of
   truth. Each exists for the other: each derives its full
   comprehensibility from the other. We must accept the general outline of
   early history as a whole, or we must reject it as a whole on the plea
   of insufficient evidence. There is not a fact of early history, whether
   Christian or pre-Christian, which is not susceptible of being disputed
   with a fair show of rational and logical argument: the evidence is
   nowhere such as would convince a man whose mind is made up against the
   trustworthiness of ancient history. Let any one test the evidence for
   any point in regard to the battles of Salamis or of Marathon; and he
   will find that everywhere he is reduced to a balance of evidence, and
   frequently to a balance so delicate that no one can feel any assured
   confidence on the point. Yet our confidence in the general facts
   regarding each battle and its results is not, as a rule, affected by
   our uncertainty as to the details. Doubtless there will always be some
   who argue that the trustworthiness of the whole must be proportionate
   to the trustworthiness of the parts, and conclude that, where all
   details are so uncertain, the whole is unworthy of study; and those who
   cannot see--or rather feel--for themselves the fallacy of the argument
   will not be convinced by any reasoning that can be adduced. But for
   those who do not adopt the extreme agnostic position, there is no other
   logical position except that of accepting the. general scheme of
   ancient history, in which Christianity is the crowning factor that
   gives unity and rational plan to the whole.

   The life of Paul partakes of the uncertainty that envelopes all ancient
   history. As regards every detail we shall find ourselves in the
   position of balancing evidence; as to almost every detail we shall find
   ourselves amid a bewildering variety of opposite opinion and assertion
   among modern scholars of every school and shade; and, strangest of all,
   in regard to two or three points where there exists the nearest
   approach to a general agreement between all the various schools, we
   shall find ourselves unable to agree. Owing to the peculiar character
   of the evidence, we shall find it best to begin in the middle of Paul's
   life and study the events of the years 44 to 61, and thereafter to
   sketch in outline the first half of his life.

   At present, however, we must emphasise the complex influences amid
   which Paul grew up. According to the law of his country, he was first
   of all a Roman citizen. That character superseded all others before the
   law and in the general opinion of society; and placed him amid the
   aristocracy of any provincial town. In the first century, when the
   citizenship was still jealously guarded, the civitas may be taken as a
   proof that his family was one of distinction and at least moderate
   wealth. It also implies that there was in the surroundings amid which
   he grew up, a certain attitude of friendliness to the Imperial
   government (for the new citizens in general, and the Jewish citizens in
   particular, were warm partisans of their protector, the new Imperial
   regime), and also of pride in a possession that ensured distinction and
   rank and general respect in Tarsus. As a Roman, Paul had a nomen and
   prænomen, probably taken from the Roman officer who gave his family
   civitas; but Luke, a Greek, had no interest in Roman names. Paulus, his
   cognomen, was not determined by his nomen: there is no reason to think
   he was an Æmilius (as some suggest).

   Paul was, in the second place, a "Tarsian, a citizen of a distinguished
   city" (XXI 39, IX 11). He was not merely a person born in Tarsus, owing
   to the accident of his family being there: he had a citizen's rights in
   Tarsus. We may confidently assume that Paul was careful to keep within
   demonstrable law and custom, when he claimed to be a Tarsian citizen in
   describing himself to the Tribune. According to the strict
   interpretation of the Roman law, the civitas superseded all other
   citizenship, but this theoretical exclusiveness was opposed to the
   Imperial spirit; and it is clear that Roman cives in a provincial city
   commonly filled the position of high-class citizens, and even had
   magistracies pressed upon them by general consent. Now, if Paul's
   family had merely emigrated to Tarsus from Judea some years before his
   birth, neither he nor his father would have been "Tarsians," but merely
   "residents" (incolæ). It is probable, but not certain, that the family
   had been planted in Tarsus with full rights as part of a colony settled
   there by one of the Seleucid kings in order to strengthen their hold on
   the city. Such a re-foundation took place at Tarsus, for the name
   Antiocheia was given it under Antiochus IV (175-164 B.C.). The Seleucid
   kings seem to have had a preference for Jewish colonists in their
   foundations in Asia Minor. Citizenship in Tarsus might also have been
   presented to Paul's father or grandfather for distinguished services to
   the State; but that is much less probable.

   In the third place, Paul was "a Hebrew sprung from Hebrews ". The
   expression is a remarkable one. It is used not to a Jewish audience,
   but to a Greek Church (Phil. III 5), and it is similar to a familiar
   expression among the Greeks: "a priest sprung from priests" is a term
   commonly applied to members of the great sacerdotal families which play
   so important a part in the society of Asian cities. He was a Jew at
   least as much as he was a Tarsian and a Roman, as regards his early
   surroundings; and it is obvious that the Jewish side of his nature and
   education proved infinitely the most important, as his character
   developed. But it is a too common error to ignore the other sides. Many
   interpreters seem to think only of his words, XXII 3, "I am a Jew born
   in Tarsus," and to forget that he said a few moments before, "I am a
   Jew, a Tarsian, a citizen of no mean city". To the Hebrews he
   emphasises his Jewish character, and his birth in Tarsus is added as an
   accident: but to Claudius Lysias, a Greek-Roman, he emphasises his
   Tarsian citizenship (after having told of his Roman citizenship). Now,
   there is no inconsistency between these descriptions of himself. Most
   of us have no difficulty in understanding that a Jew at the present day
   may be a thoroughly patriotic English citizen, and yet equally proud of
   his ancient and honourable origin. In the extraordinarily mixed society
   of the Eastern provinces, it was the usual rule in educated society
   that each man had at least two nationalities and two sides to his
   character. If we would clearly understand the society in which Paul
   worked, and the mission of Rome to make the idea of cosmopolitanism and
   universal citizenship a practical reality--an idea that had been first
   conceived by the Stoic philosophy in its attempt to fuse Greek and
   oriental thought into a unified system--we must constantly bear in mind
   that double or even triple character, which was so common.

   To the Hebrew of that period it was specially easy to preserve the
   Hebraic side of his life along with his Greek citizenship; for the
   Jewish colony in a Seleucid city preserved as a body its double
   character. It was not merely a part of the city, whose members were
   citizens, but it was also recognised by the Seleucid Empire and
   afterwards by the Roman Empire as "the Nation of the Jews in that
   city". Thus arose a strange and often puzzling complication of rights,
   which caused much heart-burning and jealousy among the non-Jewish
   citizens of the city, and which was at last terminated by the action of
   Vespasian in A.D. 70, when he put an end to the legal existence of a
   "Jewish nation," and resolved the Jews into the general population of
   the Empire.

   From this wide and diversified training we may understand better Paul's
   suitability to develop the primitive Judaic Church into the Church of
   the Roman World (for beyond that he never went in practice, though in
   theory he recognised no limit short of universal humanity), his
   extraordinary versatility and adaptability (which evidently impressed
   Luke so much, p. 22), and his quickness to turn the resources of
   civilisation to his use. The Jew in his own land was rigidly
   conservative; but the Jew abroad has always been the most facile and
   ingenious of men. There are no stronger influences in education and in
   administration than rapidity and ease of travelling and the postal
   service; Paul both by precept and example impressed the importance of
   both on his Churches; and the subsequent development of the Church was
   determined greatly by the constant intercommunication of its parts and
   the stimulating influence thereby produced on the whole.

   2. PAUL'S FAMILY.

   If Paul belonged to a family of wealth and position, how comes it that
   in great part of his career (but not in the whole, p. 312) he shows all
   the marks of poverty, maintaining himself by his own labour, and
   gratefully acknowledging his indebtedness to the contributions of his
   Philippian converts, in Rome, in Corinth, and twice in Thessalonica
   (Phil. IV 15, II Cor. XI 9; see p. 360)? It was not simply that he
   voluntarily worked with his hands in order to impress on his converts
   the dignity and duty of labour, for he conveys the impression, II Cor.
   XI 8 f., I Thess. II 9, that he had to choose between accepting help
   from his' converts, and making his own living. But it often happens in
   our own experience that a member of a rich family is in a position of
   poverty. It would be enough simply to accept the fact; but, as Paul in
   his later career is found in a different position, and as the same
   conjecture about his poverty must arise in every one's mind, we may
   glance for a moment at the relations in which Paul would stand to his
   own family after his conversion.

   The relations between Paul and his family are never alluded to by
   himself, and only once by Luke, who tells how his sisters son saved his
   life in Jerusalem by giving private information of the secret
   conspiracy against him, XXIII 16. How could this young man get
   immediate information about a conspiracy, which was concocted by a band
   of zealots, and arranged in private with the high priests and elders?
   In absolute secrecy lay the sole hope of success; and the conspiracy
   must therefore have been imparted only to a few, and probably only the
   leaders of the extreme Jewish party were aware of it. We must, I think,
   infer that the nephew acquired his information in the house of some
   leading Jew (to which he had access as belonging to an influential
   family), and that he was himself not a Christian, for in the heated
   state of feeling it may be taken as practically certain that a
   Christian would not have had free and confidential entry to the house
   of one of the Jewish leaders. But, further, if Paul's nephew were
   trusted with such a secret, it must have been assumed that he was
   hostile to Paul.

   Now, as Paul himself says, he had been brought up in strict Judaic
   feeling, not as a Sadducee, accepting the non-Jewish spirit, but as a
   Pharisee; and we must infer that the spirit of his family was strongly
   Pharisaic. The whole history of the Jews shows what was likely to be
   the feeling among his parents and brothers and sisters, when he not
   merely became a Christian, but went to the Gentiles. Their pride was
   outraged; and we should naturally expect that such a family would
   regard Paul as an apostate, a foe to God and the chosen race, and a
   disgrace to the family; his own relatives might be expected. to be his
   most bitter enemies. Looking at these probabilities, we see a special
   force in Paul's words to the Philippians, III 8, that he had given up
   all for Christ, "for whom I suffered the loss of all things and do
   count them but refuse". These emphatic words suit the mouth of one who
   had been disowned by his family, and, reduced from a position of wealth
   and influence in his nation to poverty and, contempt.

   Perhaps it is some terrible family scene that made Paul so keenly alive
   to the duty owed by a father to his children. Probably nothing in
   family life makes a more awful and lasting impression on a sensitive
   mind than a scene where a respected and beloved parent makes a demand
   beyond what love or duty permits, and tries to enforce that demand by
   authority and threats. If Paul had to face such a scene, we can
   appreciate the reason why he lays so much stress on the duty of parents
   to respect their children's just feelings: "ye fathers, provoke not
   your children to wrath; but bring them up in the education and
   admonition of the Lord" (VI 4): "fathers, provoke not your children,
   lest they lose heart" (Col. III 21). Not every person would think this
   one of the most important pieces of advice to give his young societies
   in Asia Minor. But, according to our conjecture, Paul had good cause to
   know the harm that parents may do by not reasonably considering their
   children's desires and beliefs. At the same time he strongly emphasises
   in the same passages the duty of children to obey their parents, and
   sets this before the duty of parents to their children. That also is
   characteristic of one who had been blameless as touching all the
   commandments (Phil. III 6), and who therefore must have gone to the
   fullest extreme in compliance with his father's orders before he
   announced that he could comply no further.

   3. PERSONALITY.

   While Luke is very sparing of personal details, he gives us some few
   hints about Paul's physical characteristics as bearing on his moral
   influence. As an orator, he evidently used a good deal of gesture with
   his hands; for example, he enforced a point to the Ephesian Elders by
   showing them "these hands" (XX 34). When he addressed the audience at
   Pisidian Antioch, or the excited throng of Jews in Jerusalem, he
   beckoned with the hand; when he addressed Agrippa and the distinguished
   audience in the Roman governor's hail, he "stretched forth his hand".
   This was evidently a characteristic and hardly conscious feature of his
   more impassioned oratory; but, when more quiet and simple address was
   suitable (as in the opening of his speech to the Ephesian Elders,
   before the emotion was wrought up), or when a purely argumentative and
   restrained style was more likely to be effective (as in addressing the
   critical and cold Athenian audience, or the Roman procurator's court),
   no gesture is mentioned. On the other hand, in the extreme excitement
   at Lystra he "rent his garments"; and in the jailor's critical
   situation, XVI 28, Paul called out with a loud voice. Wherever any
   little fact is mentioned by Luke, we can always observe some special
   force in it, and such details must have had real importance, when an
   author so brief and so impersonal as Luke mentions them; and they are
   very rare in him. Alexander tried to obtain a hearing from the Ephesian
   mob by such a gesture; and the din, as they howled like a lot of
   dervishes, is set before us strongly by the fact that speaking was
   impossible and gesture alone could be perceived. Peter, when he
   appeared to his astonished friends in Mary's house after his escape,
   beckoned to them to make no noise that might attract attention and
   betray his presence. Otherwise such gestures are mentioned only where
   the hand is stretched out to aid or to heal or to receive help.

   Two of the most remarkable instances of Paul's power over others are
   prefaced by the statement that Paul "fixed his eyes on" the man (XIII
   9, XIV 9, cp. XXIII 1); and this suggests that his fixed, steady gaze
   was a marked feature in his personality, and one source of his
   influence over them that were brought into relations with him. Luke
   frequently notes this trait. Peter tells that he fixed his gaze on the
   heavenly vision, XI 6; and he fixed his eyes on the lame man, III 4.
   Stephen turned his fixed gaze towards heaven, and saw it open to
   disclose the vision of glory to him. In these cases the power of the
   eye is strongly brought out. The same trait is alluded to where intense
   astonishment or admiration is involved, as when the bystanders gazed at
   Peter and John after they had healed the lame man, or Stephen's
   auditors stared on him as they saw his face suffused with glory, or the
   disciples gazed upwards as Jesus was taken away from them, or Cornelius
   stared at the Angel. In the third Gospel, IV 20, the stare of the
   congregation in Nazareth at Jesus, when He first spoke in the synagogue
   after His baptism, suggests that a new glory and a new consciousness of
   power in Him were perceived by them. The power which looks from the
   eyes of an inspired person attracts and compels a corresponding fixed
   gaze on the part of them that are brought under his influence; and this
   adds much probability to the Bezan reading in III 3, where the fixed
   gaze of the lame man on Peter seems to rouse the power that was latent
   in him. The Greek word is almost peculiar to Luke, and occurs chiefly
   in Acts. Elsewhere in N.T. it is used only by Paul in II Cor. III 7,
   13; and it has often seemed to me as if there were more of Lukan
   feeling and character in II Cor. than in any other of Paul's letters. A
   consideration of these passages must convince every one that the action
   implied by the word (atenizein) is inconsistent with weakness of
   vision: in fact, Paul says that the Jews could not gaze fixedly on the
   glory of Moses' face, implying that their eyes were not strong enough.
   The theory which makes Paul a permanent sufferer in his eyes, unable to
   see distinctly persons quite near him, and repulsive to strangers on
   account of their hideous state (Gal. IV 13 f.), is hopelessly at
   variance with the evidence of Luke. In that word, as he uses it, the
   soul looks through the eyes.

   The word twice occurs in the Third Gospel, once in a passage peculiar
   to Luke, and once when the servant maid stared at Peter and recognised
   him, where her fixed gaze is not mentioned by Matthew or Mark.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  THE CHURCH IN ANTIOCH

   1.THE GENTILES IN THE CHURCH.

   (XI 19) THEY THEN THAT WERE SCATTERED THROUGH THE TRIBULATION THAT
   AROSE ON ACCOUNT OF STEPHEN TRAVELLED (i.e., made missionary journeys)
   AS FAR AS PHOENICE AND CYPRUS AND ANTIOCH, SPEAKING THE WORD TO JEWS
   AND NONE SAVE JEWS. (20) BUT THERE WERE SOME OF THEM, MEN OF CYPRUS AND
   CYRENE, WHO WHEN THEY ARE COME TO ANTIOCH, USED TO SPEAK TO GREEKS
   ALSO, GIVING THE GOOD NEWS OF THE LORD JESUS. (21) AND THE HAND OF THE
   LORD WAS WITH THEM, AND A GREAT NUMBER THAT BELIEVED TURNED UNTO THE
   LORD.

   When Acts was written, the Church of Antioch was only about fifty years
   old, but already its beginning seems to have been lost in obscurity. It
   had not been founded, it had grown by unrecorded and almost unobserved
   steps. In the dispersion of the primitive Church at Jerusalem, during
   the troubles ensuing on the bold action of Stephen, certain Cypriote
   and Cyrenaic Jews, who had been brought up in Greek lands and had wider
   outlook on the world than the Palestinian Jews, came to Antioch. There
   they made the innovation of addressing not merely Jews but also Greeks.
   We may understand here (1) that the words used imply successful
   preaching and the admission of Greeks to the Christian congregation,
   and (2) that such an innovation took place by slow degrees, and began
   in the synagogue, where Greek proselytes heard the word. The Cypriote
   and Cyrenaic Jews began pointedly to include these Greeks of the
   synagogue in their invitations, and thus a mixed body of Jews and
   Greeks constituted the primitive congregation of Antioch; but the
   Greeks had entered through the door of the synagogue (see pp. 62, 85,
   156).

   In verses 19-21 the narrative for the moment goes back to a time
   earlier than X and XI 1-18, and starts a new thread of history from the
   death of Stephen (VII 60). That event was a critical one in the history
   of the Church. The primitive Church had clung to Jerusalem, and lived
   there in a state of simplicity and almost community of goods, which was
   an interesting phase of society, but was quite opposed to the spirit in
   which Jesus had said, "Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel
   to the whole creation". For the time it seemed that the religion of
   Christ was stagnating into a sociological experiment. Stephen's vigour
   provoked a persecution, which dispersed itinerant missionaries over
   Judea and Samaria (VIII 1-4), first among whom was Philip the colleague
   of Stephen. New congregations of Christians were formed in many towns
   (VIII 14, 25, 40, IX 31, 32, 35, 42, X 44); and it became necessary
   that, if these were to be kept in relation with the central body in
   Jerusalem, journeys of survey should be made by delegates from
   Jerusalem. The first of these journeys was made by Peter and John, who
   were sent to Samaria, when the news that a congregation had been formed
   there by Philip reached Jerusalem (VIII 14). This may be taken as a
   specimen of many similar journeys, one of which is recorded (IX 32 f.)
   on account of the important development that took place in its course.
   It appears from Acts that Peter was the leading spirit in these
   journeys of organisation, which knit together the scattered
   congregations in Judea and Samaria. Hence the first great question in
   the development of the Church was presented to him, viz., whether
   Hebrew birth was a necessary condition for entrance into the kingdom of
   the Messiah and membership of the Christian Church. That question must
   necessarily be soon forced on the growing Church; for proselytes were
   not rare, and the Christian doctrine, which was preached in the
   synagogues, reached them. It was difficult to find any justification
   for making the door of the Church narrower than the door of the
   synagogue, and there is no record that any one explicitly advocated the
   view that Christianity should be confined to the chosen people, though
   the condition and regulations on which non-Jews should be admitted
   formed the subject of keen controversy in the following years.

   According to Acts, this great question was first presented definitely
   to Peter in the case of a Roman centurion named Cornelius; and a
   vision, which had appeared to him immediately before the question
   emerged, determined him to enter the house and the society of
   Cornelius, and set forth to him the good news, on the principle that
   "in every nation he that feareth God and worketh righteousness is
   acceptable to Him" (X 35). Peter's action was immediately confirmed by
   the communication of Divine grace to the audience in Cornelius's house;
   and, though it was at first disputed in Jerusalem, yet Peter's defence
   was approved of by general consent.

   But this step, though an important one, was only the first stage in a
   long advance that was still to be made. Cornelius was a proselyte; and
   Peter in his speech to the assembly in his house laid it down as a
   condition of reception into the Church that the non-Jew must approach
   by way of the synagogue (X 35), and become "one that fears God".

   Without entering on the details of a matter which has been and still is
   under discussion, we must here allude to the regulations imposed on
   strangers who wished to enter into relations with the Jews. Besides the
   proselytes who came under the full Law and entered the community of
   Moses, there was another class of persons who wished only to enter into
   partial relations with the Jews. These two classes were at a later time
   distinguished as "Proselytes of the Sanctuary" and "of the Gate"; but
   in Acts the second class is always described as "they that fear God"
   [3] The God-fearing proselytes were bound to observe certain ceremonial
   regulations of purity in order to be permitted to come into any
   relations with the Jews; and it is probable that these rules were the
   four prohibitions enumerated in XV 28, to abstain from the flesh of
   animals sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from animals
   strangled, and from marriage within the prohibited degrees (many of
   which were not prohibited by Greek or Roman law). These prohibitions
   stand in close relation to the principles laid down in Leviticus XVII,
   XVIII, for the conduct of strangers dwelling among the Israelites; and
   it would appear that they had become the recognised rule for admission
   to the synagogue and for the first stage of approximation to the Jewish
   communion. They stand on a different plane from the moral law of the
   Ten Commandments, being rules of purity.

   While no one, probably, urged that the Church should be confined to
   born Hebrews, there was a party in the Church which maintained that
   those non-Jews who were admitted should be required to conform to the
   entire "Law of God ": this was the party of "champions of the
   circumcision," [4] which played so great a part in the drama of
   subsequent years. This party was silenced by Peter's explanation in the
   case of Cornelius, for the preliminary vision and the subsequent gift
   of grace could not be gainsaid. But the main question was not yet
   definitely settled; only an exceptional case was condoned and accepted.

   The Church Of Antioch then was in a somewhat anomalous condition. It
   contained a number of Greeks, who were in the position of "God-fearing
   proselytes," but had not conformed to the entire law; and the question
   was still unsettled what was their status in the Church.

   2. THE COMING OF BARNABAS AND THE SUMMONING OF SAUL.

   (XI 22) AND THE REPORT CONCERNING THEM CAME TO THE EARS OF THE CHURCH
   IN JERUSALEM; AND THEY SENT FORTH BARNABAS AS FAR AS ANTIOCH: (23) WHO
   WHEN HE WAS COME, AND HAD SEEN THE GRACE OF GOD, WAS GLAD; AND HE
   EXHORTED THEM ALL THAT WITH PURPOSE OF HEART THEY SHOULD CLEAVE UNTO
   THE LORD (24) (FOR HE WAS A GOOD MAN, AND FULL OF THE HOLY SPIRIT AND
   OF FAITH); AND MUCH PEOPLE WAS ADDED UNTO THE LORD. (25) AND HE WENT
   FORTH TO TARSUS TO SEEK FOR SAUL; (26) AND WHEN HE HAD FOUND HIM, HE
   BROUGHT HIM UNTO ANTIOCH. AND IT CAME TO PASS THAT EVEN FOR A WHOLE
   YEAR THEY MET IN THE ASSEMBLY, AND TAUGHT MUCH PEOPLE; AND THAT THE
   DISCIPLES WERE CALLED "CHRISTIANS" FIRST IN ANTIOCH.

   As in previous cases, an envoy was sent from the Church in Jerusalem to
   survey this new congregation, and judge of its worthiness; and Barnabas
   was selected for the purpose. The same test that had been convincing in
   the case of Cornelius satisfied Barnabas in Antioch: he saw the grace
   of God. Then he proceeded to exhort and encourage them, which he was
   qualified to do because the Divine Spirit was in him. Sparing as Luke
   is of words, he feels bound to state that Barnabas was qualified by
   grace for the work (see p. 174). The result of his course of
   ministration [5] was a great increase to the congregation.

   Mindful of his former short experience of Saul, Barnabas bethought
   himself that he was well suited to the peculiar circumstances of the
   Antiochian congregation: and he accordingly went to Tarsus, and brought
   Saul back with him to Antioch. This journey must apparently have been
   made in the early months of A.D. 43; and the rest of that year was
   spent by the two friends in Antioch. The date shows that the early
   stages of Christian history in Antioch were slow. The congregation must
   have grown insensibly, and no marked event occurred, until the
   attention of the Church in Jerusalem was called to its existence. The
   one important fact about it was that it came into existence in this
   peculiar way. But with the advent of Barnabas and Saul, its history
   enters on a new phase. It became the centre of progress and of
   historical interest in the Church.

   It lies in Luke's style to give no reason why Barnabas summoned Saul to
   Antioch. This historian records the essential facts as they occurred;
   but he does not obtrude on the reader his own private conception as to
   causes or motives. But we cannot doubt that Barnabas, who became Saul's
   sponsor at Jerusalem (IX 27), and related to the Apostles the
   circumstances of his conversion, knew that God had already called him
   "to preach Him among the Gentiles" (Gal. I 16), and recognised that
   this congregation of the Gentiles was the proper sphere for Saul's
   work. We find in Barnabas's action the proof of the correctness of
   Paul's contention in Epist. Gal., that his aim as an Apostle had been
   directed from the first towards the Gentiles; his sphere was already
   recognised.

   As we shall see later, Paul must have spent nearly eight years at
   Tarsus. Why are these eight years a blank? Why were they such a
   contrast to the crowded hours of the period that was just beginning? On
   our hypothesis as to the meaning of Luke's silence, we conclude that
   Paul was still not fully conscious of the full meaning of his mission;
   he was still bound in the fetters of Judaic consistency, and acted as
   if the door of the synagogue was the portal through which the Nations
   must find their way into the Church. He had not yet learned, or at
   least he had not yet so fully shaken himself free from the prejudices
   of education and tradition as to act on the knowledge, that God "had
   opened a door of faith unto the nations" (XIV 27, p. 85).

   A point in Luke's style here deserves note. He has mentioned in IX 30
   that Saul was sent away to Tarsus; and he now takes up the thread from
   that point, saying that Barnabas went to Tarsus to seek for Saul. He
   implies that the reader must understand Tarsus to have been Saul's
   headquarters during the intervening period. Not merely. does XI 25
   require one to look back, but also IX 30 requires one to look forward;
   each is the complement of the other, and the two together hit off a
   long period during which no critical event had to be recorded. The same
   period, together with the following year in Antioch, is described by
   Paul himself, Gal. I 21, 22: "Then I came into the climes of Syria and
   Cilicia: and I continued to be unknown by face to the churches of
   Judea, but they only heard say, He that once persecuted us now
   preacheth the faith'". Paul and Luke complete each other, and make up a
   picture of over ten years of quiet work within the range of the
   synagogue and its influence.

   The words of v. 25 seem harsh until one takes them as a direct backward
   reference to IX 30, and as implying a statement about the intervening
   period. The Bezan Commentator, not catching the style of Luke, inserts
   an explanatory clause, "hearing that Saul is in Tarsus," which rounds
   off the sense here by cutting away the necessity of finding in XI 25
   the completion of a period of history whose beginning is recorded in IX
   30.

   The term "Christians" attests that the congregation became a familiar
   subject of talk, and probably of gossip and scandal, in the city; for
   obviously the name originated Outside the brotherhood. The Brethren,
   then, were talked of in popular society as "they that are connected
   with Christos": such a title could not originate with the Jews, to whom
   "the Christ" was sacred. The name Christos therefore must have been the
   most prominent in the expressions by which the Greek Brethren described
   or defined their faith to their pagan neighbours. The latter,
   doubtless, got no clear idea of what this Christos was: some took
   Christos as one of the strange gods whom they worshipped (XVII 18);
   others took him as their leader (p. 254). In any case the name belongs
   to popular slang.

   In accordance with the tendency of popular language to find some
   meaning for strange words, the strange term Christos was vulgarly
   modified to Chrêstos, the Greek adjective meaning "good, useful," which
   seemed to popular fancy a more suitable and natural name for a leader
   or a deity. "Chrêstians" was the form in which the name was often used;
   and it occurs in inscriptions.

   3. THE ANTIOCHIAN COLLECTION FOR THE POOR OF JERUSALEM.

   (XI 27 A) AND AT THIS PERIOD THERE CAME DOWN FROM JERUSALEM PROPHETS TO
   ANTIOCH. (28A) AND THERE STOOD UP ONE OF THEM, AGABUS BY NAME, AND
   SIGNIFIED BY THE SPIRIT THAT THERE SHOULD BE GREAT FAMINE OVER ALL THE
   WORLD; WHICH CAME TO PASS IN THE DAYS OF CLAUDIUS. (29A) AND THE
   DISCIPLES ACCORDING TO THE MEANS OF THE INDIVIDUAL ARRANGED TO SEND
   CONTRIBUTIONS FOR RELIEF TO THE BRETHREN SETTLED IN JUDEA. (30A) AND
   THIS TOO THEY DID, AND DESPATCHED the relief TO THE ELDERS BY THE HAND
   OF BARNABAS AND SAUL. (XII 25A) AND BARNABAS AND SAUL FULFILLED THE
   MINISTRATION OF RELIEF, AND RETURNED FROM JERUSALEM BRINGING AS
   COMPANION JOHN SURNAMED MARK.

   Luke's brief statement about the famine is declared by Dr. Schürer to
   be unhistorical, improbable, and uncorroborated by other evidence. [6]
   Opinions differ widely; for the famine seems to me to be singularly
   well attested, considering the scantiness of evidence for this period.
   Suetonius alludes to assiduæ sterilitates causing famine-prices under
   Claudius, while Dion Cassius and Tacitus speak of two famines in Rome,
   and famine in Rome implied dearth in the great corn-growing countries
   of the Mediterranean; Eusebius mentions famine in Greece, and an
   inscription perhaps refers to famine in Asia Minor. [7] Thus widespread
   dearth over the Roman world is fully attested independently; beyond the
   Roman world our evidence does not extend. Dr. Schürer seems to require
   a distinct statement that a famine took place in the same year all over
   Europe, Asia, and Africa. But that is too hard on Luke, for he merely
   says that famine occurred over the whole (civilised) world in the time
   of Claudius: of course the year varied in different lands.

   The great famine in Palestine occurred probably in A.D. 46. The
   commentators as a rule endeavour, by straining Josephus, or by quoting
   the authority of Orosius, to make out that the famine took place in 44,
   and even that it occasioned the persecution by Herod.

   The eagerness to date the famine in 44 arises from a mistake as to the
   meaning and order of the narrative of Acts. Between XI 30 and XII 25
   there is interposed an account of Herod's persecution and his miserable
   death, events which belong to the year 44; and it has been supposed
   that Luke conceives these events as happening while Barnabas and Saul
   were in Jerusalem. But that is not the case. Luke describes the
   prophecy of Agabus, and the assessment imposed by common arrangement on
   the whole congregation in proportion to their individual resources.
   Then he adds that this arrangement was carried out and the whole sum
   sent to Jerusalem. The process thus described was not an instantaneous
   subscription. The money was probably collected by weekly contributions,
   for the congregation was not rich, and coin was not plentiful in Syrian
   cities. This collection would take a considerable time, as we gather
   both from the analogy of the later Pauline contribution (p. 288), and
   from the fact that the famine was still in the future, and no necessity
   for urgent haste existed. The arrangements were made beforehand in full
   reliance on the prophecy; but there is no reason to think that the
   money was used until the famine actually began, and relief was urgently
   needed. The manner of relief must, of course, have been by purchasing
   and distributing corn, for it would have shown criminal incapacity to
   send gold to a starving city; and the corn would not be given by any
   rational person, until the famine was at its height. When Sir Richard
   Wallace relieved the distress in Paris after the siege, he did not
   content himself with telegraphing money from London, nor yet with
   distributing gold to the starving people in Paris. He brought food and
   gave it. As he did, so we may be sure did the Antiochian delegates do;
   and no rational person will suppose that the corn was brought to
   Jerusalem until the famine was actually raging. But in a land where
   transport was difficult, preparations took time; and Luke states at the
   outset the general course of the preparations which the Divine
   revelation aroused.

   Thereafter, before describing the actual distribution of relief in
   Jerusalem, the author's method requires him to bring down the general
   narrative of events in Jerusalem and Judaea to the point when the
   famine began; and then at last he mentions the actual administering of
   the relief. He, therefore, tells about the persecution of Herod (which
   took place near the time when Agabus prophesied), and about Herod's
   death; and then at last he mentions the execution of the Antiochian
   design and the return of the delegates to their own city.

   As thus interpreted, Luke's chronology harmonises admirably with
   Josephus. Agabus came to Antioch in the winter of 43-44; and in the
   early part of 44 Herod's persecution occurred, followed by his death,
   probably in the autumn. In 45 the harvest was probably not good, and
   provisions grew scarce in the country; then, when the harvest of 46
   failed, famine set in, and relief was urgently required, and was
   administered by Barnabas and Saul. It is an interesting coincidence
   that relief was given liberally in Jerusalem by Queen Helena (mother of
   Izates, King of Adiabene), who bought corn in Egypt and figs in Cyprus,
   and brought them to Jerusalem for distribution. She came to Jerusalem
   in 45, and her visit lasted through the season of famine; she had a
   palace in Jerusalem. The way in which she imparted relief to the
   starving people illustrates the work that Barnabas and Saul had to
   perform. [8]

   The service in Jerusalem must have occupied Barnabas and Saul for. a
   considerable time. They acted as administrators (diakonoi) of the
   relief; and it becomes evident how much is implied in the words of XI
   29, XII 25 from the comparison of VI 1 "the daily ministration" of food
   to the poor. The same term (diakonia) that is used in these cases is
   applied (with logou understood) to the steady constant work of a
   missionary or an apostle, XX 24, XXI 19, I 17, 25, VI 4. The Antiochian
   delegates did not merely act as carriers of money; they stayed in
   Jerusalem through the famine and acted as providers and distributors,
   using all the opportunity of encouraging and comforting the distressed
   that was thus afforded. In this way Saul's second visit to Jerusalem
   was an important moment in the development of the Church, and is
   related as such by Luke: it united far-distant parts of the Church at a
   great crisis; it gave to the poor in Jerusalem the sense of brotherhood
   with the Antiochian brethren, and to the Antiochian congregation that
   consciousness of native life and power which comes only from noble work
   nobly done. But for this end it was necessary that the work should be
   done from first to last by the Antiochian congregation, and that every
   starving disciple in Jerusalem should realise that he owed his relief
   to his brethren at Antioch. Great part of the effect would have been
   lost, if the delegates had merely handed a sum of money to the leaders
   in Jerusalem to distribute; and the author, who is so sparing of words,
   does not fail to assure us that the two delegates "completed the
   ministration" before they returned to Antioch.

   It must be noticed that only the Elders at Jerusalem are here
   mentioned, whereas in XV Paul and Barnabas were sent to the Apostles
   and Elders. The marked difference may probably be connected with the
   author's conception of the appropriate duties of each. In XV, when a
   matter of conduct and principle was in question, the Apostles were
   primarily concerned; but when it was a matter of the distribution of
   food, the Apostles were not concerned, for it was right that they
   should not "serve tables," but "continue in the ministry of the word"
   (VI 2-4). It would have been quite natural to say that the
   contributions were sent to the congregation, or to the Brethren, in
   Jerusalem; and it is apparent that here the Elders represent the
   congregation of Jerusalem as directors of its practical working, while
   in XV the Apostles and Elders represent the Church in every aspect. The
   omission of the Apostles in XI 29 commonly explained on other grounds,
   not very honourable to them. Even Lightfoot says: "the storm of
   persecution had broken over the Church of Jerusalem." One leading
   Apostle had been put to death; another, rescued by a miracle, had fled
   for his life. It is probable that every Christian of rank had retired
   from the city. No mention is made of the Twelve; the salutations of the
   Gentile Apostles are received by the Elders'. They arrived charged with
   alms for the relief of the poor brethren of Jerusalem. Having deposited
   these in trustworthy hands, they would depart with all convenient
   speed. But Luke expressly says that the administration of the relief
   was performed in detail by the two Antiochian delegates (XII 25); and
   one can only marvel that Lightfoot ever stooped to the idea that they
   sneaked into the city and sneaked out hastily again, leaving the poor
   without a single "Christian of rank" to minister to them. Nor is there
   any good reason to think that the Apostles all fled from Jerusalem, and
   left the disciples to look after themselves. It was not men like that
   who carried Christianity over the empire within a few years. Such an
   act of cowardice should not be attributed to the Apostles without
   distinct evidence; and here the evidence tells in the opposite
   direction: (1) at the far more serious persecution following the death
   of Stephen, "all scattered abroad except the Apostles" (VIII 1): (2) it
   is implied that "James and the Brethren" were in Jerusalem, when Peter
   escaped from prison and retired (XII 17); and immediately after, Herod
   went away and the persecution was at an end. The author of Acts
   evidently had the impression that the guidance of affairs rested with
   the Apostles in Jerusalem; and they are conceived by him as being there
   permanently, except when absent on a special mission.

   It is not mere accidental collocation, that immediately on the return
   of Barnabas and Saul comes the record of the flourishing state of the
   Church in Antioch, with its band of prophets and teachers (XIII 1): the
   result of their noble work in Jerusalem was apparent in the fuller and
   more perfect manifestation of Divine power and grace to the Church in
   Antioch.

   Further, when Paul had founded a group of new churches in the four
   provinces, Galatia, Asia, Macedonia, Achaia, he, as the crowning act of
   organisation, instituted a general collection among them for the poor
   at Jerusalem; and arranged that representatives should go up along with
   himself to Jerusalem bearing the money. His object was both to
   strengthen the separate congregations by good work, and to strengthen
   the whole Church by bringing its scattered parts into personal
   relations of service and help. We cannot doubt that it was his
   experience of the immense effect produced by the first Divinely ordered
   contribution which led Paul to attach such importance and devote so
   much trouble to the organisation of the second general contribution;
   and he uses the same word to indicate the management of the second fund
   that Luke uses of the first (diakonein, II Cor. VIII 19). [9]

   The preceding notes have shown how much is contained in the brief
   record of Luke: all the main points in the execution of the scheme of
   relief are touched in the few words XI 29, 30, XII 25. But we are not
   reduced to this single account of the mission to Jerusalem. Paul, in
   writing to the Galatians, also mentions it; his reason for alluding to
   it lay in certain incidental and unessential facts that occurred at
   Jerusalem; but he tells enough to show what was the primary object of
   the visit. In describing his intercourse with the older Apostles, he
   mentions his second visit to Jerusalem in the following terms (I expand
   the concise language of Paul to bring out the close-packed meaning):--

   (Gal. II 1) THEN IN THE FOURTEENTH YEAR after it pleased God to call
   me, I WENT UP AGAIN TO JERUSALEM WITH BARNABAS, AND TOOK TITUS ALSO AS
   A COMPANION. (2) NOW I may explain that I WENT UP ON AN ACCOUNT OF A
   REVELATION (which shows how completely my action was directly guided by
   the Divine will, and how independent it was of any orders or
   instructions from the Apostles). AND I COMMUNICATED TO THEM WITH A VIEW
   TO CONSULTATION THE GOSPEL WHICH I CONTINUE PREACHING AMONG THE
   GENTILES, BUT I did so PRIVATELY TO THOSE WHO WERE RECOGNISED AS THE
   LEADING SPIRITS, not publicly to the whole body of Apostles; since the
   latter course would have had the appearance of consulting the official
   governing body, as if I felt it a duty to seek advice from them;
   whereas private consultation was a purely voluntary act. MY PURPOSE IN
   THIS CONSULTATION WAS TO CARRY WITH ME THE LEADING SPIRITS OF THE
   CHURCH, SINCE MISUNDERSTANDING OR WANT OF COMPLETE APPROVAL ON THEIR
   PART MIGHT ENDANGER OR FRUSTRATE MY EVANGELISTIC WORK WHETHER IN THE
   FUTURE OR THE PAST, if doubt or dispute arose as to the rights of my
   converts to full membership in the Church without further ceremony. (3)
   NOW, as I have touched on this point, I may mention parenthetically
   that NOT EVEN WAS MY COMPANION TITUS, GREEK AS HE WAS, REQUIRED TO
   SUBMIT TO CIRCUMCISION, much less was the general principle laid down
   that the Jewish rite was a necessary preliminary to the full membership
   of the Church. (4) FURTHER, THE OCCASION of my consulting the leading
   Apostles WAS BECAUSE OF CERTAIN INSINUATING FALSE BRETHREN, WHO ALSO
   CREPT INTO OUR SOCIETY IN AN UNAVOWED WAY TO ACT THE SPY ON OUR FREEDOM
   (WHICH WE FREE CHRISTIANS CONTINUE ENJOYING THROUGHOUT MY MINISTRY), IN
   ORDER TO MAKE US SLAVES to the ritual which they count necessary. (5)
   BUT NOT FOR AN HOUR DID WE YIELD TO THESE FALSE BRETHREN BY COMPLYING
   WITH THEIR IDEAS, OR EXPRESSING AGREEMENT WITH THEM; AND OUR FIRMNESS
   THEN WAS INTENDED TO SECURE THAT THE GOSPEL IN ITS TRUE FORM SHOULD
   CONTINUE IN LASTING FREEDOM FOR YOU to enjoy. (6) BUT FROM THE
   RECOGNISED LEADERS--HOW DISTINGUISHED SOEVER WAS THEIR CHARACTER IS NOT
   NOW THE POINT; GOD ACCEPTETH NOT MAN'S PERSON--THE RECOGNISED LEADERS,
   I SAY, IMPARTED NO NEW INSTRUCTION TO ME; (7) BUT, ON THE CONTRARY,
   PERCEIVING THAT I THROUGHOUT MY MINISTRY AM CHARGED SPECIALLY WITH THE
   MISSION TO FOREIGN (NON-JEWISH) NATIONS AS PETER IS WITH THE JEWISH
   MISSION--(8) FOR HE THAT WORKED FOR PETER TO THE APOSTOLATE OF THE
   CIRCUMCISION WORKED ALSO FOR ME TO BE THE MISSIONARY TO THE
   GENTILES--(9) AND PERCEIVING from the actual facts THE GRACE THAT HAD
   BEEN GIVEN ME, THEY, JAMES AND CEPHAS AND JOHN, THE RECOGNISED PILLARS
   OF THE CHURCH, GAVE PLEDGES TO ME AND TO BARNABAS OF A JOINT SCHEME OF
   WORK, OURS TO BE DIRECTED TO THE GENTILES, WHILE THEIRS WAS TO THE
   JEWS. (10) ONE CHARGE ALONE THEY GAVE US, TO REMEMBER THE POOR brethren
   at Jerusalem. A DUTY WHICH AS A MATTER OF FACT I at that time MADE IT
   MY SPECIAL OBJECT TO PERFORM.

   As is pointed out elsewhere in full detail, the concluding sentence
   defines the object which Paul carried out in Jerusalem: other events
   were incidental. This journey, therefore, is declared in Epist. Gal. to
   have been made according to revelation, and in Acts the exact
   circumstances of the revelation are narrated; the object of the visit
   is described in Acts as being to relieve the distress of the poor
   brethren in Jerusalem, and in Epist. Gal. Paul says he directed his
   attention specially to helping the poor brethren; another purpose is
   said in Epist. Gal. to have been achieved on this journey, v. 3, but
   Paul immediately adds that this other purpose was carried out as a mere
   private piece of business, and implies thereby that it was not the
   primary or official purpose of the journey.

   How graceful and delicate is the compliment which the older Apostles
   paid to Paul! "the only advice and instruction which we have to give is
   that you continue to do what you have been zealously doing," so they
   spoke at the conclusion of his visit. And in what a gentlemanly spirit
   does Paul refer to that visit! His object is to prove to the Galatians
   that, on his visits to Jerusalem, he received nothing in the way of
   instruction or commission from the older Apostles; and to do this he
   gives an account of his visits. When he comes to the second visit he
   might have said in the tone of downright and rather coarse candour, "So
   far from receiving on this occasion, I was sent by Divine revelation to
   be the giver". But not even in this hot and hasty letter does he swerve
   from his tone of respect and admiration, or assume in the slightest
   degree a tone of superiority to Peter and James. The facts are all
   there to show the real situation; but they are put so quietly and
   allusively (the revelation in verse 2, the object in verse 10), as to
   avoid all appearance of boasting in what was really a very legitimate
   cause of satisfaction; and even of self-gratulation. It is precisely
   because on his second visit Paul was so obviously not the recipient,
   that he appeals to it with such perfect confidence as proving his
   independence.

   Here as everywhere we find that Acts supplements and explains the
   incidents and arguments used by Paul in his letter. And we see that the
   influence which we have just ascribed to the visit in promoting the
   unity and solidarity of the whole Church is fully confirmed by Paul in
   verse 9; it resulted in a formal recognition by the older Apostles of
   the co-ordinate Apostolate of the two Antiochian delegates.

   The same party in the Church which had criticised Peter's conduct to
   Cornelius, was discontented with the conduct of Barnabas and Saul to
   their companion, Titus; but in the circumstances their discontent did
   not take public action, though it was so apparent as to put Saul on his
   guard, and once more they seem to have acquiesced in an exceptional
   case, as they did in that of Cornelius. But it was now becoming evident
   that two distinct and opposed opinions existed in the Church, and were
   likely to come to open conflict; and Saul privately satisfied himself
   that the leaders were in agreement with himself on the subject of
   difference.

   But why is Acts silent about this? Simply because it never came to an
   open discussion, and therefore did not reach the proper level of
   importance. Luke confines himself to the great steps in development.
   Nor is it strange that Titus is not mentioned by Luke. In carrying the
   relief to Jerusalem, it is obvious that Barnabas and Saul must have had
   assistants. The work was one of considerable magnitude, and involved a
   good deal of organisation. We may gather from Luke that the two envoys
   were entrusted with the management; but the whole details of purchase,
   transport, and distribution lie outside of his conception and plan. The
   essential fact for his purpose was that relief was sent by the
   congregation in Antioch (XI 30), and its distribution personally
   carried out by Paul and Barnabas in Jerusalem (XII 25); and he tells us
   no more. In his letter Paul says that Titus was privately selected
   associate and not an official; and we may confidently add that he was
   one of the assistants who were needed to carry out the work described
   in Acts (see also the omission is made on p. 170.

   The only strange fact in reference to Titus, is that he nowhere appears
   in Acts; and that is equally hard to explain on every theory. Clearly
   he played a considerable part in the early history of the Church (as
   Luke himself did); and, on our hypothesis of Luke's historical insight
   and power of selecting and grouping details, the complete omission of
   Titus's name must be intentional, just as the silence about Luke is
   intentional. A suggestion to explain the omission is made on p. 390.

   The situation on this visit is strikingly different from that described
   in Acts XV as existing at the next visit (see Chap. VII). Paul has here
   private communications with the three leading Apostles in prudent
   preparation against future difficulties. In the later stage, public
   meetings to hear the recital of his and Barnabas's experiences among
   the Gentiles are followed by a formal Council, in which "the leading
   Apostles stand forth as the champions of Gentile liberty".

   We find ourselves obliged to regard this visit as more important than
   is generally believed. Canon Farrar, who may be quoted as a clear and
   sensible exponent of the accepted view, calls it "so purely an episode
   in the work of St. Paul, that in the Epistle to the Galatians he passes
   it over without a single allusion ". According to our view, if it had
   been a mere episode without influence on the development of the Church,
   Luke would have passed it unmentioned; but it was a step of great
   consequence in the development of the Antiochian congregation and of
   the Church as a whole; and therefore it required a place in this
   history.

   The wonderful revelation described by Paul himself in his second letter
   to the Corinthians XII 2-4 took place in the fourteenth year before
   A.D. 56, when that letter was written; and therefore probably occurred
   in 43 or 44. This brings us near the period when Agabus came to
   Antioch; but all speculation is barred by the description: he "heard
   unspeakable words which it is not lawful for man to utter". Another
   revelation, however, can with certainty be ascribed to this visit, and,
   specially, to its concluding days.

   4. THE RETURN FROM JERUSALEM TO ANTIOCH.

   (XXII 17) WHEN I HAD RETURNED TO JERUSALEM, AND WHILE I PRAYED IN THE
   TEMPLE, I FELL INTO A TRANCE, (18) AND SAW HIM SAYING UNTO ME, "MAKE
   HASTE, AND GET THEE QUICKLY OUT OF JERUSALEM; BECAUSE THEY WILL NOT
   RECEIVE OF THEE TESTIMONY CONCERNING ME". (19) AND I SAID, "LORD, THEY
   THEMSELVES KNOW THAT I IMPRISONED AND BEAT IN EVERY SYNAGOGUE THEM THAT
   BELIEVED ON THEE: (20) AND WHEN THE BLOOD OF STEPHEN THY WITNESS WAS
   SHED, I ALSO WAS STANDING BY, AND CONSENTING, AND KEEPING THE: GARMENTS
   OF THEM THAT SLEW HIM (and therefore they must see that some great
   thing has happened to convince me)". (21) AND HE SAID UNTO ME, "DEPART:
   FOR I WILL SEND THEE FORTH FAR HENCE UNTO THE NATIONS ".

   Let us clearly conceive the probable situation at that time. In the
   famine-stricken city it is not to be supposed that Barnabas and Saul
   confined their relief to professing Christians, and let all who were
   not Christians starve. Christian feeling, ordinary humanity, and policy
   (in the last respect Paul was as little likely to err as in the
   others), alike forbade an absolute distinction. The Antiochian
   delegates must have had many opportunities of siding their Jewish
   brethren, though they addressed their work specially to their Brethren
   in the Church; and the result must have been that they occupied a
   position of peculiar advantage for the time, not merely in the Church
   (where the respect and honour paid them shines through Gal. II 1-10),
   but also in the city as a whole. Now it was part of Paul's missionary
   method not to insist where there was no opening, and not to draw back
   where the door was open. It might well seem that the remarkable
   circumstances of his mission to Jerusalem, the revelation by which it
   was ordered, and the advantage it secured to him in the city, were the
   opening of a door through which he might powerfully influence his own
   people. The thought could not fail to occur to Paul; and the remarkable
   incident described in XXII 17-21 shows that it was in his mind.

   This incident is usually assigned to the first visit which Paul paid to
   Jerusalem after his conversion. But he does not say or even imply that
   it was his first visit; and we must be guided by the suitability of the
   circumstances mentioned to the facts recorded about the various visits.
   Now Luke gives a totally different reason for his departure from
   Jerusalem at the first visit: he attributes it to the prudence of the
   Brethren, who learned that a conspiracy was made to slay him, and
   wished both to save him and to avoid the general danger that would
   arise for all, if persecution broke out against one. The revelation of
   XXII 18, to which Paul attributes his departure, suits the first visit
   very badly; but such discrepancy does not count for much with the
   modern interpreters, orthodox and "critical" alike, who, having
   achieved the feat of identifying the second visit of Gal. II 1-10 with
   the third visit of Acts XV (pp. 59, 154 f.), have naturally ceased to
   expect agreement between Luke and Paul on such matters. Accordingly,
   Lightfoot actually quotes the discrepancy between XXII 18 f. and IX 29.
   to illustrate and defend the discrepancy between Gal. II 2 and Acts XV
   4.

   Again, the reasoning of XXII 20, 21, is not suitable to the first
   visit. Paul argues that circumstances make him a peculiarly telling
   witness to the Jews of the power of Jesus: and the reply is that Jesus
   will send him far hence to the Nations. Now, the first visit was
   followed, not by an appeal to the Nations, but by many years of quiet
   uneventful work in Cilicia and Antioch, within the circle of the
   synagogue and its influence. But this revelation points to the
   immediate "opening of a door of belief to the Nations"; and that did
   not take place until Paul went to Paphos and South Galatia (XIV 27, pp.
   41, 85).

   To place this revelation on the first visit leads to hopeless
   embarrassment, and to one of those discrepancies which the orthodox
   historians, like Lightfoot, labour to minimise, while the critical
   historians naturally and fairly argue that such discrepancies prove
   Acts to be not the work of Paul's pupil and friend, but a work of later
   origin. On this point I can only refer to what is said on p. 15; on the
   principle there laid down, we cannot connect XXII 17 f. with IX 28 f.

   On the other hand this revelation suits excellently the state of
   matters. which we have just described at the conclusion of the second
   visit. Paul was tempted by the favourable opportunity in Jerusalem; and
   his personal desire always turned strongly towards his Jewish brethren
   (Rom. IX 1-5). He prayed in the temple: he saw Jesus: he pleaded with
   Jesus, representing his fitness for this work: and he was ordered to
   depart at once, "for I will send thee forth far hence to the Nations".
   Thereupon he returned to Antioch; and in a few days or weeks a new
   revelation to the Antiochian officials sent him on his mission to the
   West, and opened the door of belief to the Nations.

   One objection to this view is likely to be made. Many infer from XXII
   18 that the visit was short. But there is no implication as to the
   duration of the visit. The words merely show that Paul was thinking of
   a longer stay, when the vision bade him hasten away forthwith. The
   second visit, according to Lightfoot's supposition, was even shorter
   than the first, but on our view it began when the failure of harvest in
   46 turned scarcity into famine, and it probably lasted until the
   beginning of 47. Our reference of XXII 17 to the second visit is
   corroborated by the reading of the two great uncial MSS. in XII 25,
   "returned to Jerusalem": this seems to be an alteration made
   deliberately by an editor, who, because these passages referred to the
   same visit, tampered with the text of XII 25 to bring it into verbal
   conformity with XXII 17.

   5. THE MISSION OF BARNABAS AND SAUL.

   (XIII 1) NOW THERE WAS AT ANTIOCH, CONNECTED WITH "THE CHURCH," [10] A
   BODY OF PROPHETS AND TEACHERS, BARNABAS, SYMEON (SURNAMED NIGER), AND
   LUCIUS (HE OF CYRENE), WITH MANAËN (FOSTER-BROTHER OF HEROD THE
   TETRARCH) AND SAUL. (2) AS THESE WERE: LEADING A LIFE OF RELIGIOUS
   DUTIES AND FASTS, THE: HOLY SPIRIT SAID, "SEPARATE ME BARNABAS AND SAUL
   FOR THE WORK WHEREUNTO I HAVE CALLED THEM". (3) THEN THEY (i.e., the
   Church) HELD A SPECIAL FAST, AND PRAYED, AND LAID THEIR HANDS UPON
   THEM, AND GAVE THEM LEAVE TO DEPART.

   A new stage in the development of the Antiochian Church is here marked.
   It was no longer a mere "congregation"; it was now "the Church" in
   Antioch; and there was in it a group of prophets and teachers to whom
   the grace of God was given.

   There is indubitably a certain feeling that a new start is made at this
   point; but it is only through blindness to the style of a great
   historian that some commentators take this as the beginning of a new
   document. The subject demanded here a fresh start, for a great step in
   the development of the early Church was about to be narrated, "the
   opening of a door to the Gentiles" (XIV 27). The author emphasised this
   step beyond all others, because he was himself a Gentile; and the
   development of the Church through the extension of Christian influence
   was the guiding idea of his historical work.

   Probably the variation between the connecting particles (kai and te)
   marks a distinction between three prophets, Barnabas, Symeon and
   Lucius, and two teachers, Manaen and Saul. In Acts VI 5, the list of
   seven deacons is given without any such variation; and it seems a fair
   inference that the variation here is intentional. [11] The distinction
   between the qualifications required in prophets and in teachers is
   emphasised by Paul in I Cor. XII 28. As regards Barnabas and Saul their
   difference in gifts and qualifications appears clearly in other places.
   Everywhere Saul is the preacher and teacher, Barnabas is the senior and
   for a time the leader on that account.

   There is a marked distinction between the general rule of life in v. 2,
   and the single special ceremony in v. 3. An appreciable lapse of time
   is implied in 2: after the two envoys returned from Jerusalem, the
   regular course of Church life went on for a time and, so long as
   everything was normal, the historian finds nothing to relate. The
   prophets and teachers had regular duties to which their energies were
   devoted; and they practised in their life a certain regular rule of
   fasting. They were not like the Elders, who were chosen as
   representative members of the congregation; they were marked out by the
   Divine grace as fitted for religious duties in the congregation. The
   "work" in v. 2 is defined in the subsequent narrative (XIII 41, XIV 26,
   XV 3, 38, etc.) as preaching the Gospel in new regions outside of the
   province Syria and Cilicia, in which there already existed Christian
   communities.

   What is the subject in v. 3? It cannot be the five officials just
   mentioned, because they cannot be said to lay their hands on two of
   themselves. Evidently some awkward change of subject takes place; and
   the simplest interpretation is that the Church as a whole held a
   special service for this solemn purpose. Codex Bezæ makes all clear by
   inserting the nominative "all" (pantes); and on our view this
   well-chosen addition gives the interpretation that was placed in the
   second century on a harsh and obscure passage. Similarly in XV 2 it is
   meant that the congregation appointed the delegates to Jerusalem; and
   the reader is expected to supply the nominative, though it has not
   occurred in, the immediately preceding sentence. It seemed to the
   author so obvious that such action was performed by universal consent,
   that he did not feel any need to express the nominative. Such a way of
   thinking was possible only at a very early time. During the second
   century (if not even earlier) the action of officials began to
   supersede that of the whole congregation in such matters; and, when
   even a beginning had been made, it could no longer be assumed as
   self-evident that such actions as XIII 3, XV 2, were performed by the
   congregation; and the writer would necessarily express the nominative.
   The Bezan Reviser belonged to the period when the change had begun and
   the need of expressing the nominative was felt; but he lived before the
   time when official action had regularly superseded that of the
   congregation, for in that case he would have taken the officials in
   this case to be the agents (as many modern commentators understand the
   passage).

   What was the effect of the public ceremony described in v. 3? The high
   authority of Lightfoot answers that it constituted Barnabus and Saul as
   Apostles. He acknowledges that Saul's "conversion may indeed be said in
   some sense to have been his call to the Apostleship. But the actual
   investiture, the completion of his call, took place some years later at
   Antioch (Acts XIII 2). "He considers that Barnabas and Saul were only
   prophets before this, and did not become Apostles until they were
   elevated to that rank by their "consecration to the office" at Antioch
   (Ed. Galat. p. 96).

   Our view, on the contrary, is that Barnabas and Saul were Apostles
   before this. The Apostle was always appointed by God and not by the
   Church. The proof of Apostleship lay in the possession of apostolic
   message and powers, conversion of others and performance of signs. It
   is an historical anachronism to attribute to this period such belief in
   the efficacy of a Church-ceremony. Moreover, in XXII 17, 21, and XXVI
   17, Paul claims to have been an Apostle from his conversion, and
   represents his work in Cilicia and Syria as an Apostolate. In Gal. I he
   declares that his message came direct from God at his conversion.
   Further, there is no sign in XIII 2, 3, that this "consecration" by the
   Church was more efficacious than the original Divine call: the ceremony
   merely blessed Barnabas and Saul for a special work, which was
   definitely completed in the next three years. In XIV 26 the work for
   which they had been committed to the grace of God in XIII 2 is declared
   to be fulfilled; and they returned to their ordinary circle of duties
   in the Church at Antioch.

   The last word in verse 3 should not be "sent them away" (as in the
   Authorised and Revised Versions). The Spirit sent them away (verse 4);
   and the Church released them from their regular duties and bade them
   "God-speed". The Greek verb (apelusan, like the Latin dimittere) is
   used of the superior giving his visitor leave to depart (for a visitor
   in the East is considered to be paying his respects, and does not
   presume to depart without formal permission to go), or of a host
   allowing his guests to depart, or of a commanding officer giving
   soldiers honourable dismissal after their term of service. The correct
   rendering of this term will prove important at a later stage (p. 155).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3] phoboumenoi or sebomenoi ton theon

   [4] oi ek peritome, XI 2, Gal. II 12: "some of the sect of the
   Pharisees that believed," XV 5.

   [5] parekalei, imperfect.

   [6] Eine ungeschichtliche Generalisirung, and again, ist, wie an sich
   unwahrscheinlich, so auch nirgends bezeugt (Jüd. Volk I p. 474.

   [7] Le Bas-Waddington no. 1192, Studia Biblica IV p. 52 f.

   [8] Date of the famine. Orosius VII 6 puts it in the fourth year of
   Claudius, which began January 25, A.D. 44. But Orosius's dates at this
   point are put one year too early owing to a mistake in adapting to
   Claudius's years a series of events arranged in his authority according
   to a different system of chronology; this kind of mistake is known to
   have been frequently made by ancient chroniclers, and is proved in
   Orosius's case by the fact that he assigns to the tenth year of
   Claudius a famine at Rome which Tacitus Ann. II 43 places in A.D. 51 We
   therefore take Orosius as an authority for dating the commencement of
   the famine in 45. Josephus mentions the famine as having occurred while
   Tiberius Alexander was procurator of Judea; and there is general
   agreement that Alexander's administration lasted from 46 to 48: though
   the time when it began was not absolutely certain, July 45 is the
   earliest admissible date, and 46 is far more probable: his predecessor
   Cuspius Fadus was sent by Claudius in 44, and a good deal occurred
   during his office. But Josephus also mentions the famine in connection
   with Queen Helena's arrival in 45. Helena, however, seems to have
   remained a considerable time, and Josephus's words are in perfect
   accord with our view that scarcity began with a bad harvest in 45. In
   the preceding chapter, Lightfoot's view is quoted according to his
   edition of Gal., where he says that Barnabas and Saul had come to
   Jerusalem and returned to Antioch before Herod's death. Since the
   chapter was in type, I notice that in a posthumous essay "printed from
   lecture notes" he dates the famine 45; but that seems hardly consistent
   with his edition, and as he republished his edition without change
   throughout his life, it must represent his mature opinion. Perhaps he
   means that Paul and Barnabas brought the famine-money to Jerusalem a
   year or more before the famine began, which we cannot accept as a
   natural or a useful procedure.

   [9] See Mr. Rendall's admirable paper in Expositor, Nov., 1893.

   [10] Prof. Armitage Robinson, quoted in Church in R. E. p. 52.

   [11] Compare Mr. Page's note on the grouping of the list in I 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV.

  THE MISSIONARY JOURNEY OF BARNABAS AND SAUL

   1 CYPRUS AND SALAMIS.

   (XIII 4) THEY ACCORDINGLY, BEING SENT FORTH BY THE HOLY SPIRIT, CAME
   DOWN TO the harbour SELEUCEIA, AND THENCE SAILED AWAY TO CYPRUS; (5)
   AND WHEN THEY REACHED SALAMIS THEY BEGAN TO PROCLAIM THE WORD OF GOD IN
   THE SYNAGOGUES OF THE JEWS; AND THEY HAD JOHN ALSO AS A SUBORDINATE.
   (6) AND THEY MADE A missionary PROGRESS THROUGH THE WHOLE ISLAND UNTIL
   they reached PAPHOS.

   The harbour is mentioned, according to Luke's common custom (XIV 25,
   XVIII 18, XVI 11). When he has once mentioned the harbour of any city,
   he omits it on a subsequent occasion (cp. XX 6 with XVI 11). The
   failure to name the harbour of Berea is remarkable (XVII 14); doubtless
   there is some reason for it.

   As they were able to make the harbour of Salamis, on the south coast,
   they were not impeded by westerly winds, which commonly blew throughout
   the summer (see p. 298). With such winds, they would have run for the
   Cilician coast, and worked along it westward with the aid of land
   breezes and the current (p. 299), till they could run across to the
   north coast of Cyprus, as Barnabas had to do on his next journey (if
   the Periodoi Barnabæ can be trusted). But they probably started on the
   opening of the sailing season (March 5).

   John Mark is brought before the reader's notice here in a curiously
   incidental way. He came with Barnabas and Saul from Antioch (see XII
   25); why should he not be mentioned at the outset? A superficial view
   might see want of method in this apparently haphazard reference to the
   third traveller. But surely the object is to emphasise the secondary
   character of John Mark, in view of what was to happen in Pamphylia: he
   was not essential to the expedition; he had not been selected by the
   Spirit; he had not been formally delegated by the Church of Antioch; he
   was an extra hand, taken by Barnabas and Saul on their own
   responsibility. This obviated the criticism that the delegation
   consisted of three persons, and that Mark's retirement from Pamphylia
   was fatal to the official and representative character of the rest of
   the mission--a criticism which may probably have been actually used in
   the subsequent rather bitter controversy described in XV. This might
   have been formally and. expressly set forth at an earlier stage; but
   the historian briefly expresses it by saying nothing about John Mark
   until he appears incidentally as a supernumerary and subordinate. The
   silence is singularly expressive, and therefore carefully calculated.

   There must have been a large Jewish colony in Salamis, with more
   synagogues than one. Cypriote Jews are often mentioned in Acts IV 36,
   XI 20, XXI 16); and Barnabas himself was a Cypriote. The practice of
   Saul always had been to go first to the synagogues; and up to the
   present time there is no reason to think that he had directly addressed
   the Gentiles except as hearers in the synagogue.

   His procedure here is exactly as at Damascus, where he proceeded to
   preach in the synagogues immediately after his conversion (IX 20). It
   was right that the first offer should be addressed to the Jews (XIII
   46). Moreover he was always sure of a good opening for his Gentile
   mission among the "God-fearing," who formed part of his audience in
   every synagogue.

   In v. 6 how briefly the work of a considerable period is summed up!
   Four Greek words (dielthontes holen ten neson) contain all that is said
   about a missionary journey throughout the island. We understand from
   this brevity that there was no important fact for the historian's
   purpose. The passage is a typical one: the same formula occurs with
   slight variations in many later parts of the narrative; and in this
   first case its meaning is specially clear, so that it throws its light
   on all the subsequent examples (which is, of course, intended by the
   historian). Doubtless the process which has just been described at
   Salamis is intended to apply everywhere. In each city where there was a
   settlement of Jews, the missionaries preached in the synagogue.

   Further, the Cypriote Jews were not unfavourable to the new teaching.
   The influence and example of Barnabas were naturally effective with his
   fellow-countrymen. Moreover, the Word had already been preached in
   Cyprus not long after Stephen's martyrdom XI 19, and converts had been
   made. There was therefore a small audience ready to listen to the
   travelling preachers in several, perhaps in all, of the Cyprian cities.
   Finally, the doctrine that was preached was probably not such as to
   rouse strong feeling among the Jews; and, so long as the Gentiles were
   not specially appealed to and set on an equality with the Jews, the
   early Pauline teaching is not said to have caused more ill-will than
   the preaching of the older Apostles.

   But we may also probably make some negative inferences. There was no
   specially marked effect; no sign of the Divine guidance or power was
   manifested; and the address was made only through the synagogues and
   nowhere directly to the Gentiles. These are the points on which the
   historian always lays special stress; signs of the Divine power were
   the guarantee of Paul's Divine mission, and the steps by which Paul
   turned more and more decidedly to the Gentiles marked the stages in
   history as Luke conceived it.

   We conclude, then, that the silence observed with regard to the Cyprian
   evangelisation is not due to mere ignorance on the part of the
   historian or to want of authorities, but to deliberate plan. On the
   scale on which his work was planned, and his incidents selected, there
   was nothing more to say.

   The Apostles are said to have made a preaching tour through the whole
   island. In a writer so sparing of words as Luke, the addition of the
   word "whole" is important. We cannot press it so far as to suppose that
   they went through every place in the island. Its force may probably be
   best seen by supposing it were omitted: in that case the Greek
   (dielthontes ten neson achri Paphou) would permit the interpretation
   that after landing at Salamis they went along the direct road to
   Paphos, preaching at convenient places. The word "whole" is probably
   intended to bring out clearly that they made a complete tour of the
   Jewish communities in the island, preaching in each synagogue.

   2. PAPHOS.

   (XIII 6) AND WHEN THEY HAD GONE THROUGH THE WHOLE ISLAND UNTO PAPHOS,
   THEY FOUND A CERTAIN MAN, MAGlAN, PROPHET OF LIES, JEW, BY NAME
   BAR-JESUS, (7) WHO WAS IN THE COMPANY OF THE PROCONSUL, SERGIUS PAULUS,
   A MAN OF UNDERSTANDING. THE PROCONSUL SUMMONED TO HIS PRESENCE BARNABAS
   AND SAUL, AND SOUGHT [12] TO HEAR THE WORD OF GOD. (8) AND THERE STOOD
   FORTH AGAINST THEM THE MAGlAN, ETOIMAS (Son Of the Ready), FOR SO IS
   THIS NAME TRANSLATED, SEEKING TO DIVERT THE PROCONSUL FROM THE FAITH.
   (9) BUT SAUL, OTHERWISE PAUL, FILLED WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT, LOOKED
   FIXEDLY AT HIM, (10) AND SAID, "O FULL OF ALL GUILE AND ALL VILLANY,
   THOU SON OF THE DEVIL, THOU ENEMY OF ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS, WILT THOU NOT
   CEASE TO PERVERT THE RIGHT WAYS OF THE LORD? (11) AND NOW, BEHOLD THE
   HAND OF THE LORD IS UPON THEE, AND THOU SHALT BE BLIND, NOT SEEING THE
   SUN FOR A SEASON." AND IMMEDIATELY THERE FELL ON HIM A MIST AND A
   DARKNESS; AND HE WENT ABOUT SEEKING SOME TO LEAD HIM BY THE HAND. (12)
   THEN THE PROCONSUL, WHEN HE SAW WHAT WAS DONE, BELIEVED, BEING STRUCK
   TO THE HEART AT THE TEACHING OF THE LORD.

   We notice, first, the accuracy of the title proconsul, applied to the
   governor of Cyprus. The remarkable incident that follows is connected
   with a definite individual, who is named and characterised. He was
   Sergius Paulus, a man of ability. [13] Greek inscription of Soloi [14]
   on the north coast of Cyprus is dated "in the proconsulship of Paulus,"
   who probably is the same governor that played a part in the strange and
   interesting scene now to be described.

   The order and style of narrative adopted in this incident is noteworthy
   in itself, and instructive in regard to the author's plan and his
   conception of history. He directs the reader's attention first to the
   prominent figure round whom the incident is centred: "in Paphos they
   found a certain Bar-jesus". Nothing is said about the length of
   residence in Paphos, nor about the conduct of the missionaries in the
   earlier part of their visit. Before anything else is mentioned about
   Paphos, Bar-jesus is named, and then it is explained who he was and how
   the missionaries came in contact with him. The order of narrative does
   not follow the order of time, but is guided by the special interest
   felt by the author, i.e., he seizes first the detail or the personage
   that is most important in his eyes.

   If we attempt, to follow the order of development in time, the incident
   might be thus described. The missionaries came to Paphos. There they
   began preaching in the synagogues as they had done in other cities.
   They soon acquired notoriety and were talked about through the city;
   and the report about these strangers who were teaching a new kind of
   philosophy reached the Roman governor's ears. The governor was a highly
   educated man, interested in science and philosophy; and his attention
   was caught by the report of the two strangers, who were giving public
   teaching in rhetoric and moral philosophy (p. 271).

   Travellers of that class were well known at the time. Those who aimed
   at high rank and fame as teachers of philosophy often travelled through
   the great cities of the Empire, giving public demonstrations of their
   skill: thus they became famous, and were accepted finally in some of
   the great universities as established teachers and Professors of
   Philosophy or Morals.

   The governor, Sergius Paulus, then invited or commanded a Roman
   proconsul's invitation was equivalent to a command--the two travellers
   to his court, and sought to hear a specimen of their skill and a
   demonstration of their philosophy on the subject which, as he had been
   informed, was their favourite topic, the nature of God and His action
   towards human beings. The exposition which they gave seemed to him
   striking and excellent; and the marked effect which it produced on him
   was apparent to all who were in his train (who in Roman language would
   be termed his comites). Among these was a Jew, Etoimas Bar-jesus by
   name, a man skilled in the lore and the uncanny arts and strange powers
   of the Median priests or magi. On v. 6 see p. 115.

   It is often said that the governor was "under the influence of" the
   Magian; implying the view that the mind of Sergius Paulus was dominated
   by Bar-jesus, but that the Roman, deeply impressed by the way in which
   Paul seemed to overpower the Magian, recognised the new master as more
   powerful than the old, and thus passed under the influence of a better
   teacher. This account seems to me not to be consistent with the text,
   and to give a far too unfavourable conception of the governor's
   character; while it certainly conveys rather a vulgar idea of the way
   in which Paul's teaching first affected the Roman world. According to
   the conception of Luke's method as a historian, which guides us in this
   attempt to realise the facts, the words of Acts require a different
   interpretation. The author, who is singularly delicate, concise, and
   appropriate in his use of language, would not have praised Sergius
   Paulus as "a man of understanding," when describing the relation in
   which the Magian stood to him, if he had understood that the Roman was
   "under the influence of" the false prophet. Either we must say that the
   author scatters his words heedlessly on the page, or we must understand
   that these words of praise coming at that precise point exclude any
   idea of weak submission to the strong personality of the Magian.
   Moreover the Greek words express the simple fact that the Magian was
   one of the train of comites who always accompanied a Roman governor.
   Some of these were personal friends who came with him from Rome, others
   were young Romans of rank who thus gained an insight into
   administrative life (which as yet they were too young to enter on),
   others were in official attendance on the governor, and others were
   provincials, men of letters or of scientific knowledge or of tastes and
   habits that rendered them agreeable or useful to the great man.

   There is also no reason to think that the Magian was an inmate of the
   proconsul's house. The words do not imply that; and the facts in no way
   suggest it.

   3. THE MAGIAN AND THE APOSTLE.

   To us the Roman governor is the prominent figure in this scene; and his
   attitude towards the new teaching is what interests us most. But in the
   estimation of Luke, the Magian is the most important character, next to
   Paul; and therefore the reader's attention is directed first upon him.
   His prominence is perhaps due to different estimate of historical
   importance: ancient views on this subject differ from modern. But is it
   not more probable that Luke is justified in his view? It is clear that
   the Magian was here the representative of a System and a religion; and
   that his discomfiture was in itself a wide-reaching triumph. He is
   Commonly said to be a magician, a mere "Jewish impostor"; and he is
   compared to the modern gipsy teller of fortunes. Such comparisons,
   while having a certain element of truth, are misleading, and give a
   false idea of the influence exerted on the Roman world by Oriental
   personages like this Magian. The Magian represented in his single
   personality both the modern fortune-teller and the modern man of
   science; and he had a religious as well as a merely superstitious
   aspect to the outer world.

   No strict line could then be drawn between lawful honourable
   scrutinising of the secret powers of Nature and illicit attempts to pry
   into them for selfish ends, between science and magic, between
   chemistry and alchemy, between astronomy and astrology. The two sides
   of investigation passed by hardly perceptible degrees into one another:
   and the same man might be by times a magician, by times the forerunner
   of Newton and Thomson (Lord Kelvin). It was not possible in the infancy
   of knowledge to know where lay the bounds between the possible and the
   impossible, between the search for the philosopher's stone or the
   elixir of life and the investigation of the properties of argon or the
   laws of biology. It was not possible then: he would be rash who would
   say that it is possible now. A writer may venture on many prophecies
   about the future of science today, for which he would have been
   ridiculed as an impostor or a dreamer twenty years ago; and doubtless
   there are things he must not say now, which will be said soon.

   It is certain that the priests of some Eastern religions possessed very
   considerable knowledge of the powers and processes of nature; and that
   they were able to do things that either were, or seemed to be,
   marvellous. Which of these alternatives was true is a point on which
   individual judgments will vary widely; but ray own experience makes me
   believe that, so far as influence over human or animal nature and life
   was concerned, their powers were wonderful. It is natural that the
   Magian's knowledge and powers should have made him a striking and
   interesting personality; and a person like the proconsul, keenly
   interested in nature and philosophy, would enjoy his society.

   The influence of this Eastern religion--one nature with many
   varieties--was widely spread; and it was inevitable that the new
   religion, which was strongly opposed to its methods of dominating its
   votaries and crushing their personality and individuality, should often
   be brought in collision with its teachers. Bar-jesus represented the
   strongest influence on the human will that existed in the Roman world,
   an influence which must destroy or be destroyed by Christianity, if the
   latter tried to conquer the Empire. Herein lies the interest of this
   strange scene; and we cannot wonder that to Luke, familiar with the
   terrible power of that religion, the Magian seemed the prominent figure
   round whom the action moved.

   At Philippi, and at Ephesus also, collisions took place between the two
   influences, of slavery and of freedom for the human mind; but neither
   was so impressive as this at Paphos.

   It is characteristic of the simple and natural evolution of the
   incidents, that no calculation of these great issues is represented as
   influencing the drama. Human action is swayed for the most part by
   trivial motives; and the Magian here was actuated chiefly by the fear
   of losing his prominent place in the governors train. His position as
   friend and associate (amicus and comes were the technical terms to
   denote his position) of the governor was an honourable one, gratifying
   at once to ambition, to vanity, and to worse passions. In this position
   he could learn a great deal about people and events. In the East it is
   always believed that the governor's friend may influence his judgment;
   and every suppliant, every litigant, and every criminal tries to
   propitiate or to bribe the friend. We cannot tell in what proportion
   the more noble and the baser motives were mixed in the Magian's mind;
   but they all lie on the surface of the situation, and each had
   doubtless some effect on him. He saw in the new teachers mere rivals
   trying to supplant him; and human nature could not accept defeat
   without a struggle.

   Another point of method to note in the narrative is that no reason is
   stated for the Magian's opposition. It is a general rule throughout
   Acts that facts alone are stated, and causes left to the reader to
   gather from the facts: the author sees the causes so clearly that he
   does not think of stating them. In this case he even omits part of the
   sequence of facts: he does not say that the Apostles expounded their
   views, but leaves the reader to understand that the proconsul's desire
   was obeyed; and the words of verses 8, 10 ("seeking to turn aside the
   proconsul from the faith," and "pervert the right ways of the Lord")
   imply that the exposition was made. Then we may be certain that the
   Magian would not so far violate politeness and the respect due to the
   proconsul as to interrupt them, unless he had seen that a marked effect
   was produced on the governor's mind; and he interfered from fear that,
   if he did not put the strangers down or turn them into ridicule, they
   might supplant himself in the governors society.

   This view of the situation lies implicit in the text; and it is put
   explicitly by the Bezan Reviser, who makes Bar-jesus "stand forth in
   opposition to them, seeking to divert the proconsul from the faith,
   because he was listening with much pleasure to them". If the added
   words are a gloss, they are inserted with great skill and judgment. But
   to me they appear to be an addition, inserted to make the narrative
   simpler and easier: the author, as usual, left the reason unstated.

   4. SAUL, OTHERWISE PAUL.

   The name Paul, here applied for the first time by the historian to the
   person whom he has hitherto called Saul, has given rise to much
   discussion and many theories. We shall not begin by theorising as to
   the names of this individual, but by inquiring what was the meaning of
   that very common formula, "Saul, otherwise Paul" in the society of the
   Eastern provinces; and shall then apply the results to this case.

   The custom which was thus expressed seems to have originated in the
   bilingual governments and countries of the later centuries B.C. (or, at
   least, to have become common and familiar then). At that time Greece
   had gone forth to conquer the East; and a varnish of Greek culture was
   spread over many non-Greek races, affecting the richer and the educated
   classes of the natives, but hardly reaching the mass of the people.
   Then it was the fashion for every Syrian, or Cilician, or Cappadocian,
   who prided himself on his Greek education and his knowledge of the
   Greek language, to bear a Greek name; but at the same time he had his
   other name in the native language, by which he was known among his
   countrymen in general. His two names were the alternative, not the
   complement, of each other; and the situation and surroundings of the
   moment, the rôle which he was playing for the time being, determined
   which name he was called by. In a Greek house he played the Greek, and
   bore the Greek name: in a company of natives, he was the native, and
   bore the native name. He did not require both to complete his legal
   designation, as a Roman required both nomen and prænomen. His Greek
   name, taken alone, was a full legal designation in a Greek court.

   This has an obvious bearing on the case of Saul, otherwise "Paul". In
   the earlier part of this book he has been a Jew among Jews; and we have
   seen only his Hebrew name. Nothing has hitherto transpired to show that
   he was anything but "Hebrew sprung from Hebrews". In Cyprus he went
   through the country city by city, synagogue by synagogue: and he was
   the Jew in all. But here he is in different surroundings: he stands in
   the hall of the proconsul, and he answers the questions of the Roman
   official. The interview, doubtless, began, as all interviews between
   strangers in the country still begin, with the round of questions: What
   is your name? (or who are you? ) Whence come you? What is your
   business? The type is seen in the question of the Cyclops to Ulysses
   (Odyssey IX 252): "Strangers, who are ye? Whence sail ye over the wet
   ways? On some trading enterprise, or at adventure do ye rove? "

   To these questions how would Saul answer? After his years of recent
   life as a Jew, filled with the thought of a religion that originated
   among Jews, and was in his conception the perfected form of Jewish
   religion, did he reply: "My name is Saul, and I am a Jew from Tarsus"?
   First, let us see what he himself says as to his method of addressing
   an audience (I Cor. IX 20 f.), "to the Jews I made myself as a Jew that
   I might gain Jews; to them that are under the law as under the law
   (though not myself under the law); to them that are without the law as
   without the law; I am become all things to all men; and I do all for
   the Gospel's sake". We cannot doubt that the man who wrote so to the
   Corinthians replied to the questions of Sergius Paulus, by designating
   himself as a Roman, born at Tarsus, and named Paul. By a marvellous
   stroke of historic brevity, the author sets before us the past and the
   present in the simple words: "Then Saul, otherwise Paul, fixed his eyes
   on him and said"

   The double character, the mixed personality, the Oriental teacher who
   turns out to be a freeborn Roman, would have struck and arrested the
   attention of any governor, any person possessed of insight into
   character, any one who had even an average share of curiosity. But to a
   man with the tastes of Sergius Paulus, the Roman Jew must have been
   doubly interesting; and the orator or the preacher knows how much is
   gained by arousing such an interest at the outset.

   Coming forward in this character and name, Paul was taking a momentous
   step, the importance of which was fully marked in the narrative. In the
   first place, he was taking the leading place and guiding the tone of
   the interview instead of being, as heretofore, the subordinate
   following Barnabas. Hence in the narrative we find that Barnabas
   introduced Saul to the Apostles; Barnabas brought Saul to Antioch;
   Barnabas and Saul carried the Antiochian aims to Jerusalem; Barnabas
   and Saul brought back John Mark with them from Jerusalem; Barnabas was
   first and Saul last in the body of prophets and teachers of the Church
   at Antioch; Barnabas and Saul were selected by the Spirit; and Barnabas
   and Saul were invited to the proconsul's presence. But now Paul took
   this new departure, and Paul and his company sailed away from Paphos to
   Pamphylia; Paul and Barnabas addressed the Gentiles in Antioch; Paul
   and Barnabas disputed with the Judaising party on their return to
   Syrian Antioch; and henceforth the regular order places Paul first.
   There are only two exceptions to this rule, and these serve to bring
   out its true character more clearly.

   (1) In the Council at Jerusalem, and in the letter of the Apostles and
   Elders, XV 12, 25, the order is Barnabas and Paul; but there we are
   among Jews, who follow the order of seniority and Jewish precedence.
   The only surprising thing here is that they use the name Paul, not the
   Hebrew Saul. We can only infer from that that the Greek-speaking Jews
   generally used the name Paul (compare p. 169), and that the historian's
   use of the name Saul in the earlier part of this narrative was
   deliberately chosen to emphasise the contrast between Paul's earlier
   and his later manner.

   (2) In the episode where the two Apostles were worshipped at Lystra,
   Barnabas is named first as Zeus the chief god, and Paul next as Hermes
   the messenger. But the same qualities which mark out Paul to us as the
   leader, marked him out to the populace of Lycaonia as the agent and
   subordinate. The Western mind regards the leader as the active and
   energetic partner; but the Oriental mind considers the leader to be the
   person who sits still and does nothing, while his subordinates speak
   and work for him. Hence in the truly Oriental religions the chief god
   sits apart from the world, communicating with it through his messenger
   and subordinate. The more statuesque figure of Barnabas was therefore
   taken by the Orientals as the chief god, and the active orator, Paul,
   as his messenger, communicating his wishes to men. Incidentally, we may
   notice both the diametrical antithesis of this conception of the Divine
   nature to the Christian conception, and also the absolute negation of
   the Oriental conception in Christ's words to His Disciples, "whosoever
   would become great among you shall be your minister; and whosoever
   would be first among you shall be your servant" (Matt. XX 26).

   How delicate is the art which by simple change in the order of a
   recurring pair of names, and by the slight touch at the critical.
   moment, "Saul, otherwise Paul," suggests and reveals this wide-reaching
   conception in Luke's mind of historical development!

   In the second place, when Paul thus came forward under his new aspect
   and personality, he was inaugurating a new policy. He was appealing
   direct for the first time to the Græco-Roman world as himself a member
   of that world. This is put plainly in XIV 27 as the great innovation
   and the great fact of the journey: as soon as Paul and Barnabas
   returned to Syrian Antioch, they made a report to the assembled Church
   "of all things that God had done with them, and how He had opened a
   door of faith unto the Gentiles". The first Stage in the admission of
   the Gentiles to the Christian Church was taken long before this
   journey. But the full implication of the Apostolate to the Gentiles was
   not even by Paul himself realised for many years. The second stage was
   achieved on this journey, and the historian fixes the psychological
   moment precisely at the point where the Apostles faced the Magian in
   the presence of the proconsul of Cyprus. Amid the conflict of the two
   religions before the Roman governor, Paul stepped forward in his
   character of citizen of the Empire; and his act was followed by that
   transport of power, which attested the grace that was given to the bold
   innovator, and the Divine approval and confirmation of his step. On
   former occasions the grace that was evident in Antioch confirmed the
   high character of the Antiochian Brotherhood in the eyes of Barnabas
   (Acts XI 23, and the grace that was given Paul had justified his
   apostolate in the eyes of James, Peter and John (Gal. II 9).

   Such is the situation in which we stand when we transport ourselves in
   thought to the time and the country where the events took place, and
   take the few brief words of Luke in the sense which they bore to the
   men of his time. But now let us turn from this picture to see what is
   made of the scene by the critic, who sits in his study and writes as if
   the men of this book were artificial figures and not real human beings.
   Weizsäcker, one of the most distinguished of modern German scholars,
   finds in this delicacy of language nothing but a sign of double
   authorship. The late author, he says, used two earlier authorities, one
   of whom employed the name Saul, while the other designated the Apostle
   as Paul, and by a mere conjecture he puts the change at this point.
   Weizsäcker emphasises this view that the point was selected by an
   arbitrary conjecture, and that any other point might have been chosen
   equally well. It might almost seem that, in a statement like this, the
   learned professor is taking his fun off us, and is experimenting to see
   how much the world will accept at the mouth of a deservedly famous
   scholar without rebelling.

   Mr. Lewin states better than almost any other the force of this passage
   when he says: "The dropping of the Jewish, and the adoption of a Roman
   name, was in harmony with the great truth he was promulgating--that
   henceforth the partition between Jew and Gentile was broken down". He
   then asks, "Why is not the name of Paul introduced when he first left
   Antioch to commence his travels?" and after he has in a rather
   hesitating way suggested some quite unsuitable occasions as possible
   for the change, he rightly concludes, "It occurs more naturally
   immediately afterwards when Saul stands forth by himself and becomes
   the principal actor" The marvels described in Acts concern my present
   purpose only in so far as they bear upon the historical effect of the
   narrative. In themselves they do not add to, but detract from its
   verisimilitude as history. They are difficulties; but my hope is to
   show first that the narrative apart from them is stamped as authentic,
   second that they are an integral part of it. To study and explain them
   does not belong to me. Twenty years ago I found it easy to dispose of
   them; but now-a-days probably not even the youngest among us finds
   himself able to maintain that we have mastered the secrets of nature,
   and determined the limits which divide the unknown from the impossible.
   That Paul believed himself to be the recipient of direct revelations
   from God, to be guided and controlled in his plans by direct
   interposition of the Holy Spirit, to be enabled by the Divine power to
   move the forces of nature in a way that ordinary men cannot, is
   involved in this narrative. You must make up your own minds to accept
   or to reject it, but you cannot cut out the marvellous from the rest,
   nor can you believe that either Paul or this writer was a mere victim
   of hallucinations. To the men of that age only what was guaranteed by
   marvellous accompaniments was true; to us unusual accompaniments tend
   to disprove truth. The contrast between the ages is himmelweit.

   The marvellous is indissolubly interwoven--for good or for bad--with
   this narrative, and cannot be eliminated. Do the marvellous adjuncts
   discredit the rest of the narrative, or does the vividness and accuracy
   of the narrative require us to take the marvels with the rest and try
   to understand them? Every one must answer the question for himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [12] In classical Greek the meaning would be "put questions to them";
   and perhaps that is the sense here.

   [13] xunetos (in Attic) "of practical ability," sophos "cultivated".

   [14] Found and made known by General Cesnola: but more accurately and
   completely published in Mr. D. G Hogarth's Devia Cypria, p. 114.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V.

  FOUNDATION OF THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA [15]

   1. PAMPHYLIA.

   (XIII 13) AND PAUL AND HIS COMPANY SET SAIL FROM PAPHOS AND CAME TO
   PERGA IN the province PAMPHILIA. AND JOHN DEPARTED FROM THEM, AND
   RETURNED TO JERUSALEM; (14) BUT THEY WENT ACROSS FROM PERGA AND ARRIVED
   AT PISIDIAN ANTIOCH.

   The phrase "Perga of Pamphylia" is not intended to distinguish this
   Perga from others (cp. XXI 39): there was no other city of the same
   name. Nor is it a mere piece of geographical information: this
   historian has no desire to teach the reader geography. The sense is
   "they proceeded to Pamphylia, to the special point Perga"; and the
   intention is to define their next sphere of work as being Pamphylia.
   This sense would have naturally been understood by every one, were it
   not that no missionary work was actually done in Pamphylia, for the
   next fact mentioned is that John left the party, and the others went on
   to Pisidian Antioch; and the conclusion has sometimes been drawn
   hastily that Pamphylia had never been contemplated as a mission-field,
   and was merely traversed because it lay between Cyprus and Antioch. But
   the plain force of the words must be accepted here, for it lies in the
   situation that Pamphylia was the natural continuation of the work that
   had been going on, first in Syria and Cilicia for many years, and next
   in Cyprus. They went to Pamphylia to preach there, and, as they did not
   actually preach there, something must have occurred to make them change
   their plan. Further, the reason for this change of plan must have been
   merely a temporary one, for they preached in Pamphylia on their return
   journey.

   We are justified in connecting with this change of plan the one fact
   recorded about the missionary party in Pamphylia: John left them in
   circumstances that made a deep and painful impression on Paul, and
   remained rankling in his mind for years (XV 38). The historian places
   together in a marked way the departure of John and the onward journey
   of the others without preaching in Pamphylia. Now, as we have seen, it
   does not lie in this historian's manner to state reasons; he rarely
   says that one event was the cause of another, but merely states the
   facts side by side, and leaves the reader to gather for himself the
   causal connection between them.

   Other reasons, which need not be repeated here, point to the same
   conclusion, that a change of plan was the reason why John abandoned the
   expedition. He conceived that the new "proposal was a departure from
   the scheme" with which they had been charged, "carrying their work into
   a region different in character and not contemplated by the Church".

   Further, we observe that the country between Perga and Pisidian Antioch
   is not mentioned; the journey is not even summed up briefly as the
   Cyprian journey between Salamis and Paphos was described (XIII 6): it
   is simply said that "they went across (the intervening mountain lands
   of Taurus) to Antioch," as in XVIII 27 Apollos "conceived the intention
   to go across (the intervening Ægean Sea) to Achaia". On our hypothesis
   that the narrative is singularly exact in expression, and that the
   slightest differences are significant, we gather that the journey to
   Antioch was a mere traversing of the country without preaching, with
   the view of reaching Antioch. On the other hand, it is stated that the
   return journey some years later from Antioch to Perga was a preaching
   journey, though no marked effects are recorded on it.

   Again, it is a rule in this historian's clear and practical style, that
   when Paul is entering (or intending, even though unsuccessfully, to
   enter) a new field of missionary enterprise, the field is defined (as
   in v. 4); and the definition usually takes the form of a Roman
   provincial district. This will become apparent as the narrative
   proceeds, and the inferences that can be drawn from the form of
   definition or absence of definition in each case will illustrate and
   give precision to the rule. It is, I believe, a fair inference from the
   want of any indication of a wider sphere that when the travellers went
   to Pisidian Antioch, they had not in mind a wider field of work than
   the city: they went to Pisidian Antioch and not to the province
   Galatia, in which it was included.

   The name is rightly given as Pisidian Antioch in the great MSS.; the
   form "Antioch of Pisidia" is a corruption. Besides other reasons,
   Antioch was not considered by Luke to be in Pisidia (p. 124).

   The facts, then, which can be gathered from the narrative of Acts are
   these. Paul and his companions came to Perga with the view of
   evangelising the next country on their route, a country similar in
   character to and closely. connected in commerce and racial type with
   Cyprus and Syria and Cilicia. For some reason the plan was altered, and
   they passed rapidly over the Pamphylian lowlands and the Pisidian
   mountain-lands to Antioch, postponing the evangelisation of these
   districts till a later stage of their journey. They went to Antioch for
   some reason which concerned only that city, and did not contemplate as
   their object the evangelisation of the province to which it belonged.
   John, however, refused to participate in the changed programme,
   presumably because he disapproved of it. His refusal seems to have been
   felt as a personal slight by Paul, which suggests that the change of
   plan was in some way caused by Paul. What then was the reason? Is any
   clue to it given in any other part of Acts or in the words of Paul
   himself?

   In passing from Perga to Pisidian Antioch, the travellers passed from
   the Roman province Pamphylia to the Roman province Galatia, and the
   rest of their journey lay in Galatia until they returned to Perga. Now,
   we possess a letter written by Paul to the Churches of Galatia, in
   which he says: "Ye know that it was by reason of physical infirmity
   that I preached the Gospel unto you on the first of my two visits; and
   the facts of my bodily constitution which were trying to you were not
   despised nor rejected by you, but ye received me as a messenger of
   God". We learn, then, from Paul himself that an illness (we may
   confidently say a serious illness) was the occasion of his having
   originally preached to the churches of Galatia. The words do not
   necessarily imply that the illness began in Galatia; they are quite
   consistent with the interpretation that the illness was the reason why
   he came to be in Galatia and had the opportunity of preaching there;
   but they imply that the physical infirmity lasted for some considerable
   time, and was apparent to strangers, while he was in Galatia.

   Here we have a reason, stated by Paul himself, which fully explains all
   the curious phenomena of the text of Acts. Paul had a serious illness
   in Pamphylia, and on that account he left Perga and went to Antioch. It
   is unnecessary to repeat the argument that this is in perfect agreement
   with the known facts. Any constitutional weakness was liable to be
   brought out by "the sudden plunge into the enervating atmosphere of
   Pamphylia" after the fatigue and hardship of a journey on foot through
   Cyprus, accompanied by the constant excitement of missionary work,
   culminating in the intense nervous strain of the supreme effort at
   Paphos. The natural and common treatment for such an illness is to go
   to the higher ground of the interior; and the situation of Antioch
   (about 3600 ft. above the sea, sheltered by mountains on the north and
   east, and overlooking a wide plain to the south and south-west), as
   well as its Jewish population, and commercial connection with the
   Pamphylian coast-cities, made it a very suitable place for Paul's
   purpose.

   But why then did the historian not state this simple fact? It lies out
   of his purpose and method to notice such personal details. He states in
   the briefest possible form the essential facts of the evangelisation of
   the world; and everything else he passes over as of ephemeral nature.
   We are dealing with a first century, and not a nineteenth century
   historian,--one who had not the eager desire to understand causes and
   reasons which characterises the present day, one who wrote for a public
   that was quite satisfied with a statement of facts without a study of
   causes. There is too much tendency to demand from the first century
   writers an answer to all the questions we should like to put.

   Moreover, Luke passes very lightly over the sufferings and the dangers
   that Paul encountered; many he omits entirely, others he mentions
   without emphasising the serious nature of the case (p. 279 f.).

   It is plain that Paul at the moment felt deeply wounded. The journey
   which he felt to be absolutely necessary in the interests of future
   work was treated by Mark as an abandonment of the work; and his
   sensitive nature would consider Mark's arguments, plausible as they
   were in some respects, as equivalent to a declaration of want of
   confidence. But that feeling, though it lasted for some years, was not
   of the permanent nature which would put it on the same plane as the
   facts recorded by Luke. Who can think that Paul would have desired
   permanent record of his illness and Mark's desertion? And his desire on
   a matter personal to himself would be Luke's law.

   2.THE "THORN IN THE FLESH".

   The character of the Pamphylian country, not merely in its modern
   half-cultivated condition, but at all times, must have been enervating
   and calculated to bring out any latent weakness of constitution. Now it
   is a probable and generally accepted view that the "physical weakness,"
   which was the occasion why Paul preached to the Galatians, was the same
   malady which tormented him at frequent intervals. I have suggested that
   this malady was a species of chronic malaria fever; and, in view of
   criticisms, it is necessary to dwell on this point; for I have incurred
   the blame of exaggerating an ephemeral attack. The question is put
   whether such an illness "could reasonably have called forth their
   contempt and loathing. [16]

   A physical weakness, which recurs regularly in some situation that one
   is regularly required by duty to face, produces strong and peculiar
   effect on our human nature. An attentive student of mankind has caught
   this trait and described it clearly in one of the characters whom his
   genius has created. I quote from Charles Reade's description of a
   clergyman engaged in warfare against the barbarity of prison
   discipline, upon whom every scene of cruelty which he had often to
   witness produced a distressing physical effect, sickness and trembling.
   "His high-tuned nature gave way. He locked the door that no one might
   see his weakness; and, then, succumbing to nature, he fell first into a
   sickness and then into a trembling, and more than once hysterical tears
   gushed from his eyes in the temporary prostration of his spirit and his
   powers. Such are the great. Men know their feats, but not their
   struggles. The feeling of shame at this weakness is several times
   described in the course of the narrative (It is Never too Late to
   Mend); and, when at last nature, on the verge of a more serious
   physical prostration, ceased to relieve itself in this painful way, "he
   thanked Heaven for curing him of that contemptible infirmity, so he
   called it". Yet that weakness did not prevent the sufferer from facing
   his duty, but only came on as a consequence; and it could be hidden
   within the privacy of his chamber. Let the reader conceive the distress
   and shame of the sufferer, if the weakness had prostrated him before
   his duty was finished, and laid him helpless before them all when he
   required his whole strength. Surely he would have "besought the Lord
   that it might depart from" him, and regarded it as "a messenger of
   Satan sent to buffet him" (II Cor. XII 7, 8).

   Now, in some constitutions malaria fever tends to recur in very
   distressing and prostrating paroxysms, whenever one's energies are
   taxed for a great effort. Such an attack is for the time absolutely
   incapacitating: the sufferer can only lie and feel himself a shaking
   and helpless weakling, when he ought to be at work. He feels a contempt
   and loathing for self, and believes that others feel equal contempt and
   loathing.

   Charles Reade's hero could at least retire to his room, and lock the
   door, and conceal his weakness from others; but, in the publicity of
   Oriental life, Paul could have no privacy. In every paroxysm, and they
   might recur daily, he would lie exposed to the pity or the contempt of
   strangers. If he were first seen in a Galatian village, or house, lying
   in the mud on the shady side of a wall for two hours shaking like an
   aspen leaf, the gratitude that he expresses to the Galatians, because
   they "did not despise nor reject his infirmity," was natural and
   deserved.

   Fresh light is thrown on this subject by an observation of Mr. Hogarth,
   my companion in many journeys. In publishing a series of inscriptions
   recording examples of punishment inflicted by the God on those who had
   approached the sanctuary in impurity, he suggests that malarial fever
   was often the penalty sent by the God. The paroxysms, recurring
   suddenly with overpowering strength, and then passing off, seemed to be
   due to the direct visitation of God. This gives a striking effect to
   Paul's words in Gal. IV 14, "you did not despise nor reject my physical
   infirmity, but received me as an angel of God": though the Galatians
   might have turned him away from their door as a person accursed and
   afflicted by God, they received him as God's messenger. The obvious
   implication of this passage has led many to the view that Paul's malady
   was epilepsy, which was also attributed to the direct visitation of
   God.

   A strong corroboration is found in the phrase: "a stake in the flesh,"
   which Paul uses about his malady (II Cor. XII 7)--That is the peculiar
   headache which accompanies the paroxysms: within my experience several
   persons, innocent of Pauline theorising, have described it as "like a
   red-hot bar thrust through the forehead". As soon as fever connected
   itself with Paul in my mind, the "stake in the flesh" impressed me as a
   strikingly illustrative metaphor; and the oldest tradition on the
   subject, quoted by Tertullian and others, explains the" stake in the
   flesh "as headache.

   The malady was a "messenger of Satan". Satan seems to represent in
   Pauline language any overpowering obstacle to his work, an obstacle
   which it was impossible to struggle against: so Satan prevented him
   from returning to Thessalonica, in the form of an ingenious obstacle,
   which made his return impossible for the time (p. 230). The words
   "messenger sent to buffet me," imply that it came frequently and
   unexpectedly, striking him down with the power of the Enemy.

   The idea that the malady was an affection of the eyes, resulting from
   blinding at his conversion, seems inadequate in itself, unsuitable to
   his own words, and contradicted by the evidence as to the power of his
   eyes (p. 38).

   Paul describes the malady as sent to prevent him from "being exalted
   overmuch by reason of the exceeding greatness of the revelations" which
   had been granted to him; and he clearly implies that it came later than
   the great revelation, when "he was caught up even to the third heaven"
   about 43 A.D. (p. 60). The malady certainly did not begin long before
   this journey; and the attack in Pamphylia may perhaps have been the
   first

   3. THE SYNAGOGUE IN PISIDIAN ANTIOCH.

   (XIII 13) JOHN DEPARTED FROM THEM AND RETURNED TO JERUSALEM; (14) BUT
   THEY WENT ACROSS FROM PERGA AND ARRIVED AT PISIDIAN ANTIOCH. AND THEY
   WENT INTO THE SYNAGOGUE ON THE SABBATH DAY, AND SAT DOWN; (15) AND
   AFTER THE READING OF THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS, THE ARCHISYNAGOGOI SENT
   TO THEM SAYING, "GENTLEMEN, BRETHREN, IF THERE IS IN YOU A WORD OF
   ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE PEOPLE, SAY ON". (16) AND PAUL STOOD UP AND MADE A
   GESTURE WITH HIS HAND AND SPOKE . . . (42) AND AS THEY WENT OUT, THEY
   BESOUGHT THAT THESE WORDS MIGHT BE SPOKEN TO THEM THE NEXT SABBATH.
   (43) NOW, WHEN THE SYNAGOGUE BROKE UP, MANY OF THE JEWS AND OF THE
   GOD-FEARING PROSELYTES FOLLOWED PAUL AND BARNABAS: WHO, SPEAKING TO
   THEM, URGED THEM TO CONTINUE IN THE GRACE OF GOD. (44) AND THE NEXT
   SABBATH ALMOST THE WHOLE CITY WAS GATHERED TOGETHER TO HEAR THE WORD OF
   GOD. (45) BUT WHEN THE JEWS SAW THE MULTITUDES, THEY WERE FILLED WITH
   JEALOUSY, AND CONTRADICTED THE THINGS WHICH WERE SPOKEN BY PAUL, AND
   BLASPHEMED. (46) AND PAUL AND BARNABAS SPAKE OUT BOLDLY AND SAID, "IT
   WAS NECESSARY THAT THE WORD OF GOD SHOULD FIRST BE SPOKEN TO YOU.
   SEEING YE THRUST IT FROM YOU, AND JUDGE YOURSELVES UNWORTHY OF ETERNAL
   LIFE, LO, WE TURN TO THE GENTILES." . . . (48) AND AS THE GENTILES
   HEARD THIS, THEY WERE GLAD AND GLORIFIED THE WORD OF GOD: AND AS MANY
   AS WERE ORDAINED TO ETERNAL LIFE BELIEVED. (49) AND THE WORD OF THE
   LORD WAS SPREAD ABROAD THROUGHOUT ALL THE REGION. (50) BUT THE JEWS
   URGED ON THE DEVOUT WOMEN OF HONOURABLE ESTATE, AND THE CHIEF MEN OF
   THE CITY, AND STIRRED UP A PERSECUTION AGAINST PAUL AND BARNABAS, AND
   CAST THEM OUT OF THEIR BORDERS. (51) BUT THEY SHOOK OFF THE DUST OF
   THEIR FEET AGAINST THEM, AND CAME UNTO ICONIUM. (52) AND THE DISCIPLES
   WERE FILLED WITH JOY AND WITH THE HOLY GHOST.

   The route between Perga and Pisidian Antioch, with its perils of
   rivers, perils of robbers, and the later legend connected with the
   journey across the Pisidian mountains by the city which still bears the
   Apostle's name, is described elsewhere, and need not here detain us.

   The usual punctuation of vv. 13, 14, seems to arise from the idea that
   Paul's sermon was delivered on the first Sabbath after he reached
   Antioch. So, Conybeare and Howson say, "a congregation came together at
   Antioch on the Sabbath which immediately succeeded the arrival of Paul
   and Barnabas". It seems, however, not possible that such powerful
   effect as is described in v. 44 should have been produced on the whole
   city within the first ten days after they arrived in Antioch. Moreover,
   when Paul's teaching had become more definite and pronounced, he
   preached three successive Sabbaths to the Jews at Thessalonica (p.
   228), and it seems implied that the rupture took place there unusually
   soon; hence, at this time, when he had been preaching for years in the
   Jewish synagogues of Cilicia, Syria and Cyprus, it is improbable that
   the quarrel with the Jews of Antioch took place on the second Sabbath.

   But, when the passage is properly punctuated, there remains nothing to
   show that Paul's speech was delivered on his first Sabbath in Antioch.
   Nothing is said as to the first days of the Apostles' stay in the city.
   We are to understand, according to the rule already observed (p. 72
   f.), that the usual method was pursued, and that some time passed
   before any critical event took place. As at Paphos, the fame of the new
   teachers gradually spread through the city. The historian gives an
   address to the synagogue with an outline of the teaching which produced
   this result; the address delivered on a critical Sabbath, after feeling
   had already been moved for some time, may well have remained in the
   memory or in the manuscript diary of some of the interested hearers,
   and thus been preserved. We make it part of our hypothesis that Luke
   took his task as a historian seriously, and obtained original records
   where he could.

   Paul's address to the assembled Jews and proselytes was doubtless
   suggested by the passages, one from the Law, one from the Prophets,
   which were read before he was called to speak. It has been conjectured
   that these passages were Deut. I and Isaiah I, which in the Septuagint
   Version contain two marked words employed by Paul: the Scriptures were
   probably read in Greek in this synagogue of Grecised Jews (see pp. 84,
   169). Deut. I naturally suggests the historical retrospect with which
   Paul begins; and the promise of remission of sins rises naturally out
   of Isaiah I 18. Dean Farrar mentions that "in the present list of
   Jewish lessons, Deut. I-III 22 and Isaiah I 1-22 stand forty-fourth in
   order". That list is of decidedly later origin; but probably it was
   often determined by older custom and traditional ideas of suitable
   accompaniment.

   The climax of the address passed from the historical survey (with its
   assurance of unfailing Divine guidance for the Chosen People) to the
   sending of Jesus, who had been slain by the rulers of Jerusalem
   ("because they knew Him not, nor the voices of the prophets which are
   read every Sabbath," v. 27), but whom God had raised from the dead.
   Then follow the promise and the peroration:--

   (XIII 38) BE IT KNOWN UNTO YOU THEREFORE, BRETHREN, THAT THROUGH THIS
   MAN IS PROCLAIMED UNTO YOU REMISSION OF SINS; (39) AND BY HIM EVERY ONE
   THAT BELIEVETH IS JUSTIFIED FROM ALL THINGS, FROM WHICH YE COULD NOT BE
   JUSTIFIED BY THE LAW OF MOSES. (40) BEWARE, THEREFORE, LEST THAT COME
   UPON YOU, WHICH IS SPOKEN IN THE PROPHETS; "BEHOLD, YE DESPISERS, AND
   WONDER, AND PERISH; FOR I WORK A WONDER IN YOUR DAYS".

   This outspoken declaration that the Judaic system was superseded by a
   higher message from God is not said to have hurt the feelings of the
   Jews who were present. Paul was invited to continue his discourse on
   the following Sabbath; many of the audience, both Jews and proselytes,
   followed the Apostles from the synagogue; and both Paul and Barnabas
   addressed them further, and emphasised the effect of the previous
   address.

   There must have been something in the situation or in the supplementary
   explanations given by Paul and Barnabas, which made his words specially
   applicable to the Gentiles; and a vast crowd of the citizens gathered
   to hear Paul on the following week. Paul's address on this occasion is
   not given. It was in all probability addressed pointedly to the
   Antiochians, for violent opposition and contradiction and jealousy were
   roused among the Jews. We may fairly infer that the open door of belief
   for the whole world irrespective of race was made a prominent topic;
   for the passion which animated the Jewish opposition is said to have
   been jealousy. The climax of a violent scene was the bold declaration
   of Paul and Barnabas that they "turned to the Gentiles, since the Jews
   rejected the Gospel".

   In this scene the same fact that was observed at Paphos came out
   prominently. The eager interest and the invitation of the general
   population stimulated Paul; and his ideas developed rapidly. The first
   thoroughly Gentile congregation separate from the synagogue was
   established at Pisidian Antioch. Where he saw no promise of success, he
   never persisted; but where "a door was opened unto him," he used the
   opportunity (I Cor. XVI 9, II Cor. II 12). The influence attributed to
   the women at Antioch, v. 50, is in perfect accord with the manners of
   the country. In Athens or in an Ionian city, it would have been
   impossible (p. 252).

   4. THE CHURCH AT PISIDIAN ANTIOCH.

   The deep impression that had already been produced on the general
   population of Antioch was intensified when the preaching of Paul and
   Barnabas began to be addressed to them directly and exclusively. The
   effect was now extended to the whole Region. This term does not
   indicate the lands immediately around the fortifications of Antioch,
   and belonging to that city. The free population of those lands were
   citizens of Antioch; and the term "city," according to the ancient
   idea, included the entire lands that belonged to it, and not the mere
   space covered by continuous houses and a fortified wail. "A city was
   not walls, but men;" and the saying had a wider and more practical
   meaning to the ancients than is generally taken from it in modern
   times. The phrase that is here used, "the whole Region," indicates some
   distinct and recognised circle of territories.

   Here we have a fact of administration and government assumed in quiet
   undesigned fashion: Antioch was the centre of a Region. This is the
   kind of allusion which affords to students of ancient literature a test
   of accuracy, and often a presumption of date. I think that, if we put
   this assumption to the test, we shall find (1) that it is right, (2)
   that it adds a new fact, probable in itself but not elsewhere formally
   stated, about the Roman administration of Galatia, (3) that it explains
   and throws new light on several passages in ancient authors and
   inscriptions. Without discussing the subject too elaborately, we may
   point out the essentials.

   My friend Prof. Sterrett, of Amherst, Massachusetts, has discovered and
   published an inscription of Antioch, which speaks of a "regionary
   centurion" (hekatontarchen rhegeonarion), evidently a military official
   charged with certain duties (probably in the maintenance of peace and
   order) within a certain Regio of which Antioch was the centre. [17]

   Thus we have epigraphic authority to prove that Antioch under the Roman
   administration was the centre of a Region. Further, we can determine
   the extent and the name of that Region, remembering always that in a
   province like Galatia, where evidence is lamentably scanty, we must
   often be content with reasonable probability, and rarely find such an
   inscription as Prof. Sterrett's to put us on a plane of demonstrated
   certainty.

   It is natural in the administration of so large a province as Galatia,
   and there are some recorded proofs, that a certain number of distinct
   Regiones (or chorai) existed in Southern Galatia. To quote the exact
   names recorded, we have Phrygia or Phrugia chora, Isauria or Isaurike
   (chora), Pisidia, Lycaonia or Galatike chora (with tes Lukanoias
   understood, denoting the Roman part of Lycaonia in contrast with
   Lycaonia Antiochiana or Agtiochaane chora the part of Lycaonia ruled by
   King Antiochus). There can be no doubt that Pisidian Antioch (strictly
   "a Phrygian city towards Pisidia") was the centre of the Region called
   Phrygia in inscriptions enumerating the parts of the province, and "the
   Phrygian Region of (the province) Galatia" in Acts XVI 6, or "the
   Phrygian Region" XVIII 23. This central importance of Antioch was due
   to its position as a Roman Colony, which made it the military and
   administrative centre of the country.

   Thus, without any formal statement, and without any technical term, but
   in the course of a bare, simple and brief account of the effects of
   Paul's preaching, we find ourselves unexpectedly (just as Paul and
   Barnabas found themselves unintentionally) amid a Roman provincial
   district, which is moved from the centre to the extremities by the new
   preaching. It is remarkable how the expression of Luke embodies the
   very soul of history (p. 200).

   A certain lapse of time, then, is implied in the brief words of v. 49.
   The process whereby the whole region was influenced by the Word must
   have been a gradual one. The similar expression used in XIX 10 may
   serve as a standard of comparison: there, during a period of two years
   in Ephesus, "all they which dwelt in Asia heard the Word". The sphere
   of influence is immensely wider in that case; but the process is the
   same. Persons from the other cities came to Antioch as administrative
   centre, the great garrison city, which was often visited by the Roman
   governor and was the residence of some subordinate officials: they came
   for law-suits, for trade, for great festivals of the Roman unity (such
   as that described in the Acta of Paul and Thekla). [18] In Antioch they
   heard of the new doctrine; some came under its influence; the knowledge
   of it was thus borne abroad over the whole territory; probably small
   knots of Christians were formed in other towns.

   How long a period of time is covered by v. 49 we cannot tell with
   certainty; but it must be plain to every one that the estimate of the
   whole residence at Antioch as two to six months, is, as is elsewhere
   said, a minimum. It may be observed that in the Antiochian narrative a
   period of some weeks is passed over in total silence, then thirty-three
   verses are devoted to the epoch-making events of two successive
   Sabbaths, and then another considerable period is summed up in v. 49.

   The action by which Paul and Barnabas were expelled from Antioch has
   been fully described elsewhere. The expulsion was inflicted by the
   magistrates of the city, and was justified to their minds in the
   interests of peace and order. It was not inflicted by officials of the
   province, and hence the effect is expressly restricted by the historian
   to Antiochian territory. Slight as the details are, they suit the
   circumstances of the time perfectly. [19]

   In the additions of this kind made to Codex Bezæ we have the beginnings
   of a Pauline myth. There is nothing in which popular fancy among the
   early Christians showed itself so creative as the tortures of its
   heroes. The earliest Acta of martyrs contain only a moderate amount of
   torture, such in kind as was inseparable from Roman courts of justice;
   as time passed, these tortures seemed insufficient, and the old Acta
   were touched up to suit what the age believed must have taken place.
   Where we possess accounts of a martyrdom of different dates, the older
   are less filled with sufferings than the later. A similar process of
   accretion to Acts was actually beginning, but was checked by the
   veneration that began to regard its text as sacred.

   Luke passes very lightly over Paul's sufferings: from II Tim. III 11,
   we see that he must have endured much. He was three times beaten with
   the rods of lictors before A.D. 56 (II Cor. XI 25). Now, since the
   Roman governors whom he met were favourable to him, these beatings must
   have taken place in "colonies," whose magistrates were attended by
   lictors. It is probable that the persecution which is mentioned in
   Antioch, and hinted. at in Lystra, included beating by lictors. It is
   noteworthy that the magistrates of these two cities are not expressly
   mentioned, and therefore there was no opportunity for describing their
   action. The third beating by lictors was in Philippi, also a colony.
   Similarly it can hardly be doubted that some of the five occasions on
   which Paul received stripes from the Jews were in the Galatian cities,
   where some Jews were so active against him.

   5. ICONIUM.

   (XIV 1) AND IT CAME TO PASS IN ICONIUM AFTER THE SAME FASHION as in
   Antioch THAT THEY ENTERED INTO THE SYNAGOGUE OF THE JEWS AND SO SPAKE
   THAT A GREAT MULTITUDE, BOTH OF JEWS AND OF GREEKS, BELIEVED. (2) BUT
   THE DISAFFECTED AMONG THE JEWS STIRRED UP AND EXASPERATED THE MINDS OF
   THE GENTILES AGAINST THE BRETHREN. (4) AND THE POPULACE WAS DIVIDED;
   AND PART HELD WITH THE JEWS AND PART WITH THE APOSTLES. (5) AND WHEN
   THERE WAS MADE AN ONSET BOTH OF THE GENTILES AND OF THE JEWS WITH THEIR
   RULERS, TO ENTREAT THEM SHAMEFULLY, AND TO STONE THEM, (6) THEY BECAME
   AWARE OF IT, AND FLED INTO LYCAONIA.

   According to the reading of the MSS., the narrative of these incidents
   is obscure; and it is hard to believe that the text is correct. In v. 1
   the great success of the preaching is related, while in v. 2 the
   disaffected Jews rouse bitter feeling against the Apostles (the aorists
   implying that the efforts were successful). Then in v. 3 we are
   astonished to read, as the sequel of the Jewish action, that the
   Apostles remained a long time preaching boldly and with marked success:
   and finally, in v. 4, the consequences of the Jewish action are set
   forth. It is therefore not surprising that the critics who look on Acts
   as a patchwork have cut up this passage. It must be conceded that
   appearances in this case are in their favour, and that the correctness
   and originality of the narrative can hardly be defended without the
   supposition that some corruption has crept into it; but the great
   diversity of text in the various MSS. and Versions is, on ordinary
   critical principles, a sign that some corruption did take place at a
   very early date.

   The close relation of vv. 2 and 4 is patent; and Spitta's hypothesis of
   a primitive document containing vv. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, gives a clear and
   excellent narrative. Only, in place of his improbable theory that v. 3
   is a scrap from an independent and complete narrative, I should regard
   it as an early gloss, similar to the many which have crept into the
   Bezan Text. The emphasis laid on the marvel at Lystra, which perhaps
   implies that it was the first sign of special Divine favour in the
   Galatian work (p. 115), may corroborate this view to some extent.
   Marvels and tortures are the two elements which, as time goes on, are
   added to the story of every saint and martyr; the Bezan Text of this
   passage shows a further addition of the same type (p. 113), and is
   distinguished by numerous additions telling of the Divine intervention
   in Paul's work. All such additions, probably, grew in the popular
   belief, and then became attached as true facts to the original text.

   The Bezan Text of 2, 3, is a good example of its character as a
   modernised and explanatory edition of an already archaic and obscure
   text. The discrepancy between v. 2 and v. 3 called for some remedy,
   which was found in the supposition that there were two tumults in
   Iconium: on this supposition v. 2 was interpreted of the first tumult,
   and a conclusion, "and the Lord soon gave peace," was tacked on to it.
   The narrative then proceeds, after the renewed preaching of v. 3, to
   the second tumult of vv. 4, 5 (p. 113). The double tumult lent itself
   well to the growing Pauline myth, which sought to find occasion for the
   sufferings and persecutions of II Cor. XI.

   But, if there were two stages in the Iconian narrative in its original
   uncorrupted form, we might reasonably argue from the words "in the same
   way (as at Antioch)," that the two stages were (1) successful preaching
   in the synagogue, brought to a conclusion by the jealousy and
   machinations of the Jews; (2) Paul and Barnabas turned to the Gentile
   population exclusively and were remarkably successful among them. But
   conjectural alteration of the text would be required to elicit that
   meaning; and we cannot spend more time here on this passage.

   It is to be noted that no effect on the Region around Iconiurm is
   mentioned. According to our hypothesis we must recognise the difference
   from the narrative at Antioch, where the wide-spread effect is
   emphasised so strongly. The difference is natural, and the reason is
   clear, when we consider the difference between the two cities: Antioch
   was the governing centre of a wide Region which looked to it for
   administration, whereas Iconium was a comparatively insignificant town
   in the Region round Antioch.

   Again, when Paul and Barnabas went from Antioch to Iconium, they were
   not going to a new district, but to an outlying city of the same
   district; hence there is no definition of their proposed sphere of
   duty. They were expelled from Antioch, and they came to Iconium. The
   case was very different when they found it expedient to leave Iconium.
   They then had to cross the frontier to a new Region of the same
   province, which began a few miles south and east from Iconium. The
   passage to a new Region and a new sphere of work is clearly marked in
   the text.

   6. THE CITIES OF LYCAONIA.

   (XIV 6) Paul and Barnabas FLED UNTO THE CITIES OF LYCAONIA, LYSTRA AND
   DERBE, AND THE SURROUNDING REGION; (7) AND THERE THEY WERE ENGAGED IN
   PREACHING THE GOSPEL.

   The expression used in XIV 6 is remarkable (p. 90): "they fled into
   Lycaonia, especially to the part of it which is summed up as the
   cities, Lystra and Derbe, and the surrounding Region". To understand
   this we must bear in mind that the growth of cities in Central and
   Eastern Asia Minor was connected with the spread of Greek civilisation;
   and in the primitive pre-Greek condition of the country there were no
   cities organised according to the Greek system, and hardly any large
   settlements, except the governing centres, which were, however,
   Oriental towns, not Greek cities. Now, in v. 6 a Region comprising part
   of Lycaonia is distinguished from the rest as consisting of two cities
   and a stretch of cityless territory (i.e., territory organised on the
   native pre-Greek village system).

   Here, as in XIII 14, we have one of those definite statements,
   involving both historical and geographical facts, which the student of
   ancient literature pounces upon as evidence to test accuracy and date.
   Is the description accurate? If so, was it accurate at all periods of
   history, or was it accurate only at a particular period? To these
   questions we must answer that it was accurate at the period when Paul
   visited Lycaonia; that it was accurate at no other time except between
   37 and 72 A.D.; and that its only meaning is to distinguish between the
   Roman part of Lycaonia and the non-Roman part ruled by Antiochus. It is
   instructive as to Luke's conception of Paul's method, and about Luke's
   own ideas on the development of the Christian Church, that he should
   here so pointedly define the Roman part of Lycaonia as the region to
   which Paul went and where he continued preaching.

   In modern expression we might call this district Roman Lycaonia; but
   that would not be true to ancient usage. Territory subject to Rome was
   not termed ager Romanus (p. 347), but was designated after the province
   to which it was attached; and this district was Galatica Lycaona,
   because it was in the province Galatia. It was distinguished from
   "Lycaonia Antiochiana," which was ruled by King Antiochus.

   Such was official usage; but we know the capriciousness of popular
   nomenclature, which often prefers some other name to the official
   designation. The inhabitants of the Roman part spoke of the other as
   "the Antiochian Region" (Antiochize chora, and the people of the latter
   spoke of the Roman part as the Galatic Region (Galatike chora) It was
   unnecessary for persons who were living in the country to be more
   precise. Now this Region of Roman or Galatic Lycaonia is three times
   mentioned in Acts. (1) In XIV 7 it is defined by enumerating its parts;
   and as Paul goes to it out of Phyrgia, it is necessary to express that
   he went into Lycaonia: the advice which the Iconians gave him would be
   to go into Lycaonia. (2) In XVI 1-3 the writer does not sum up the
   district as a whole, for his narrative requires a distinction between
   the brief visit to Derbe and the long visit to Lystra. (3) In XVIII 23,
   as he enters the Roman Region from the "Antiochian Part," the writer
   uses the name which Paul would use as he was entering it, and calls it
   "the Galatic Region". This is characteristic of Acts: it moves amid the
   people, and the author has caught his term in many a case from the
   mouth of the people. But this is done with no subservience to vulgar
   usage; the writer is on a higher level of thought, and he knows how to
   select those popular terms which are vital and powerful, and to reject
   those which are vulgar and inaccurate: he moves among the people, and
   yet stands apart from them.

   The subsequent narrative makes it clear that Paul visited only Lystra
   and Derbe. Why, then, should the author mention that Paul proceeded "to
   Lystra and Derbe and the Region in which they lie"? The reason lies in
   his habit of defining each new sphere of work according to the existing
   political divisions of the Roman Empire. It is characteristic of Luke's
   method never formally to enunciate Paul's principle of procedure, but
   simply to state the facts and leave the principle to shine through
   them; and here it shines clearly through them, for he made the limit of
   Roman territory the limit of his work, and turned back when he came to
   Lystra. He did not go on to Laranda, which was probably a greater city
   than Derbe at the time, owing to its situation and the policy followed
   by King Antiochus. Nor did he go to the uncivilised, uneducated native
   villages or towns of Roman Galatia, such as Barata.

   Accordingly, the historian in the few words (XIV 6, 7) assumes and
   embodies the principle which can be recognised as guiding Paul's
   action, viz., to go to the Roman world, and especially to its great
   cities. There is no more emphatic proof of the marvellous delicacy in
   expression that characterises the selection of words in Acts,--a
   delicacy that can spring only from perfect knowledge of the characters
   and actions described.

   But the passage, not unnaturally, caused great difficulties to readers
   of the second century, when the bounds of Galatia had changed, and the
   remarkable definition of XIV 6 had become unintelligible. It was then
   gathered from these words that some preaching took place in "the region
   round about," and the explanation was found in the later historical
   fact (which we may assume unhesitatingly as true), that converts of
   Paul carried the new religion over the whole region. This fact, got
   from independent knowledge, was added to the text, and thus arose the
   "Western" Text, which appears with slight variations in different
   authorities. In Codex Bezæ the result is as follows (alterations being
   in italics):--

   "(4) AND THE POPULACE remained divided, SOME TAKING PART WITH THE JEWS,
   AND SOME WITH THE APOSTLES, cleaving to them through the ward of God.
   (5) And again the Jews, along with the Gentiles, roused perucution for
   the second time, and having stoned them they cast them out of the city;
   (6) and fleeing tiny came into Lycaonia, to a certain city called
   LYSTRA, AND DERBE, AND THE whole SURROUNDING REGION; (7) AND THEY WERE
   THERE ENGAGED IN PREACHING, and the entire population was moved at the
   teaching; but Paul and Barnabas continued in Lystra."

   In this text the Pauline myth has been considerably developed. The
   disciples cling to the Apostles, are persecuted with them, accompany
   their flight, and preach in the surrounding Region, while Paul and
   Barnabas spent their time at Lystra. But the enlarged text moves in the
   atmosphere of the second century. It gives us an idea of the
   difficulties besetting the study of Acts even then, owing to the
   changes that had occurred in the surroundings of the events narrated;
   and it shows that these difficulties were not ignored and the text
   accepted as inspired and above comprehension, but facts of history were
   applied to explain the difficulties.

   7. LYSTRA. [20]

   In v. 8 we observe the marked emphasis laid on the real physical
   incapacity of the lame man. Though Luke, as a rule, carries brevity
   even to the verge of obscurity, here he reiterates in three successive
   phrases, with growing emphasis, that the man was really lame. The three
   phrases are like beats of a hammer: there is no fine literary style in
   this device, but there is real force, which arrests and compels the
   readers attention. Luke uses the triple beat in other places for the
   same purpose, e.g. XIII 6, "Magian, false prophet, Jew," and XVI 6, 7
   (according to the true text, p. 196).

   The author therefore attached the utmost importance to this point. The
   man was no mendicant pretender, but one whose history from infancy was
   well known. The case could not be explained away: it was an
   incontestable proof of the direct Divine power working through Paul and
   guaranteeing his message to the Galatic province as of Divine origin.
   The sign has extreme importance in the author's eyes as a proof that
   Paul carried the Divine approval in his new departure in Galatia, and
   we can better understand its importance he had to record in his eyes if
   it were the first which on distinct evidence (p. 108); but he
   attributes to it no influence in turning the people to Christianity.
   The result was only to persuade the populace that the deifies whom they
   worshipped had vouchsafed to visit their people; and at Malta the same
   result followed from the wonders which Paul wrought. The marvels
   recorded in Acts are not, as a rule, said to have been efficacious in
   spreading the new religion; the marvel at Philippi caused suffering and
   imprisonment; to the raising of Eutychus no effect is ascribed. The
   importance of these events lies rather in their effect on the mind of
   the Apostles themselves, who accepted them as an encouragement and a
   confirmation of their work. But the teaching spread by convincing the
   minds of the hearers (XIII 12).

   The Bezan Text adds several details which have the appearance of truth.
   The most important is that the lame man was "in the fear of God," i.e.,
   he was a pagan of Lystra who had been attracted to Judaism before he
   came under Paul's influence: after some time Paul recognised him as a
   careful hearer (ekouen, corrupted ekousen in the Bezan Text) and a
   person inclined towards the truth. Several other authorities give the
   same statement at different points and in varying words; and it
   therefore has the appearance of a gloss that has crept into the text in
   varying forms. It has however all the appearance of a true tradition
   preserved in the Church; for the idea that he was a proselyte is not
   likely to have grown up falsely in a Gentile congregation, nor is it
   likely to have lasted long in such a congregation, even though true. It
   is therefore a very early gloss.

   8. THE APOSTLES AS GODS.

   (11) AND THE MULTITUDE, SEEING WHAT PAUL DID, LIFTED UP THEIR LIFTED IP
   THEIR VOICE IN THE LYCAONIAN TONGUE, SAYING, "THE GODS HAVE TAKEN THE
   FORM OF MEN AND HAVE COME DOWN TO US"; (12) AND THEY CALLED BARNABAS
   ZEUS, AND PAUL HERMES. [21]

   Accepted Text Bezan Text.
   (13) AND THE PRIEST OF ZEUS, THE GOD BEFORE THE CITY BROUGHT OXEN AND
   GARLANDS TO THE GATES, AND INTENDED TO OFFER SACRIFICE ALONG WITH THE
   MULTITUDES. (14) AND HEARING, THE APOSTLES BARNABAS AND PAUL RENT THEIR
   GARMENTS AND RAN HASTILY OUT AMONG THE CROWD, (15) SHOUTING AND SAYING,
   "SIRS, WHAT IS THIS YE DO? WE ALSO ARE MEN OF LIKE NATURE TO YOU,
   BRINGING YOU THE GLAD NEWS TO TURN FROM THESE VAIN ONES TO GOD THE
   LIVING, WHICH MADE THE HEAVEN AND THE EARTH AND THE SEA AND EVERYTHING
   IN THEM. (13) AND THE PRIESTS OF THE GOD, "ZEUS BEFORE THE CITY"
   BROUGHT OXEN AND GARLANDS TO THE GATES, AND INTENDED TO MAKE SACRIFICE
   BEYOND the usual ritual ALONG WITH THE MULTITUDES. (14) AND HEARING,
   THE APOSTLES BARNABAS AND PAUL RENT THEIR GARMENTS AND RAN HASTILY OUT
   AMONG THE CROWD, (15) SHOUTING AND SAYING, "SIRS, WHAT IS THIS YE DO?
   WE ARE MEN OF LIKE NATURE TO YOU, BRINGING YOU THE GLAD NEWS OF THE
   GOD, THAT YOU MAY TURN FROM THESE VAIN ONES TO THE GOD, THE LIVING,
   WHICH MADE THE HEAVEN AND THE EARTH AND THE SEA AND EVERYTHING IN THEM.

   (16) WHO IN THE BYGONE GENERATIONS LEFT ALL NATIONS TO GO IN THEIR OWN
   WAYS. (17) AND YET HE LEFT NOT HIMSELF WITHOUT WITNESS, IN THAT HE DID
   GOOD, GIVING YOU FROM HEAVEN RAINS AND FRUITFUL SEASONS, FILLING YOUR
   HEARTS WITH FOOD AND GLADNESS." (18) AND, SAYING THIS, THEY SCARCE
   RESTRAINED THE MULTITUDES FROM DOING SACRIFICE UNTO THEM.

   Paul is here the Messenger of the Supreme God (p. 84): he says in Gal.
   IV 14, "ye received me as a Messenger of God". The coincidence, as
   Prof. Rendel Harris points out, is interesting.

   The Bezan Text has in several details the advantage of local
   accuracy--the plural "priests," the title "Zeus before the city," the
   phrase "the God," the "extra sacrifice". Dr. Blass rejects the Bezan
   reading "priests" on the ground that there was only one priest of a
   single god; but there was regularly a college of priests at each of the
   great temples of Asia Minor. The "God before the city" had in almost
   every case been seated in his temple when there was no city; and he
   remained in his own sacred place after civilisation progressed and a
   Greek or Roman city was rounded in the neighbourhood. According to the
   Bezan Text the proposed sacrifice was an extra beyond the ordinary
   ritual which the priests performed to the God. This sense of epithueni
   does not occur elsewhere, but seems to lie fairly within the meaning of
   the compound. Dr. Blass, who is usually so enthusiastic a supporter of
   the Western Text, rejects these three variations; but they add so much
   to the vividness of the scene, that one cannot, with him, regard them
   as mere corruptions.

   In Asia Minor the great God was regularly termed by his worshippers
   "the God"; and Paul, who introduces the Christian God to his Athenian
   audience as "the Unknown God," whom they have been worshipping, might
   be expected to use the familiar term "the God" to the Lystran crowd.
   Here, probability favours the originality of the Bezan Text.

   There remain some serious difficulties in this episode: Dr. Blass
   rejects the idea of some commentators that the sacrifice was prepared
   at the gates of the temple; and explains that the priests came from the
   temple before the city to the gates of the city. But in that case Lukan
   usage would lead us to expect pule. (cp. IX 24, XVI 13), rather than
   pulon (cp. X 17, XII 13, 14). Another difficulty occurs in v. 14. Dr.
   Blass's explanation is that the Apostles had gone home after healing
   the lame man, and there heard what was going on and hurried forth from
   their house. This explanation is not convincing.

   Probably a better knowledge of the localities might make the narrative
   clearer: it has been for years a dream of mine to make some excavations
   at Lystra, in the hope of illustrating this interesting episode. One
   suggestion, however, may be made. The college of priests probably
   prepared their sacrifice at the outer gateway of the temple-grounds,
   because, being no part of the ordinary ritual, it could not be
   performed on one of the usual places, and because they wished the
   multitudes to take part; whereas sacrifice at the city-gates seems
   improbable for many reasons. Then as the day advanced, the Apostles,
   who were continuing their missionary work, heard that the priests and
   people were getting ready to celebrate the Epiphany of the Gods; and
   they hurried forth from the city to the temple.

   The use of the Lycaonian language shows that the worshippers were not
   the Roman coloni, the aristocracy of the colony, but the natives, the
   less educated and more superstitious part of the population (incolæ, p.
   218).

   9. DERBE.

   (XIV 19) AND THERE CAME JEWS FROM ANTIOCH AND ICONIUM; AND THEY
   PERSUADED THE MULTITUDES AND STONED PAUL AND DRAGGED his body OUT OF
   THE CITY, CONSIDERING THAT HE WAS DEAD. (20) BUT, WHEN THE DISCIPLES
   ENCIRCLED HIM, HE STOOD UP AND WENT INTO THE CITY; AND ON THE MORROW HE
   WENT FORTH WITH BARNABAS TO DERBE. (21) AND THEY PREACHED THE GLAD NEWS
   TO THAT CITY AND MADE MANY DISCIPLES.

   It is interesting to observe the contrast between the emphasis of XIV 8
   and the cautiousness of statement in XIV 19. The writer considered that
   there was full evidence as to the real condition of the lame man; but
   all that he can guarantee in XIV 19 is that his persecutors considered
   Paul to be dead; and beyond that he does not go. As usual, he simply
   states the facts, and leaves the reader to judge for himself. A writer
   who tried to find marvels would have found one here, and said so.

   In Derbe nothing special is recorded: the same process went on as in
   previous cases. Here on the limits of the Roman province the Apostles
   turned. New magistrates had now come into office in all the cities
   whence they had been driven; and it was therefore possible to go back.

   10. ORGANISATION OF THE NEW CHURCHES.

   (XIV 21) THEY RETURNED TO LYSTRA AND TO ICONIUM AND TO ANTIOCH, (22)
   CONFIRMING THE SOULS OF THE DISCIPLES, EXHORTING THEM TO CONTINUE IN
   THE FAITH, AND THAT THROUGH MANY TRIBULATIONS WE MUST ENTER INTO THE
   KINGDOM OF GOD. (23) AND WHEN THEY HAD APPOINTED FOR THEM ELDERS IN
   EVERY CHURCH, AND HAD PRAYED WITH FASTING, THEY COMMENDED THEM TO THE
   LORD, ON WHOM THEY HAD BELIEVED.

   On the return journey the organisation of the newly rounded churches
   occupied Paul's attention. It is probable that, in his estimation, some
   definite organisation was implied in the idea of a church; and until
   the brotherhood in a city was organised, it was not in the strictest
   sense a church. In this passage we see that the fundamental part of the
   Church organisation lay in the appointment of Elders (presbuteroi). In
   XIII 1 we found that there were prophets and teachers in the Antiochian
   church; here nothing is said about appointing them, but the reason
   indubitably is that prophets and teachers required Divine grace, and
   could not be appointed by men: they were accepted when the grace was
   found to have been given them.

   Paul used the word Bishops (episkopoi) as equivalent to Elders. This is
   specially clear in XX, where he summoned the Ephesian Elders, v. 17,
   and said to them: "the Holy Spirit hath made you Bishops," verse 28. It
   is therefore certain that the "Bishops and Deacons" at Philippi (Phil.
   I 1) are the Elders and Deacons, who were the constituted officials of
   the Church. The Elders are also to be understood as "the rulers"
   (proistamenoi) at Rome and Thessalonica (Rom XII 8, I Thess. V 12).
   Both terms, Elders and Bishops, occur in the Epistles to Titus and
   Timothy; but it is plain from Tit. I 5-7 that they are synonymous.

   It is clear, therefore, that Paul everywhere instituted Elders in his
   new Churches; and on our hypothesis as to the accurate and methodical
   expression of the historian, we are bound to infer that this first case
   is intended to be typical of the way of appointment followed in all
   later cases. When Paul directed Titus (I 5) to appoint Elders in each
   Cretan city, he was doubtless thinking of the same method which he
   followed here. Unfortunately, the term used (cheirotonesantes) is by no
   means certain in meaning; for, though originally it meant to elect by
   popular vote, yet it came to be used in the sense to appoint or
   designate (e.g., Acts X 41). But it is not in keeping with our
   conception of the precise and often pragmatically accurate expression
   of Luke, that he should in this passage have used the term
   cheirotonesantes, unless he intended its strict sense. If he did not
   mean it strictly, the term is fatally ambiguous, where definiteness is
   specially called for. It must, I think, be allowed that the votes and
   voice of each congregation were considered; and the term is obviously
   used in that way by Paul, II Cor. VIII 19.

   It is also apparent that a certain influence to be exercised by himself
   is implied in the instructions given to Titus (I 5); but those
   instructions seem only to mean that Titus, as a sort of presiding
   officer, is to instruct the people what conditions the person chosen
   must satisfy, and perhaps to reject unsuitable candidates. Candidature,
   perhaps of a merely informal character, is implied in I Tim. III 1;
   but, of course, if election has any scope at all, candidature goes
   along with it. The procedure, then, seems to be not dissimilar to Roman
   elections of magistrates, in which the presiding magistrate subjected
   all candidates to a scrutiny as to their qualifications, and had large
   discretion in rejecting those whom he considered unsuitable.

   Finally, it is stated in XX 28 that the Holy Spirit made men Bishops;
   but this expression is fully satisfied by what may safely be assumed as
   the final stage of the appointment, viz. the Bishops elect were
   submitted to the Divine approval at the solemn prayer and fast which
   accompanied their appointment. This meeting and rite of fasting, which
   Paul celebrated in each city on his return journey, is to be taken as
   the form that was to be permanently observed (cp. XIII 3).

   The use of the first person plural in v. 22 is not personal, but
   general; Paul impressed on them the universal truth that "we
   Christians" can enter the kingdom of God by no other path than that of
   suffering. At the same time the author, by using the first person,
   associates himself with the principle, not as one of the audience at
   the time, but as one who strongly realised its truth. This is one of
   the few personal touches in Acts; and we must gather from it that, at
   the time when he was writing, the principle was strongly impressed on
   him by circumstances. I can understand this personal touch, in
   comparison with the studious suppression of personal feelings and views
   throughout Acts, in no other way than by supposing that Luke was
   composing this history during a time of special persecution. On that
   supposition the expression is luminous; but otherwise it stands in
   marked contrast to the style of Acts. Now evidence from a different
   line of reasoning points to the conclusion that Luke was writing this
   second book of his history under Domitian, the second great persecutor
   (Ch. VII).

   11. PISIDIA AND PAMPHYLIA.

   (XIV 24) AND HAVING MADE A MISSIONARY JOURNEY THROUGH PISIDIA, THEY
   CAME INTO PAMPHYLIA; (25) AND AFTER HAVING SPOKEN THE WORD IN PERGA,
   THEY CAME DOWN TO the harbour ATTALEIA; (26) AND FROM THENCE THEY
   SAILED AWAY TO ANTIOCH, WHENCE THEY HAD BEEN COMMITTED TO THE GRACE OF
   GOD FOR THE WORK WHICH THEY FULFILLED. (27) AND REACHING ANTIOCH, AND
   HOLDING A MEETING OF THE CHURCH, THEY PROCEEDED TO ANNOUNCE ALL THAT
   GOD DID WITH THEM, AND THAT HE OPENED TO THE NATIONS THE GATE OF BELIEF
   (See p. 85).

   Next, the journey goes on from Antioch (v. 21), leading first into
   Pisidia, a Region of the province Galatia, and then into the province
   Pamphylia. It is clearly implied that Pisidian Antioch was not in
   Pisidia; and, strange as that seems, it is correct (p. 104). Any Church
   founded in Pisidia would rank along with those founded in Galatic
   Phrygia and Galatic Lycaonia as one of "the Churches of Galatia"; but
   neither Pisidia nor Pamphylia plays any further part in early Christian
   History. There was, however, a Pauline tradition at Adada.

   Attaleia seems to be mentioned here solely as the port of departure
   (though they had formerly sailed direct up the Cestrus to Perga). Not
   catching Luke's fondness for details connected with the sea and
   harbours (p. 20), the Bezan Reviser reads: "they came down to Attaleia,
   giving them the good news".

   12. THE CHURCHES.

   In Lukan and Pauline language two meanings are found of the term
   Ecclesia. It means originally simply "an assembly"; and, as employed by
   Paul in his earliest. Epistles, it may be rendered "the congregation of
   the Thessalonians". It is then properly construed with the genitive,
   denoting the assembly of this organised society, to which any man of
   Thessalonica may belong if he qualifies for it. The term Ecclesia
   originally implied that the assembled members constituted a
   self-governing body like a free Greek city (polis). Ancient religious
   societies were commonly organised on the model of city organisation.
   The term was adopted in the Septuagint, and came into ordinary use
   among Grecian Jews.

   Gradually Paul's idea of "the Unified Church" became definite; and,
   with the true philosophic instinct, he felt the need of a technical
   term to indicate the idea. Ecclesia was the word that forced itself on
   him. But in the new sense it demanded a new construction; it was no
   longer "the church of the Thessalonians," but "the Church in Corinth";
   and it was necessarily singular, for there was only one Church.

   The new usage grew naturally in the mind of a statesman, animated with
   the instinct of administration, and gradually coming to realise the
   combination of imperial centralisation and local home rule, which is
   involved in the conception of a self-governing unity, the Universal
   Church, consisting of many parts, widely separated in space. Each of
   these parts must govern itself in its internal relations, because it is
   distant from other parts, and yet each is merely a piece carved out of
   the homogeneous whole, and each finds its justification and perfect
   ideal in the whole. That was a conception analogous to the Roman view,
   that every group of Roman citizens meeting together in a body
   (conventus Civium Romanorum) in any part of the vast Empire formed a
   part of the great conception "Rome," and. that such a group was not an
   intelligible idea, except as a piece of the great unity. Any Roman
   citizen who came to any provincial town where such a group existed was
   forthwith a member of the group; and the group was simply a fragment of
   "Rome," cut off in space from the whole body, but preserving its
   vitality and self-identity as fully as when it was joined to the whole,
   and capable of reuniting with the whole as soon as the estranging space
   was annihilated. Such was the Roman constitutional theory, and such was
   the Pauline theory. The actual working of the Roman theory was
   complicated by the numberless imperfect forms of citizenship, such as
   the provincial status (for the provincials were neither Romans nor
   foreigners; they were in the State yet not of the State), and other
   points in which mundane facts were too stubborn; and it was impeded by
   failure to attain full consciousness of its character. The Pauline
   theory was carried out with a logical thoroughness and consistency
   which the Roman theory, could never attain in practice; but it is
   hardly doubtful that, whether or not Paul himself was conscious that
   the full realisation of his idea could only be the end of a long
   process of growth and not the beginning, his successors carried out his
   theory with a disregard of the mundane facts of national and local
   diversity that produced serious consequences. They waged relentless war
   within the bounds of the Empire against all provincial distinctions of
   language and character, they disregarded the force of associations and
   early ties, and aimed at an absolute uniformity that was neither
   healthy nor attainable in human nature. The diversities which they
   ejected returned in other ways, and crystallised in Christian forms, as
   the local saints who gradually became more real and powerful in the
   religious thought and practice of each district than the true Christian
   ideas; and, as degeneration proceeded, the heads of the Church
   acquiesced more and more contentedly in a nominal and ceremonial unity
   that had lost reality.

   As is natural, Paul did not abandon the old and familiar usage of the
   term Ecclesia, when the new and more technical usage developed in his
   mind and language. The process is apparent in Gal. I 13, where the new
   sense occurs, though hardly as yet, perhaps, with full consciousness
   and intention. Elsewhere in that letter the term is used in the old
   sense, "the Churches of Galatia ". In I Cor. I 2 the new sense of
   Ecclesia is deliberately and formally employed.

   The term Ecclesia is used in Acts in both these ways, and an
   examination of the distinction throws some light on the delicacy of
   expression in the book. It occurs in the plural. sense of
   "congregations" or "every congregation" in XIV 23, XV 41, XVI 5. In
   each of these eases it is used about Paul's work in the period when he
   was employing the term in its earlier sense; and there is a fine sense
   of language in saying at that period that Paul went over the
   congregations which he had rounded in Syria and Cilicia and in Galatia.
   In all other cases (in the Eastern Text at least), Luke uses Ecclesia
   in the singular, in some cases markedly in the sense of the Unified
   Church (e.g., IX 31), in some cases as "the Church in Jerusalem" (VIII
   1), and in some cases very pointedly,. "the Church in so far as it was
   in Jerusalem" or "in Antioch" (XI 22, XIII 1); and in some cases where
   the sense "congregation" might be permitted by the context, the sense
   of "the Church" gives a more satisfactory meaning.

   The author, therefore, when he speaks in his own person, stands on the
   platform of the developed Pauline usage, and uses Ecclesia in the sense
   of "the single Unified Church," but where there is a special dramatic
   appropriateness in employing the earlier Pauline term to describe
   Paul's work, he employs the early term. [22]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [15] Date. On our view this journey began in March 47, and ended about
   July or August 49.

   [16] Expositor, Dec., 1893, p. 4417.

   [17] Partly to guard against a possible objection, partly to show how
   much may depend on accuracy in a single letter, it may be added that
   Prof. Sterrett in publishing this inscription makes a conjectural
   alteration, which would deprive us of the help that the inscription
   gives. He prints egeonarion but this is an arbitrary change in
   violation of his own copy.

   [18] Church in R. E., p. 396; Cities and Bishoprics, p. 56.

   [19] A slight addition made in Codex Bezæ at this point presents some
   features of interest. In the Approved Text the Jews "roused
   persecution" against the Apostles; but in the Codex they roused "great
   affliction and persecution" The additional words are not characterised
   by that delicate precision in the choice of terms which belongs to
   Luke. "Affliction" (thlipsis)refers more to the recipient,
   "persecution" (diogmos) to the agent; hence the "to rouse persecution"
   is a well-chosen phrase, but "to rouse affliction "is not. The words of
   Codex Bezæ have been added under the influence of the enumeration of
   his sufferings given by Paul in II Cor. XI 23 (cp. II Tim. III 11). The
   disproportion between that list and the references to physical
   sufferings in Acts led to a series of additions, designed to bring
   about a harmony between the two authorities.

   [20] The variation in the declension of the word Lystra (Accusative
   Lustran XIV 6, XVI 1, dative Lustrois XIV 8, XVI 2.) is sometimes taken
   as a sign that the author employed two different written authorities
   (in one of which the word was declined as feminine singular and in the
   other as neuter plural), and followed them implicitly, using in each
   case the form employed in the authority whom he was following at the
   moment. This suggestion has convinced neither Spitta nor Clemen, who
   both assign XVI 1-3 to one author. Only the most insensate and
   incapable of compilers would unawares use the double declension twice
   in consecutive sentences. The author, whoever he was and whenever he
   lived, certainly considered that the proper declension of the name was
   Lustrois, Lustran; and the only question is this: was that variation
   customary in the Lystran Greek usage? If it was customary, then its
   employment in Acts is a marked proof of first-hand local knowledge, and
   if it was not customary, the opposite. We have unfortunately no
   authorities for the Lystran usage: the city name occurs in the
   inscriptions only in the nominative case, Lustra. It is certain that
   many names in Asia Minor, such as Myra, etc., occur both in feminine
   singular and in neuter plural; but there is no evidence as to any local
   usage appropriating certain cases to each form. Excavations on the site
   may yield the needed evidence to test the accuracy of this detail. One
   indirect piece of evidence may be added. Myra is an analogous name. Now
   the local form of accus. was Muran for the Turkish Dembre comes from
   ten Mbra(n) i.e. (eis) ten Muran. [It is most probable that in XXVII 5
   Muran (or Murran) should be read, not Mura.] I know no evidence as to
   the local form of the dative; but the genitive appears as Muron in the
   signatures of bishops. Incidentally we notice that the name of the city
   is spelt Lustra, not Lystra (like Prymnessos), on coins and
   inscriptions. That is an indication of Latin tone, and of the desire to
   make the city name a Latin word. People who called their city Lustra
   would have distinguished themselves pointedly from the Lycaonians, the
   subjects of King Antiochus and mentioned in that way on his coins.

   [21] In v. 12 the Accepted Text contains a gloss, which is rightly
   omitted in one old Latin Version (Fl.).

   [22] An exception occurs to this rule, in an addition of the Bezan
   Text, according to which Apollos went to Achaia and contributed much to
   strengthening the congregations (tais ekklesiais). We have here not the
   original words of Luke, but an addition (as I believe, trustworthy in
   point of fact) made by a second century Reviser, imitating passages
   like XV 41, XVI 5, Gal. I 2, 22. This case stands in close analogy to
   IX 31, where many authorities have (Codex Bezæ is defective) "the
   Ecclesiai throughout the whole of Judea and Galilee and Samaria," but
   the singular is used in the Accepted Text founded on the great MSS.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI.

  ST. PAUL IN GALATIA

   1. THE IMPERIAL AND THE CHRISTIAN POLICY

   When Paul passed out of Pamphylia into Galatia, he went out of a small
   province, which was cut off from the main line of historical and
   political development, into a great province that lay on that line. The
   history of Asia Minor at that time had its central motive in the
   transforming and educative process which the Roman imperial policy was
   trying to carry out in the country. In Pamphylia that process was
   languidly carried out by a governor of humble rank; but Galatia was the
   frontier province, and the immense social and educational changes
   involved in the process of romanising an oriental land were going on
   actively in it. We proceed to inquire in what relation the new Pauline
   influence stood to the questions that were agitating the province.
   What, then, was the character of Roman policy and the line of
   educational advance in the districts of Galatic Phrygia and Galatic
   Lycaonia; and what were the forces opposing the Roman policy?

   The aim of Roman policy may be defined as the unification and education
   in Roman ideas of the province; and its general effect may be summed up
   under four heads, which we shall discuss in detail, comparing in each
   case the effect produced or aimed at by the Church. We enumerate the
   heads, not in order of importance, but in the order that best brings
   out the relation between Imperial influence and Church influence: (1)
   relation to Greek civilisation and language: (2) development of an
   educated middle class: (3) growth of unity over the Empire: (4) social
   facts.

   (1) The Roman influence would be better defined as "Græco-Roman ".
   Previous to Roman domination, the Greek civilisation, though fostered
   in the country by the Greek kings of Syria and Pergamos, who had
   successively ruled the country, had failed to affect the people as a
   body; it had been confined to the coast valleys of the Hermus, Cayster,
   Mæander and Lycus, and to the garrison cities rounded on the great
   central plateau by the kings to strengthen their hold on the country.
   These cities were at the same time centres of Greek manners and
   education; their language was Greek; and, in the midst of alien tribes,
   their interests naturally coincided with those of the kings who had
   rounded them.

   The Roman Government, far from being opposed to Greek influence, acted
   in steady alliance with it. It adopted the manners of Greece, and even
   recognised the Greek language for general use in the Eastern provinces.
   Rome was so successful, because she almost always yielded to the logic
   of facts. The Greek influence was, on the whole, European and Western
   in character; and opposed to the oriental stagnation which resisted
   Roman educative efforts. Rome accepted the Greek language as her ally.
   Little attempt was made to naturalise the Latin language in the East;
   and even the Roman colonies in the province of Galatia soon ceased to
   use Latin except on state occasions and in a few formal documents. A
   Græco-Roman civilisation using the Greek language was the type which
   Rome aimed at establishing in the East.

   The efforts of Rome to naturalise Western culture in Asia Minor were
   more successful than those of the Greek kings had been; but still they
   worked at best very slowly. The evidence of inscriptions tends to show
   that the Phrygian language was used in rural parts of the country
   during the second and even the third century. In some remote and rustic
   districts it persisted even until the fourth century, as Celtic did in
   parts of North Galatia.

   The Christian influence was entirely in favour of the Greek language.
   The rustics clung longest to Paganism, while the Greek-speaking
   population of the cities adopted Christianity. It is not probable that
   any attempt was made to translate the Christian sacred books into
   Phrygian or Lycaonian; there is not even any evidence that
   evangelisation in these languages was ever attempted. The Christians
   seem to have been all expected to read the Scriptures in Greek. That
   fact was sufficient to put the Church, as regards its practical effect
   on society, on the same side as the romanising influence; and the
   effect was quite independent of any intentional policy. The most
   zealous enemy of the imperial Antichrist was none the less effective in
   aiding the imperial policy by spreading the official language. In fact,
   Christianity did far more thoroughly what the emperors tried to do. It
   was really their best ally, if they had recognised the facts of the
   case; and the Christian Apologists of the second century are justified
   in claiming that their religion was essentially a loyal religion.

   (2) The Empire had succeeded in imposing its languages on the central
   districts of Asia only so far as education spread. Every one who wrote
   or read, wrote and read Greek; but those who could do neither used the
   native language. Hence inscriptions were almost universally expressed
   in Greek, for even the most illiterate, if they aspired to put an
   epitaph on a grave, did so in barbarous (sometimes unintelligible)
   Greek; the desire for an epitaph was the first sign of desire for
   education and for Greek.

   In education lay the most serious deficiency of the imperial policy.
   Rome cannot be said to have seriously attempted to found an educational
   system either in the provinces or in the metropolis. "The education
   imparted on a definite plan by the State did not go beyond instituting
   a regular series of amusements, some of a rather brutalising tendency"
   (Church in R.E., p. 360). And precisely in this point, Christianity
   came in to help the Imperial Government, recognising the duty of
   educating, as well as feeding and amusing, the mass of the population.
   The theory of universal education for the people has never been more
   boldly and thoroughly stated than by Tatian (ibid. p. 345). "The weak
   side of the Empire--the cause of the ruin of the first Empire was the
   moral deterioration of the lower classes: Christianity, if adopted in
   time, might have prevented this result."

   Now, the classes where education and work go hand in hand were the
   first to come under the influence of the new religion. On the one hand
   the uneducated and grossly superstitious rustics were unaffected by it.
   On the other hand, there were "not many wise, not many mighty, not many
   noble" in the Churches of the first century, i.e., not many
   professional teachers of wisdom and philosophy, not many of the
   official and governing class, not many of the hereditarily privileged
   class. But the working and thinking classes, with the students, if not
   the Professors, at the Universities, were attracted to the new
   teaching; and it spread among them with a rapidity that seemed to many
   modern critics incredible and fabulous, till it was justified by recent
   discoveries. The enthusiasm of the period was on the side of the
   Christians; its dilettantism, officialism, contentment and
   self-satisfaction were against them.

   In respect of education Christianity appears as filling a gap in the
   imperial policy, supplementing, not opposing it--a position which,
   though it earns no gratitude and often provokes hatred, implies no
   feeling of opposition in the giver.

   (3) Again, the main. effort of Roman policy was directed towards
   encouraging a sense of unity and patriotism in the Empire. It
   discouraged the old tribal and national divisions, which kept the
   subject population in their pre-Roman associations, and substituted new
   divisions. Patriotism in ancient time was inseparable from religious
   feeling, and Roman policy fostered a new imperial religion in which all
   its subjects should unite, viz., the worship of the divine majesty of
   Rome incarnate in human form in the series of the emperors and
   especially in the reigning emperor. Each province was united in a
   formal association for this worship: the association built temples in
   the great cities of the province, held festivals and games, and had a
   set of officials, who were in a religious point of view priests and in
   a political point of view, officers of the imperial service. Everything
   that the imperial policy did in the provinces during the first century
   was so arranged as to encourage the unity of the entire Roman province;
   and the priests of the imperial religion became by insensible degrees a
   higher priesthood, exercising a certain influence over the priests of
   the other religions of the province. In this way a sort of hierarchy
   was created for the province and the empire as a whole; the reigning
   emperor being the religious head, the Supreme Pontiff of the State, and
   a kind of sacerdotal organisation being grouped under him according to
   the political provinces.

   As time passed, gradually the Christian Church grouped itself according
   to the same forms as the imperial religion,--not indeed through
   conscious imitation, but because the Church naturally arranged its
   external form according to the existing facts of communication and
   interrelation. In Pisidian Antioch a preacher had unique opportunities
   for affecting the entire territory whose population resorted to that
   great centre (p. 105). So Perga was a centre for Pamphylia, Ephesus for
   Asia. But the direct influence of these centres was confined to the
   Roman district or province. In this way necessarily and inevitably the
   Christian Church was organised around the Roman provincial metropolis
   and according to the Roman provincial divisions.

   The question then is, when did this organisation of the Church begin? I
   can see no reason to doubt that it began with Paul's mission to the
   West. It grew out of the circumstances of the country, and there was
   more absolute necessity in the first century than later, that, if the
   Church was organised at all, it must adapt itself to the political
   facts of the time, for these were much stronger in the first century.
   The classification adopted in Paul's own letters of the Churches which
   he rounded is according to provinces, Achaia, Macedonia, Asia, and
   Galatia. The same fact is clearly visible in the narrative of Act,: it
   guides and inspires the expression from the time when the Apostles
   landed at Perga. At every step any one who knows the country recognises
   that the Roman division is implied. There is only one way of avoiding
   this conclusion, and that is to make up your mind beforehand that the
   thing is impossible, and therefore to refuse to admit any evidence for
   it.

   The issue of events showed that the Empire had made a mistake in
   disregarding so completely the existing lines of demarcation between
   tribes and races in making its new political provinces. For a time it
   succeeded in establishing them, while the energy of the Empire was
   still fresh, and its forward movement continuous and steady. But the
   differences of tribal and national character were too great to be
   completely set aside; they revived while the energy of the Empire
   decayed during the second century. Hence every change in the bounds of
   the provinces of Asia Minor from 138 onwards was in the direction of
   assimilating them to the old tribal frontiers; and at last in 295 even
   the great complex province Asia was broken up after 428 years of
   existence, and resolved into the old native districts, Lydia, Caria,
   Phrygia, etc.; and the moment that the political unity was dissolved
   there remained nothing of the Roman Asia. But the ultimate failure of
   the Roman policy must not blind us to the vigour and energy with which
   that policy was carried out during the first century. "Asia" and
   "Galatia" were only ideas, but they were ideas which the whole efforts
   of Roman government aimed at making into realities.

   (4) There was another reason why the power of the new religion was
   necessarily thrown on the side of the Roman policy. Greek civilisation
   was strongly opposed to the social system that was inseparably
   connected with the native religion in all its slightly varying forms in
   different localities. The opposition is. as old as the landing of the
   earliest Greek emigrants on the Asian coasts: the colonists were the
   force of education, and progress and freedom, the priests arrayed
   against them the elements that made for stagnation and priest-ridden
   ignorance and slavery. Throughout Greek history the same opposition
   constantly appears. The Phrygian religion was always reckoned as the
   antithesis of Hellenism. That is all a matter of history, one might say
   a commonplace of history. But the same opposition was necessarily
   developed in the Romanisation of the provinces of Asia Minor. The
   priests of the great religious centres were inevitably opposed to the
   Roman policy; but their power was gone, their vast estates had become
   imperial property, and their influence with the population was weakened
   by the growth of the Greek spirit. This subject might be discussed at
   great length; but I must here content myself with referring to the full
   account of the districts in my Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia.

   In this conflict there can be no doubt on which side the Christian
   influence must tell. When we consider the social system which was
   inculcated as a part of the native religion, it is evident that every
   word spoken by Paul or Barnabas must tell directly against the
   prevalent religion, and consequently on the side of the Roman policy.
   It is true that in moral tone the Greek society and religion were low,
   and Christianity was necessarily an enemy to them. But Greek religion
   was not here present as the enemy. The native religion was the active
   enemy; and its character was such that Greek education was pure in
   comparison, and the Greek moralists, philosophers, and politicians
   inveighed against the Phrygian religion as the worst enemy of the Greek
   ideals of life. Greek society and life were at least rounded on
   marriage; but the religion of Asia Minor maintained as a central
   principle that all organised and settled social life on the basis of
   marriage was an outrage on the free unfettered divine life of nature,
   the type of which was found in the favourites of the great goddesses,
   the wild animals of the field and the mountains. The Greek and Roman
   law which recognised as citizens only those born from the legitimate
   marriage of two citizens had no existence in Phrygian cities.

   Thus in Galatia the Græco-Roman education, on the side of freedom,
   civilisation and a higher social morality, was contending against the
   old native religious centres with their influential priestly colleges,
   on the side of ignorance, stagnation, social anarchy, and enslavement
   of the people to the priests. Christian influence told against the
   latter, and therefore in favour of the former.

   In all these ways Christianity, as a force in the social life of the
   time, was necessarily arrayed on the side of the Roman imperial policy.
   "One of the most remarkable sides of the history of Rome is the growth
   of ideas which found their realisation and completion in the Christian
   Empire. Universal citizenship, universal equality of rights, universal
   religion, a universal Church, all were ideas which the Empire was
   slowly working out, but which it could not realise till it merged
   itself in Christianity." "The path of development for the Empire lay in
   accepting the religion which offered it the possibility of completing
   its organisation."

   With the instinctive perception of the real nature of the case that
   characterises the genius for organisation, Paul from the first directed
   his steps in the path which the Church had to tread. He made no false
   step, he needed no tentatives before he found the path, he had to
   retract nothing (except perhaps the unsuccessful compromise embodied in
   the Decree of the Apostolic Council, pp. 172, 182). It is not necessary
   to assert or to prove that he consciously anticipated all that was to
   take place; but he was beyond all doubt one of those great creative
   geniuses whose policy marks out the lines on which history is to move
   for generations and even for centuries afterwards.

   It is apparent how far removed we are from a view, which has been
   widely entertained, "that there was an entire dislocation and
   discontinuity in the history of Christianity in Asia Minor at a certain
   epoch; that the Apostle of the Gentiles was ignored and his teaching
   repudiated, if not anathemarised"; and that this anti-Pauline tendency
   found in "Papias a typical representative". Like Lightfoot, whose
   summary we quote, we must reject that view. We find in the epitaph of
   the second-century Phrygian saint, Avircius Marcellus, a proof of the
   deep reverence retained in Asia Minor for St. Paul: when he travelled,
   he took Paul everywhere with him as his guide and companion.

   These considerations show the extreme importance of the change of plan
   that led Paul across Taurus to Pisidian Antioch. So far as it is right
   to say that any single event is of outstanding importance, the step
   that took Paul away from an outlying corner and put him on the main
   line of development at the outset of his work in Asia Minor, was the
   most critical step in his history. It is noteworthy that the historian,
   who certainly understood its importance, and whose sympathy was deeply
   engaged in it, does not attribute it to Divine suggestion, though he
   generally records the Divine guidance in the great crises of Paul's
   career; and it stands in perfect agreement with this view, that Paul
   himself, when he impresses on the Galatian Churches in the strongest
   terms his Divine commission to the Gentiles, does not say that the
   occasion of his going among them was the Divine guidance, but expressly
   mentions that an illness was the cause why he preached among them at
   first.

   Now, every reader must be struck with the stress that is laid, alike by
   Paul and by Luke, throughout their writings, on the Divine guidance.
   They both find the justification of all Paul's innovations on
   missionary enterprise in the guiding hand of God. We demand that there
   should be a clear agreement in the occasions when they discerned that
   guidance; and in this case the South Galatian theory enables us to
   recognise a marked negative agreement.

   Further, there is evidently a marked difference between the looser way
   of talking about "the hand of God" that is common in the present day,
   and the view entertained by Paul or Luke. Where a great advantage
   results from a serious illness, many of us would feel it right to
   recognise and acknowledge the "guiding hand of God"; but it is evident
   that, when Luke or Paul uses such language as "the Spirit suffered them
   not," they refer to some definite and clear manifestation, and not to a
   guidance which became apparent only through the results. The superhuman
   element is inextricably involved in Luke's history and in Paul's
   letters.

   All that has just been said is, of course, mere empty verbiage, devoid
   of any relation to Paul's work and policy in Galatia, if the Churches
   of Galatia were not the active centres of Roman organising effort, such
   as the colonies Antioch and Lystra, or busy trading cities like
   Claud-Iconium and Claudio-Derbe, but Pessinus and some villages in the
   wilderness of the Axylon (as Professor Zöckler has quite recently
   maintained). Lightfoot saw the character of Paul's work, and supposed
   him to have gone to the great cities of North Galatia, and specially
   the metropolis Ancyra; but the most recent development of the
   North-Galatian theory denies that Paul ever saw the Roman central city.

   2. THE JEWS IN ASIA AND SOUTH GALATIA.

   In Cyprus, Barnabas and Saul had confined themselves within the circle
   of the synagogue, until Paul stepped forth from it to address the Roman
   proconsul. In entering Galatia Paul was passing from Semitic
   surroundings into a province where Greek was the language of all even
   moderately educated persons, and where Græco-Roman manners and ideas
   were being actively disseminated and eagerly assimilated by all active
   and progressive and thoughtful persons. How then did Paul, with his
   versatility and adaptability, appear among the Galatians, and in what
   tone did he address them?

   At first he adhered to his invariable custom of addressing such
   audience as was found within the synagogue. There was a large Jewish
   population in the Phrygian district of Galatia, as well as in Asian
   Phrygia (which Paul entered and traversed at a later date XIX 1).
   According to Dr. Neubauer (Géographie du Talmud, p. 315), these Jews
   had to a considerable extent lost connection with their country, and
   forgotten their language; and they did not participate in the educated
   philosophy of the Alexandrian Jews: the baths of Phrygia and its wine
   had separated the Ten Tribes from their brethren, as the Talmud
   expresses it: hence they were much more readily converted to
   Christianity; and the Talmud alludes to the numerous converts.

   It is much to be desired that this distinguished scholar should discuss
   more fully this subject, which he has merely touched on incidentally.
   The impression which he conveys is different from that which one is apt
   to take from the narrative in Acts; and one would be glad to have the
   evidence on which he relies stated in detail. But my own epigraphic
   studies in Phrygia lead me to think that there is much in what Dr.
   Neubauer has said; and that we must estimate Luke's account from the
   proper point. Luke was profoundly interested in the conflict between
   Paul and the Judaising party; and he recounts with great detail the
   stages in that conflict. That point of view is natural in one who had
   lived through the conflict, before the knot was cut by the destruction
   of Jerusalem in A.D. 70; but, though short, the struggle was far more
   severe than later scholars, who see how complete was Paul's triumph,
   are apt to imagine. Even to a writer of the second century, the
   conflict with the Judaisers could not have bulked largely in Church
   history. But to Luke that conflict is the great feature in the
   development of the Church. Hence he emphasises every point in the
   antagonism between Paul and the Judaisers; and his readers are apt to
   leave out of notice other aspects of the case. The Jews of Pisidian
   Antioch are not represented as opposed to Paul's doctrines, but only to
   his placing the Gentiles on an equality with themselves (p. 101, XIII
   45). A great multitude of the Iconian Jews believed (XIV 1). The few
   Jews of Philippi seem to have been entirely on Paul's side: they were
   probably to a great extent settlers who had come, like Lydia, in the
   course of trade with Asia Minor. In Berea the Jews in a body were
   deeply impressed by Paul's preaching. In Thessalonica, however, the
   Jews were almost entirely opposed to him; and in Corinth it was nearly
   as bad, though the archisynagogos followed him. In Corinth the Jewish
   colony would certainly be in close and direct communication with Syria
   and Palestine by sea, more than with the Phrygian Jews of the land
   road; and it is probable that the same was the case in Thessalonica,
   though no facts are known to prove it.

   From the recorded facts, therefore, it would appear that the Jews in
   central Asia Minor were less strongly opposed to Pauline Christianity
   than they were in Palestine. Further, the Asian and Galatian Jews had
   certainly declined from the high and exclusive standard of the
   Palestinian Jews, and probably forgotten Hebrew. In Lystra we find a
   Jewess married to a Greek, who cannot have come into communion with the
   Jews, for the son of the marriage was not submitted to the Jewish law
   (XVI 1-3). The marriage of a Jewess to a Gentile is a more serious
   thing than that of a Jew, and can hardly have come to pass except
   through a marked assimilation of these Jews to their Gentile
   neighbours. In Ephesus the sons even of distinguished priests practised
   magic, and exorcised demons in the name of Jesus (XIX 14); and Dr.
   Schürer has shown that gross superstitions were practised by the Jews
   of Thyatira. There seems, therefore, to be no real discrepancy between
   the evidence of Luke and Dr. Neubauer's inference about the Phrygian
   Jews from the Talmud.

   Naturally the approximation between Jews and Gentiles in Phrygia had
   not been all on one side. An active, intelligent, and prosperous
   minority like the Jews must have exercised a strong influence on their
   neighbours. Evidence to that effect is not wanting in inscriptions (see
   Cities and Bishoprics, Chap. XIV); and we may compare the readiness
   with which the Antiochians flocked to the synagogue, XIII 43-4, and at
   a later time yielded to the first emissaries of the Judaising party in
   the Church (Gal. I 6). The history of the Galatian Churches is in the
   closest relation to their surroundings (p. 183).

   3. TONE OF PAUL'S ADDRESS TO THE GALATIAN AUDIENCES.

   The only recorded sermon of Paul in Galatia was delivered in the
   synagogue at Antioch (p. 100). Thereafter he "turned to the Gentiles,"
   and appealed direct to the populace of the city. Now Paul was wont to
   adapt himself to his hearers (p. 82). Did he address the people of
   Antioch as members of a nation (Phrygians, or, as Dr. Zöckler thinks,
   Pisidians), or did he regard them as members of the Roman Empire? We
   cannot doubt that his teaching was opposed to the native tendency as
   one of mere barbarism and superstition; and that he regarded them as
   members of the same Empire of which he was a citizen. Moreover, the
   Antiochians claimed to be a Greek foundation of remote time by
   Magnesian settlers: that is, doubtless, a fiction (of a type
   fashionable in the great cities of Phrygia), but it shows the tendency
   to claim Greek origin and to regard national characteristics as vulgar.
   Finally, Antioch was now a Roman colony, and its rank and position in
   the province belonged to it as the representative of old Greek culture
   and modern Roman government amid uncultured rustic Pisidians and
   Phrygians. But some North Galatian theorists resolutely maintain that
   Paul could never appeal to its population as "men of the province
   Galatia," but only as "Pisidians".

   We possess a letter which Paul addressed to the Galatian Churches; but
   it was addressed to congregations which had existed for five years or
   more, and was written on a special occasion to rebuke and repress the
   Judaising tendency: it moves in a series of arguments against that
   tendency, and gives us little information as to the line Paul would
   take in addressing for the first time a pagan audience in one of the
   Galatian cities (see Ch. VIII).

   In writing to the Corinthian Church Paul mentions that he had adopted a
   very simple way of appealing to them, and that his simple message was
   by some persons contrasted unfavourably with the more philosophical
   style of Apollos and the more ritualistic teaching of the Judaising
   Christians. But it is apparent (see p. 252) that Paul made a new
   departure in this respect at Corinth; and we must not regard too
   exclusively what he says in that letter. Though the main elements of
   his message were the same from first to last (Gal. III 1, I Cor. II 2),
   yet it is natural and probable that there should be a certain degree of
   development in his method; and in trying to recover the tone in which
   he first appealed to his Galatic audiences, we are carried back to a
   period in his career earlier than any of his extant letters.

   The passages in Acts that touch the point are the address to his
   worshippers at Lystra, the speech before the Areopagus at Athens, and,
   at a later time, the account which the Town-clerk at Ephesus gave of
   his attitude as a preacher.

   The Town-clerk of Ephesus reminded the rioters that Paul had not been
   guilty of disrespect, either in action or in language, towards the
   patron and guardian goddess of the city. Chrysostom in the fourth
   century remarks that this was a false statement to suit the occasion
   and calm the riot; it seemed to him impossible that Paul should refrain
   from violent invective against the false goddess, for the later
   Christians inveighed in merciless terms against the Greek gods, and (as
   every one who tries to understand ancient religion must feel) the
   Apologists from the second century onwards give a one-sided picture of
   that religion, describing only its worst features, and omitting those
   germs of higher ideas which it certainly contained. But we cannot
   suppose with Chrysostom that the clerk misrepresented the facts to
   soothe the popular tumult. The effect of his speech depended on the
   obviousness of the facts which he appealed to; and it would defeat his
   purpose, if his audience had listened to speeches in which Paul
   inveighed against the goddess. If this speech is taken from real life,
   the clerk of Ephesus must be appealing to well-known facts (see p. 281
   f.).

   Next we turn to the speech at Athens. So far was Paul from inveighing
   against the objects of Athenian veneration that he expressly commended
   the religious feelings of the people, and identified the God whom he
   had come to preach with the god whom they were blindly worshipping. He
   did not rebuke or check their religious ideas, but merely tried to
   guide them; he distinctly set forth the principle that the pagans were
   honestly striving to worship "the God that made the world and all
   things therein" (p. 251 f.).

   In this speech Paul lays no emphasis on the personality of the God whom
   he sets forth: "what ye worship in ignorance, this set I forth unto
   you," and "we ought not to think that the Divine nature is like unto
   gold or silver or stone, graven by art and device of man". The popular
   philosophy inclined towards Pantheism, the popular religion was
   Polytheistic; but Paul starts from the simplest platform common to
   both--there exists something in the way of a Divine nature which the
   religious try to please and the philosophers try to understand. That is
   all he seeks as a hypothesis to start from.

   At Athens the speech was more philosophical in tone, catching the
   spirit of a more educated populace. At Lystra it was more simple,
   appealing to the witness they had of the God "who gives from heaven
   rain and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with gladness". But the
   attitude is the same in both cases. "God who made the heaven and the
   earth in the generations gone by suffered all the nations to walk in
   their own ways"; and "we bring you the good news that you should
   repent". That is the same tone in which at Athens he said, "The times
   of ignorance God overlooked; but now He commandeth men that they should
   all everywhere repent"

   There is one condition, however, on which Paul insisted from the first,
   at Athens and at Lystra and everywhere. The worship of idols and images
   was absolutely pernicious, and concealed from the nations the God whom
   they were groping after and trying to find: they must turn from these
   vain and dead gods to the God that lives. Hence the riot at Ephesus was
   got up by the tradesmen who made images of the Goddess Artemis in her
   shrine, and whose trade was threatened when the worship of images was
   denounced. But the denunciation of images was a commonplace of Greek
   philosophy; and the idea that any efficacy resided in images was widely
   regarded among the Greeks as a mark of superstition unworthy of the
   educated man. Paul stands here on the footing of the philosopher, not
   contravening the State laws by introducing new gods, but expounding to
   the people the true character of the living God whom they are seeking
   after.

   Such was the way in which Paul introduced his Good Tidings to the
   peoples of the province Galatia. From this he went on step by step, and
   his method is summed up by himself, Gal. III 1, "Christ had been
   placarded before their eyes". Now was the opportunity granted them;
   "through this Man is proclaimed remission of sins" (XIII 38). But if
   they despised the opportunity they must beware (XIII 40-1), "inasmuch
   as He hath appointed a day in the which He will judge the world" (XVII
   31).

   Paul's teaching thus was introduced to his pagan audiences in the
   language of the purest and simplest theology current among educated
   men. He started from those thoughts which were familiar to all who had
   imbibed even the elements of Greek education. But even in the more
   advanced stage of his teaching he did not cut it off from the
   philosophy of the time. He never adopted that attitude of antagonism to
   philosophy which became customary in the second century, springing from
   the changed circumstances of that period. On the contrary, he says
   (Col. IV 5-6, cf. Eph. V 16): "Regulate with wisdom your conduct
   towards the outside world, making your market to the full from the
   opportunity of this life. Let your conversation be always gracious,
   seasoned with the salt and the refinement of delicacy, so as to know
   the suitable reply to make to every individual." As Curtius says, with
   his own grace and delicacy of perception, the Attic salt is here
   introduced into the sphere of Christian ethics. Polished courtesy of
   address to all, was valued by Paul as a distinct and important element
   in the religious life; and he advised his pupils to learn from the
   surrounding world everything that was worthy in it, "making your market
   fully from the occasion" (a thought very inadequately expressed in the
   English Version, "redeeming the time," Col. IV 6). But it is in Phil.
   IV 8 that his spirit is expressed in the fullest and most graceful and
   exquisite form, "whatsoever is true, whatsoever is holy, whatsoever is
   just, whatsoever is pure, whatsoever is courteous, whatsoever is of
   fine expression, all excellence, all merit, take account of these,"
   wherever you find these qualities, notice them, consider them, imitate
   them.

   It is not the Jew who speaks in these and many other sentences; it is
   the educated citizen of the Roman world attuned to the most gracious
   and polished tone of educated society. We can faintly imagine to
   ourselves the electrical effect produced by teaching like this on the
   population of the Galatian cities, on a people who were just beginning
   to rise from the torpor of oriental peasant life and to appreciate the
   beauty of Greek thought and the splendour of Roman power. They found in
   Paul no narrow and hard bigot to dash from their lips the cup of
   education; they found one who guided into the right channel all their
   aspirations after culture and progress, who raised them into a finer
   sphere of thought and action, who showed them what wealth of meaning
   lay in their simple speculations on the nature of God, who brought
   within their grasp all that they were groping after. We can imagine how
   sordid and beggarly were the elements that Jewish ritual had to offer
   them in comparison; and we can appreciate the tone of Paul's letter to
   them, where his argument is to recall to their minds the teaching which
   he had given them on his former visit, to contrast with this freedom
   and graciousness and progress which he offered them the hard cut and
   dry life of Jewish formalism, and to ask who had bewitched them into
   preferring the latter before the former. [23]

   It is remarkable that, alike at Lystra and Athens, there is nothing in
   the reported words of Paul that is overtly Christian, and nothing (with
   the possible exception of "the man whom he hath ordained") that several
   Greek philosophers might not have said. That is certainly not
   accidental; the author of Acts must have been. conscious of it; and it
   is a strong proof of their genuineness: no one would invent a speech
   for Paul, which was not markedly Christian. That remarkable omission is
   explained by some commentators in the speech at Athens (e.g.,
   Meyer-Wendt) as due to the fact that the speech was not completed; and
   yet they acknowledge that the speech is a rounded whole, and that all
   the specially Pauline ideas are touched in it. To look for an addition
   naming the Saviour is to ignore the whole character of the speech and
   the scene where it was delivered.

   The same mark of genuineness occurs in the central episode of the
   romance of Thekla, when we disentangle the tale of her trials at
   Pisidian Antioch from the incongruous and vulgar additions by which it
   is disfigured. In the beautiful story as it was originally written,
   probably in the latter part of the first century, Thekla appeared to
   the mass of the Antiochian populace to be a devotee of "the God," bound
   by a rule of service given her by direct Divine command; and she
   commanded their sympathy, in so far as she represented their own cause;
   whereas, if she had been seen to be severing herself absolutely from
   their life and their religion, their sympathy would be incredible. In
   this character lies the proof of its early date: the episode in its
   original form is contrary to the tone of the second century.

   Incidentally we notice what an anachronism it is to suppose that the
   attitude attributed in Acts to Paul could have been conceived by a
   second-century author! The tone of these speeches is of the first
   century, and not of the time when the Apologists were writing. In the
   first century Christianity and the current philosophy alike were
   disliked and repressed by the Flavian emperors, as favouring the spirit
   of unrest and dissatisfaction. But during the second, the Imperial
   Government and the popular philosophy were in league against the
   increasing power of the Church; and the tone of the speeches in
   incredible in a composition of that time.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [23] Curtius's beautiful essay on Paulus in Athen has been constantly
   in the writer's mind in this and some other places.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII.

  THE APOSTOLIC COUNCIL

   1 ORIGIN OF THE COUNCIL.

   (XIV 27) WHEN PAUL AND BARNABAS WERE COME TO ANTIOCH AND HAD GATHERED
   THE CHURCH TOGETHER, THEY REHEARSED ALL THINGS THAT GOD HAD DONE WITH
   THEM, AND HOW THAT HE HAD OPENED A DOOR OF BELIEF UNTO THE NATIONS.
   (28) AND THEY TARRIED NO LITTLE TIME WITH THE DISCIPLES. (XV 1) AND
   CERTAIN PERSONS CAME DOWN FROM JUDEA, AND TAUGHT THE BRETHREN, THAT
   "EXCEPT YE BE CIRCUMCISED, AFTER THE CUSTOM OF MOSES, YE CANNOT BE
   SAVED". (2) AND WHEN PAUL AND BARNABAS HAD NO SMALL DISSENSION AND
   QUESTIONING WITH THEM, THEY (i.e., the Brethren) APPOINTED THAT PAUL
   AND BARNABAS AND CERTAIN OTHER OF THEM SHOULD GO UP TO JERUSALEM ABOUT
   THIS QUESTION. (3) THEY, THEREFORE, BEING BROUGHT ON THEIR WAY BY THE
   CHURCH, PASSED THROUGH BOTH PHOENICE AND SAMARIA, DECLARING THE
   CONVERSION OF THE NATIONS; AND THEY CAUSED GREAT JOY UNTO ALL THE
   BRETHREN.

   A considerable lapse of time is implied in v.28, during which Paul and
   Barnabas resumed their former duties at Antioch (III 1). Luke, as
   usual, states the lapse of time very vaguely, and it is impossible to
   estimate from his words the interval between Paul's return and the
   arrival of the envoys from Jerusalem (V 1). If v. 28 includes only that
   interval, the Apostolic Council cannot have occurred before A.D. 50;
   but if, as is more likely (p. 256), v. 28 refers to the whole residence
   of Paul at Antioch before and after the Council, then probably the
   Council took place in the end of 49.

   A difficulty (which is described in § 2) occurred at Antioch as to the
   obligation of the Gentile members of the Church to come under the full
   ceremonial regulations of the Jewish Law; and it was resolved to send
   delegates to the governing body of the Church in Jerusalem about this
   question. We cannot doubt that this resolution was acquiesced in by
   Paul; probably he even proposed it. Now, the resolution clearly
   involved the recognition that Jerusalem was the administrative centre
   of the Church; and this is an important point in estimating Paul's
   views on administration. With the vision of a statesman and organiser,
   he saw that the Church as a unified and organised body must have an
   administrative centre, and that a Church of separate parts could not be
   unified without such a centre, which should be not a governor over
   subordinates, but the head among equals; and his whole history shows
   that he recognised Jerusalem as necessarily marked out for the centre.
   Hence he kept before the attention of his new foundations their
   relation and duty to Jerusalem; and he doubtless understood the
   solitary injunction given him by the older Apostles on his second visit
   to Jerusalem (p. 57), as involving a charge to remember that duty.

   Moreover, he had already communicated privately with the recognised
   leaders in. Jerusalem, and knew that their sentiments agreed with his
   own; and he must have been fully alive to the great step in
   organisation which would be made, if Antioch set the example of
   referring such a question to authoritative decision in Jerusalem at a
   meeting where it was represented by delegates.

   In the mission of Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem it is noteworthy that
   the Divine action plays no part. The Church in Antioch resolved, and
   the Church sent them to Jerusalem, escorting them on their way. This is
   not accidental, but expresses the deliberate judgment of Paul and of
   Luke. The action that led up to the Council in Jerusalem and the
   ineffective Decree did not originate in Divine revelation.

   The accepted view is different. There is a practically universal
   agreement among critics and commentators of every shade of opinion that
   the visit described as the third in Acts XV is the one that Paul
   describes as the second in Gal. II 1-10. Scholars who agree in regard
   to scarcely any other point of early Christian history are at one in
   this. Now, Paul says in his letter to the Galatians that he made his
   second visit in accordance with revelation. Lightfoot tries to elude
   the difficulty of identifying this second visit by revelation with the
   third visit without revelation recorded in Acts XV: he says (Gal., p.
   125), "here there is no contradiction. The historian naturally records
   the external impulse which led to the mission: the Apostle himself
   states his inward motive." He quotes "parallel cases which suggest how
   the one motive might supplement the other". But the parallels which he
   quotes to support his view seem merely to prove how improbable it is.
   (1) He says that in Acts XIII 2, 4, Barnabas and Paul were sent forth
   by the Holy Spirit through a direct command; while in XIII 3 they are
   sent away by the Church of Antioch. But that is not the proper force of
   XIII 3 (p. 67 f.): the Church merely gave Barnabas and Saul freedom
   from their duties and leave to depart, while the Spirit "sent them
   out". In XV 3, on the contrary, the Church is said to have initiated
   and completed the action. (2) He founds another parallel on the
   mistaken idea that XXII 17 and IX 29 f. refer to the same visit (p.
   62).

   The journey to Jerusalem occupied some time; for in Phoenice and in
   Samaria the envoys took the opportunity of "describing in detail the
   turning of the Nations to God". Here, evidently, the newly accomplished
   step, "the opening of the door of faith to the Nations," is meant. The
   recital of the circumstances and results of the new step caused great
   joy. Now, Luke pointedly omits Judea; and his silence is, as often
   elsewhere, eloquent: the recital would cause no joy in Judea.
   Accordingly, we are not to suppose that the joy was merely caused by
   sympathy with the spread of Christianity, in which the Judean Brethren
   would doubtless rejoice as much as any. The joy of the people of
   Phoenice and Samaria was due to the news of free acceptance of Gentile
   converts: Paul, as he went, preached freely to all and invited all.
   When he did this in Phoenice and Samaria, it follows that he had been
   doing the same in Antioch since his return from Galatia: the door which
   had once been opened, XIV 27, remained permanently open.

   2. THE DISPUTE IN ANTIOCH.

   The new departure in Galatia and Antioch--the opening of the door of
   faith to the Nations--forced into prominence the question of the
   relations of Gentile to Jewish Christians.

   There had already been some prospect that this question would be opened
   up during Paul's second visit to Jerusalem (p. 56 f.); but for the
   moment the difficulty did not become acute. The older Antiochian
   converts, as we have seen, had all entered through the door of the
   synagogue; and had necessarily accepted certain prohibitions as a rule
   of life. But the newly rounded Galatian Churches contained large
   numbers who had joined Paul directly, without any connection with the
   synagogue; in the face of Luke's silence on such a crucial point we
   cannot think that Paul imposed on them any preliminary conditions of
   compliance with Jewish rules; and, if so, we must understand that the
   same interpretation of "the open door" characterised his action in
   Antioch, Phoenice and Samaria.

   The Jews who had been settled for generations in the cities of Syria
   and Asia Minor had lost much of their exclusiveness in ordinary life
   (p. 143). Moreover, the development of events in Antioch had been
   gradual; and no difficulty seems to have been caused there at first by
   this last step. We learn from Paul himself (Gal. II 12 f.) that even
   Peter, already prepared to some extent by his own bold action in the
   case of Cornelius, had no scruple in associating freely with the
   Antiochian Christians in general. But the Jews of Jerusalem were far
   more rigid and narrow; and when some of them came down on a mission to
   Antioch from the Church in Jerusalem, they were shocked by the state of
   things which they found there. They could not well take the ground that
   one Christian should not associate with another; they put their
   argument in a more subtle form, and declared that no one could become
   in the full sense a member of the Church, unless he came under the
   Jewish Law, and admitted on his body its sign and seal: the Nations
   could be received into the Church, but in the reception they must
   conform to the Law (XV 2). The question, it must be clearly observed,
   was not whether non-Jews could be saved, for it was admitted by all
   parties that they could, but how they were saved: did the path of
   belief lie through the gate of the Law alone, or was there a path of
   belief that did not lead through that gate? Had God made another door
   to Himself outside of the Law of Moses? Had He practically set aside
   that Law, and declared it of no avail, by admitting as freely them that
   disregarded it as them that believed and followed it?

   When the question was put in this clear and logical form, we can well
   believe that Jews as a rule shrank from all the consequences that
   followed from free admission of the Nations. We can imagine that some
   who had answered practically by associating with the Gentile
   Christians, repented of their action when its full consequences were
   brought before them. Only rare and exceptional natures could have risen
   unaided above the prejudices and the pride of generations, and have
   sacrificed their Law to their advancing experience. The record confirms
   what we see to be natural in the circumstances. Paul stood immovably
   firm; and he carried with him, after some wavering, the leaders (but
   not the mass) of the Jewish Christians. This point requires careful
   study.

   The occasion of the dissension at Antioch is thus described by our
   three authorities,--Luke, the Apostles at Jerusalem, and Paul himself.

   Acts XV 1. Acts XV 24. Gal. II 12.
   CERTAIN PERSONS CAME DOWN FROM JUDEA AND TAUGHT THE BRETHREN, THAT "IF
   YE BE NOT CIRCUMCISED AFTER THE MANNER OF MOSES, YE CANNOT BE SAVED WE
   HAVE HEARD THAT CERTAIN PERSONS WHICH WENT FORTH FROM US HAVE TROUBLED
   YOU WITH WORDS, SUBVERTING YOUR SOULS [AND (as v. 28 implies) LAYING ON
   YOU GREATER BURDEN THAN THE FOUR NECESSARY POINTS OF RITUAL]. BEFORE
   THAT CERTAIN PERSONS CAME FROM JAMES, PETER USED TO EAT WITH THE
   GENTILES; BUT, WHEN THEY CAME, HE BEGAN TO DRAW BACK AND SEPARATE
   HIMSELF, FEARING THE CHAMPIONS OF CIRCUMCISION. (14) BUT I SAID UNTO
   CEPHAS BEFORE THEM ALL, "HOW COMPELLEST THOU THE NATIONS TO CONFORM TO
   JEWISH CEREMONIAL?"

   It is noteworthy that Luke used the vague expression that "persons came
   down from Judea," which is made more definite in v. 24: the champions
   of circumcision who caused the dissension in Antioch had come on a
   mission from the Apostles in Jerusalem. Luke pointedly avoids any
   expression that would connect the leading Apostles with the action of
   these emissaries. They had been sent from Jerusalem: but in v. 24 the
   Apostles disclaim all responsibility for their action. While Luke gives
   all the materials for judging, the substitution of Judea for Jerusalem
   in his narrative is very significant of his carefulness in the minutiæ
   of expression. It is in no sense incorrect (it puts the general name of
   the whole land in place of the city name), and it guards against a
   probable misconception in the briefest way.

   The incidents described in Gal. II 11-1 are not usually referred to
   this period; and it is therefore advisable to elicit from the words of
   Paul the precise situation as he conceives it. Certain persons had come
   to Antioch from James: James, the head of the Church in Jerusalem, here
   stands alone as "the local representative" of that Church (to borrow a
   phrase from Lightfoot, Ed. Gal., p. 365). These persons had found in
   Antioch a situation that shocked them, and they expressed their
   disapproval so strongly and effectively, that Peter shrank from
   continuing the free intercourse with Gentile Christians which he had
   been practising. What do we learn from the context as to their
   attitude? They are styled "they of the circumcision"; and this phrase
   (as distinguished from the mere general expression of disagreement and
   dislike used about persons of the same class in Gal. II 4) implies that
   they actively championed that cause against Peter. The exact form of
   the argument which moved Peter is not stated explicitly by Paul in his
   hurried and impassioned narrative; but we gather what it was from the
   terms of his expostulation with Peter. He said to him in public: "how
   compellest thou the Nations to Judaise? "The words have no force unless
   Peter, convinced by the Judaistic envoys, had begun to declare that
   compliance with the Law was compulsory, before Gentiles could become
   members of the Church fully entitled to communion with it.

   Accordingly, the situation described in (Gal. II 11-14 is that which
   existed in Antioch after Paul's return from the Galatian Churches. In
   the first part of his letter to the Galatians, Paul recapitulates the
   chief stages in the development of the controversy between the
   Judaising party in the Church, the premonitory signs on his second
   visit to Jerusalem, and the subsequent open dispute with Peter in
   Antioch. The dispute occurred after Paul's second, but before his
   third, visit to Jerusalem, i.e., either between Acts XII 25 and XIII 1,
   or between XIV 26 and XV 4. Now in XV 1 (cp. v. 24) envoys from James
   caused strife in Antioch; and we can hardly think that envoys also came
   from James after XII 25, and caused exactly similar strife, which was
   omitted by Luke but recorded in Gal. II 12.

   When the question was put distinctly in all its bearings and
   consequences before Peter, he was unable to resist the argument that
   Christians ought to observe the Law, as Christ had done, and as the
   Twelve did. On one or two occasions, indeed, Christ had been taunted
   with permitting breaches of the Law; but His actions could be so
   construed only by captious hypercriticism. It is quite clear that Peter
   and the older Apostles did not for a time grasp the full import of
   Christ's teaching on this subject: the actual fact that He and they
   were Jews, and lived as such, made more impression on them than mere
   theoretical teaching. Barnabas, even, was carried away by the example
   of Peter, and admitted the argument that the Gentile Christians ought
   "to live as do the Jews". Paul alone stood firm. The issue of the
   situation is not described by Paul; he had now brought down his
   narrative to the situation in which the Galatian defection arose; and
   his retrospect therefore came to an end, when he reached the familiar
   facts (p. 185 f.). We must estimate from the context the general
   argument and what was the issue. Obviously, the rebuke which Paul gave
   must have been successful in the case of Peter and Barnabas; the
   immediate success of his appeal to their better feelings constitutes
   the whole force of his argument to the Galatians. The power of his
   letter to them lies in this, that the mere statement of the earlier
   stages of the controversy is sufficient to show the impregnability of
   his position and the necessity of his free and generous policy: the
   narrow Judaising tyranny was self-condemned; Peter was wholly with him,
   and so was Barnabas; but the victory had been gained, not by listening
   to the older Apostles, but by obeying "the good pleasure of God, who
   called me by His grace to preach Him among the Gentiles". If the
   hesitation of Peter and Barnabas had resulted in an unreconciled
   dispute, the force of Paul's argument is gone: he has urged at great
   length that the older Apostles were in agreement with him, and accepted
   him as the Apostle called to the Foreign Mission, as they were to the
   Jewish Mission; and, as the climax of his argument for equality of
   privilege, he says: "Peter and even Barnabas wavered for a moment from
   their course, when the gravity of its consequences, viz., the
   supersession of the Judaic Law, was set plainly before them by some of
   their friends; but I pointed out Peter's error in one brief appeal from
   his present wavering to his own past action".

   From this analysis we see that the issue of the situation implied in
   Gal. II 11-14 is described in Acts XV 2, 7: Barnabas joined Paul in
   combating the Judaising party, and Peter championed the cause in
   emphatic and noble terms at the subsequent Council in Jerusalem. That
   follows naturally on the interrupted narrative of the Epistle: the
   history as related in Acts completes and explains the Epistle, and
   enables us to appreciate the force of Paul's argument and its
   instantaneous effect on the Galatian Churches.

   It is an interesting point, that Peter used at the Council the argument
   in favour of freedom with which Paul had pressed him in Antioch. Paul
   said to him, "In practice thou, a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles; how
   then compellest thou the Gentiles to act according to the Jewish Law?
   "Struck with this argument, Peter puts it in a more general form to the
   Council, "Why put a yoke on them which neither we nor our fathers could
   bear? "It is true to nature that he should employ to others the
   argument that had convinced himself.

   It must, however, be confessed that while Galatians leads up
   excellently to Acts, and gains greatly in force from the additional
   facts mentioned there, Acts is silent about the facts narrated in
   Galatians. The eyewitness's narrative gains from the historian and
   stands out in new beauty from the comparison; but here Acts seems to
   lose by being brought into juxtaposition with the narrative of the
   eye-witness. To our conception the omission of all reference to the
   wavering of Barnabas and Peter appears almost like the sacrifice of
   historic truth, and certainly loses a picturesque detail. But the
   difference of attitude and object, I think, fully explains the
   historian's selection amid the incidents of the controversy. For him
   picturesque details had no attraction; and the swerving of all the Jews
   except Paul from the right path seemed to him an unessential fact, like
   hundreds and thousands of others which he had to leave unnoticed. The
   essential fact which he had to record was that the controversy raged,
   and that Paul and Barnabas championed the cause of freedom.

   But, it may be objected, Barnabas had wavered, and it is not accurate
   to represent him as a champion along with Paul. We reply that Paul does
   not make it clear how far Barnabas had gone with the tide: the matter
   was one of tendency, more than of complete separation. Peter began to
   withdraw and separate himself [24] from familiar communion with the
   Gentile Christian: the resident Jews joined him in concealing their
   real sentiment and their ordinary conduct towards the non-Jewish
   members of the Church: even Barnabas was carried off his feet by the
   tide of dissembling. These words would be correct, if Barnabas had
   merely wavered, and been confirmed by Paul's arguments in private.
   Paul's public rebuke was not addressed to Barnabas, but only to Peter.
   There is a certain difficulty in the record; but I confess that, after
   trying honestly to give full emphasis to the difficulty, I see no
   reason why we should not, as the issue of the facts in Gal. II 11-14
   conceive Barnabas to have come forward as a thorough-going advocate of
   the Pauline doctrine and practice.

   Moreover, the difficulty remains, and becomes far more serious, on the
   ordinary view that the incidents of Gal. II 11-14 occurred after the
   Council in Jerusalem. According to that view, Barnabas, when delegates
   came from Jerusalem (Acts XV 2, 24), resisted them strenuously,
   represented the cause of freedom as an envoy to Jerusalem, and obtained
   an authoritative Decree from the Apostles disowning the action of the
   delegates, and emphatically condemning it as "subverting your souls"
   thereafter delegates came again from James, the same Apostle that had
   taken the foremost part in formulating the recent Decree; [25] but this
   time Barnabas, instead of resisting, weakly yielded to their arguments.

   Worse, almost, is the conduct of Peter in that view. When the ease came
   up before the Council to be considered in all its bearings and solemnly
   decided, he, "after there had been much discussion" (in which we may be
   sure that the consequences were fully emphasised by the Judaising
   party), appeared as the most outspoken advocate of freedom, and
   declared that "we must not demand from them what we ourselves have been
   unable to endure" Shortly after the Council (on that view), Peter went
   to Antioch and put in practice the principle of freedom for which he
   had contended at the Council. But "certain persons came from James" the
   same Apostle that had supported him in the Council; these persons
   reopened the controversy; and Peter abandoned his publicly expressed
   conviction, which in a formal letter was declared with his approval to
   be the word of the Holy Spirit.

   We are asked to accept as a credible narrative this recital of
   meaningless tergiversation, which attributes to Peter and to Barnabas,
   not ordinary human weakness and inability to answer a grave issue at
   the first moment when it is presented to them, but conduct devoid of
   reason or sanity. Who can wonder that many who are asked to accept this
   as history, reply that one of the two authors responsible for the two
   halves of the recital has erred and is untrustworthy? For the truth of
   history itself one must on that theory distrust one of the two
   documents. That is not the faith, that is not the conduct, which
   conquered the world! The only possible supposition would be that the
   Apostles were men unusually weak, ignorant, and inconstant, who
   continually went wrong, except where the Divine guidance interposed to
   keep them right. That theory has been and is still held by some; but it
   removes the whole development of Christianity out of the sphere of
   history into the sphere of the supernatural and the marvellous, whereas
   the hypothesis on which this investigation is based is that it was a
   process intelligible according to ordinary human nature, and a proper
   subject for the modern historian.

   It is true that Peter once before denied his own affirmed principles,
   but that was when he was younger, when he was a mere pupil, when a
   terrible strain was put on him; but this denial is supposed to have
   been made when he was in the maturity of his power, after he had
   experienced the quickening sense of responsibility as a leader of the
   Church for many years, and after his mind and will had been enlarged
   and strengthened at the great Pentecost (see p. 365).

   Further, according to the view stated by Lightfoot, the feeble action
   of Peter and Barnabas in Antioch produced lasting consequences: it "may
   have prepared the way for the dissension between Paul and Barnabas
   which shortly afterwards led to their separation. From this time
   forward they never appear again associated together." If it was so
   serious, the total omission of it by Luke becomes harder to understand
   and reconcile with the duty of a historian; whereas, if it was (as we
   suppose) a mere hesitation when the question was first put explicitly,
   it was not of sufficient consequence to demand a place in his history.

   Peter's visit to Antioch was not of the same character as his visits to
   Samaria and other Churches at an earlier time, in which he was giving
   the Apostolic approval to the congregations established there. The
   first visit of Barnabas to Antioch, followed by the Antiochian
   delegation to Jerusalem (XI 28, XII 25), and the recognition of Paul
   and Barnabas as Apostles (Gal. II 9), had placed Antioch on a
   recognised and independent basis (XIII 1). In Luke's view, therefore,
   as in Paul's, Peter's visit was not a step in the development of the
   Church in Antioch, as Barnabas's had been.

   3. THE COUNCIL.

   (XV 4) AND WHEN THEY WERE COME TO JERUSALEM, THEY WERE RECEIVED BY THE
   CHURCH AND THE APOSTLES AND THE ELDERS, AND THEY REHEARSED ALL THINGS
   THAT GOD HAD DONE WITH THEM. (5) BUT THERE ROSE UP CERTAIN OF THE SECT
   OF THE PHARISEES WHO BELIEVED, SAYING, "IT IS NEEDFUL TO CIRCUMCISE
   THEM, AND TO CHARGE THEM TO KEEP THE LAW OF MOSES". (6) AND THE
   APOSTLES AND THE ELDERS WERE GATHERED TOGETHER TO CONSIDER OF THIS
   MATTER. (7) AND WHEN THERE HAD BEEN MUCH DISCUSSION, PETER ROSE AND
   SPOKE. (12) AND ALL THE MULTITUDE KEPT SILENCE; AND THEY HEARKENED UNTO
   BARNABAS AND PAUL, WHO REHEARSED WHAT SIGNS AND WONDERS GOD HAD WROUGHT
   AMONG THE NATIONS BY THEM. (13) AND AFTER THEY HAD CEASED, JAMES SPOKE.

   At Jerusalem there occurred in the first place a general meeting of the
   Church as a whole to receive and welcome the delegates. The Apostles
   and the Elders are specified as taking part in the meeting; and the
   separate article before each name implies distinct action of each body.
   At this meeting the delegates explained the circumstances which had
   caused their mission; and the extreme members of the Judaising party,
   who are described here as Pharisees, stated their view forthwith.

   A mark of the developed situation since Paul's last visit must be noted
   in v. 4. Paul and Barnabas now expound in a formal and public way all
   their missionary experience; but on their previous visit, Paul
   privately submitted to the leaders of the Church his views as to
   missionary enterprise.

   Thereupon, a special meeting of the Apostles and the Elders was held to
   consider the matter, and a long discussion took place. Peter delivered
   a speech in favour of complete freedom for the new converts; and the
   effect which he produced was shown by the patient hearing accorded to
   Barnabas and to Paul, as they recounted the proofs of Divine grace and
   Divine action in the test that God was with them. Thus, the course of
   the meeting was very similar to the discussion that followed after the
   conversion of Cornelius (XI 1-18. The general sense was clearly against
   the claim of the extreme Judaistic party (called "them of the
   circumcision" XI 2, Gal. II 12).

   But, while the champions of circumcision were clearly in the minority,
   apparently a decided feeling was manifest in favour of some concessions
   to the Jewish feeling and practice: the Nations were to be received
   into the Church, but the widened Church was not to be apart from and
   independent of the old Jewish community: it was to be "a rebuilding of
   the tabernacle of David". To render possible a real unanimity of
   feeling, the Nations must accept the fundamental regulations of purity.
   The chairman's speech summed up the sense of the meeting in a way that
   was universally accepted. James, the recognised head of the Church in
   Jerusalem, said:--

   (XV 14) SYMEON HATH REHEARSED HOW FIRST GOD TOOK CARE TO GATHER FROM
   AMONG THE NATIONS A PEOPLE FOR HIS NAME. (15) AND TO THIS AGREE THE
   WORDS OF THE PROPHETS: AS IT IS WRITTEN, (16) "I WILL BUILD AGAIN THE
   TABERNACLE OF DAVID, (17) THAT THE RESIDUE OF MEN MAY SEEK AFTER THE
   LORD, AND ALL THE NATIONS, OVER WHOM MY NAME IS PRONOUNCED," SAITH THE
   LORD, WHO MAKETH THESE THINGS (18) KNOWN FROM THE BEGINNING OF TIME.
   [26] (19) WHEREFORE MY VOICE IS THAT WE TROUBLE NOT THEM WHICH FROM
   AMONG THE NATIONS TURN TO GOD; (20) BUT SEND INSTRUCTIONS TO THEM TO
   ABSTAIN FROM THE POLLUTIONS OF IDOLS AND FROM MARRIAGE WITHIN THE
   DEGREES FORBIDDEN BY THE LAW, AND FROM WHAT IS STRANGLED, AND FROM the
   use of BLOOD as food. (21) FOR MOSES FROM ANCIENT GENERATIONS HATH IN
   EVERY CITY THEM THAT PREACH HIM, AS HE IS READ IN THE SYNAGOGUES EVERY
   SABBATH.

   James grounds his advice for partial conformity on the fact, v. 21,
   that the Mosaic Law had already spread widely over the cities of the
   empire, and that the existing facts which facilitated intercourse
   between Jews and "God-fearing" pagans should be continued. He grounds
   his advice for freedom from the rest of the Law on the declared will of
   God, first by prophecy in time long past, and afterwards by revelation
   to Peter, that the Nations should be admitted to the tabernacle of
   David, from which he infers that their own duty is to make admission
   easy.

   Incidentally we observe that James used the Septuagint Version, quoting
   loosely from Amos IX 11, 12, passage where the telling point for his
   purpose occurs only in the Greek and not in the Hebrew Version.

   Another point of development since Paul's second visit to Jerusalem
   must be noticed here. On the second visit, as Paul declares, the
   recognised leaders in Jerusalem gave him no advice and no instruction,
   except to remember the poverty of the brethren there. It would. be hard
   to put that in more emphatic terms than he uses (p. 56). But on the
   third visit, the delegates bring a question for settlement, and receive
   from the recognised leaders in Jerusalem an authoritative response,
   giving a weighty decision in a serious matter of practical work. a
   decision that would have been epoch-making, if it had been permanently
   carried into effect. On the second visit the difficulty could be
   foreseen; between the second and third visit it became acute; at the
   third visit it was settled in a way that was a distinct rebuff to the
   Judaising party, but not a complete triumph for the party of freedom.
   It would not be honest to use the words of Gal. II 10 about the visit
   described in Acts XV.

   Another contrast between the second and the third visit must be
   observed. The Church sent forth several delegates along with Paul and
   Barnabas on the third journey; but on the second they were the sole
   delegates. The common view, which identifies the second visit of Gal.
   II 1-10 with the third visit of Acts XV, is defended by its supporters
   on the ground that Titus, who went along with Paul (Gal. II 1), was one
   of the additional delegates mentioned, XV 2. This argument sins against
   the facts. In Gal. II 1 Titus is defined as a subordinate, and not as
   one of the delegates; [27] we have no reason to think that any
   subordinates went up to the Council, whereas it was necessary for the
   work of the second visit to use assistants. Moreover, we may be certain
   that, if Paul did take any subordinates with him to the Council, he was
   too prudent and diplomatic to envenom a situation already serious and
   difficult by taking. an uncircumcised Greek with him. It was different
   on a later visit, when the authoritative decree had decided against
   circumcision, or on an earlier visit, before the question was raised;
   but when that question was under discussion, it would have been a harsh
   and heedless hurt to the susceptibilities of the other party, to take
   Titus with him; and Paul never was guilty of such an act. The example
   of Timothy shows how far he went about this time in avoiding any chance
   of hurting Jewish feeling.

   4. THE DECREE.

   (XV 22) THEN IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE APOSTLES AND ELDERS, WITH THE WHOLE
   CHURCH, TO CHOOSE MEN OUT OF THEIR COMPANY, AND SEND THEM TO ANTIOCH
   WITH PAUL AND BARNABAS, namely, JUDAS CALLED BARSABAS, AND SILAS, CHIEF
   MEN AMONG THE BRETHREN. (23) AND THEY SENT A LETTER BY THEIR MEANS:
   "THE APOSTLES AND THE ELDERS [BRETHREN] [28] UNTO THE BRETHREN WHICH
   ARE OF THE NATIONS IN ANTIOCH AND SYRIA AND CILICIA, GREETING. (24)
   FORASMUCH AS WE HAVE HEARD THAT CERTAIN WHICH WENT OUT FROM US HAVE
   TROUBLED YOU WITH WORDS, SUBVERTING YOUR SOULS; TO WHOM WE GAVE NO
   COMMANDMENT; (25) IT SEEMED GOOD UNTO US, HAVING COME TO ONE ACCORD, TO
   CHOOSE OUT MEN AND SEND THEM UNTO YOU WITH OUR BELOVED BARNABAS AND
   PAUL, (26) MEN THAT HAVE HAZARDED THEIR LIVES FOR THE NAME OF OUR LORD
   JESUS CHRIST. (27) WE HAVE SENT THEREFORE JUDAS AND SILAS, WHO
   THEMSELVES ALSO SHALL TELL YOU THE SAME THINGS BY WORD OF MOUTH. (28)
   FOR IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND TO US, TO LAY UPON YOU NO
   GREATER BURDEN THAN THESE NECESSARY THINGS. (29) THAT YE ABSTAIN FROM
   THINGS SACRIFICED TO IDOLS, AND FROM BLOOD, AND FROM THINGS STRANGLED,
   AND FROM MARRIAGE WITHIN THE DEGREES; FROM WHICH YE KEEP YOURSELVES, IT
   SHALL BE WELL WITH YOU. FARE YE WELL."

   The Decree is, as Lightfoot says, a compromise. On the one hand the
   extreme Judaising party is entirely disowned and emphatically
   condemned, as "subverting the souls" of the Gentiles. But, on the other
   hand, part of the Law is declared to be obligatory; and the word
   selected is very emphatic (epanankes). If this word be taken in its
   full sense, the Decree lacks unity of purpose and definiteness of
   principle; it passes lamely from side to side. Now it seems impossible
   to suppose that Paul could have accepted a Decree which declared mere
   points of ritual to be compulsory; and one of them he afterwards
   emphatically declared to be not compulsory (I Cor. VIII 4 f.). But
   those who had listened to the speeches of Peter and James, and were
   familiar with the situation in which the question had emerged, were
   prepared to look specially at the exordium with its emphatic
   condemnation of the Judaising party; and thereafter, doubtless, they
   took the concluding part as a recommendation, and regarded the four
   points as strongly advised in the interests of peace and unity.

   But the real power of a law lies in its positive enactment; and most
   people would look only to what the Decree ordered. Now, whether or not
   the last sentences must bear the sense, they certainly may naturally
   bear the sense, that part of the Law was absolutely compulsory for
   salvation, and that the Nations were released from the rest as a
   concession to their weakness: "we lay on you no greater burden than
   these necessary conditions". This seemed to create two grades of
   Christians: a lower class of weaker persons, who could not observe the
   whole Law, but only the compulsory parts of it, and a higher class, who
   were strong enough to obey the whole Law. The Gentile Christians were
   familiar in the pagan religions with distinctions of grade; for stages
   of initiation into the Mysteries existed everywhere. It was almost
   inevitable that a Decree, which lays down no clear and formal principle
   of freedom, should in practice be taken as making a distinction between
   strong and weak, between more and less advanced Christians; and it is
   certain that it was soon taken in that sense.

   The question is often asked, why this letter was not addressed also to
   the Churches of Galatia; and several answers are suggested. But the
   answer which seems obvious from our point of view is that the letter
   was addressed only to those who asked the question. The provincial
   organisation of the Church began through the compulsion of
   circumstances (p. 135): there must either be a provincial organisation
   or no organisation. The principle, when it has been once stated, is
   self-evident. Circumstances made Antioch the centre of the Church in
   the province Syria and Cilicia; and the address of this letter attests
   the recognition of that fact and its consequences.

   Hence, when Paul went forth on his next journey, he did not communicate
   the Decree to the Churches in Syria and Cilicia, XV 41, because they
   had already received it, when it was first sent out. But, when he and
   Silas reached Galatia, "they delivered them the decrees for to keep,
   which had been ordained of the Apostles and Elders," XVI 4. But the
   Bezan Reviser, not understanding this delicate distinction,
   interpolated the statement in XV 41, that Paul and Silas "delivered the
   instructions of the Apostles and Elders".

   5. THE RETURN TO ANTIOCH.

   (XV 30) SO THEY, BEING SET FREE TO DEPART, CAME DOWN TO ANTIOCH; AND
   HAVING GATHERED THE MULTITUDE TOGETHER, THEY DELIVERED THE LETTER. (31)
   AND WHEN THEY HAD READ IT, THEY REJOICED AT THE ENCOURAGEMENT. (32) AND
   JUDAS AND SILAS ON THEIR OWN ACCOUNT ALSO, INASMUCH AS THEY WERE
   PROPHETS, ENCOURAGED THE BRETHREN AT GREAT LENGTH, AND CONFIRMED THEM.
   (33) AND AFTER THEY HAD SPENT SOME TIME, THEY WERE SET FREE BY THE
   BRETHREN TO DEPART IN PEACE TO THEM THAT SENT THEM FORTH; (34) But it
   pleased Silas to abide there still. (35) AND PAUL AND BARNABAS TARRIED
   IN ANTIOCH, TEACHING AND PREACHING THE WORD OF THE LORD, WITH MANY
   OTHERS ALSO. (36) AND AFTER CERTAIN DAYS PAUL SAID . . .

   As in XI 24, so here, v. 32, the qualification of Judas and Silas for
   exhorting the congregation is carefully stated. Luke lays such evident
   stress on proper qualification, that he seems to have considered Divine
   gifts necessary in any one that was to address a congregation (p. 45).

   After the Council, Paul and Barnabas returned to their ordinary duties
   in Antioch, where the number of qualified prophets and teachers was now
   larger than in XIII 1. They remained there a short time (v. 36, cp. IX
   19, 23. The second journey began probably in the spring of the year 50.

   At some period v. 34 was deliberately omitted from the next, from the
   mistaken idea that v. 33, declared the actual departure of Judas and
   Silas: but the officials of the Church in Antioch (the Elders?) simply
   informed Judas and Silas that their duties were concluded and they were
   free to return home, and Silas did not avail himself of the permission.
   Considering how XII 25 prepares the way for XIII 5, we must hold that
   XV 34 is genuine and prepares for XV 40; and the fact that the Bezan
   Reviser found 34 is the text and added to it the comment "and Judas
   went alone," constitutes a distinct proof of its genuineness. It is not
   that any difficulty need be found in Paul selecting Silas from
   Jerusalem, for Barnabas here takes Mark from Jerusalem (XIII 13). But
   it is one of the points of Luke's style to furnish the material for
   understanding a new departure, and the very marked statement that Silas
   voluntarily remained, when his official duty was declared to be at an
   end, makes the next event much more intelligible (p. 176). There is in
   the sequence of thought 33-4a certain harshness (characteristic of Luke
   when he wants to draw attention to a point); and this led to the
   omission of 34 in the great MSS. and by many modern editors.

   6. THE SEPARATION OF PAUL AND BARNABAS.

   (v 36) AND AFTER SOME DAYS PAUL SAID UNTO BARNABAS, "LET US RETURN NOW
   AND VISIT THE BRETHREN IN EVERY CITY WHEREIN WE PROCLAIMED THE WORD OF
   THE LORD, HOW THEY FARE". (37) AND BARNABAS WAS MINDED TO TAKE WITH
   THEM JOHN ALSO, WHO WAS CALLED MARK. (38) BUT PAUL THOUGHT NOT GOOD TO
   TAKE WITH THEM HIM THAT WITHDREW FROM THEM FROM PAMPHYLIA AND WENT NOT
   WITH THEM TO THE WORK. (39) AND THERE AROSE A SHARP CONTENTION, SO THAT
   THEY PARTED ASUNDER ONE FROM THE OTHER; AND BARNABAS TOOK MARK WITH
   HIM, AND SAILED AWAY UNTO CYPRUS; (40) BUT PAUL CHOSE SILAS AND WENT
   FORTH, BEING COMMENDED BY THE BRETHREN TO THE GRACE OF THE LORD: AND HE
   WENT THROUGH SYRIA AND CILICIA, CONFIRMING THE CHURCHES.

   Barnabas here passes out of this history. The tradition, as stated in
   the apocryphal Periodoi Barnabæ, a very late work, was that he remained
   in Cyprus till his death; and the fact that Mark reappears at a later
   stage without Barnabas, is in agreement. At any rate his work, wherever
   it was carried on, did not, in Luke's estimation, contribute to work
   out the idea of the organised and unified Church. That idea was
   elaborated in Paul's work; and the history is guided by Paul's activity
   from the moment when he began to be fully conscious of the true nature
   of his work. Others contributed to the earlier stages, but, as it
   proceeded, all the other personages became secondary, and Paul more and
   more the single moving genius.

   The choice of Silas was, of course, due to his special fitness for the
   work, which had been recognised during his ministration in Antioch.
   Doubtless he had shown tact and sympathy in managing the questions
   arising from the relations of the Gentile Christians to the Jews. His
   sympathies had also been shown by his preferring to remain in the mixed
   and freer congregation in Antioch, when he had been at liberty to
   return to Jerusalem.

   The name Silas is a familiar diminutive of Silvanus; and the full and
   more dignified form is employed in the superscription of the two
   letters to the Thessalonians. Silvanus is a Latin name; and Silas is
   implied in XVI 37 to have been a Roman citizen. It may, however, be
   looked on as certain that he was a Hebrew, for only a Hebrew would have
   been a leading man among the Brethren at Jerusalem (XV 22). His double
   character, Hebrew and Roman, was in itself a qualification for a
   coadjutor of Paul; and, doubtless, the Roman side of his character
   caused that freedom from narrow Judaistic prejudice which shines
   through his action.

   It appears from the term employed in v. 40 that Silas took the place of
   Barnabas, not of Mark. The latter was a mere unofficial companion in
   every case, as is shown by the word used. [29] The verbs in the next
   few verses are all singular; though it is clear that Silas is concerned
   in many of the actions. The singular was preferred by Luke because
   certain of the actions were special to Paul, the choosing of Silas and
   of Timothy. There is a decided harshness in the narrative that follows,
   owing to the variation between the singular and the plural. At some
   points in the action Paul monopolises the author's attention; and
   probably the expression, harsh though it be grammatically, corresponds
   to the facts. At the opening of the journey Paul alone is the subject:
   now at the opening the new comrade was untrained to the work. After a
   time the plural begins, XVI 4, and, wherever travelling is described,
   it is employed; but, when the direction given to missionary work is
   alluded to, Silas disappears, and Paul alone is the subject, XVII 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [24] Imperfects, not aorists.

   [25] "The Apostolic letter seems to have been drawn up by him"
   (Lightfoot, Ed. Gal., p. 112, II 12).

   [26] The Bezan Text, and many other authorities, have "saith the Lord
   who doeth this. (18) Known to the Lord from the beginning of time is
   His work.

   [27] sumparalabon, cp. XII 25 and pp. 59, 71, 177.

   [28] Dr. Blass's explanation of this word as an accidental corruption
   is highly probable.

   [29] sumparalambeno XII 25, XV 37, p. 170/
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIII.

  HISTORY OF THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA

   1. THE VISIT OF PAUL AND SILAS.

   (XVI 1) AND HE CAME ALSO TO DERBE AND TO LYSTRA; AND BEHOLD A CERTAIN
   DISCIPLE WAS THERE NAMED TIMOTHY, THE SON OF A JEWESS WHICH BELIEVED;
   BUT HIS FATHER WAS A GREEK. (2) THE SAME HAD A GOOD REPUTATION AMONG
   THE BRETHREN THAT WERE IN LYSTRA AND ICONIUM. (3) HIM WOULD PAUL HAVE
   TO GO FORTH WITH HIM; AND HE TOOK AND CIRCUMCISED HIM BECAUSE OF THE
   JEWS THAT WERE IN THOSE PARTS, FOR THEY ALL KNEW THAT HIS FATHER WAS A
   GREEK. (4) AND AS THEY WERE PASSING THROUGH THE CITIES, THEY in each
   DELIVERED THEM THE DECREES FOR TO KEEP, WHICH HAD BEEN ORDAINED OF THE
   APOSTLES AND ELDERS THAT WERE AT JERUSALEM. (5) THE CHURCHES THEN WERE
   STRENGTHENED IN THE FAITH, AND INCREASED IN NUMBER DAILY. (6) AND THEY
   MADE A MISSIONARY PROGRESS THROUGH THE PHRYGIAN REGION OF the province
   GALATIA (the Phrygo-Galatic Region.)

   In v. 1 it is implied that Derbe and Lystra are a pair, constituting a
   district (p. 110). The work of this journey is divided according to
   districts: (1) Syria and Cilicia, a single Roman province; (2) Derbe
   and Lystra, a region of the province Galatia, which is here indicated
   by its two cities as the most convenient way, because in one. of them a
   considerable halt had to be described; (3) the Phrygian region of the
   province Galatia; (4) Asia, where preaching was forbidden, was
   traversed transversely to its northwestern point after an unsuccessful
   effort to enter the province Bithynia for missionary purposes. Between
   Cilicia and Derbe the great realm of Antiochus is omitted from the
   narrative, as being a non-Roman territory and out of Paul's plans.

   Derbe and Lystra are grouped together as a Region, but the author
   dwells only on Lystra. The only reason why they are grouped together
   and separated from the districts that precede and follow, lies in the
   Roman classification, which made them a group. But in order to mark
   that Lystra alone is referred to in the sequel, the historian repeats
   the preposition before it: "he came to Derbe and to Lystra".

   In v. 2 Lystra and Iconium are grouped together as the district where
   Timothy was well known. It is implied that he was not known at Derbe.
   This again is true to the facts of commerce and intercourse. Lystra is
   much nearer Iconium than it is to Derbe; and geographically, Lystra
   goes along with Iconium, while Derbe goes with Laranda and that part of
   Lycaonia. Neither blood nor Roman classification could prevent commerce
   from running in its natural channels (XIV 19). The nearest city to
   Iconium was Lystra, and the nearest to Lystra was Iconium; and the
   relations between them must always be close.

   The historian is careful to add in this case, as he does about the
   Seven Deacons (VI 3), about Cornelius (X 22, cp. 2), and as Paul does
   about Ananias (XXII 12), and as is implied in I 21, that Timothy had so
   lived as to bear a good character in the district where he was known.
   It is not meant that Paul went about taking the opinion of Lystra and
   Iconium about Timothy, any more than it is meant in X 22 that
   Cornelius's messengers went collecting evidence about him all over
   Palestine: we may be sure that in such a selection Paul depended on his
   own insight, guided perhaps by Divine approval. The author adds this
   information about the good repute of Timothy, because he considered
   good repute one of the conditions of appointment to any office however
   humble in the Church. He is interested in all questions of
   organisation, and we may compare what he says about the qualification
   of preachers (pp. 45, 174). As a point of literary style we note that
   the event of a new and important character is marked by an unusually
   detailed account of him.

   We infer from the expression that in vv. 1-3 Paul and Silas have not
   gone beyond Lystra; and that it is a misconception to think that in v.
   2 Paul is in Iconium. At Lystra Paul felt that, along the route which
   he intended to take, the Jews knew Timothy's father to be a Greek: he
   was going along a frequented route of trade, on which were colonies of
   Jews in communication with each other, for there can be no doubt that
   his plan was to go by Iconium and Antioch into Asia. The opinion has
   sometimes been held that at this point Paul abandoned the visitation of
   his Churches as contemplated in XV 36; and that "the fact that God put
   this companion in his way served as a warning to him to go direct from
   Lykaonia to a new mission-field" (see Weiss's note on XVI 2). But, on
   the contrary, our view is that, when Luke records any deliberately
   formed intention on Paul's part, he leaves us to understand that it was
   carried out, if no intimation to the contrary is given (p. 342); and
   that Timothy here was taken as companion for the route as first
   planned, to fill the place of John Mark on the previous journey. There
   seems no reason to think (as Blass does) that one or more subordinates
   accompanied Paul from Syrian Antioch. It is not improbable that Paul,
   owing to previous experience, thought of Timothy as a companion even
   before he left Antioch.

   Paul then proceeded on his intended route through the Phrygian Region
   of the province, whose two cities visited on the previous journey were
   Iconium and Pisidian Antioch. The cities are not specially named, as
   nothing striking or important occurred in either. It is implied that no
   Church had been rounded on the former journey in Pisidia or Pamphylia;
   and hence Paul had no Churches to review and confirm there. The
   reference to Pisidia (a Region of the province Galatia) in XIV 24 does
   not suggest that any success was attained there; and we may find in the
   list of I Peter I 1 a clear proof that there was no Church in Pamphylia
   at a date considerably later. That list is clearly intended to exhaust
   the Church in Asia Minor; and it mentions every province except Lycia
   and Pamphylia (which, therefore, did not yet contain any Churches, and
   seem to have long resisted Christianity), and Cilicia, which was part
   of Syria. The list, incidentally, shows that already in the first
   century a certain coherence was perceptible between the various
   Churches of Asia Minor, as distinguished from Syria and Cilicia. That
   springs naturally from the political conditions, and it grew stronger
   as time passed, until the two divisions became the patriarchates of
   Constantinople and of Antioch.

   At this point Luke inserts an account of Paul's action in the cities
   through which he was making his way. It is in his style to put this
   account near the beginning and expect the reader to apply it in all
   subsequent cases (p. 72). It does not apply to Cilicia (p. 173), and
   could not therefore be given sooner. In each city Paul and Silas
   delivered the Decree, and urged the Gentile converts to observe the
   necessary points of Jewish ritual; and everywhere the congregations
   were vigorous and growing. We cannot mistake the emphasis laid by the
   historian on Paul's loyal determination to carry out the Apostolic
   Decree. and his anxiety to go as far as was honestly possible in the
   way of conciliating the Jews: that is in keeping with his view that the
   entire blame for the rupture between Paul and the Jews lay with the
   latter. But, if Paul was so anxious at this time to recommend the
   Decree to his converts, why does he never refer to it in any of his
   subsequent letters, even where he touches on points that were formally
   dealt with in the Decree, and why does he give advice to the
   Corinthians about meat offered to idols, which certainly strains the
   Decree to the utmost, if it be not actually inconsistent with it? The
   explanation lies in the immediate consequences of his action in the
   Galatian Churches.

   2. THE DESERTION OF GALATIANS.

   Soon after Paul left the province Galatia, there came to it
   missionaries of the Judaising party, who taught the Galatian Churches
   to take that view of the Apostolic Decree which we have described on p.
   172 f. They pointed out that Paul himself recognised the principle that
   circumcision was needed for the higher grade of Christian service; for
   when he selected Timothy for a position of responsibility in the
   Church, he, as a preliminary, performed the rite on him; and they
   declared that thereby he was, in effect, "preaching circumcision" (Gal.
   V 11). Further, they threw doubt on his sincerity in this act; and
   insinuated that he was reluctantly complying with necessity, in order
   to "conciliate and ingratiate himself with" the mass of the Church (see
   Lightfoot on Gal. I 10). Above all they insisted on the existence of
   the two grades of Christians; they pointed out that Paul had himself
   delivered and recommended the Apostolic Decree which recognised the
   distinction of weaker and stronger Brethren; and they urged the
   Galatians to strive to attain to the higher, and not rest content with
   the lower grade, which was a mere concession to weakness.

   Such teaching found a ready response in the minds of the Galatian
   Christians. Many of them had first heard Paul preaching in the
   synagogue, many had come under the influence of Judaism to some extent
   even before Paul entered Galatia; all were ready to accept the belief
   that, as the Jews were always the first in Paul's own plans, and as
   Christianity came from the Jews, therefore it was right to imitate the
   Jews (p. 144). It was precisely the most enthusiastic and devoted, who
   would be eager to rise to the highest and most difficult stage of
   Christian life.

   Further, the Judaistic emissaries urged that Paul was merely the
   messenger and subordinate of the Twelve, that these original Apostles
   and leaders of the Church must be accepted as the ultimate guides. and
   that where Paul swerved from their teaching he was in error; and they
   claimed likewise to be the messengers come direct from the Twelve to
   communicate their latest views. Paul had recently delivered the Decree
   of the older Apostles; and now later messengers supplemented and
   elucidated the Decree.

   3. LETTER TO THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA.

   Paul saw that his vision of the Church that should unite the civilised
   world was a vain dream, if it were to be bound by the fetters of
   Judaism; and he felt, as soon as he heard of this defection, that it
   must be met at once. If these Churches, his first foundations towards
   the west, were to pass under the party of slavery, his work was ruined
   at its inception: the blow to his policy and his influence was ruinous.
   One of the arguments by which the change had been produced was
   especially galling to him: his efforts at conciliation were taken
   advantage of to distort his motives, and to represent him as
   inconsistent and temporising, and his attempts to soothe the prejudices
   of the Judaistic party were treated as attempts at compromise. Hence he
   bursts forth at the outset in a strain of terrific vehemence (which I
   purposely give as far as possible in Lightfoot's language): "Though we
   (i.e., Silas and I), or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you
   any gospel other than that which we preached unto you, let him be
   accursed. As we have told you before, so now once more I say, if any
   man preacheth unto you any gospel other than that which ye received,
   let him be anathema. What! does my boldness startle you? Is this, I
   ask, the language of a time-server? Will any one say now that, careless
   of winning the favour of God, I seek to conciliate men, to ingratiate
   myself with men? I speak thus strongly, for my language shall not be
   misconstrued, shall wear no semblance of compromise" (Gal. I 8-10). And
   towards the end of his letter he returns to the same point: "What! do I
   who have incurred the deadly hatred of the Judaisers, who am exposed to
   continual persecution from them, do I preach circumcision? If so, why
   do they persecute me? Surety what scandalises them in my teaching, the
   crucifixion with its atonement for sin, has been done away with, if I
   have, as they say, taken to their method, and begun to preach
   circumcision" (V 11).

   Satisfied with the vehemence of the first outburst, and the sarcasm of
   the second, Paul wastes no argument to prove that he has been
   consistent throughout. He knows that the Galatic Churches cannot really
   believe that part of his adversaries' arguments: they feel in their
   hearts that he has always been true to the first Gospel; and he
   proceeds to remind them of its origin and its hold on them, in order to
   enforce the conclusion that they must cling to the first Gospel,
   whoever it be that preaches any other. His argument, therefore, is
   directed to show that he came among them in the beginning with a
   message direct from God: "the Gospel which was preached by me is not
   after man" (I 11): "it came to me through revelation of Jesus". Then he
   proceeds to show, by appealing to the facts, that he had not had the
   opportunity of learning anything from the recognised pillars of the
   Church. When it pleased God to reveal Jesus in him, bitter enemy of the
   Church as he was, he "conferred not with flesh and blood," but went
   away for solitary meditation into Arabia. He was made by God His
   Apostle to the Nations years before he conferred with any of the
   Apostles. Twice at a later date did he go up to Jerusalem, in one case
   remaining fifteen days and seeing only Peter and James, in the second
   going up at the Divine command to help the poor at Jerusalem (II
   10)--on which occasion, as a matter of fact, no injunction was laid on
   his Greek assistant Titus to accept the Judaic rite--and receiving the
   recognition of his Apostleship, but no instruction, from the heads of
   the Church (p. 56 f.).

   Here in passing let us ask the question, Did Paul in this
   autobiographical sketch, given in such solemn yet vehement style, with
   the oath by God that he is not deceiving them--did Paul, I say, omit to
   mention that he had paid another visit to Jerusalem between the two
   that he describes? The question seems almost an insult; yet many
   scholars of the highest order consider that he here leaves out of sight
   the visit described by Luke, XI 28-30, and XII 25. I confess that,
   after studying all that the orthodox scholars say on this point I find
   a higher conception of Paul's character and truthfulness in the
   position of the critics who conclude that Luke utterly misconceived the
   sequence of events in early Christian history and interpolated an
   intermediate visit where no visit occurred, than in Bishop Lightfoot's
   position that "of this visit Paul makes no mention here". Paul 's
   argument is rounded on the rarity of his visits, and his aim is to show
   that on these visits he received no charge from the Twelve. Reason and
   truth rebel against the idea that he left out the middle visit. If he
   passed over part of the facts here, what situation can be imagined in
   which he would feel obliged to tell all the facts? And on that
   supposition, that Paul omitted a fact so essential to his purpose and
   to honest autobiography, the entire body of orthodox scholars have
   built up their theory of early Church history! It cannot be! Luke's
   second visit must be Paul's second visit; and when we build boldly on
   that plain foundation, the history rises before us in order and
   symmetry.

   But further, it is obvious that Paul appeals with absolute confidence
   to this second visit as proving his ease: he evidently conceives that
   he has merely to recall the facts to the Galatians in order to make all
   clear. Now, there is one situation in which a man is obviously not
   receiving from others, and that is when he is actually giving to them:
   that was the situation on the second visit according to Luke, and that
   explains Paul's confidence in appealing to his second visit.

   Again, Paul knew that he had clever and skillful arguers to contend
   against. How could he expose himself to the retort that he was missing
   out the intermediate visit to Jerusalem? How could he feel confident
   that the Galatians, who had already shown themselves so liable to be
   deceived by specious arguments, would be able at once to reply to that
   obvious retort?

   Finally, Paul, as an honest and rational man, could not appeal to the
   events of the third visit according to Luke, as proving beyond question
   that he received on that occasion no charge from the Apostles. He did
   receive a charge then, and he delivered that charge to the Churches.

   Why, then, it may be objected, does Paul not mention his third visit?
   The answer is obvious. He is engaged in proving that, when he gave his
   first message to the Churches of Galatia, he had never received any
   charge from the older Apostles. His whole point is: "Cleave to my first
   message, which came direct from God: if Silas and I afterwards said
   anything inconsistent with that message, we are accursed". The third
   visit to Jerusalem did not take place until after the Galatian Churches
   were rounded, and therefore it could find no place in the
   autobiographical retrospect of I 12-II 10; but it is clearly implied in
   the scornful and impetuous sentence, I 8: "Even if Silas and I (as
   these emissaries have been telling you), if an angel from heaven,
   should preach to you a Gospel contrary to that which we originally
   preached to you, a curse be upon us".

   After this autobiographical sketch, Paul refers to an instance which
   showed very strongly his independence in face of the leading Apostle
   Peter, and then passes on to the third and main argument of his
   adversaries, rounded on the supposed grades in Christian life. His line
   of reply is to bring out in various ways the truth that the Judaistic
   form is the lower stage, and the Gospel of freedom which had been
   delivered to the Galatians the higher stage. The Law alone was not
   sufficient for salvation, inasmuch as Christ had died to supplement its
   deficiency; therefore life according to the Law could not be the
   highest stage of Christian life. How could the Galatians be so foolish
   as to think that, having begun in the Spirit, their higher stage of
   development would be in the flesh (III 3)? The Christians who have
   entered through the Spirit are the children of the free woman, but the
   Judaistic Christians are the children of the bond woman and lower in
   rank (IV 31). The latter may rise to be free, but, if the former sink
   under bondage to the Law, they sacrifice their Christianity. The
   Judaistic Christians are children under care of a pedagogue, who have
   to be raised by Christ to the full growth and freedom (III 23-4). In a
   variety of other striking and impressive figures the superiority of the
   free to the Judaistic Christians is illustrated. It cannot be said that
   there is any reasoning or argument: illustrations are used to bring the
   Galatians to a clear consciousness of what they have in their own
   minds. Argument is too external a process; Paul merely points out to
   the Galatians that "they already know".

   As a whole, the letter is an eloquent and powerful claim for freedom of
   life, freedom of thought, freedom of the individual from external
   restrictions and regulations, freedom for all to work out their own
   salvation and develop their own nature: "Ye were called for freedom" (V
   13). And towards the conclusion this turns to a glorification of love.
   Their freedom is freedom to do right, not freedom to do everything;
   "the whole Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shalt love
   thy neighbour as thyself" (V 14). Selfishness, i.e., "the flesh," is
   the absolute antithesis of love, i.e., "the Spirit "; and the receiving
   of Christ is "crucifying the flesh with the passions thereof" (V 24).
   The essence of the true life lies neither in observing the Law nor in
   being above the Law, but in building anew one's nature (VI 15).

   4. THE DATE OF THE GALATIAN EPISTLE

   The date of the Galatian Epistle, though out of chronological order,
   may be considered here. The defection of the Galatians occurred shortly
   after Paul's second visit (not shortly after his first visit, as
   Lightfoot strangely takes it, I 6, p. 42). He spent the summer of 50
   among them; and the Judaie emissaries may have come in the summer of 51
   or 52. But, amid the sudden changes of plan on his journey, Paul could
   not receive many letters from Galatia. Moreover, his epistle seems to
   imply the possession of full knowledge, such as could not be gained
   from a mere letter: if the Galatians wrote to him, it is most
   improbable that they explained their changed attitude and all the
   reasons for it. No! Paul's information comes from the personal report
   of a trusty messenger; and the obvious suitability of Timothy for the
   duty occurs at once to one's mind. Further, it is clear that Timothy
   was with Paul during a considerable part of the stay in Corinth, for he
   joined in the greeting at the opening of both letters to Thessalonica.
   It is therefore hardly possible that he could have gone home, visited
   his friends, satisfied himself as to the condition of the Churches, and
   returned to Corinth before Paul left that city. Moreover, if Paul heard
   at that time, it is not probable that he would have spent so much time
   on a voyage to Jerusalem and a visit to Syrian Antioch before visiting
   personally the wavering Churches.

   We conclude, then, that Timothy went to pay a visit to his friends, not
   before the latter part of Paul's stay in Corinth; and, when he found
   out the real state of affairs in South Galatia, he went to meet Paul
   with the news. Owing to Paul's movements, there are only two places
   where Timothy could have met him,--Ephesus and Syrian Antioch. The
   former is most unlikely, for, if Timothy left Corinth some months
   before Paul, he could have no assurance of meeting him there, where he
   merely called in passing. It is probable, then, that he brought his
   report to Paul at Syrian Antioch after the fourth visit to Jerusalem
   (p. 265). With the entire want of definite evidence, we cannot get
   beyond this estimate of probabilities; and it is most likely that
   Timothy stayed with Paul during the whole of his residence at Corinth,
   sailed with him as far as Ephesus, and landed there in order to go home
   on a visit to his friends, while Paul went on to Jerusalem. We shall at
   a later stage find that Paul often sent deputies to inspect his
   Churches; and their reports often drew forth an Epistle to correct an
   erring Church (pp. 275, 284).

   In this way, when Paul reached Syrian Antioch, or immediately after he
   reached it, at the end of his visit to Cæsareia and Jerusalem, he found
   Timothy waiting with the disheartening news, in the summer of 53: and
   at once he sat down and wrote the letter which has been preserved to
   us.

   One question remains. Why was Paul content with writing? Why did he not
   start at once himself? Personal intervention is always more effective
   in such cases. But, in the first place, a letter would certainly travel
   faster than Paul could get over the ground; and he would not lose a
   moment in letting the Galatians hear what he thought. In the second
   place, he could hardly sacrifice the opportunity of reviewing the
   Churches in Syria and Cilicia that lay on his way: everywhere he would
   be besieged with entreaties to stay for a little, and he could not well
   hurry past them without at least a brief stay of one or two days in
   each. Finally there are frequently reasons which make it impossible to
   hurry away on a serious journey like that from Syria to South Galatia.
   Paul was only human.

   When Paul wrote the letter he must, on our view, have been intending to
   arrive very soon after his letter. It may be asked why he makes no
   reference to this intention. But we should rather ask, if, according to
   the ordinary view, he were not coming immediately, why he did not make
   some explanatory statement of the reasons that compelled him at such a
   crisis to be content with a letter and to do without a visit (p. 275
   f.). The messenger who carried the letter carried also the news that
   Paul was following close after, as fast as his necessary detentions at
   Antioch and other cities on the way permitted; and part of the effect
   of the letter lay in the fact that the writer was going to be present
   in person very soon.

   The Epistle to the Galatians, therefore, belongs to A.D. 53, and was
   written just when he was starting on his third journey, but before he
   had begun that scheme of a general contribution among all his new
   Churches which is so prominent in the three following letters, I, II
   Cor. and Rom.

   To this date one objection may perhaps be urged: in IV 10, Paul asks,
   "Are ye observing days and months and seasons and years?" It has been
   urged that this implies that the Sabbatical year 54-55 was observed by
   the Galatians when the letter was written. But Lightfoot has rightly
   rejected this argument: Paul asks in sarcasm: "Are ye observing the
   whole series of institutions? are ye taking up anew a ritual like that
   of paganism from which you were set free?"

   5. THE LATER HISTORY OF THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA

   The later history of the churches of Galatia is obscure. They took part
   in the contribution raised by the Pauline Churches for the poor
   brethren at Jerusalem (p. 286 f.), and were represented in the
   delegation that carried it to Jerusalem. Thereafter history ends, and
   tradition alone preserves some scraps of information about Antioch,
   Iconium and Lystra. Derbe alone is not mentioned either in the
   tradition (so far as my knowledge extends) or in the history of the
   Church until we come down to A.D. 381, when its bishop Daphnus was
   present at the Council of Constantinople. The only hope of further
   information about the four Churches lies in archæology; but unless the
   spade can be brought to supplement the too scanty records that remain
   above ground, little can be hoped for. [30]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [30] The Christian antiquities of Antioch and Iconium will be discussed
   at some length in my Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia. If my dream of
   excavating the deserted sites of Derbe and Lystra be ever realised,
   they would form the subject of a special treatise.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX.

  THE COMING OF LUKE AND THE CALL INTO MACEDONIA

   1. ACROSS ASIA.

   (XVI 6) AND THEY, HAVING MADE PROGRESS THROUGH THE PHRYGIAN REGION OF
   the province GALATIA, AND HAVING BEEN PREVENTED BY THE HOLY SPIRIT FROM
   SPEAKING THE WORD IN the Province ASIA, (7) AND HAVING REACHED A POINT
   OVER AGAINST MYSIA (or perhaps, on the skirts of Mysia), WERE
   ATTEMPTING TO MAKE THEIR WAY INTO the province BITHYNIA; AND THE SPIRIT
   OF JESUS SUFFERED THEM NOT; (8) AND, NEGLECTING MYSIA, THEY CAME DOWN
   TO the harbour TROAS. (9) AND A VISION APPEARED TO PAUL BY NIGHT: THERE
   WAS A CERTAIN MAN, A MACEDONIAN, STANDING, AND EXHORTING HIM AND
   SAYING, "COME OVER TO MACEDONIA, AND HELP US". (10) AND WHEN HE SAW THE
   VISION, IMMEDIATELY WE SOUGHT TO GO OUT from Asia INTO the province
   MACEDONIA, ASSUREDLY GATHERING THAT "GOD HAS SUMMONED US TO BRING THE
   GOOD NEWS TO THEM".

   Paul and his companions made a missionary progress through the Phrygian
   Region of the province Galatia [31] , and then crossed the frontier of
   the province Asia: but here they were prevented from preaching, and the
   prohibition was made absolute for the entire province. They therefore
   kept to the north across Asian Phrygia with the intention of entering
   the adjoining Roman province Bithynia; but when they came opposite
   Mysia, and were attempting to go out of Asia into Bithynia, the Spirit
   of Jesus suffered them not. They therefore kept on towards the west
   through Mysia, without preaching in it (as it was part of Asia), until
   they came out on its western coast at the great harbour of Alexandria
   Troas.

   The expression marks clearly the distinction between the prohibition to
   preach in Asia, while they were actually in it, and the prohibition
   even to set foot in Bithynia. It was necessary for them to cross Asia
   in order to fulfill the purpose. for which they were about to be
   called.

   The geographical facts of this paragraph are stated with great
   clearness in the text followed by the Authorised Version and the older
   editions; but the reading which they give is rounded on Manuscripts of
   an inferior class (while the great MSS. have a different text), and is
   characterised by the sequence of three participial clauses, a sequence
   almost unique in Luke's writings, and therefore suspected and altered.
   But the strange form of construction by a succession of participles
   suits so perfectly the strange and unique character, the hurry, and the
   deep-lying emotion of the passage (see § 2) that, as Lightfoot's
   judgment, Bibl Essays, p. 237, perceived, the inferior MSS. must here
   be followed. The text of the great MSS., though it does not quite
   conceal the feeling of the passage, yet obscures it a little, and, by
   approximating more to Luke's ordinary form of sentence, loses that
   perfect adaptation of form to sense, which so often strikes us in this
   history. We have already noticed, p. 115, that Luke loves the triple
   iteration of successive words or clauses to produce a certain effect in
   arresting attention.

   The reading of the inferior MSS. suits the South-Galatian theory
   admirably; but that fact never weighed with me for a moment in the
   choice. As long as the question between the two theories was alone
   concerned, the thought of following the inferior MSS. did not even
   present itself: I followed the great MSS. and interpreted them in the
   best way possible, neither looking aside nor feeling the slightest wish
   to adopt the rival text. But when the question of literary feeling came
   up, after the delicate adaptation of expression to emotion throughout
   Acts gradually revealed itself, it became clear that here the choice
   lay between a cast of sentence unusual in this author, and one that was
   quite in his ordinary style, in a place where the feeling and the facts
   were strange and unique: hesitation was then impossible: the unusual
   emotion demanded the unusual expression. [32]

   In this passage the distinction observed by Luke between Roman
   provincial designations and the older national names is specially
   clear. Wherever he mentions districts of mission work, he classifies
   according to the existing political (Roman) divisions (as here, the
   Phrygo-Galatic Region, Asia, Bithynia, Macedonia); but where he is
   simply giving geographical information, he either uses the pre-Roman
   names of lands (e.g., Mysia), or omits the land from his narrative.

   The "neglecting" of Mysia is a remarkable expression, one of those by
   which Luke compels attention at a critical point. As a rule he simply
   omits a country where no preaching occurred (p. 90 f.); but here he
   accumulates devices to arrest the reader. His effects are always
   attained, not by rhetorical devices, but by order and marshalling of
   facts; and here, in a missionary tour, the "neglecting" of a great
   country is a fact that no one can pass over. Not catching the
   intention, many understand "passing without entering" (parelthontes):
   Dr. Blass rightly sees that a traveller cannot reach Troas without
   crossing Mysia; but he goes on to alter the text, following the Bezan
   reading (dielthontes; see p. 235).

   The journey across Mysia led naturally down the course of the river
   Rhyndacos, and past the south shore of the great lakes. A tradition
   that Paul had travelled by the sacred town of the goddess Artemis at
   the hot springs of the river Aisepos can be traced as early as the
   second century, accompanied with the legend that he had rounded a
   chapel in the neighbourhood. If he went down the Rhyndacos, it is
   practically certain that he must have passed close to, or through,
   Artemaia on his way to the great harbour. Under the influence of this
   tradition, the Bezan Reviser changed the text of v. 8, reading "making
   a progress through Mysia". But evangelisation on the journey across
   Mysia was forbidden, v. 6. The tradition, however, is interesting, and
   there is further trace of very early foundations in this quarter, which
   will be treated elsewhere.

   The rapid sweep of narrative, hurrying on from country to country, is
   the marked feature of this paragraph; yet it merely places before us
   the facts, as Paul's missionary aims found no opening, and he was
   driven on and on. But. on the current North-Galatian theory, this
   effect, which is obviously intended, is got, not by simply stating
   facts, but by slurring over one of Paul's greatest enterprises, the
   evangelisation of North Galatia and the rounding of several Churches in
   a new mission district. But the first words of v. 6 describe a progress
   marked by no great events, a steady continuance of a process fully
   described in the context (p. 72).

   2. THE CALL INTO MACEDONIA.

   This is in many respects the most remarkable paragraph in Acts. In the
   first place the Divine action is introduced three times in four verses,
   marking and justifying the new and great step which is made at this
   point. In XIII 1-11 also the Divine action is mentioned three times,
   leading up to the important development which the author defines as
   "opening the door of belief to the Nations"; but in that case there
   were only two actual manifestations of the Divine guidance and power.
   Here on three distinct occasions the guidance of God was manifested in
   three different ways--the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Jesus, and the
   Vision--and the three manifestations all lead up to one end, first
   forbidding Paul's purpose of preaching in Asia, then forbidding his
   purpose of entering Bithynia, and finally calling him forward into
   Macedonia. Now, amid "the multitude of the revelations" (II Cor. XII 7)
   granted to Paul, Luke selects only those which have a distinct bearing
   on his own purpose as an historian, and omits the vast majority, which
   were all important in their influence on Paul's conduct and character.
   What is the reason for his insistence in this case?

   It is not easy to account on strictly historical grounds for the
   emphasis laid on the passage to Macedonia. Lightfoot, in his fine essay
   on "the Churches of Macedonia," recognises with his usual insight that
   it is necessary to acknowledge and to explain that emphasis; but his
   attempt cannot be called successful. As he himself acknowledges, the
   narrative gives no ground to think that the passage from Troas to
   Philippi was ever thought of by Luke as a passage from Continent to
   Continent. A broad distinction between the two opposite sides of the
   Hellespont as belonging to two different Continents, had no existence
   in the thought of those who lived in the Ægean lands, and regarded the
   sea as the path connecting the Ægean countries with each other; and the
   distinction had no more existence in a political point of view, for
   Macedonia and Asia were merely two provinces of the Roman Empire,
   closely united by common language and character, and divided from the
   Latin-speaking provinces further west.

   After an inaccurate statement that Macedonia was "the natural highroad
   between the East and the West" (the Ægean was the real highroad, and
   Corinth was "on the way of them that are being slain to God," Church in
   R. E., p. 318 f.), Lightfoot finds in Alexander the Great the proof of
   the greatness of the step which Luke here records in Paul's work, and
   even says that "each successive station at which he halted might have
   reminded the Apostle of the great services rendered by Macedonia as the
   pioneer of the Gospel!" That is mere riot of pseudo-historical fancy;
   and it is hardly possible to believe that Lightfoot ever composed it in
   the form and with the suggestion that it has in this essay. This is one
   of not a few places in his Biblical Essays in which the expansion of
   his own "briefest summary" by the aid of notes of his oral lectures
   taken by pupils has not been thoroughly successful. The pages of the
   essay amount to a practical demonstration that, on mere grounds of
   historical geography alone, one cannot explain the marked emphasis laid
   on this new departure.

   In the second place, the sweep and rush of the narrative is unique in
   Acts: point after point, province after province are hurried over. The
   natural development of Paul's work along the great central route of the
   Empire was forbidden, and the next alternative that rose in his mind
   was forbidden: he was led across Asia from the extreme south-east to
   the extreme north-west corner, and yet prevented from preaching in it;
   everything seemed dark and perplexing, until at last a vision in Troas
   explained the purpose of this strange journey. As before (p. 104), we
   cannot but be struck with the fact, that in this paragraph the idea
   seems to clothe itself in the natural words, and not to have been
   laboriously expressed by a foreign mind. And the origin of the words
   becomes clear when we look at the concluding sentence: "immediately we
   sought to go forth into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that God has
   called us for to preach the Gospel unto them'". The author was with
   Paul in Troas; and the intensity of this paragraph is due to his
   recollection of the words in which Paul had recounted the vision, and
   explained the whole Divine plan that had guided him through his
   perplexing wanderings. The words derive their vivid and striking
   character from Paul, and they remained indelibly imprinted on Luke's
   memory.

   3. THE COMING OF LUKE.

   The introduction of the first person at this striking point in the
   narrative must be intentional. This is no general statement like XIV 22
   (though even there the first person has a marked effect, p. 123). Every
   one recognises here a distinct assertion that the author was present.
   Now the paragraph as a whole is carefully studied, and the sudden
   change from third to first person is a telling element in the total
   effect: if there is any passage in Acts which can be pressed close, it
   is this. It is almost universally recognised that the use of the first
   person in the sequel is intentional, marking that the author remained
   in Philippi when Paul went on, and that he rejoined the Apostle some
   years later on his return to Philippi. We must add that the precise
   point at which the first-personal form of narrative begins is also
   intentional; for, if Luke changes here at random from third to first
   person, it would be absurd to look for purpose in anything he says. The
   first person, when used in the narrative of XVI, XX, XXI, XXVII,
   XXVIII, marks the companionship of Luke and Paul; and, when we carry
   out this principle of interpretation consistently and minutely, it will
   prove an instructive guide. This is the nearest approach to personal
   reference that Luke permits himself; and he makes it subservient to his
   historical purpose by using it as a criterion of personal witness.

   Luke, therefore, entered into the drama of the Acts at Troas. Now it is
   clear that the coming of Paul to Troas was unforeseen and
   unforeseeable; the whole point of the paragraph is that Paul was driven
   on against his own judgment and intention to that city. The meeting,
   therefore, was not, as has sometimes been maintained, pre-arranged.
   Luke entered on the stage of this history at a point, where Paul found
   himself he knew not why. On the ordinary principles of interpreting
   literature, we must infer that this meeting, which is so skillfully and
   so pointedly represented as unforeseen, was between two strangers: Luke
   became known to Paul here for the first time. Let us, then, scrutinise
   more closely the circumstances. The narrative pointedly brings together
   the dream and the introduction of the first-personal element, "when he
   saw the vision, straightway we sought to go"; and collocation is
   everywhere one of the most telling points in Luke's style.

   When we examine the dream, we observe that in it "a certain man of
   Macedonia" was seen by Paul. Paul did not infer his Macedonian origin
   from his words, but recognised him as a Macedonian by sight. Now, there
   was nothing distinctive in the appearance or dress of a Macedonian to
   mark him out from the rest of the world. On the contrary, the
   Macedonians rather made a point of their claim to be Greeks; and
   undoubtedly they dressed in the customary Greek style of the Ægean
   cities. There was, therefore, only one way in which Paul could know the
   man by sight to be a Macedonian--the man in the dream was personally
   known to him; and, in fact, the Greek implies that it was a certain
   definite person who appeared (aner tis, Latin quidam, very often
   followed by the person's name; V 1, VIII 9, IX 10, 33, 36, X 1, etc.).

   In the vision, then, a certain Macedonian, who was personally known to
   Paul, appeared, and called him over into Macedonia. Now, it has been
   generally recognised that Luke must have had some connection with
   Philippi; and we shall find reason to think that he had personal
   knowledge of the city. Further, Paul, whose life had been spent in the
   eastern countries, and who had come so far west only a few days past,
   was not likely to be personally acquainted with natives of Macedonia.
   The idea then suggests itself at once, that Luke himself was the man
   seen in the vision; and, when one reads the paragraph with that idea,
   it acquires new meaning and increased beauty. As always, Luke seeks no
   effect from artifices of style. He tells nothing but the bare facts in
   their simplest form; and leaves the reader to catch the causal
   connection between them. But we can imagine how Paul came to Troas in
   doubt as to what should be done. As a harbour, it formed the link
   between Asia and Macedonia. Here he met the Macedonian Luke; and with
   his view turned onwards he slept, and beheld in a vision his Macedonian
   acquaintance beckoning him onward to his own country.

   Beyond this we cannot penetrate through the veil in which Luke has
   enveloped himself. Was he already a Christian, or did he come under the
   influence of Christianity through meeting Paul here? for the
   prohibition against preaching in Asia would not preclude Paul from
   using the opportunity to convert an individual who was brought in
   contact with him. No evidence remains; "something sealed the lips of
   that evangelist," so far as he himself is concerned. But we have
   gathered from the drift of the passage that they met as strangers; and
   in that case there can be no doubt where the probability lies. The
   inference that they met accidentally as strangers is confirmed by the
   fact that Luke was a stranger to the Levant (p. 317). In one of the
   many ways in which men come across one another in travelling, they were
   brought into contact at Troas: Luke was attracted to Paul; and the
   vision was taken by Luke, as well as by Paul, for a sign. He left all,
   and followed his master.

   All this he suggests to us only by the same kind of delicate and subtle
   literary devices, consisting merely in collocation of facts, order of
   words, and slight changes of form, by which he suggested the
   development of Paul's method and the change in his relation to Barnabas
   (p. 82 f.). Luke always expects a great deal from his readers, but some
   critics give too little attention to literary effect. These will ask me
   for proofs; but proofs there are none. I can only point to the facts:
   they that have eyes to see them know; they that have not eyes to see
   them will treat this section (and others) as moonstruck fancy. All that
   can be said is that, if you read the book carefully, observing these
   devices, you recognise a great work; if you don't, and follow your
   denial to its logical consequences, you will find only an assortment of
   scraps. Probably there will always be those who prefer the scraps.

   It is quite in Luke's style to omit to mention that Paul related the
   vision to his companions. So also he omitted in XIII 7, 8, to mention
   that Paul expounded the doctrine to the proconsul. Luke always expects
   a great deal from his readers. But here the Bezan Reviser inserts the
   missing detail, as he so often does (e.g., XIII 9).

   While there is no authority for the circumstances of the meeting,
   conjecture is tempting and perhaps permissible. It will appear that
   Luke, though evidently acquainted with Philippi and looking to it as
   his city, had no home there. His meeting with Paul, then, did not take
   place merely on an excursion from Philippi; and he was probably one of
   the many Greeks in all ages who have sought their fortune away from
   home. His acquaintance with medicine is certain from the words of Paul
   himself, "Luke, the beloved physician" (Col. IV 14), and from the cast
   of his language in many places; [33] and it is quite natural and
   probable that the meeting might have been sought by Paul on that
   account, if Luke was resident in Troas and well known there.

   4. THE ENTRANCE INTO MACEDONIA.

   (XVI 1l) WE SET SAIL THEN FROM TROAS, AND MADE A STRAIGHT RUN TO
   SAMOTHRACE; AND THE DAY FOLLOWING we came TO the harbour NEAPOLIS, (12)
   AND THENCE TO PHILIPPI, WHICH IS THE LEADING CITY OF ITS DIVISION OF
   MACEDONIA, AND having the rank of A ROMAN COLONY: AND WE WERE IN THIS
   CITY TARRYING CERTAIN DAYS.

   It is remarkable with what interest Luke records the incidents from
   harbour to harbour. He has the true Greek feeling for the sea, a
   feeling that must develop in every race possessing any capacity for
   development, and any sensitiveness to the influences of nature, when
   settled round the Ægean coasts; for the Ægean sea is so tempting, with
   its regular winds and regular sunset calm, when the water lies dead,
   with a surface which looks like oil, dense and glistening and dark,
   that it seems to invite one to walk upon it.

   To a certain extent the wealth of maritime details might be accounted
   for by the loving interest with which Luke dwelt on his journeys in
   company with Paul; but caution that the author recognises as needful.
   this does not fully explain the facts. Every one who compares Luke's
   account of the journey from Cæsareia to Jerusalem (which might be
   expected to live in his memory beyond others), or from Puteoli to Rome,
   with his account of any of the voyages, must be struck by the
   difference between the scanty matter-of-fact details in the land
   journeys, and the love that notes the voyage, the winds, the runs, the
   appearance of the shores, Cyprus rising out of the sea, the Cretan
   coast close in by the ship's side, the mountains towering above it from
   which the blast strikes down. At the same time, it is quite clear that,
   though he reported nautical matters with accuracy, he was not a trained
   and practised sailor. His interest for the sea sprang from his natural
   and national character, and not from his occupation.

   Philippi was an inland city, and Neapolis was its harbour. Having once
   mentioned the port, Luke leaves it to be understood in XX 6. As usual,
   Paul goes on to the great city, and does not preach in the port (cp.
   XIV 26, XVIII 18).

   The description of the dignity and rank of Philippi is unique in Acts;
   nor can it be explained as strictly requisite for the historian's
   proper purpose. Here again the explanation lies in the character of the
   author, who was specially interested in Philippi, and had the true
   Greek pride in his own city. Perhaps he even exaggerates a little the
   dignity of Philippi, which was still only in process of growth, to
   become at a later date the great city of its division. Of old
   Amphipolis had been the chief city of the division, to which both
   belonged. Afterwards Philippi quite outstripped its rival; but it was
   at that time in such a position, that Amphipolis was ranked first by
   general consent, Philippi first by its own consent. These cases of
   rivalry between two or even three cities for the dignity and title of
   "First" are familiar to every student of the history of the Greek
   cities; and though no other evidence is known to show that Philippi had
   as yet began to claim the title, yet this single passage is conclusive.
   The descriptive phrase is like a lightning flash amid the darkness of
   local history, revealing in startling clearness the whole situation to
   those whose eyes are trained to catch the character of Greek
   city-history and city-jealousies.

   It is an interesting fact that Luke, who hides himself so completely in
   his history, cannot hide his local feeling; and there every one who
   knows the Greek people recognises the true Greek! There lies the
   strength, and also the weakness, of the Greek peoples; and that quality
   beyond all others has determined their history, has given them their
   strength against the foreigner, and their weakness as a united country.

   Nationality is more conspicuous in the foibles and weaknesses of
   mankind, whereas great virtues and great vices have a common character
   in all nations. Luke shows himself the Greek when he talks of the
   Maltese as "the barbarians"; when he regards the journey to Jerusalem
   as a journey and nothing more; when he misrepresents the force of a
   Latin word (p. 225); when he is blind to the true character of the
   Roman name (the tria nomina); when he catches with such appreciation
   and such ease the character of Paul's surroundings in Athens. His
   hatred of the Jews and his obvious inability to feel the slightest
   sympathy for their attitude towards Paul, are also Greek. On the other
   hand, his touches of quiet humour are perhaps less characteristically
   Greek; but he was not the old Greek of the classical period: he was the
   Greek of his own age, when Greece had been for centuries a power in
   Asia; when Macedonia had long been the leading Greek country; when
   Stoicism and Epicureanism were the representative philosophies (XVII
   18);and when the Greek language was the recognised speech of many
   eastern Roman provinces, along with the Latin itself. To appreciate
   Luke, we must study the modern Greek, as well as the Greek of the great
   age of freedom.

   I know that all such mundane characteristics are commonly considered to
   be non-existent in "the early Christian"! But an "early Christian" did
   not cease to be a man, and a citizen. Christianity has not taught men
   to retire from society and from life; and least of all did Pauline
   Christianity teach that lesson. It has impressed on men the duty of
   living their life better, of striving to mould and to influence society
   around them, and of doing their best in the position. in which they
   were placed. When Luke became a Christian, he continued to be a Greek,
   and perhaps became even more intensely a Greek, as his whole life
   became more intense and more unselfish. It is a complete and ruinous
   error for the historical student to suppose that Luke broke with all
   his old thoughts, and habits, and feelings, and friends, when he was
   converted. He lived in externals much as before; he observed the same
   laws of politeness and good breeding in society (if he followed Paul's
   instructions); his house, his surroundings, continued much the same; he
   kept up the same family names; and, when he died, his grave, his
   tombstone, and his epitaph, were in the ordinary style. It took
   centuries for Christianity to disengage itself from its surroundings,
   and to remake society and the rules of life. Yet one rarely finds among
   modern historians of Christianity in the first two centuries of its
   growth, any one who does not show a misconception on this point; and
   the climax, perhaps, is reached in one of the arguments by which Dr.
   Ficker attempts to disprove the Christian character of the epitaph of
   the Phrygian second-century saint, Avircius Marcellus, on the ground
   that a Christian epitaph would not be engraved on an attar. I presume
   his point is that the altar-shaped form of tombstone was avoided by the
   Christians of that time, because it was connected with the pagan
   worship. But a Pauline Christian would hold that "a gravestone will not
   commend us to God; neither, if we use it not, are we the worse, nor if
   we use it, are we the better" (I Cor. VIII 8); and Avircius Marcellus
   mentions Paul, and Paul alone among the Apostles, in his epitaph. In
   fact, almost all the early Christian epitaphs at Eumeneia are engraved
   on altars, because there that shape was fashionable; whereas at Apameia
   they are rarely on altars, because there that shape was not in such
   common use.

   Our view that the author of Acts was a Macedonian does not agree with a
   tradition (which was believed to occur in Eusebius, see p. 389) that
   Luke was an Antiochian. The modern authorities who consider this
   tradition to be rounded on a confusion between Lucas and Lucius, an
   official of the Antiochian Church (XIII 1), seem to have strong
   probability on their side. The form Lueas may very well be a vulgarism
   for Lucius; but, except the name, these two persons have nothing in
   common. The name Lucas is of most obscure origin: it may be a shortened
   form of Lucius, or Lucilius, or Lucianus, or Lucanus, or of some Greek
   compound name. The Latin names, Lucius, Lucilius, etc., were spelt in
   earlier Greek Leukios, in later Greek Loukios; and the change may
   roughly be dated about A.D. 50-75, though Leukios in some rare cases
   occurs later, and possibly Loukios sometimes earlier. It is noteworthy
   that Loukas has the later form.

   The Bezan "we" in XI 28 will satisfy those who consider the Bezan Text
   to be Lukan; but to us it appears to condemn the Bezan Text as of
   non-Lukan origin. The warmth of feeling, which breathes through all
   parts of Acts dealing with the strictly Greek world, is in striking
   contrast with the cold and strictly historical tone of the few brief
   references to Syrian Antioch. If the author of Acts was a native bred
   up in Antioch, then we should have to infer that there lay behind him
   an older author, whose work he adapted with little change. But our view
   is that the Reviser had an Antiochian connection, and betrays it in
   that insertion, which to him recorded a historical fact, but to us
   seems legend in an early stage of growth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] ten Phrugian kai Galatiken choran. The use of kai to connect two
   epithets of the same person or place is regular in Greek (so Saulos ho
   kai Paulos, Saul alias Paul); e.g., Strabo speaks of a mouth of the
   Nile as to Kanobikon kai herakleotikon, the mouth which is called by
   both names, Canopic and Heracleotic, where we should say, "the Canopic
   or Heracleotic mouth". I need not dwell on such an elementary point.
   Another point of Greek construction comes up in XVIII 23: when a list
   is given in Greek, the items of which are designated by adjectives with
   the same noun, the regular order is to use the noun with the first
   alone. Strabo has numberless examples: 767, ton parakeimenon Arabion
   ethnon Nabataion te kai Chaulotopaion kai Agraion; 751, ho Arkeuthes
   potamos kai ho Orontes kai ho Labotas; 802, to Mendesion stoma kai to
   Tanitikon (there are some interesting and delicate examples in Strabo,
   on which we cannot here dwell, of the distinction between the double
   epithet and the double item); Herodotus, II 17, to de Bolbitinon stoma
   kai to Boukolikon and so Luke groups two Regiones as ten Galatiken
   choran kai Phrugian, XVIII 23. The North-Galatian theorists insist that
   Phrugian in XVI 6 must be a substantive; but they have not quoted any
   case in which a noun with its adjective is coupled anarthrously by kai
   to a preceding noun with the article. Dr. Chase quoted Luke III 1, tes
   Itouraias kai Trachonitidos choras; but the case tells against him, for
   Luke's intention to use Itouraias here as an adjective is proved by the
   following reasons:-- (1) Eusebius and Jerome repeatedly interpret Luke
   III 1 in that way (see Expositor, Jan. 1894, p. 52; April, p. 289). (2)
   Itouraia is never used as a noun by the ancients, but is pointedly
   avoided, even where he Itouraion was awkward: the reason was that
   Itoupaia, as a noun, would indicate a political entity, whereas the
   Ituræi were a wandering nomadic race, who had not a definite and
   organised country. As my other reasons have been disputed, I do not
   append them here; though I consider them unshaken. [Mr. Arnold's
   attempt to find one instance of Itoupaia as a noun in Appian seems to
   refute itself, Engl. Hist Rev., 1895, p. 553.]

   [32] dielthon ten Ph. k. G. chopan koluthentes. Many are likely to rest
   on the authority of the great MSS., and prefer this reading. It may be
   understood, by an ellipse common in Greek, "they made a missionary
   progress through the Phrygian land, viz., the Galatic part of it,
   inasmuch as they were prevented from preaching in Asia, and could not,
   therefore, do missionary work in the Asian part of it". But, if this
   were the writing of Luke, I should prefer to hold that he meant
   dielthon kai ekoluthesan, using a construction which he has in (1)
   XXIII 35 ephe keleusas he said, "I will hear thee, when thy accusers
   arrive," and ordered him to be imprisoned: (2) XXV 13 katentesan
   aspasamenoi "they arrived at Cæsareia and paid their respects to
   Festus": (3) XVII 26 epoiesen ex henos, horisas "he made all nations of
   one blood, and assigned to them limits and bounds" (here the unity of
   all nations is the initial idea, and the fixing of limits and
   distinctions is later). Blass, who thus explains XXIII 35, gives in his
   preface, p. 20, many examples of the present infinitive used in the
   same way (XVIII 23 exelthn dierchomenos he went forth and made a
   progress through the Galatic Region, cp. VI 9 anestesan sunzetountes
   they rose up and disputed with Stephen, VI 11 hupebalon andras legontas
   they suborned men which said [also VI 13], VIII 10 proseichon legontes
   they hearkened and said, V. 36 aneste legon he stood up and said, VIII
   18, XlV 22, etc.); and he accepts and prints in his text the reading of
   inferior authority in XXVIII 14 pareklethemen par autois, etimeinantes
   we were cheered among them, and remained seven days. The usage is
   common in Paul. The use of aorist or present participle corresponds to
   the tense which would be used if the sentence were constructed in the
   fuller fashion, ephe kai ekeleusen but exelthen kai diercheto (Blass
   differs in regard to XXI 16, which he says = sunelthon kai egagon).

   [33] Hobart, The Medical Language of St. Luke, a work which has to be
   used with the caution that the author recognises as needful.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER X.

  THE CHURCHES OF MACEDONIA

   1. PHILIPPI.

   (XVI 13) ON THE SABBATH DAY WE WENT FORTH WITHOUT THE GATE BY THE RIVER
   SIDE, WHERE THERE WAS WONT TO BE HELD A MEETING FOR PRAYER; AND WE SAT
   DOWN, AND SPARE UNTO THE WOMEN THAT CAME TOGETHER. (14) AND A CERTAIN
   WOMAN NAMED LYDIA, A SELLER OF PURPLE, OF THE CITY OF THYATIRA, A
   GOD-FEARING proselyte WAS A HEARER; AND THE LORD OPENED HER HEART TO
   GIVE HEED UNTO THE THINGS THAT WERE SPOKEN BY PAUL. (15) AND WHEN SHE
   WAS BAPTISED AND HER HOUSEHOLD, SHE BESOUGHT US, SAYING, "IF YE HAVE
   JUDGED ME TO BE. FAITHFUL TO THE LORD, COME INTO MY HOUSE AND ABIDE
   THERE"; AND SHE CONSTRAINED US.

   The omission of the article before the word "river" (potamon) is one of
   the touches of familiarity which show the hand of one who knew Philippi
   well. As we say "I'm going to town," the Greeks omitted the article
   with familiar and frequently mentioned places or things. In this phrase
   the commentators in general seem to understand that the Greek words
   mean "along a river," which is the form of expression that a complete
   stranger might use about a city and a river that he had only heard of.

   The text of the next clause is uncertain; but we hold that the
   Authorised Version is right, following the inferior MSS. [34] On the
   first Sabbath they went along the river-bank to the regular place where
   the Jews in Philippi, and those non-Jews who had been attracted to
   Jewish customs, were wont to meet in prayer. There seems to have been
   no proper synagogue, which shows that the Jewish community was very
   small; and in the rest of the narrative no Jew is mentioned.

   Lydia, the Thyatiran woman, settled at Philippi, is an interesting
   person in many respects. Thyatira, like the Lydian land in general, was
   famous for its dyeing; and its guild of dyers is known from the
   inscriptions. Lydia sold the purple dyed garments from Thyatira in
   Philippi; and she had, no doubt, a regular connection with a firm in
   her native city, whose agent she was. In ancient time many kinds of
   garments were woven in their perfect shape; and there was much less
   cutting and sewing of cloth than at the present day. Lydia, of course,
   sold also the less expensive kinds of garments; but she takes her
   trade-name from the finest class of her wares, indicating that she was
   a first-class dealer. She must have possessed a considerable amount of
   capital to trade in such articles. As her husband is not mentioned, and
   she was a householder, she was probably a widow; and she may be taken
   as an ordinary example of the freedom with which women lived and worked
   both in Asia Minor and in Macedonia.

   Lydia had probably become addicted to Jewish religious practices in her
   native city. There had been a Jewish colony planted in Thyatira, which
   had exercised considerable influence on the city; and a hybrid sort of
   worship had been developed, half Jewish, half pagan, which is called in
   Revelation II 20, "the woman Jezebel". [35]

   It is not to be inferred that Lydia and her household were baptised on
   the first Sabbath. A certain interval must be admitted in v. 14, which
   shows Luke's looseness about time. Lydia was present on the first
   Sabbath, and became a regular hearer; and finally her entire household
   came over with her.

   2. THE VENTRILOQUIST.

   (XVI 16) AND IT CAME TO PASS, AS WE WERE GOING TO THE PLACE OF PRAYER,
   THAT A CERTAIN SLAVE-GIRL, POSSESSED OF A SPIRIT PYTHON, i.e., a
   ventriloquist, MET US, WHICH BROUGHT HER MASTERS MUCH GAIN BY
   SOOTHSAYING. (17) THE SAME, FOLLOWING AFTER PAUL AND US, KEPT CRYING
   OUT SAYING, "THESE MEN ARE THE SLAVES OF THE GOD THE HIGHEST, WHICH
   ANNOUNCE TO YOU THE WAY OF SAFETY ". (18) AND THIS SHE DID FOR MANY
   DAYS. BUT PAUL, BEING SORE TROUBLED, TURNED AND SAID TO THE SPIRIT, "I
   CHARGE THEE IN THE NAME OF JESUS THE ANOINTED TO GO OUT FROM HER"; AND
   IT WENT OUT THAT VERY MOMENT.

   The idea was universally entertained that ventriloquism was due to
   superhuman influence, and implied the power of foretelling the future.
   The girl herself believed this; and in her belief lay her power. Her
   words need not be taken as a witness to Christianity. "God the Highest"
   was a wide-spread pagan expression, and "salvation" was the object of
   many vows and prayers to that and other gods. We need not ask too
   curiously what was her motive in thus calling out at Paul's company. In
   such a case there is no distinct motive; for it is a poor and false
   view, and one that shows utter incapacity to gauge human nature, that
   the girl was a mere impostor. That her mind became distorted and
   diseased by her belief in her supernatural possession, is certain; but
   it became thereby all the more acute in certain perceptions and
   intuitions. With her sensitive nature, she became at once alive to the
   moral influence, which the intense faith by which the strangers were
   possessed gave them, and she must say what she felt without any
   definite idea of result therefrom; for the immediate utterance of her
   intuitions was the secret of her power. She saw in Paul what the
   populace at Pisidian Antioch saw in Thekla, "a devotee, bound by some
   unusual conditions, an inspired servant of the God,' who differed from
   the usual type" of "God-driven" devotees.

   When Paul turned on her, and ordered the spirit to come forth from her
   in the name of his Master, the girl, who had been assiduously declaring
   that Paul and his companions were God-possessed, and fully believed it,
   was utterly disconcerted, and lost her faith in herself and with it her
   power. When next she tried to speak as she had formerly done, she was
   unable to do so; and in a few days it became apparent that she had lost
   her power. Along with her power, her hold on the superstitions of the
   populace disappeared; and people ceased to come to her to have their
   fortunes read, to get help in finding things they had lost, and so on.
   Thus the comfortable income that she had earned for her owners was
   lost; and these, knowing who had done the mischief, sought revenge.
   This was by no means a rare motive for the outbreak of persecution
   against the Church in later time; and at this stage, when Christianity
   was an unknown religion, it was only through its interference with the
   profits of any individual or any class (p. 277) that it was likely to
   arouse opposition among the pagans.

   3. ACCUSATION AND CONDEMNATION IN PHILIPPI.

   (XVI 19) BUT, WHEN HER MASTERS SAW THAT THEIR HOPE OF GAIN HAD
   DEPARTED, THEY SEIZED PAUL AND SILAS [AND DRAGGED THEM INTO THE AGORA
   BEFORE THE MAGISTRATES], (20) [AND BRINGING THEM TO THE PRESENCE OF THE
   PRÆTORS], THEY SAID, "THESE MEN DO EXCEEDINGLY DISTURB OUR CITY, JEWS
   AS THEY ARE, (21) AND RECOMMEND CUSTOMS, WHICH IT IS ILLEGAL FOR US TO
   RECEIVE OR TO OBSERVE, AS WE ARE ROMANS". (22) AND THE POPULACE ROSE IN
   A BODY AGAINST THEM; AND THE PRÆTORS, RENDING THEIR GARMENTS in horror,
   BADE the lictors BEAT THEM, (23) AND WHEN THEY HAD LAID MANY STRIPES ON
   THEM, THEY CAST THEM INTO PRISON, CHARGING THE JAILOR TO KEEP THEM
   SAFELY: (24) AND HE HAVING RECEIVED SUCH A CHARGE, CAST THEM INTO THE
   INNER PRISON, AND MADE THEIR FEET FAST IN THE STOCKS.

   It is hardly possible that vv. 19, 20 have the final form that the
   writer would have given them. The expression halts between the Greek
   form and the Latin, between the ordinary Greek term for the supreme
   board of magistrates in any city (archontes), and the popular Latin
   designation (strategoi, prætores), as if the author had not quite made
   up his mind which he should employ. Either of the clauses bracketed is
   sufficient in itself; and it is hardly possible that a writer, whose
   expression is so concise, should have intended to leave in his text two
   clauses which say exactly the same thing.

   The title Prætors was not technically accurate, but was frequently
   employed as a courtesy title for the supreme magistrates of a Roman
   colony; and, as usual, Luke moves on the plane of educated conversation
   in such matters, and not on the plane of rigid technical accuracy. He
   writes as the scene was enacted.

   It is impossible and unnecessary to determine whether the slave-girl's
   owners were actually Roman citizens. They speak here as representatives
   of the general population. The actual coloni planted here by Augustus
   when he rounded the colony, were probably far outnumbered by the Greek
   population (incolæ); and it is clear that in the colonies of the
   Eastern provinces, any Italian coloni soon melted into the mass of the
   population, and lost most of their distinctive character, and probably
   forgot even their language. The exact legal relation of the native
   Greek population to the Roman coloni is uncertain; but it is certain
   that the former occupied some kind of intermediate position between
   ordinary provincials and Romans or Latins (when the colony was a Latin
   colony like Antioch). These colonies were one of the means whereby Rome
   sought to introduce the Roman spirit and feeling into the provinces, to
   romanise them; and the accusation lodged against Paul, with the whole
   scene that followed, are a proof, in this vivid photographic picture,
   that the population prided themselves on their Roman character and
   actually called themselves Romans, as they called their magistrates
   Prætors.

   Paul on other occasions claimed his right of citizen ship; why not
   here? It is evident that the Prætors made a great to-do over this case:
   they regarded it as a case of treason, or, as it was termed in Greek,
   "impiety" (asebeia), rent their clothes in loyal horror, with the
   fussy, consequential airs that Horace satirises in the would-be Prætor
   of a country town (Sat. I 5, 34): the fabric of the Empire was shaken
   to its foundations by this disgraceful conduct of the accused persons;
   but the Prætors of Philippi stood firm, and the populace rose as one
   man, like true Romans, to defend their country against her insidious
   enemies. In such a scene what chance was there that Paul's protest
   should be listened to? Perhaps it was made and not listened to, since
   the whole proceedings were so disorderly and irregular.

   The first person ceases at this point; the author was not arrested, and
   therefore could not speak in the first person of what happened in the
   prison. He did not accompany Paul further; but remained at Philippi as
   his headquarters, till Paul returned there, XX 6, when the first person
   is resumed. It is only natural to understand that he was left in
   Philippi, because of his obvious suitability for the work of
   evangelising that city; and his success was so striking that his
   "praise in the preaching of the good news was through all the
   Churches," II Cor. VIII 18 (a passage which is understood by early
   tradition as referring to Luke). At the same time it is clear that he
   had not been a householder in Philippi previously, for he went with
   Paul to enjoy Lydia's hospitality.

   4. THE PRISON AND THE EARTHQUAKE.

   (XVI 25) BUT ABOUT MIDNIGHT PAUL AND SILAS WERE PRAYING AND SINGING
   HYMNS UNTO GOD, AND THE PRISONERS WERE LISTENING TO THEM; (26) AND
   SUDDENLY THERE WAS A GREAT EARTHQUAKE, SO THAT THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE
   PRISON-HOUSE WERE SHAKEN; AND IMMEDIATELY ALL THE DOORS WERE OPENED;
   AND EVERY ONE'S FETTERS WERE SHAKEN OUT. (27) AND THE JAILOR, BEING
   ROUSED FROM SLEEP, AND SEEING THE PRISON-DOORS OPEN, DREW HIS SWORD,
   AND WAS ABOUT TO KILL HIMSELF, CONSIDERING THAT THE PRISONERS HAD
   ESCAPED. (28) BUT PAUL CRIED OUT WITH A LOUD VOICE, "DO THYSELF NO
   HARM, FOR WE ARE ALL HERE ". (29) AND CALLING FOR LIGHTS, HE RAN
   HASTILY IN, AND TREMBLING FOR FEAR THREW HIMSELF BEFORE PAUL AND SILAS,
   (30) AND BROUGHT THEM OUT [WHEN HE HAD MADE THE REST FAST], AND SAID,
   "SIRS! WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED?" (31) AND THEY SAID, "BELIEVE ON THE
   LORD JESUS, AND THOU SHALT BE SAVED, THOU AND THY HOUSE". (32) AND THEY
   SPAKE THE WORD OF THE LORD TO HIM, WITH ALL THAT WERE IN HIS HOUSE.
   (33) AND HE TOOK THEM AT THAT HOUR OF THE NIGHT AND WASHED THEM OF
   THEIR STRIPES; AND WAS BAPTISED, HE AND ALL HIS IMMEDIATELY. (34) AND
   HE BROUGHT THEM UP INTO HIS HOUSE, AND SET MEAT BEFORE THEM, AND
   REJOICED GREATLY, WITH ALL HIS HOUSE, HAVING CONCEIVED FAITH IN GOD.

   There are several difficulties which occur to every one on first
   reading this passage. (1) The opening of the doors and the undoing of
   the bonds by the earthquake seem incredible to one who thinks of doors
   like those in our prisons and of handcuffed prisoners. But any one that
   has seen a Turkish prison will not wonder that the doors were thrown
   open: each door was merely closed by a bar, and the earthquake, as it
   passed along the ground, forced the door posts apart from each other,
   so that the bar slipped from its hold, and the door swung open. The
   prisoners were fastened to the wall or in wooden stocks, v. 24; and the
   chains and stocks were detached from the wall, which was shaken so that
   spaces gaped between the stones. In the great earthquakes of 1880 at
   Smyrna, and 1881 at Scio, I had the opportunity of seeing and hearing
   of the strangely capricious action of an earthquake, which behaves
   sometimes like a playful, good-natured sprite, when it spares its full
   terrors.

   (2) Why did not the prisoners run away when their fetters were loosed?
   The question is natural to those who are familiar with the northern
   races, and their self-centred tenacity of purpose and presence of mind.
   An earthquake strikes panic into the semi-oriental mob in the Ægean
   lands; and it seems to me quite natural that the prisoners made no dash
   for safety when the opportunity was afforded them. Moreover, they were
   still only partially free; and they had only a moment for action. The
   jailor was also roused by the earthquake, and came to the outer door;
   he was perhaps a soldier, or at least had something of Roman
   discipline, giving him presence of mind; his call for lights brought
   the body of diogmitai or other class of police who helped to guard the
   prisoners; and the opportunity was lost.

   (3) It was midnight, and the jailor had to call for lights: how could
   Paul from the inner prison see that the jailor was going to kill
   himself? We must understand that the inner prison was a small cell,
   which had no window and no opening, except into the outer and larger
   prison, and that the outer prison, also, had one larger door in the
   opposite wall; then, if there were any faint starlight in the sky,
   still more if the moon were up, a person in the outer doorway would be
   distinguishable to one whose eyes were accustomed to the darkness, but
   the jailor would see only black darkness in the prison.

   The jailor was responsible with his life for the safety of his
   prisoners; and, concluding from the sight of the open door that they
   had managed to set themselves free, and open the door, and escape, he
   preferred death by his own hand, to exposure, disgrace, and a
   dishonourable death.

   The Bezan Text preserves in v. 30 a little detail, which is so
   suggestive of the orderly well-disciplined character of the jailor,
   that we are prompted to accept it as genuine. The jailor first attended
   to his proper work, and secured all his prisoners; and thereafter he
   attended to Paul and Silas, and brought them forth. It seems highly
   improbable that a Christian in later time would insert the gloss that
   the jailor looked after his prisoners before he cared for his
   salvation; it is more in the spirit of a later age to be offended with
   the statement that the jailor did so, and to cut it out. In his
   subsequent action to Paul and Silas, the jailor was not acting
   illegally. He was responsible for producing his prisoners when called
   for; but it was left to himself to keep them as he thought best.

   5. RELEASE AND DEPARTURE FROM PHILIPPI.

   (XVI 35) AND WHEN DAY WAS COME THE PRÆTORS SENT THE LICTORS, WITH THE
   MESSAGE to the jailor: "LET THOSE MEN GO". (36) AND THE JAILOR REPORTED
   THE MESSAGE TO PAUL THAT "THE PRÆTORS HAVE SENT orders THAT YOU BE SET
   FREE. NOW, THEREFORE, GO FORTH AND TAKE YOUR WAY IN PEACE]" (37) BUT
   PAUL SAID UNTO THEM: "THEY FLOGGED US IN PUBLIC without investigation,
   ROMAN CITIZENS AS WE ARE, AND CAST US INTO PRISON; AND NOW DO THEY TURN
   US OUT SECRETLY? NOT SO; BUT LET THEM COME IN PERSON AND BRING US OUT."
   (38) AND THE LICTORS REPORTED TO THE PRÆTORS THESE WORDS; AND THEY WERE
   TERRIFIED ON HEARING THAT "THEY ARE ROMAN CITIZENS"; (39) AND THEY WENT
   AND BESOUGHT THEM, AND BROUGHT THEM OUT, AND ASKED THEM TO GO AWAY FROM
   THE CITY. (40) AND THEY WENT OUT FROM THE PRISON AND ENTERED INTO
   LYDIA'S HOUSE; AND THEY SAW AND EXHORTED THE BRETHREN, AND WENT AWAY.

   The sudden change of attitude on the part of the Prætors is remarkable.
   One day they sent the prisoners for careful custody: the next morning
   they send to release them. The Bezan Reviser felt the inconsequence,
   and inserts an explanation: "And when day was come the Prætors
   [assembled together in the agora, and remembering the earthquake that
   had taken place, they were afraid, and] sent the lictors". But, though
   this is modelled on Luke's language (cp. I 15, etc.), it is hardly in
   his style of narrative. It is more characteristic of him to give no
   explanation, but simply to tell the facts. Perhaps the earthquake had
   roused their superstitious fears on account of the irregular and
   arbitrary proceedings of yesterday. Perhaps they felt some misgivings
   about their action. if we are right in thinking that Paul and Silas had
   appealed vainly to their rights as Romans.

   Whatever be the reason, there can be no mistake as to Luke's intention
   to bring out the contrast (1) between the orders sent to the jailor in
   the morning, and the charge given to him at night; (2) between the
   humble apology of the Prætors in the morning, and their haughty action
   on the previous day; (3) between the real fact, that the Prætors had
   trampled on Roman order and right, and their fussy pretense of
   vindicating the majesty of Rome. And so the same Prætors who had
   ordered them to be beaten and imprisoned now begged them to go away
   from the city. In the Bezan Text the request of the Prætors is put at
   greater length, and with obvious truth: "the magistrates, being afraid
   lest there should be another conspiracy against Paul, and distrusting
   their own ability to keep order, said, Go forth from this city, lest
   they, again make a riot and inveigh loudly against you to us' ". The
   weakness of municipal government in the cities of the Ægean lands was
   always a danger to order; and the Bezan Text hits off admirably the
   situation, and brings out with much skill the naive desire of the
   magistrates to avoid an unpleasant ease by inducing the innocent and
   weaker parties to submit to injustice and withdraw from the city. One
   would gladly think this Lukan.

   In v. 37 the rendering (A.V. and R.V.) "uncondemned" does not fairly
   represent Paul's meaning, for it suggests that it would have been
   allowable for the Prætors to condemn Paul after fair trial to be
   flogged. But the Prætors could not in any circumstances order him to be
   flogged; in fact, formal trial would only aggravate their crime, as
   making it more deliberate. The crime might be palliated by pleading
   that it was done in ignorance: and Paul would naturally cut away the
   plea by saying that they had made no attempt to investigate the facts.
   Yet the Greek is clear, and can only be translated "uncondemned". A
   parallel case occurs XXII 25, where Paul asks the centurion: "is it
   lawful for you to flog a man that is a Roman citizen, and him
   uncondemned?" Here there is the same false implication that the act
   would be aggravated by being done without the proper formal
   condemnation.

   Yet Paul, as a Roman citizen, must have known his rights; and it seems
   clear that he could not have used the exact words which Luke reports.
   Now, when we consider the facts, we see that it must be so. No civis
   Romanus would claim his rights in Greek; the very idea is ludicrous.
   Paul claimed them in the Roman tongue; and we may fairly understand
   that the officials of a Roman colony were expected to understand Latin;
   for the official language even of far less important colonies in Asia
   Minor was Latin. The phrase which Paul used was most probably re
   incognita, "without investigating our case". Luke, however, had the
   true Greek inability to sympathise with the delicacies of Roman usage,
   and. translates the Latin by a term, which would in some circumstances
   be a fair representative, but not here, nor in XXII 25.

   The whole residence of Paul at Philippi seems to have been short: it is
   defined by Luke as being "for certain days," and apparently not much
   seems to have been accomplished before the incident of the
   ventriloquist and the resulting imprisonment. If the party was at Troas
   in October A.D. 50, they probably left Philippi before the end of the
   year. It seems probable from v. 40 that there were some other
   Christians besides those in Lydia's house. It is, however, remarkable
   that Luke makes no explicit reference to any other converts.

   Doubtless, before Paul left, the question was discussed what should be
   his next centre; and Thessalonica was suggested, probably on account of
   its Jewish settlers, whose synagogue offered a good opening for work.
   The directions which were given the travellers at starting were to make
   their way along the Roman road through Amphipolis and Apollonia to
   Thessalonica (XVII 1, where diodeusantes is the verb, hodos denoting
   the Roman road).

   6. THESSALONICA.

   (XVII 1) AND THEY WENT ALONG THE Roman ROAD THROUGH AMPHIPOLIS AND
   APOLLONIA, AND CAME TO THESSALONICA, WHERE WAS A SYNAGOGUE OF THE JEWS.
   (2) AND, AS WAS CUSTOMARY WITH PAUL, HE WENT IN TO ADDRESS THEM, AND
   FOR THREE SABBATHS HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES, (3)
   OPENING THEIR MEANING, AND QUOTING TO PROVE THAT IT WAS PROPER THAT THE
   ANOINTED ONE SHOULD SUFFER AND RISE AGAIN FROM THE DEAD, AND THAT "THE
   ANOINTED ONE IS THIS man, THE very JESUS WHOM I AM PROCLAIMING TO YOU".
   (4) AND SOME OF THEM WERE PERSUADED; AND THERE WERE IN ADDITION
   GATHERED TO PAUL AND SILAS MANY OF THE GOD-FEARING proselytes, AND A
   GREAT MULTITUDE OF THE GREEKS, AND OF THE LEADING WOMEN NOT A FEW. [36]

   This passage is full of difficulty both in text and in interpretation.
   Our text, agreeing with many MSS. and Versions, recognises three
   classes of hearers besides the Jews; whereas the Approved Text, resting
   on the great MSS., unites the "God-fearing" and "the Greeks" into the
   single class "God-fearing Greeks". In this case many reasons combine to
   show the error of the latter reading, and the falseness of the
   principle that has led Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort, and others to
   set almost boundless confidence in those MSS. [37]

   In v. 4 Paul goes on to a wider sphere of influence than the circle of
   the synagogue; and a lapse of time is implied in the extension of his
   work over the general population of the city (called here by the
   strictly correct term, Hellenes). Between the two opposite groups, the
   Jews and the Hellenes, there is interposed the intermediate class of
   God-fearing proselytes; and there is added as a climax a group of noble
   ladies of the city. In Macedonia, as in Asia Minor, women occupied a
   much freer and more influential position than in Athens; and it is in
   conformity with the known facts that such prominence is assigned to
   them in the three Macedonian cities.

   In this journey a more pointed distinction than before between the
   short period of synagogue work, and the longer period of general work,
   may be noticed. The three Sabbaths of v. 2 must be taken as the entire
   period of work within the circle of the synagogue; and the precise
   statement of time may also be taken as an indication that the usual
   quarrel with the Jews took place earlier at Thessalonica than in former
   cases.

   That a considerable time was spent in the wider work is proved both by
   its success, and by the language of I Thess. I, II, which cannot
   reasonably refer only to work in the synagogue or to a short missionary
   work among the general population. Paul clearly refers to a long and
   very successful work in Thessalonica. His eagerness to return, and his
   chafing at the ingenious obstacle preventing him, are explained by his
   success: he was always eager to take advantage of a good opening.
   Further Paul mentions that the Philippians, IV 16, "sent once and again
   unto my need in Thessalonica". It is reasonable to think that some
   interval elapsed between the gifts (especially as Paul had to work to
   maintain himself, I Thess. II 9). Dec. 50-May 51 seems a probable
   estimate of the residence in Thessalonica.

   7. THE RIOT AT THESSALONICA.

   (XVII 5) AND THE JEWS BECAME JEALOUS; AND WITH SOME WORTHLESS
   ASSOCIATES OF THE LOWER ORDERS THEY GATHERED A MOB AND MADE A RIOT;
   AND, ASSAULTING THE HOUSE OF JASON, THEY SOUGHT TO BRING Paul and Silas
   BEFORE A PUBLIC MEETING. (6) AND WHEN THEY FOUND THEM NOT, THEY BEGAN
   TO DRAG JASON AND CERTAIN BRETHREN BEFORE THE POLITARCHS, SHOUTING,
   "THESE THAT HAVE TURNED THE CIVILISED WORLD UPSIDE DOWN HAVE COME
   HITHER ALSO, (7) AND JASON HATH RECEIVED THEM; AND THE WHOLE OF THEM
   ARE VIOLATING THE IMPERIAL LAWS, ASSERTING THAT THERE IS ANOTHER
   EMPEROR, JESUS". (8) AND THEY TROUBLED THE PEOPLE AND THE POLITARCHS,
   WHO HEARD THIS. (9) AND THE POLITARCHS TOOK SECURITIES FOR GOOD
   BEHAVIOUR FROM JASON AND THE OTHERS, AND LET THEM GO.

   The curious and rare title "politarchs" was given to the supreme board
   of magistrates at Thessalonica, as is proved by inscriptions.

   The description of this riot is more detailed than any of the
   preceding. The lower classes, the least educated, and the most enslaved
   to paganism on its vulgarest and most superstitious side, were the most
   fanatical opponents of the new teaching; while the politarchs were by
   no means inclined to take active measures against it, and the better
   educated people seem to have supplied most of the converts. Men of all
   classes were impressed by the preaching of Paul, but only women of the
   leading families; and the difference is obviously due to the fact that
   the poorer women were most likely to be under the sway of superstition.
   A similar distinction is mentioned at Berea (XVII 12), where not a few
   of the high-born Greek ladies and of the male population in general
   were attracted by the new teaching.

   It would appear that this riot was more serious than the words of Luke
   would at first sight suggest. The language of Paul in his first letter
   to the Thessalonians, II 14-16, shows that a powerful, dangerous, and
   lasting sentiment was roused among the classes which made the riot.

   The charge brought against Paul was subtly conceived and most
   dangerous. The very suggestion of treason against the Emperors often
   proved fatal to the accused; and it compelled the politarchs to take
   steps, for, if they failed to do so, they became exposed to a charge of
   treason, as having taken too little care for the honour of the Emperor.
   Many a man was ruined by such a charge under the earlier Emperors.

   The step taken by the politarchs was the mildest that was prudent in
   the circumstances: they bound the accused over in security that peace
   should be kept. This was a penalty familiar in Roman law, from which it
   must have been adopted in the ordinary practice of provincial towns
   like Thessalonica.

   Paul evidently felt very deeply his sudden and premature separation
   from the Church of Thessalonica: it was at once so promising and so
   inexperienced, that he was unusually eager to return to it; and as he
   says, "we endeavoured the more exceedingly to see your face with great
   desire; because we would fain have come to you, I Paul once and again;
   and Satan hindered us". What is the meaning of the strange expression,
   "Satan hindered us"? How did Paul, who was so eager to go back to
   Thessalonica, find an insurmountable obstacle in his way? Was it mere
   personal danger that prevented him, or was it some more subtle device
   of Satanic craft that kept him out of Thessalonica?

   It is not in keeping with Paul's language to interpret "Satan" in this
   case as the mob, which had brought him into danger and was still
   enraged against him. He alludes by a very different metaphor to the
   opposition which he often. experienced from the vulgar, uneducated, and
   grossly superstitious city populace. In I Cor. XV 32 he describes his
   relations with the Ephesian mob as "fighting with beasts". This term is
   an interesting mixture of Greek and Roman ideas, and corresponds well
   to Paul's mixed education, as a Roman citizen in a Greek philosopher's
   lecture-room. In the lecture room he became familiar with the Platonic
   comparison of the mob to a dangerous beast; and amid the surroundings
   of the Roman Empire he became familiar with the death-struggle of
   criminals against the wild beasts of the circus. But a person who
   designates the mob in this contemptuous way, uses the term "Satan" only
   of some more subtle and dangerous enemy, far harder to overcome.

   Now, security against any disturbance of the peace had been exacted
   from Jason and his associates, the leading Christians of Thessalonica;
   and clearly this implied that they were bound over to prevent the cause
   of disturbance, Paul, from coming to Thessalonica. This ingenious
   device put an impassable chasm between Paul and the Thessalonians
   (enekopsen is the strong term used). So long as the magistrates
   maintained this attitude, he could not return: he was helpless, and
   Satan had power. His only hope lay in an alteration of the magistrates'
   policy. They would not be long in power; and perhaps their successors
   might act differently. But the politarchs doubtless thought that they
   treated the case mildly and yet effectually; they got rid of the cause,
   without inflicting any punishment on any person. This interpretation of
   the term "Satan," as denoting action taken by the governing power
   against the message from God, is in keeping with the figurative use of
   the word throughout the New Testament.

   8. BEROEA.

   (XVII 10) AND THE BRETHREN IMMEDIATELY SENT AWAY PAUL AND SILAS BY
   NIGHT UNTO BEREA; AND WHEN THEY WERE COME HITHER THEY WENT INTO THE
   SYNAGOGUE OF THE JEWS. (11) NOW THESE WERE MORE NOBLE THAN THOSE IN
   THESSALONICA, IN THAT THEY RECEIVED THE WORD WITH ALL READINESS OF
   MIND, EXAMINING THE SCRIPTURES DAILY WHETHER THESE THINGS WERE SO. (12)
   MANY OF THEM THEREFORE BELIEVED; AS DID ALSO NOT A FEW OF THE HIGH-BORN
   GREEK LADIES AND OF THE MALE POPULATION. (13) BUT WHEN THE JEWS OF
   THESSALONICA LEARNED THAT IN BEREA ALSO THE WORD OF GOD WAS PREACHED BY
   PAUL, THEY CAME THERE ALSO EXCITING AND DISTURBING THE MULTITUDES. (14)
   THEN FORTHWITH PAUL WAS SENT FORTH BY THE BRETHREN TO GO TOWARDS THE
   SEA; BUT SILAS AND TIMOTHY REMAINED THERE. (15) AND THEY THAT CONDUCTED
   PAUL BROUGHT HIM AS FAR AS ATHENS; AND RECEIVING DIRECTIONS FOR SILAS
   AND TIMOTHY THAT THEY SHOULD COME TO HIM WITH ALL SPEED, THEY DEPARTED.

   Here, just as at Thessalonica, a wider influence than the circle of the
   synagogue is distinctly implied, so that we must understand that Paul
   preached also to the Greek population. The nobler conduct of the Berean
   Jews consisted in their freedom from that jealousy, which made the Jews
   in Thessalonica and many other places enraged when the offer of
   salvation was made as freely to others as to themselves.

   The process that compelled Paul's departure from Berea was evidently
   quite similar to that at Thessalonica; and probably that is the reason
   why the riot and the accusation of treason against the Emperor are not
   mentioned more particularly (p. 72). As usual, we notice how lightly
   Luke passes over the difficulties and dangers which drove Paul from
   place to place.

   In v. 15 we must understand that Silas and Timothy obeyed the
   directions, and came on to rejoin Paul. There is no point in mentioning
   such an order, unless it were obeyed. It is in the style of Luke to
   mention an intention and leave the reader to gather that it was carried
   into effect (p. 181). Moreover, we learn from I Thess. III 1 that
   Timothy was sent by Paul away from Athens to Thessalonica, which
   implies that he rejoined him. It is undeniable that the statement in
   XVIII 5, "when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia," seems at
   first sight to imply that they arrived from Berea only after Paul had
   left Athens, and followed him on to Corinth, and met him there for the
   first time since his departure from Berea. But the calculation of time
   shows that that could hardly be the case: it would not take nearly so
   long to perform the journey, and we shall see that Silas and Timothy
   rejoined Paul in Corinth after a mission from Athens to Thessalonica
   and Philippi (p. 241). In that case the narrative is very awkward and
   badly constructed; and we can hardly suppose that it has received the
   final touches from the author's hand. It is not unnatural that the
   Philippian author, writing about facts with which he and his nearest
   audience were specially familiar, and making his narrative as brief as
   possible, should have omitted to mention the mission from Athens to
   Macedonia. But it is probable that, if he had lived to put the
   finishing touch to his work, he would not have left this awkwardness.
   Another possible indication of incompleteness is the emission of the
   harbour of Berea, a unique omission in this history (p. 70).

   The question naturally occurs, why did Paul go on from Berea alone,
   leaving Silas and Timothy behind, and yet send orders immediately on
   reaching Athens that they were to join him with all speed? There seems
   at first sight some inconsistency here. But again comparison between
   Acts and Thess. solves the difficulty. Paul was eager "once and again"
   to return to Thessalonica; and was waiting for news that the impediment
   placed in his way was removed. Silas and Timothy remained to receive
   the news (perhaps about the attitude of new magistrates); and to bring
   it on to Paul. But they could not bring it on to him until they
   received his message from Athens; Paul left Berea with no fixed plan,
   "sent forth by the brethren to go to the coast," and the further
   journey to Athens was resolved on at the harbour.

   We must allow several months for the residence at Berea, with the
   preaching in the synagogue and the city, and the riot. Paul must have
   reached Athens some time in August 51, as is shown by the dates of his
   residence in Corinth (p. 264).

   There is an interesting addition made to the Bezan Text of v. 15: "and
   they which conducted Paul brought him as far as Athens; [and he
   neglected Thessalia, for he was prevented from preaching the word unto
   them]". Here we meet a difficult question in provincial bounds. Where
   should Paul go from Beroea? The one thing clear to him was that he was
   called to Macedonia. If Thessaly was part of that province, [38]
   Larissa was the natural completion of his Macedonian work; and we could
   readily believe that he thought of it and was prevented by a
   revelation. But, in that case, why is "the revelation" left out? Such
   an omission is unique in Acts. On the other hand, if Thessaly was part
   of Achaia, Paul could not think at that time of beginning work in a new
   province. In Athens he was merely waiting for the chance of returning
   to Thessalonica (p. 240). But, in that case, we might understand, "he
   was prevented (by the call restricting him to Macedonia)". Perhaps the
   Reviser, having eliminated parelthen from XVI 8, thought that XVII 15
   was a suitable place for the idea, which he wished to preserve.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [34] The Place of Prayer at Philippi. We take our stand upon the fact
   that the Bezan Text, "where there seemed to be a prayer-place" (edokei
   proseuche einai , appears to be an explanation of our text (eomizeto
   proseuche einai): it is therefore clear that in the middle of the
   second century our text was read, and was found difficult, and was
   misunderstood to mean "there was thought to be a prayer-place ". This
   misunderstanding led to other attempts at correction, one of which
   appears in the great MSS. (enomizomen proseuche einai).

   [35] See Schürer in Abhandlungen Weizsäcker gewidmet, p. 39.

   [36] In v. 4 kai tines ex auton epeisthesan. kai proseklerothesan to
   Paulo kai Sila polloi ton sebomenon. kai ellenon plethos polu. gunaikon
   te ton proton ouk oligai, approximating to the Bezan Text, and to that
   of the inferior MSS. followed in the Authorized Version.

   [37] The true reading of XVII 4 results from a comparison of A with D.
   The reading of the great MSS. is impossible for these reasons: (1) It
   restricts Paul's converts to Jews. proselyte Greeks, and a few ladies,
   taking no notice of any work outside the circle of the synagogue. I
   Thess. gives the impression that converts direct from heathenism were
   the mass of the Church. (2) It restricts Paul's work to three Sabbaths,
   which is opposed to all rational probability, to Thess. and to Phil.;
   whereas our text restricts the work within the circle of the synagogue
   to three Sabbaths, but adds a second stage much more important, when a
   great multitude of the general population of the city was affected. (3)
   The contrast drawn between the Jews of Berea and of Thessalonica, v.
   11, is very unfair to the latter, if, as the great MSS. put it, three
   Sabbaths produced such vast effect within the circle of the synagogue.
   (4) That reading speaks of "a great multitude of God-fearing Greeks,"
   implying that the synagogue had exercised an astonishing influence on
   the population. Lightfoot quotes the fact that Salonica is still mainly
   a Jewish city, as a proof that Judaism gained and kept a strong hold on
   the city throughout Christian history; but a visit to Salonica would
   have saved him from this error. The Jews of Salonica speak Spanish as
   their language, and are descended from Spanish Jews, expelled by
   Ferdinand and Isabella, who found in Turkey a refuge denied or grudged
   them in most European countries. There is no reason known to me for
   thinking that Judaism was strong in the city under the Byzantine
   Empire; and the strong antipathy of the Greeks to the Jews makes it
   improbable. The Thessalonian Jews were protected by the Roman
   government; but one may doubt if they maintained their ground under the
   Christian Empire.

   [38] Ptolemy gives Thessaly to Macedonia, Strabo to Achaia (for we
   cannot accept Mommsen's interpretation of Strab. p. 276): at some
   unknown time Thessaly was separated from Achaia (Brandis thinks by
   Pius, Marquardt by Vespasian, but perhaps 44 may have been the time).
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XI.

  ATHENS AND CORINTH

   1. ATHENS.

   (XVII 16) NOW WHILE PAUL WAS WAITING FOR THEM IN ATHENS, HIS SOUL WAS
   PROVOKED WITHIN HIM AS HE BEHELD THE CITY FULL OF IDOLS. (17) SO HE
   REASONED IN THE SYNAGOGUE WITH THE JEWS AND THE PROSELYTES, AND IN THE
   MARKETPLACE EVERY DAY WITH CHANCE COMERS. . . . (23) "AS I WENT THROUGH
   THE CITY SURVEYING THE MONUMENTS OF YOUR RELIGION, I FOUND ALSO AN
   ALTAR WITH THIS INSCRIPTION TO UNKNOWN GOD'."

   The picture of Paul in Athens, which is given in the ensuing scene, is
   very characteristic of Athenian life. Luke places before us the man who
   became "all things to all men," and who therefore in Athens made
   himself like an Athenian and adopted the regular Socratic style of
   general free discussion in the agora; and he shows him to us in an
   atmosphere and a light which are thoroughly Attic in their clearness,
   delicacy, and charm.

   It is evident from v. 23, and our conception of Paul's character forces
   the same view on us, that he was not indifferent even to the "sights"
   of the great university city of the world, which united in itself so
   many memorials of history and of education. The feelings which would
   rise in the mind of an American scholar from Harvard, seeing Oxford for
   the first time, were not alien to Paul's spirit The mere Jew could
   never have assumed the Attic tone as Paul did. He was in Athens the
   student of a great university, visiting an older but yet a kindred
   university, surveying it with appreciative admiration, and mixing in
   its society as an equal conversing with men of like education.

   This extraordinary versatility in Paul's character, the unequaled
   freedom and ease with which he moved in every society, and addressed so
   many races within the Roman world, were evidently appreciated by the
   man who wrote this narrative, for the rest of Chapter XVII is as
   different in tone from XIII as Athens is different from Phrygia. Only a
   writer who was in perfect sympathy with his subject could adapt his
   tone to it so perfectly as Luke does. In Ephesus Paul taught "in the
   school of Tyrannus"; in the city of Socrates he discussed moral
   questions in the market-place. How incongruous it would seem if the
   methods were transposed! But the narrative never makes a false step
   amid all the many details, as the scene changes from city to city; and
   that is the conclusive proof that it is a picture of real life.

   Athens in Paul's time was no longer the Athens of Socrates; but the
   Socratic method had its roots in the soil of Attica and the nature of
   the Athenian people. In Athens Socrates can never quite die, and his
   spirit was in Paul's time still among the people, though the learned
   lecturers of the university felt already the coming spirit of Herodes
   Atticus more congenial to them. Among the people in the agora, then,
   Paul reasoned in the Socratic fashion; but when the Professors came
   upon the scene, they soon demanded of him a display in the style of the
   rhetorician.

   As Paul wandered through Athens, the interest in its monuments and its
   university was soon overpowered by the indignation roused by the idols
   with which it was crowded. In this centre of the world's education,
   amid the lecture-rooms where philosophers had taught for centuries that
   it was mere superstition to confuse the idol with the divine nature
   which it represented, the idols were probably in greater numbers than
   anywhere else in Paul's experience. Though he was only waiting for the
   message to go back to Thessalonica, and resume the work in Macedonia to
   which he had been called, yet indignation would not let him keep
   silence during the short stay which he anticipated in Athens. He began
   to discourse in the synagogue, and to hold Socratic dialogue in the
   agora with any one whom he met.

   Here we observe the same double mission as in Berea, Thessalonica, and
   elsewhere; and, as in other cases, the Jewish mission is mentioned
   first. There is one marked difference between this passage and the
   corresponding descriptions at Berea and Thessalonica. In those cases
   great results were attained; but in Athens no converts are mentioned at
   this stage, either in the synagogue or in the agora. The lack of
   results at this stage is, however, fully explained by the shortness of
   the time. Paul's stay in Athens can hardly have been longer than six
   weeks, and was probably less than four; and the process described in v.
   17 was brought to a premature close by the great event of his visit,
   which the historian describes very fully.

   The time spent in Athens may be deduced approximately from the
   following considerations. Probably less than a fortnight elapsed before
   Silas and Timothy joined him there, according to his urgent directions.
   They brought with them no favourable news: it was still impossible for
   him to return to Thessalonica, and he "thought it good to be left in
   Athens alone, and sent Timothy to comfort the Thessalonians concerning
   their faith" (I Thess. III 1, 2).

   Since Paul remained alone, Silas also must have been sent away from
   Athens; and as, some two months later, Silas with Timothy rejoined Paul
   from Macedonia, he was probably sent to Philippi, for frequent
   communication was maintained at this time between Paul and his first
   European Church (Phil. IV 15 f.).

   Paul was still looking forward to a return to his proper work in
   Macedonia; and it is clear that he intended to remain in Athens until
   Silas and Timothy came back from their mission, which makes it probable
   that their absence was not intended to be a long one. Doubtless they
   travelled to Thessalonica together, and Timothy waited there while
   Silas went to Philippi, discharged his mission, and returned; and then
   they came to Athens together. They found Paul no longer there, for he
   had in the meantime gone to Corinth. Circumstances that happened in
   Athens had forced him to abandon the city and go to Corinth: "after
   this he departed from Athens and came to Corinth" (XVIII 1). In this
   sentence it might seem that the words "departed from Athens" are
   wasted; and that it would have been sufficient to say after this he
   came to Corinth"; but our principle is that every minute fact stated in
   Acts has its own significance, and the departure from Athens
   (choristheis ek ton Athenon is emphasised, because it was a violation
   of the intended plan under the compulsion of events.

   The same word is used in XVIII 1 to describe Paul's departure from
   Athens, and in 2 to describe Aquila's enforced departure from Rome. On
   our view (p. 252) the idea of sudden, premature departure is contained
   in each. Further, it is clear that Paul had been in Corinth for some
   time and attained a certain measure of success, before Silas and
   Timothy arrived; and, if we allow seven weeks for their mission, which
   seems ample, he must have spent altogether about three or four weeks in
   Athens and five or six in Corinth.

   2. IN THE UNIVERSITY AT ATHENS.

   (XVII 18 AND CERTAIN ALSO OF THE STOIC AND EPICUREAN PHILOSOPHERS
   ENGAGED IN DISCUSSIONS WITH HIM; AND SOME SAID, "WHAT WOULD THIS
   SPERMOLOGOS [ignorant plagarist] SAY?" AND OTHERS, "HE IS APPARENTLY AN
   EXPONENT OF FOREIGN DIVINITIES" [BECAUSE HE WAS GIVING THE GOOD NEWS OF
   "JESUS" AND "RESURRECTION "]. (19) AND THEY TOOK HOLD OF HIM AND
   BROUGHT HIM BEFORE THE Council of AREOPAGUS, SAYING, "MAY WE LEARN WHAT
   IS THIS NEW TEACHING WHICH IS SPOKEN BY THEE? (20) FOR THOU BRINGEST
   SOME THINGS OF FOREIGN FASHION TO OUR EARS; WE WISH THEREFORE TO LEARN
   WHAT IS THEIR NATURE." (21) BUT THE WHOLE crowd of ATHENIANS AND
   RESIDENT STRANGERS who formed the audience WERE INTERESTED ONLY IN
   SAYING OR HEARING SOMETHING NEW and smart. (22) AND PAUL STOOD IN THE
   MIDST OF THE Council of AREOPAGUS AND SAID . . . (33) THUS PAUL WENT
   FORTH FROM THE MIDST OF THEM.

   The explanatory clause in v. 18 is wanting in the Bezan Text and an old
   Latin Version, and is foreign to Luke's fashion of leaving the reader
   to form his own ideas with regard to the scene. It is apparently a
   gloss, suggested by v. 32, which found its way into the text of almost
   all MSS.

   The different opinions of the philosophers in v. 18 are purposely
   placed side by side with a touch of gentle sarcasm on their inability,
   with all their acuteness, to agree in any opinion even about Paul's
   meaning. The first opinion is the most interesting. It contains a word
   of characteristically Athenian slang, Spermológos, and is clearly
   caught from the very lips of the Athenians (as Dr. Blass happily puts
   it). This term was used in two senses--(1) a small bird that picks up
   seeds for its food, and (2) a worthless fellow of low class and vulgar
   habits, with the insinuation that he lives at the expense of others,
   like those disreputable persons who hang round the markets and the
   quays in order to pick up anything that falls from the loads that are
   carried about. Hence, as a term in social slang, it connotes absolute
   vulgarity and inability to rise above the most contemptible standard of
   life and conduct; it is often connected with slave life, for the
   Spermológos was near the type of the slave and below the level of the
   free man; and there clings to it the suggestion of picking up refuse
   and scraps, and in literature of plagiarism without the capacity to use
   correctly. In ancient literature plagiarism was not disapproved when it
   was done with skill, and when the idea or words taken from another were
   used with success: the literary offence lay in the ignorance and
   incapacity displayed when stolen knowledge was improperly applied.

   To appreciate fully a term of social slang requires the greatest effort
   to sympathise with and recreate the actual life of the people who used
   the term. Probably the nearest and most instructive parallel in modern
   English life to Spermológos is "Bounder," allowing for the difference
   between England and Athens. In both there lies the idea of one who is
   "out of the swim," out of the inner circle, one who lacks that thorough
   knowledge and practice in the rules of the game that mould the whole
   character and make it one's nature to act in the proper way and play
   the game fair. The English term might be applied to a candidate for a
   professorship, whose life and circumstances had lain in a different
   line and who wanted knowledge and familiarity with the subject; and
   that is the way in which St. Paul is here called a Spermológos, as one
   who aped the ways and words of philosophers. Dean Farrar's rendering,
   "picker-up of learning's crumbs," is happy, but loses the touch of
   slang.

   The general tendency of recent opinion is that Paul was taken to the
   Hill of Ares, in order to give an address in quiet surroundings to a
   crowd of Athenians on the spot where the Council that derived its name
   from the hill sat to hold solemn trials for murder; and the view taken
   in the Authorised Version and the ancient authorities, such as
   Chrysostom and Theophylact, that Paul was subjected to a trial before
   the Council, is rejected on the ground that in the proceedings there is
   nothing of a judicial type, no accuser, no accusation, and no defensive
   character in Paul's speech, which is addressed not to a court but to a
   general Athenian audience. These reasons quite disprove the view that
   the scene described in vv. 19-34 was a trial. But the idea that the
   assembly of Athenians went up to the hill-top as a suitable place for
   listening to an address is even more unsatisfactory. The top of the
   little hill is a most unsuitable place from its small size and its
   exposed position; and it is quite out of keeping with the habits of the
   people to go to such a place for such a purpose. Curtius has led the
   way to a proper view of the whole incident, which lies wholly in the
   agora.

   Further, it is inconsistent with the patriotism and pride of the
   Athenians that they should conduct a foreigner for whom they expressed
   such contempt to the most impressive seat of Athenian religious and
   national history, in order that he might there talk to them. The
   Athenians were, in many respects, flippant; but their flippancy was
   combined with an intense pride in the national dignity and the historic
   glory of the city, which would have revolted at such an insult as that
   this stranger should harangue them about his foreign deities on the
   spot where the Athenian elders had judged the god Ares and the hero
   Orestes, where the goddess Athena had presided in the highest court of
   her chosen people, and where still judgment on the most grave cases of
   homicide was solemnly pronounced.

   Nor would it be a permissible interpretation that a small number of
   philosophic inquirers retired to this quiet spot for unimpeded
   discussion. The scene and the speech breathe the spirit of the agora,
   and the open, free, crowded life of Athens, not the quiet atmosphere of
   the philosophic study or class-room; while the tone of the opinions
   expressed in v. 18 is not one of philosophic interest and careful
   discussion, but of contempt, dislike, and jealousy. Moreover, it would
   be an insult to address philosophic inquirers in the language of vv.
   22-3. The philosophers did not dedicate altars to an Unknown God, but
   regarded all such proceedings as the mere superstition of the vulgar.
   Paul's speech is an exceedingly skillful one, if addressed to a popular
   audience; but to philosophers it would be unskillful and unsuitable.

   But the language shows clearly that Paul was brought before the Council
   and not simply conducted to the Hill. He stood "in the midst of the
   Areopagus," v. 22, and "he went forth from the midst of them": he that
   went forth from the midst of them must have been standing in the midst
   of them. In this scene, full of the Attic spirit and containing typical
   words of Athenian slang like Spermológos, we require some distinctly
   Greek sense for each detail; and "Paul stood in the middle of the Hill"
   is in Greek an absurdity. He stood in the middle of the Council, a
   great and noble, but not a friendly assembly, as in IV 7 Peter stood
   "in the midst" of the Sanhedrim; and in Acts and the Gospels many
   similar expressions occur. [39]

   The philosophers took hold of Paul. When a man, especially an educated
   man, goes so far as to lay his hands on another, it is obvious that his
   feelings must be moved; and the word must have some marked sense in a
   writer whose expression is so carefully studied as Luke's. It occurs as
   a sign of friendly encouragement to a person in a solitary and
   difficult position, IX 27, XXIII 19; but more frequently it denotes
   hostile action, as XXI 30, XVIII 17, XVI 19. There must have been some
   stronger feeling among the philosophers than mere contempt mingled with
   some slight curiosity, before they actually placed their hands on Paul.
   Now they certainly did not act as his friends and sponsors in taking
   him before the Council, therefore we must understand that they took him
   there from dislike and with malice.

   What then was their object? Every attempt to explain the scene as a
   trial has failed, and must fail (p. 243). Even the idea of a
   preliminary inquiry is unsuitable; for, if it were so, none of the
   marked features of the scene are preserved in the narrative, which
   would be contrary to our experience in Luke's descriptions. In
   estimating the situation, we must remember that in vv. 18, 19, Paul is
   among the lecturers and professors of the university. Therein lies the
   chief interest of the scene, which is unique in Acts. We have seen Paul
   in various situations, and mixing in many phases of contemporary life.
   Here alone he stands amid the surroundings of a great university,
   disputing with its brilliant and learned teachers; and here, as in
   every other situation, he adapts himself with his usual versatility to
   the surroundings, and moves in them as to the manner born.

   Two questions have to be answered in regard to the scene that follows:
   why was Paul taken before the Council? and what were the intentions of
   the philosophers in taking him there? It is clear that Paul appeared to
   the philosophers as one of the many ambitious teachers who came to
   Athens hoping to find fame and fortune at the great centre of
   education. Now, certain powers were vested in the Council of Areopagus
   to appoint or invite lecturers at Athens, and to exercise some general
   control over the lecturers in the interests of public order and
   morality. There is an almost complete lack of evidence what were the
   advantages and the legal rights of a lecturer thus appointed, and to
   what extent or in what way a strange teacher could find freedom to
   lecture in Athens. There existed something in the way of privileges
   vested in the recognised lecturers; for the fact that Cicero induced
   the Areopagus to pass a decree inviting Cratippus, the Peripatetic
   philosopher, to become a lecturer in Athens, implies that some
   advantage was thereby lectured to him. There certainly also existed
   much freedom for foreigners to become lecturers in Athens, for the
   great majority of the Athenian professors and lecturers were foreign.
   The scene described in vv. 18-34 seems to prove that the recognised
   lecturers could take a strange lecturer before the Areopagus, and
   require him to give an account of his teaching and pass a test as to
   its character.

   When they took him to the court to satisfy the supreme university
   tribunal of his qualifications, they probably entertained some hope
   that he would be overawed before that august body, or that his teaching
   might not pass muster, as being of unsettling tendency (for no body is
   so conservative as a University Court).

   The government in Greek cities exercised a good deal of control over
   the entire system of education, both for boys and for young men, who
   were trained in graduated classes and passed on from one to another in
   regular course. There is good reason for thinking that in Athens this
   control was exercised by the Council of Areopagus, in the case both of
   boys and of young men: it rises naturally out of their ancient charge
   of the manners and morals of the citizens, of the public hygiene and
   the state physicians, and of offences against religious ritual (though
   serious charges of impiety and of introducing foreign religion were not
   tried before the Areopagus but before the popular courts); and it is,
   in ancient view, related to the control of peace and order which they
   exercised in the Roman period. Moreover, Quintilian mentions that the
   Areopagus punished a boy who used to pluck out the eyes of quails,
   which implies their jurisdiction over the young.

   In the rhetorical displays of that period, the general audience
   (corona) was an important feature. The influence of the audience is
   familiar to every reader of the literature of that time; and the
   younger Pliny says that even the lawyers of his time spoke more to gain
   the approval and applause of the audience than to influence the opinion
   and judgment of the court. Owing to the difficulty in multiplying
   copies of literary productions, public opinion could not be so well
   appealed to or expressed in any other way; and the applause or
   disapproval of the circle of hearers came to represent to a great
   extent the public verdict on all intellectual achievements. Luke,
   therefore, could not well omit the audience, even in this brief
   account; and he touches it off in v. 21, where the force of the
   imperfect tense is important: Luke is not describing the general
   character of the Athenian people (which would require a present tense):
   he places another element in the scene alongside of those already
   described. While the philosophers insisted with some malevolent
   intention on having a test applied, the general crowd of Athenians and
   resident strangers were merely moved by curiosity.

   The unmistakable tone of contempt in the description suits a Macedonian
   describing an Athenian crowd (for the two peoples always disliked and
   despised each other); and it is not undeserved. As Mr. Capes says in
   his University Life in Ancient Athens: "the people commonly was nothing
   loath to hear: they streamed as to a popular preacher in our own day,
   or to an actor starring in provincial towns: the epicures accepted the
   invitation to the feast of words, and hurried to the theatre to judge
   as critics the choice of images, and refinement of the style, and all
   the harmony of balanced periods ". As Luke says, they were as eager to
   make smart criticisms as to listen.

   3. THE SPEECH BEFORE THE COUNCIL OF AREOPAGUS.

   (XVII 22) AND PAUL STOOD IN THE MIDST OF THE COUNCIL AND SAID, "YE MEN
   OF ATHENS, IN ALL RESPECTS I OBSERVE THAT YOU ARE MORE than others
   RESPECTFUL OF WHAT IS DIVINE. (23) FOR AS I WAS GOING THROUGH your city
   AND SURVEYING THE MONUMENTS OF YOUR WORSHIP, I FOUND ALSO AN ALTAR WITH
   THE INSCRIPTION TO UNKNOWN GOD. THAT divine nature, THEN, WHICH YOU
   WORSHIP, NOT KNOWING what it is, I AM SETTING FORTH TO YOU. (24) THE
   GOD THAT MADE THE WORLD AND ALL THINGS THEREIN, HE, LORD AS HE IS OF
   HEAVEN AND EARTH, DWELLETH NOT IN SHRINES MADE WITH HANDS, (25) AND IS
   NOT SERVED BY HUMAN HANDS AS THOUGH HE NEEDED ANYTHING, SINCE HE
   HIMSELF GIVETH TO ALL LIFE AND BREATH AND ALL THINGS. (26) AND HE MADE
   OF ONE nature EVERY RACE OF MEN TO DWELL ON ALL THE FACE OF THE EARTH;
   AND FIXED DEFINED TIMES AND BOUNDS OF THEIR HABITATION, (27) THAT THEY
   SHOULD SEEK THE GOD, IF HAPLY THEY MIGHT FEEL AFTER HIM AND FIND HIM,
   BEING AS INDEED HE IS NOT FAR FROM EACH ONE OF US. (28) FOR IN HIM WE
   LIVE AND MOVE AND ARE, AS CERTAIN ALSO OF YOUR POETS HAVE SAID, FOR WE
   ARE ALSO HIS OFFSPRING. (29) BEING THEN THE OFFSPRING OF GOD, WE OUGHT
   NOT TO THINK THAT THE DIVINE NATURE IS LIKE UNTO GOLD OR SILVER OR
   STONE, GRAVEN BY ART AND DEVICE OF MAN. (30) NOW THE TIMES OF IGNORANCE
   GOD OVERLOOKED, BUT AT PRESENT HE CHARGETH ALL MEN EVERYWHERE TO
   REPENT, (31) INASMUCH AS HE HATH SET A DAY ON WHICH, IN the person of
   THE MAN WHOM HE HATH ORDAINED, HE WILL JUDGE THE WORLD IN
   RIGHTEOUSNESS; AND HE HATH GIVEN ALL A GUARANTEE BY RAISING HIM FROM
   THE DEATH." (32) AND WHEN THEY HEARD OF "RAISING FROM THE DEAD," SOME
   MOCKED, AND OTHERS SAID, "WE WILL HEAR THEE CONCERNING THIS YET AGAIN".
   (33) THUS PAUL WENT OUT FROM THE MIDST OF THEM. (34) BUT CERTAIN MEN
   CLAVE UNTO HIM AND BELIEVED; AMONG WHOM ALSO WAS DIONYSIUS, A MEMBER OF
   THE COUNCIL, AND A WOMAN NAMED DAMARIS, AND OTHERS WITH THEM. (XVIII 1)
   AND THEREAFTER HE LEFT ATHENS, AND WENT TO CORINTH.

   The influence of Paul's Athenian surroundings may be traced in the
   "philosophy of history" which he sketches briefly in his address. In
   the Socratic position the virtue of" knowing" was too exclusively dwelt
   on, and in some of the earlier Platonic dialogues the view is
   maintained that virtue is knowledge and vice ignorance; and Greek
   philosophy was never clear about the relation of will and permanent
   character to "knowing". The Greek philosophers could hardly admit, and
   could never properly understand, that a man may know without carrying
   his knowledge into action, that he may refuse to know when knowledge is
   within his grasp, and that the refusal exercises a permanent
   deteriorating influence on his character. Now Paul, in his estimate of
   the relation of the pre-Christian world to God, adopts a different
   position in the Athenian speech from that on which he afterwards took
   his stand in his letter to the Romans, I 19-32. In the latter place he
   recognises (to quote Lightfoot's brief analysis) that the pagan world
   "might have seen God through His works. They refused to see Him. They
   disputed, and they blinded their hearts. Therefore they were delivered
   over to impurity. They not only did those things; but they took delight
   in those who did them." Here we have a full recognition of that
   fundamental fact in human nature and life, which Æschylus expressed in
   his greatest drama [40] a conception of his own differing from the
   common Greek view:" the impious act breeds more, like to its own kind:
   it is the nature of crime to beget new crime, and along with it the
   depraved audacious will that settles, like an irresistible spirit of
   ill, on the house". But to the Athenians Paul says, "the times of
   ignorance, therefore, God overlooked"; and those times are alluded to
   as a period, when men were doing their best to find and to worship "God
   Unknown". We must not, of course, demand that the entire theology of
   Paul should be compressed into this single address; but yet there is a
   notable omission of an element that was unfamiliar and probably
   repugnant to his audience, and an equally notable insistence on an
   element that was familiar to them. The Stoic ring in 23 f. is marked
   (pp. 147, 150).

   One woman was converted at Athens; and it is not said that she was of
   good birth, as Was stated at Berea and Thessalonica and Pisidian
   Antioch. The difference is true to life. It was impossible in Athenian
   society for a woman of respectable position and family to have any
   opportunity of hearing Paul; and the name Damaris (probably a vulgarism
   for damalis, heifer) suggests a foreign woman, perhaps one of the class
   of educated Hetairai, who might very well be in his audience.

   It would appear that Paul was disappointed and perhaps disillusioned by
   his experience in Athens. He felt that he had gone at least as far as
   was right in the way of presenting his doctrine in a form suited to the
   current philosophy; and the result had been little more than naught.
   When he went on from Athens to Corinth, he no longer spoke in the
   philosophic style. In replying afterwards to the unfavourable
   comparison between his preaching and the more philosophical style of
   Apollos, he told the Corinthians that, when he came among them, he
   "determined not to know anything save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified"
   (I Cor. I 12); and nowhere throughout his writings is he so hard on the
   wise, the philosophers, and the dialecticians, as when he defends the
   way in which he had presented Christianity at Corinth. Apparently the
   greater concentration of purpose and simplicity of method in his
   preaching at Corinth is referred to by Luke, when he says, XVIII 5,
   that when Silas and Timothy rejoined him there, they found him wholly
   possessed by and engrossed in the word. This strong expression, so
   unlike anything else in Acts, must, on our hypothesis, be taken to
   indicate some specially marked character in the Corinthian preaching.

   4. CORINTH.

   (XVIII 1) AFTER THESE EVENTS HE LEFT ATHENS AND WENT TO CORINTH. (2)
   AND, FINDING A CERTAIN JEW NAMED AQUILA, A MAN OF PONTUS BY BIRTH, WHO
   HAD LATELY COME FROM ITALY, AND PRISCILLA HIS WIFE, BECAUSE CLAUDIUS
   HAD COMMANDED ALL THE JEWS TO LEAVE ROME, HE ACCOSTED THEM. (3) AND
   BECAUSE HE WAS OF THE SAME CRAFT, HE ABODE WITH THEM, AND WROUGHT AT
   HIS TRADE [FOR THEY WERE TENTMAKERS BY THEIR CRAFT]. (4) AND HE USED TO
   DISCOURSE IN THE SYNAGOGUE EVERY SABBATH, AND TRIED TO PERSUADE JEWS
   AND GREEKS. (5) AND WHEN SILAS AND TIMOTHY ARRIVED FROM MACEDONIA, HE
   WAS WHOLLY ABSORBED IN PREACHING, ATTESTING TO THE JEWS THAT THE
   ANOINTED ONE IS JESUS.

   Almost all MSS. add to v. 3 the explanation which we have given in
   parentheses; but it comes in very awkwardly, for Luke, who said at the
   beginning of the verse, "because he was of the same craft," did not
   intend to say at the end, "for they were tentmakers by craft". The
   Bezan Text and an old Latin Version (Gig.) omit this detail; and they
   must here represent the original state of the text. In order to make
   the explanation a little less awkward, the two great MSS. read, "he
   abode with them and they wrought". The explanation is a gloss, which
   crept from the margin into the text. It is doubtless very early, and
   perfectly trustworthy: its vitality lies in its truth, for that was not
   the kind of detail that was invented in the growth of the Pauline
   legend.

   Aquila, a man of Pontus, settled in Rome bears a Latin name; and must
   therefore have belonged to the province and not to non-Roman Pontus.
   This is a good example of Luke's principle to use the Roman provincial
   divisions for purposes of classification (pp. 91, 196).

   There is here a reference to Imperial history. Aquila and Priscilla had
   come recently from Rome, on account of an edict of Claudius expelling
   the Jews from Rome. Suetonius says that the expulsion was caused by a
   series of disturbances "due to the action of Chrestus"; and in all
   probability this Chrestus must be interpreted as "the leader of the
   Chrestians" (p. 47 f.), taken by a popular error as actually living. In
   the earliest stages of Christian history in Rome, such a mistake was
   quite natural; and Suetonius reproduces the words which he found in a
   document of the period. As Dion Cassius mentions, it was found so
   difficult to keep the Jews out of Rome on account of their numbers,
   that the Emperor did not actually expel them, but made stricter
   regulations about their conduct. It would therefore appear that the
   edict was found unworkable in practice; but Suetonius is a perfect
   authority that it was tried, and it is quite probable that some Jews
   obeyed it, and among them Aquila. Neither Suetonius nor Dion gives any
   clue to the date; but Orosius says that it occurred in Claudius's ninth
   year, 49. I believe that this date is a year wrong, like that of the
   famine (p. 68), and for the same reason: the edict must be placed in
   the end of 50, and thus Aquila arrived in Corinth six or seven months
   before Paul came in Sept. 51.

   The careful record of Aquila's antecedents must, on our hypothesis, be
   taken as not a mere picturesque detail; Luke mentioned his Roman
   residence, because it had some bearing on his subject. After some time
   (during most of which Paul had been in Aquila's company at Corinth and
   at Ephesus), a journey to Rome is announced as Paul's next intention,
   XIX 21. Aquila was able to tell him of the events that had occurred in
   Rome "at the action of Chrestus"; and his experience showed him how
   important it was to go direct to the great centres of Roman life. The
   connection of Luke with the Macedonian journey (p. 203) is an
   interesting parallel.

   Paul mentions in writing to the Romans, XV 24, that he intended to go
   on from Rome to Spain. Such an intention implies in the plainest way an
   idea already existent in Paul's mind of Christianity as the religion of
   the Roman Empire. Spain was by far the most thoroughly romanised
   district of the Empire, as was marked soon after by the act of
   Vespasian in 75, when he made the Latin status universal in Spain. From
   the centre of the Roman world Paul would go on to the chief seat of
   Roman civilisation in the West, and would thus complete a first survey,
   the intervals of which should be filled up by assistants, such as
   Timothy, Titus, etc.

   5. THE SYNAGOGUE AND THE GENTILES IN CORINTH.

   (XVIII 6) AND WHEN THEY BEGAN TO FORM A FACTION AGAINST HIM AND
   BLASPHEME, HE SHOOK OUT HIS GARMENTS AND SAID UNTO THEM, "YOUR BLOOD ON
   YOUR OWN HEAD! I ON MY SIDE AM CLEAN! FROM HENCEFORTH I WILL GO UNTO
   THE GENTILES," i.e., in this city. (7) AND HE CHANGED HIS PLACE from
   the synagogue, AND WENT INTO THE HOUSE OF A CERTAIN MAN NAMED TITIUS
   JUSTUS, A GOD-FEARING proselyte, WHOSE HOUSE JOINED HARD TO THE
   SYNAGOGUE. (8) BUT CRISPUS, THE ARCHISYNAGOGOS, BELIEVED IN THE LORD
   WITH ALL HIS HOUSE; AND MANY OF THE PEOPLE OF CORINTH USED TO HEAR AND
   BELIEVE AND RECEIVE BAPTISM. (9) AND THE LORD SAID IN THE NIGHT BY A
   VISION UNTO PAUL, "BE NOT AFRAID, BUT SPEAK ON, AND HOLD NOT THY PEACE;
   (10) BECAUSE I AM WITH THEE, AND NO MAN SHALL SET ON THEE TO HARM THEE;
   BECAUSE I HAVE MUCH PEOPLE IN THIS CITY". (11) AND HE SETTLED A YEAR
   AND SIX MONTHS, TEACHING AMONG THEM THE WORD OF GOD.

   The distinction between the period of work in the synagogue, and that
   of direct preaching to the populace, is expressed with marked emphasis
   at Corinth. Corinth stood on the highroad between Rome and the East;
   and was therefore one of the greatest centres of influence in the Roman
   world. Macedonia was in this respect quite secondary, though one of the
   routes to the East passed across it; and hence Paul was ordered to sit
   down for a prolonged stay when he reached Corinth. It is characteristic
   of Luke to define the entire stay before relating some incidents that
   occurred in it (pp. 153, 289).

   It must be acknowledged that Paul had not a very conciliatory way with
   the Jews when he became angry. The shaking out of his garments was
   undoubtedly a very exasperating gesture; and the occupying of a
   meetinghouse next door to the synagogue, with the former archisynagogos
   as a prominent officer, was more than human nature could stand.
   Probably he found unusual opposition here, pp. 143, 287; but it is not
   strange that the next stage of proceedings was in a law-court.

   Titius Justus was evidently a Roman or a Latin, one of the coloni of
   the colony Corinth. Like the centurion Cornelius, he had been attracted
   to the synagogue. His citizenship would afford Paul an opening to the
   more educated class of the Corinthian population.

   It seems to be implied by vv. 8, 17, that there was only one
   archisynagogos in the Corinthian synagogue; and, when Crispus became a
   Christian, a successor was appointed. At Pisidian Antioch there were
   several archisynagogoi. M.S. Reinach has shown from a Smyrnæ an
   inscription that the title in Asia Minor did not indicate an office,
   but was a mere expression of dignity, "a leading person in the
   synagogue"; and the Bezan Text of XIV 2 distinguishes clearly between
   the archons of the synagogue (officials, probably two in number), and
   the archisynagogoi.

   6. THE IMPERIAL POLICY IN ITS RELATION TO PAUL AND TO CHRISTIAN
   PREACHING.

   (XVIII 12) BUT WHILE GALLIO WAS PROCONSUL OF ACHAIA, THE JEWS WITH ONE
   ACCORD ROSE UP AGAINST PAUL, AND BROUGHT HIM BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL,
   SAYING, (13) "THIS MAN PERSUADETH PEOPLE TO WORSHIP GOD CONTRARY TO THE
   LAW" (14) BUT WHEN PAUL WAS ABOUT. TO OPEN HIS MOUTH, GALLIO SAID UNTO
   THE JEWS, "IF A MISDEMEANOUR OR A CRIME WERE IN QUESTION, YE JEWS,
   REASON WOULD THAT I SHOULD BEAR WITH YOU; (15) BUT IF THEY ARE
   QUESTIONS OF WORD, not deed, AND OF NAMES, not things, AND OF YOUR LAW,
   not Roman law, YE YOURSELVES WILL LOOK TO IT: TO BE A JUDGE OF THESE
   MATTERS for my part HAVE NO MIND". (16) AND HE DROVE THEM FROM THE
   TRIBUNAL. (17) AND ALL THE GREEKS SEIZED SOSTHENES, THE ARCHISYNAGOGOS,
   AND PROCEEDED TO BEAT HIM BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL; AND GALLIO TOOK NO
   NOTICE OF THIS CONDUCT.

   Achaia was governed by a proconsul from B.C. 27 to A.D. 15, and from
   A.D. 44 onwards. It was a province of the second rank, and was
   administered by Roman officials, after holding the prætorship, and
   generally before the consulship. Corinth had now become the chief city
   of Achaia, and the residence of its governors (as Marquardt infers from
   this passage).

   Here we have another point of contact with Roman history. Gallio was a
   brother of the famous Seneca, and shared his fortunes. [41] Seneca was
   in disgrace from 41 to 49; but in 49 he was recalled from banishment
   and appointed prætor for A.D. 50. Pliny mentions that Gallio attained
   the consulship, which was probably after his proconsulship in Achaia.
   In his career of office Gallio must have been prætor not less than five
   years before he went to Achaia; but no evidence survives to show in
   what year he held the prætorship (except that it cannot have been
   between 41 and 49):as the elder brother, he probably held it before
   Seneca. There is no other evidence that Gallio governed Achaia; but the
   statement of Luke is corroborated by the fact, which Seneca mentions,
   that Gallio caught fever in Achaia, and took a voyage for change of
   air.

   Either the Jews at Corinth did not manage their accusation so well as
   those of Thessalonica, or Gallio elicited the true character of their
   complaints against Paul as being really matters of mere Jewish concern.
   It is clear that Gallio's short speech represents the conclusion of a
   series of inquiries, for the accusation, as it is quoted, does not
   refer to words or names, but only to the Law. But it is reasonable to
   suppose that the Jews put their accusation at first in a serious light,
   with a view to some serious penalty being inflicted; and Gallio, on
   probing their allegations, reduced the matter to its true dimensions as
   a question that concerned only the self-administering community of "the
   Nation of the Jews in Corinth". It would have been interesting to know
   more about this case, for it seems to show that Gallio shared the broad
   and generous views of his brother about the policy of Rome in regard to
   the various religions of the provinces. The Greeks, who always hated
   the Jews, took advantage of the marked snub which the governor had
   inflicted on them, to seize and beat Sosthenes, who had been appointed
   to replace Crispus as Archisynagogos, and who doubtless was taking a
   prominent part in the proceedings. Gallio took no notice of this piece
   of "Lynch law," which probably seemed to him to be a rough sort of
   justice.

   The fact that Sosthenes (whether the same or another) joined with Paul
   in writing to the Corinthians, I 1, caused an early misapprehension of
   the scene. It was understood that Gallio, after deciding against the
   Jews, allowed them to console themselves by beating a Christian; and
   the word "Greeks" is omitted in the great MSS. under the influence of
   this mistake. But such action is inconceivable in the Roman governor;
   and the text of the inferior MSS. which substitutes a lifelike and
   characteristic scene for one that is utterly foolish, must undoubtedly
   be preferred. Probably two persons at Corinth named Sosthenes were
   brought into relations with Paul, one a Jew, the other a prominent
   Christian; or perhaps the Jew was converted at a later date.

   This action of the Imperial government in protecting him from the Jews,
   and (if we are right) declaring freedom in religious matters, seems to
   have been the crowning fact in determining Paul's line of conduct.
   According to our view, the residence at Corinth was an epoch in Paul's
   life. As regards his doctrine he became more clearly conscious of its
   character, as well as more precise and definite in his presentation of
   it; and as regards practical work he became more clear as to his aim
   and the means of attaining the aim, namely, that Christianity should be
   spread through the civilised, i.e., the Roman, world (not as excluding,
   but as preparatory to, the entire world, Col. III 11), using the
   freedom of speech which the Imperial policy as declared by Gallio
   seemed inclined to permit. The action of Gallio, as we understand it,
   seems to pave the way for Paul's appeal a few years later from the
   petty outlying court of the procurator of Judea, who was always much
   under the influence of the ruling party in Jerusalem, to the supreme
   tribunal of the Empire (p. 306 f.).

   The letters to the Thessalonians belong to the earlier part of his stay
   in Corinth, before he had definitely reached the new stage of thought
   and aim. To the new stage, when he had attained full consciousness and
   full dominion over his own plans, belong the four great letters, Gal. I
   and II Cor., Rom.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [39] ho Areios Pagos was often used, in a conversational way, in place
   of the cumbrous technical form, he ex Areiou Pagou boule. The decisive
   passages are pointed out to me by two friends and old pupils, Mr. A.
   Souter and Rev. A.F. Findlay. Cicero says to Atticus, I 14, 5, Senatus
   [Areios Pagos. "our Senate is a veritable Areopagus". Cicero picked up
   the conversational usage during his six months residence in Athens; and
   hence he uses Areopagus to denote the Court, Nat. D. II 29, 74, Rep. I
   27, 43. Again in an inscription of A.D. 50-100 (Cavvadias, Fouilles
   d'Epidaure I p. 68, No. 206) we find Areios Pagos en Eleusini logous
   epoiesato. (Pape quotes other cases, which are not so clear, and are
   denied by some authorities.) Here, as everywhere, we find Luke using
   the language of educated conversation.

   [40] Agamemnon 730 f., a passage where the text is very uncertain and
   is terribly maltreated by many editors. Paley turns it into an
   elaborate genealogical tree, while Wecklein conjectures away the
   depravation of the will, which is the key to the philosophic position
   of Æschylus.

   [41] Gallio. One of the many difficulties in which Dr. Clemen's theory
   involves him is that he has to deny the identity of Luke's Gallio with
   Seneca's brother. Gallio's voyage from Achaia, undertaken on account of
   a local fever (Seneca, Ep. Mor. 104, 1), was not the same as his voyage
   from Rome to Egypt after his consulship on account of phthisis (Pliny,
   XXXI 33), though probably the first also was to Egypt.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XII.

  THE CHURCH IN ASIA

   1. THE SYRIAN VOYAGE AND THE RETURN TO EPHESUS.

   (XVIII 18) AND PAUL TOOK HIS LEAVE OF THE BRETHREN, AND SAILED [42]
   THENCE FOR SYRIA, AND WITH HIM PRISCILLA AND AQUILA; AND HE SHORE HIS
   HEAD IN CENCHREÆ, FOR HE HAD A VOW. (19) AND THEY REACHED EPHESUS, AND
   HE LEFT THE OTHERS THERE. AND FOR HIMSELF, HE WENT INTO THE SYNAGOGUE,
   AND DELIVERED A DISCOURSE UNTO THE JEWS. (20) AND WHEN THEY ASKED HIM
   TO ABIDE A LONGER TIME, HE CONSENTED NOT; (21) BUT HE TOOK HIS LEAVE OF
   THEM, AND SAID, ["I MUST BY ALL MEANS PASS THE COMING FEAST IN
   JERUSALEM]; IF GOD PLEASE, I WILL RETURN UNTO YOU;" AND HE SET SAIL
   FROM EPHESUS. (22) AND, REACHING CÆSAREIA, HE WENT UP to Jerusalem,
   SALUTED THE CHURCH, AND then WENT DOWN TO ANTIOCH. (23) AND, HAVING
   SPENT SOME TIME there, HE WENT FORTH, AND MADE A PROGRESS IN ORDER from
   first to last THROUGH THE GALATIC REGION AND THE PHRYGIAN Region,
   CONFIRMING ALL THE DISCIPLES. . . . (IX 1) AND IT CAME TO PASS THAT
   PAUL, MAKING A MISSIONARY PROGRESS THROUGH THE HIGHER-LYING QUARTERS of
   Asia, CAME TO the capital of the province EPHESUS (Expositor, July,
   1895, p. 39).

   Just as in XX 6 the company sailed away from Philippi (Neapolis, where
   they really embarked, being omitted, p. 70), so here Paul sailed from
   Corinth, the harbour being left out of sight. Then the harbour is
   brought in as an afterthought: before actually embarking at Cenchreæ,
   the eastern port of Corinth, Paul cut his hair, marking the fulfilment
   of a vow which apparently was connected with safe embarkation from
   Corinth. Though the grammatical construction of v. 18 would suggest
   that Aquila made the vow, and one old Latin Version makes this sense
   explicit, yet the natural emphasis marks Paul as the subject here.

   Aquila and Priscilla remained in Ephesus until the end of 55 (I Cor.
   XVI 19); but in 56 they returned to Rome, where they were in the early
   part of A.D. 57 (Rom. XVI 3). We may fairly suppose that Timothy came
   with Paul to Ephesus, and went up on a mission from thence to his
   native city and the other Churches of Galatia.

   This is an important passage for dating the journey. If we accept the
   longer reading of v. 21 (which appears in the Bezan Text, and
   elsewhere), it is certain that Paul was hurrying to Jerusalem for the
   coming feast, which may be confidently understood as the Passover. But
   even with the shorter reading of the great MSS., it would be highly
   probable that the reason why he postponed accepting the invitation to
   work in Ephesus and hurried on to Cæsareia, could lie only in his
   desire to be present at Jerusalem on some great occasion; and the
   Passover is the feast which would attract him. Paul seems to have made
   a practice of beginning his journeys in the spring.

   According to our view the whole journey took place thus. Paul was
   always eager to. profit by any "open door," and an invitation from his
   own people to preach to them in Ephesus must have been specially
   tempting to him. Nothing but some pressing duty, which seemed to him to
   imperatively require his presence in Jerusalem at the feast, was likely
   to hurry him away from them. Further, the feast must have been close at
   hand, otherwise he could have waited some weeks before going on. Now,
   in A.D. 53, Passover fell on March 22; and navigation began as a rule
   only on March 5. But Paul took an early ship for Cæsareia, probably a
   pilgrim ship, carrying from Corinth and Ephesus many Jews for the
   coming Passover, and directing its course accordingly. In these
   circumstances he could not lose a day on the road, and could merely
   promise to return, "if God will ".

   On reaching Cæsareia, he went up and saluted the Church. Dr. Blass
   considers that he went up from the harbour to the city of Cæsareia and
   saluted the Church there, and then "went down" to Antioch. That
   interpretation is impossible for several reasons. (1) It is impossible
   to use the term "went down" of a journey from the coast-town Cæsareia
   to the inland city Antioch. On the contrary, one regularly "goes down"
   to a coast-town (III 4, XIV 25, XVI 8, etc.). (2) The terms "going up"
   and "going down" are used so frequently of the journey to and from
   Jerusalem as to establish this usage. Usually the phrase is given in
   full, "they went up to Jerusalem"; but Dr. Blass accepts as Lukan a
   reading in XV 6, in which "to go up to the Elders" is used in the sense
   of "to go up to Jerusalem to the Elders". If he admits that sense in XV
   6, why not also in XVIII 22? Conversely, the phrase "to go down" is
   used XXIV 22, where the reader has to understand "from Jerusalem to
   Cæsareia". Now, the aim of Paul's journey to Jerusalem, having been put
   in the reader's mind by the words of v. 21, is readily and naturally
   supplied in v. 22.

   The shipload of pilgrims to Jerusalem, with Paul among them, landed at
   Cæsareia, and went up to Jerusalem to the Passover in regular course.
   Paul exchanged greetings with the Church (this phrase implies that he
   made only a brief stay), and went down to Antioch. There he received
   serious news about the Galatian Churches (p. 190); and with all
   convenient speed he went by the land route through Cilicia, to Derbe,
   Lystra, Iconium, and Pisidian Antioch. With the shortest stay that can
   be supposed, when he was seeing old and loved friends after years of
   absence, Paul can hardly have reached Derbe before July 53. We cannot
   allow less than two months for confirming the wavering Churches of
   Galatia, especially as on this visit (I Cor. XVI 1) he probably planned
   the collection for the poor in Jerusalem, which was made universal
   throughout his new Churches during the following three years. Thus he
   would have completed his work in Galatia by the beginning of September.
   Then he went on to Ephesus, taking the higher-lying and more direct
   route, not the regular trade route on the lower level down the Lycus
   and Mæander valleys. As he made a missionary progress through the upper
   lands, he can hardly have reached Ephesus before the end of September,
   A.D. 53, and October is a more probable time. Such a journey must have
   occupied much time, even if we cut it down to the shortest possible
   limits. The distances are very great, and progression was very slow;
   and even on a rapid journey many interruptions must be allowed for (as
   any one who travels in these countries knows only too well).

   In interpreting v. 22, we had to understand that the thought of
   Jerusalem as Paul's aim had been suggested to the reader's mind by v.
   21. That is the case when the longer form of v. 21 is accepted; but
   with the shorter text it becomes too harsh and difficult to supply the
   unexpressed thought in v. 22. We conclude that the longer form is the
   original text, and the shorter form is a corruption. But how did the
   corruption originate? A curious error appears in Asterius (c. 400,
   A.D.), and in Euthalius (probably c. 468), and therefore was probably
   part of the early tradition, according to which Pisidian Antioch, not
   Syrian Antioch, was alluded to in v. 22. By that misconception the
   whole journey is obscured, and especially a visit to Jerusalem in v. 22
   becomes impossible. Two ways of curing the difficulty were tried. The
   Bezan Text retained the allusion to Jerusalem and the feast in v. 22,
   and explained the supposed failure to pay the visit by interpolating in
   XIX 1 the statement, "now when Paul wished according to his own plan to
   go to Jerusalem, the Spirit bade him turn away into Asia". On the other
   hand, in the text of the great MSS., the reference to the intended
   visit to Jerusalem is cut out of v. 21. Each of these seems a
   deliberate and conscious effort made by some editor to eliminate a
   difficulty from the passage as it stood originally

   2. APOLLOS, PRISCILLA AND AQUILA.

   During the time that Paul was absent from Ephesus, there came thither
   an Alexandrian Jew named Apollos, a good speaker, and well read in the
   Scriptures. He had learned in Alexandria the doctrine of John the
   Baptist and his prophecy of the immediate coming of Christ; and this he
   preached in Ephesus with great fervour and detailed proof from
   Scripture. Priscilla and Aquila, having heard his preaching, instructed
   him with regard to the fulfilment of John's prophecy. Afterwards he
   conceived the intention of crossing over to Achaia; and the Brethren
   gave him letters of recommendation to the disciples in Corinth. When he
   settled there he became an effective preacher, and a powerful opponent
   of the Jews, showing how in Jesus the prophecies with regard to the
   Anointed One were fulfilled.

   This episode is obviously introduced, not so much for its own intrinsic
   importance, as for the sake of rendering the opening of Paul's first
   letter to the Corinthians clear and intelligible. A contrast is drawn
   there between the more elaborate and eloquent style of Apollos and the
   simple Gospel of Paul; and it is implied that some of the Corinthian
   Brethren preferred the style and Gospel of Apollos. The particulars
   stated here about Apollos have clearly been selected to throw light on
   the circumstances alluded to, but not explained in the letter.

   In the Bezan Text the account of Apollos appears in a different form,
   which has all the marks of truth, and yet is clearly not original, but
   a text remodelled according to a good tradition. The name is given in
   the fuller form Apollonius; but Paul uses the diminutive Apollos; and
   Luke, to make his explanation clearer would naturally use the same
   form. Moreover, Luke regularly uses the language of conversation, in
   which the diminutive forms were usual; and so he speaks of Priscilla,
   Sopatros and Silas always, though Paul speaks of Prisca, Sosipatros and
   Silvanus. On that principle we must prefer the form Apollos.

   Again, the text of almost all MSS. mentions Priscilla first; but the
   Bezan Text alters the order, putting Aquila first. Elsewhere also the
   Bezan Reviser shows his dislike to the prominence assigned to women in
   Acts. In XVII 12 he changes "not a few of the honourable Greek women
   and of men" into "of the Greeks and the honourable many men and women".
   In XVII 34 he cuts out Damaris altogether. In XVII 4 he changes the
   "leading women" into "wives of the leading men" These changes show a
   definite and uniform purpose, and therefore spring from a deliberate
   Revision of the original Received Text.

   The unusual order, the wife before the husband (so XVIII 18), must be
   accepted as original; for there is always a tendency among scribes to
   change the unusual into the usual. Paul twice (II Tim. IV 19, Rom. XVI
   3) mentions Prisca before Aquila; that order was, therefore, a
   conversational custom, familiar in the company among whom they moved;
   though it must have seemed odd to strangers in later generations.

   Probably Prisca was of higher rank than her husband, for her name is
   that of a good old Roman family. Now, in XVIII 2 the very harsh and
   strange arrangement of the sentence must strike every reader. But
   clearly the intention is to force on the reader's mind the fact that
   Aquila was a Jew, while Priscilla was not; and it is characteristic of
   Luke to suggest by subtle arrangement of words a distinction which
   would need space to explain formally (pp. 85, 204). Aquila was probably
   a freedman. The name does indeed occur as cognomen in some Roman
   families; but it was also a slave name, for a freedman of Mæcenas was
   called (C. Cilnius) Aquila. There is probably much to discover with
   regard to this interesting pair, but in this place we cannot dwell on
   the subject.

   The order in which the different threads of the narrative here succeed
   one another exactly recalls the method of XI 27-XII 25. There vv. 27-30
   narrate the events in Antioch, and bring Barnabas and Saul to the gates
   of Jerusalem; next, the events in Jerusalem are brought up to date; and
   then the action of the envoys in Jerusalem is described. So here Paul's
   journey is narrated, and he is brought to the frontier of Asia; next,
   the events in Ephesus are brought up to date; and then Paul's entrance
   into Asia and his action at Ephesus are described.

   3. EPHESUS.

   (XIX 1) AND IT CAME TO PASS, THAT, WHILE APOLLOS WAS AT CORINTH, PAUL,
   HAVING PASSED THROUGH THE UPPER DISTRICTS, CAME TO EPHESUS. (8) AND HE
   ENTERED INTO THE SYNAGOGUE, AND SPAKE BOLDLY FOR THE SPACE OF THREE
   MONTHS, REASONING AND PERSUADING AS TO WHAT CONCERNS THE KINGDOM OF
   GOD. (9) BUT WHEN SOME WERE HARDENED AND DISOBEDIENT, SPEAKING EVIL OF
   THE WAY BEFORE THE MULTITUDE, HE DEPARTED FROM THEM AND SEPARATED THE
   DISCIPLES, REASONING DAILY IN THE SCHOOL OF TYRANNUS [FROM THE FIFTH TO
   THE TENTH HOUR]. (10) AND THIS CONTINUED FOR THE SPACE OF TWO YEARS.

   The distinction between the period of preaching in the synagogue and
   the direct address to the Ephesian population is very clearly marked,
   and the times given in each case. In vv. 2-7 a strange episode is
   related before Paul entered the synagogue. He found twelve men who had
   been baptised by the baptism of John, and induced them to accept
   rebaptism. This episode I must confess not to understand. It interrupts
   the regular method of Luke's narrative; for in all similar cases, Paul
   goes to the synagogue, and his regular efforts for his own people are
   related before any exceptional cases are recorded. The circumstances,
   too, are difficult. How had these twelve escaped the notice of Aquila,
   Priscilla, and Apollos, and yet attracted Paul's attention before he
   went to the synagogue? Perhaps the intention is to represent Paul as
   completing and perfecting the work begun by Apollos; rebaptism was,
   apparently, not thought necessary for Apollos, and now Paul lays down
   the principle that it is required in all such cases. But that seems
   distinctly below the level on which Luke's conception of Paul is
   pitched. If there were any authority in MS. or ancient Versions to omit
   the episode, one would be inclined to take that course. As there is
   none, I must acknowledge that I cannot reconcile it with the conception
   of Luke's method, founded. on other parts of the narrative, which is
   maintained in this book. Possibly better knowledge about the early
   history of the Ephesian Church might give this episode more
   significance and importance in the development history than it seems to
   possess.

   We should be glad to know more about the lecture room of Tyrannus. It
   played the same part in Ephesus that the house of Titius Justus
   adjoining the synagogue did in Corinth. Here Paul regularly taught
   every day; and the analogy which we have noticed in other cases (pp.
   75, 243) between his position, as it would appear to the general
   population, and that of the rhetors and philosophers of the time, is
   very marked. There is one difference, according to the Bezan Text of v.
   9: Paul taught after the usual work of the lecture-room was concluded,
   i.e., "after business hours ". Doubtless he himself began to work (XX
   34, I Cor. IV 12) before sunrise and continued at his trade till
   closing time, an hour before noon. His hours of work are defined by
   himself, I Thess. II 9, "ye remember our labour and toil, working day
   and night "; there, as often in ancient literature, the hours before
   daybreak are called "night," and his rule at Thessalonica may be
   extended to Ephesus. Public life in the Ionian cities ended regularly
   at the fifth hour; and we may add to the facts elsewhere stated a
   regulation at Attaleia in Lydia that public distribution of oil should
   be "from the first to the fifth hour" [43] . Thus Paul himself would be
   free, and the lecture-room would be disengaged, after the fifth hour;
   and the time, which was devoted generally to home-life and rest, was
   applied by him to mission-work.

   In the following narrative the powers of Paul are brought into
   competition with those of Jewish exorcists and pagan dabblers in the
   black art, and his superiority to them demonstrated. Ephesus was a
   centre of all such magical arts and practices, and it was therefore
   inevitable that the new teaching should be brought in contact with them
   and triumph over them. There can be no doubt that, in the conception of
   Luke, the measure of success lay in the extent to which Divine power
   and inspiration was communicated to a new Church; and perhaps the whole
   description may be defended as the extremist example of that view. But
   it seems undeniable that, when we contrast this passage with the great
   scene at Paphos, or the beautiful though less powerful scene with the
   ventriloquist at Philippi, there is in the Ephesian description
   something like vulgarity of tone, together with a certain vagueness and
   want of individuality, very different from those other scenes. Such
   details, too, as are given, are not always consistent and satisfactory.
   The seven sons in v. 14 change in an unintelligible way to two in v. 16
   (except in the Bezan Text); and the statement that the seven were sons
   of a chief priest, looks more like a popular tale than a trustworthy
   historical statement. There is no warrant in the text for the view
   sometimes advocated, that Sceva was merely an impostor who pretended to
   be a chief priest. The money value of the books that were destroyed is
   another touch that is thoroughly characteristic of the oriental popular
   tale. The inability of the vulgar oriental mind to conceive any other
   aim, object, or standard in the world except money, and its utter
   slavery to gold, are familiar to every one who has seen the life of the
   people, or studied the Arabian Nights: in the West one sees nothing
   like the simple, childish frankness with which the ordinary oriental
   measures all things by gold, and can conceive of no other conscious aim
   except gold. So far as the oriental peasant is natural and unconscious,
   he is interesting and delightful, and his complete difference of nature
   at once attracts and holds at a distance the man of Western thoughts;
   but so far as he consciously attempts to conceive motives and form
   plans, gold is his sole standard of value.

   In this Ephesian description one feels the character, not of weighed
   and reasoned history, but of popular fancy; and I cannot explain it on
   the level of most of the narrative The writer is here rather a
   picker-up of current gossip, like Herodotus, than a real historian. The
   puzzle becomes still more difficult when we go on to v. 23, and find
   ourselves again on the same level as the finest parts of Acts. If there
   were many such contrasts in the book as between vv. 11-20 and 23-41, I
   should be a believer in the composite character of Acts. As it is, I
   confess the difficulty in this part; but the existence of some unsolved
   difficulties is not a bar to the view maintained in the present
   treatise (p. 16).

   4. THE CHURCH IN THE PROVINCE OF ASIA.

   (XIX 10) THIS CONTINUED FOR THE SPACE OF TWO YEARS, SO THAT ALL THEY
   THAT DWELT IN ASIA HEARD THE WORD. . . . (21) NOW AFTER THESE THINGS
   WERE ENDED, PAUL PURPOSED IN THE SPIRIT, WHEN HE HAD MADE A PROGRESS
   THROUGH MACEDONIA AND ACHAIA, TO GO TO JERUSALEM, SAYING, "AFTER I HAVE
   BEEN THERE, I MUST ALSO SEE ROME". (22) AND, HAVING SENT INTO MACEDONIA
   TWO OF THEM THAT ASSISTED HIM, TIMOTHY AND ERASTUS, HE HIMSELF STAYED
   IN ASIA FOR A WHILE.

   The work in Asia, which had been Paul's aim in A.D. (p. 198), was now
   carried out. The long residence suits the greatness of the work, for
   Asia was the richest. one of the largest, and in many ways the leading
   province of the East.

   Ephesus, as the seat of government, was the centre from which the whole
   province of Asia could best be affected (p. 104); and the effect of
   Paul's long work there extended far over that vast province, but
   chiefly, of course, along the great lines of communication. For
   example, Churches arose in three cities of the Lycos Valley, Laodiceia,
   Colossai, and Hierapolis, though Paul himself did not go there. All the
   seven Churches mentioned in the Revelation were probably rounded during
   this period, for all were within easy reach of Ephesus, and all were
   great centres of trade. It is probable that they, being the first
   foundations in the province, retained a sort of representative
   character; and thus they were addressed in the Revelation (perhaps as
   heads over districts), when there were certainly other Churches in the
   province.

   In the ordinary communication between the capital and the other cities
   of the province, the influence from Ephesus would be carried to these
   cities; but that was not the only way in which these other Churches
   grew. Paul had with him a number of subordinate helpers, such as
   Timothy, Erastus, Titus, etc. The analogy of many other cases in the
   early history of the Church would leave no room to doubt that helpers
   were often employed in missions to the new Churches; and, as Timothy
   joined with Paul in the letter to the Colossians, it may be inferred
   that he had been working in that city. The clear conception of a
   far-reaching plan revealed in v. 21 is confirmed by Rom. XV 24 (see p.
   255).

   It has been argued by some (and notably by Lightfoot) that Paul made a
   short visit to Corinth, during his Ephesian mission. But this
   conjectural visit (II Cor. XII 14, XIII 1) is more likely to have been
   made from Philippi, (p. 283), for clearly (Acts XIX 9, 10) Paul resided
   in Ephesus throughout the period Oct. 53 to Jan. 56. In the latter part
   of autumn 55 he sent to Corinth the First Epistle; and at that time his
   intention was to remain in Ephesus till Pentecost 56 (XVI 8), and then
   to go through Macedonia to Corinth. But this was an alteration of a
   previous plan to sail direct from Ephesus to Corinth, thence going to
   Macedonia, and returning to Corinth, from whence he should sail for
   Jerusalem (II Cor. I 16). That intention was abandoned, and a letter, I
   Cor., was sent instead: the full knowledge of the state of things in
   Corinth, which is revealed in that letter, was gained by the report of
   some envoys (XVI 17, compare p. 284). The abandonment of the plan was
   doubtless due to the conviction that the success of the work in Asia
   demanded a longer residence. He, therefore, cut out of his programme
   the first of these two proposed visits to Corinth, and restricted
   himself to one, which he should pay after a progress through Macedonia
   (I Cor. XVI 5). He sent Timothy and Erastus to Macedonia, instructing
   the former to go on to Corinth, and he told the Corinthians, IV 17,
   that Timothy was coming, "who shall put you in remembrance of my ways
   which be in Christ". Finally, when his Asian work was cut short, he
   went from Philippi to Corinth, April 56 (see Preface).

   The analogy of this case strengthens our interpretation of the Galatian
   letter (p. 190). In each case Paul had to encounter a serious and
   dangerous situation in a distant Church. In the case of Corinth, he
   could not go, but sent a substitute and a letter explaining that the
   substitute was on the way, and the bearer would give the reason why
   Paul could not go then; but he adds in the letter a promise to go
   later, though "some of them fancied that he was not coming". In the
   case of Galatia he was able to go immediately, and sent off a hasty
   letter in front, the bearer of which would announce that he was
   following. But on the usual theory, Paul, in that serious emergency In
   Galatia, neither thought of going there, nor of explaining that he
   could not go.

   No allusion to Timothy occurs between XVIII 5 (where he rejoined Paul
   at Corinth) and XIX 22. According to the analogy of Luke's method (p.
   46 f.), this shows that he was understood by the author to have been
   attached to Paul's service during the intervening period, ready for any
   mission, such as that to Galatia, or this to Macedonia. According to I
   Cor. IV 17, Timothy was to go on to Corinth: Luke speaks only of
   Macedonia. Both are correct; it becomes clear from II Cor. that Timothy
   did not go on to Corinth, and that Paul found him in Macedonia:
   probably he met Titus on his way back to report to Paul the result of
   the first letter, and waited instructions before going on. See p. 285.

   The plan of staying in Ephesus till Pentecost was interrupted by a
   popular riot. Already in the autumn of 55 Paul spoke of the
   difficulties in Ephesus caused by the opposition of the vulgar populace
   (p. 230, I Cor. XV 32); and the character of the city shows how
   inevitable that was. The superstition of all Asia was concentrated in
   Ephesus. Throughout the early centuries the city mob, superstitious,
   uneducated, frivolous, swayed by the most commonplace motives, was
   everywhere the most dangerous and unfailing enemy of Christianity, and
   often carried the imperial officials further than they wished in the
   way of persecution. Moreover, round the great Ephesian temple, to which
   worshippers came from far, many tradesmen got their living from the
   pilgrims, supplying them with victims and dedicatory offerings of
   various kinds, as well as food and shelter. During the year 55, the
   tension in Ephesus grew more severe: the one hand, the teaching spread
   so fast that Paul was tempted to remain longer than he had intended (p.
   275): on the other hand, his success only enraged and alarmed the
   opposing forces. "A great door and effectual is opened unto me, and
   there are many adversaries" (I Cor. XVI 9): "after the manner of men I
   fought with beasts in Ephesus" (ib. XV 32, p. 230).

   The most sensitive part of "civilised" man is his pocket; and it was
   there that opposition to Christian changes, or "reforms," began. Those
   "reforms" threatened to extinguish some ancient and respectable trades,
   and promised no compensation; and thus all the large class that lived
   off the pilgrims and the temple service was marshalled against the new
   party, which threatened the livelihood of all.

   5. DEMETRIUS THE SILVERSMITH.

   The scene which follows is the most instructive picture of society in
   an Asian city at this period that has come down to us. It is impossible
   here to treat it so fully as it deserves; and we can only enumerate the
   more striking points, and refer to previous discussions. A certain
   Demetrius was a leading man in the associated trades, which made in
   various materials, terra-cotta, marble and silver, small shrines (naoi)
   for votaries to dedicate in the temple, representing the Goddess
   Artemis sitting in a niche or naiskos, with her lions beside her. Vast
   numbers of these shrines were offered to the goddess by her innumerable
   votaries. The rich bought and offered them in more expensive materials
   and more artistic form, the poor in simple rude terra-cotta. The temple
   and the sacred precinct were crowded with dedications; and the priests
   often cleared away the old and especially the worthless offerings to
   make room for new gifts. The richer tradesmen made shrines in the more
   expensive material, and silver was evidently a favourite material among
   the wealthy. Demetrius, then, must have had a good deal of capital sunk
   in his business. He called a meeting of the trades, doubtless in a
   guild house where they regularly met, and pointed out that Paul, by
   teaching the worthlessness of images, was seriously affecting public
   opinion and practice over almost the whole province Asia, [44] and
   endangering their business as well as the worship of the goddess. The
   tradesmen were roused; they rushed forth into the street; [45] a
   general scene of confusion arose, and a common impulse carried the
   excited crowd into the great theatre. The majority of the crowd were
   ignorant what was the matter; they only knew from the shouts of the
   first rioters that the worship of Artemis was concerned; and for about
   two hours the vast assembly, like a crowd of devotees or howling
   dervishes, shouted their invocation of "Great Artemis". In this scene
   we cannot mistake the tone of sarcasm and contempt, as Luke tells of
   this howling mob; they themselves thought they were performing their
   devotions, as they repeated the sacred name; but to Luke they were
   merely howling, not praying.

   A certain Alexander was put forward by the Jews to address the mob; but
   this merely increased the clamour and confusion. There was no clear
   idea among the rioters what they wanted: an anti-Jewish and an
   anti-Christian demonstration were mixed up, and probably Alexander's
   intention was to turn the general feeling away from the Jews. It is
   possible that he was the worker in bronze, who afterwards did Paul much
   harm (II Tim. IV 14).

   Our conception of the scene assumes that the Bezan reading in 28, 34
   (megale Artemis) is original. The accepted text, "Great is Artemis,"
   gives a different tone to the scene: that is the quiet expression in
   which a worshipper recognises and accepts a sign of the goddess's
   power, drawing an inference and expressing his respect and gratitude.
   "Great Artemis" was a common formula of devotion and prayer, as is
   attested by several inscriptions; and it gives a more natural and a far
   more effective tone to the scene.

   Two of Paul's companions in travel, Gaius and Aristarchus, had been
   carried into the theatre with the crowd; and he himself was on the
   point of going there, but the disciples would not allow him, and his
   friends among the Asiarchs sent urging him not to risk himself among
   the mob. It is noteworthy that Luke, as usual, adds no comments or
   reflections of his own as to the danger in which Paul was placed. But
   the slightest consideration suffices to show that he must have been at
   this period in the most imminent danger, with the mob of a great Ionian
   coast-city raging against him. In the speech of Demetrius are
   concentrated most of the feelings and motives that, from the beginning
   to the end, made the mob so hostile to the Christians in the great
   oriental cities. Paul himself says, "concerning our affliction which
   befell in Asia, that we were weighed down exceedingly, beyond our
   power, insomuch that we despaired even of life" (II Cor. I 8). His
   immediate withdrawal from Ephesus, in the midst of his promising work,
   was forced on him.

   It is a question whether the reading of some few MSS., "Gaius and
   Aristarchus a Macedonian," should not be followed. Gaius, in that case,
   would be the native of Derbe mentioned in XX 4. Luke, himself a
   Macedonian, does not omit the little touch of national pride in
   Aristarchus; but he was not so interested in the nationality of Gaius.
   The peculiar phraseology, with the ethnic in singular (Makedona)
   following two names, and preceding sunekdemous, led naturally to the
   change (Makedonas), which appears in most MSS. The epithet, "travelling
   companions," seems to point forward to XX 4, as we have no reason to
   think that either Gaius or Aristarchus had hitherto been companions of
   Paul on a journey. Prof. Blass, recognising the probability that Gaius
   is the travelling companion of XX 4, accepts Valckenaer's alteration of
   the text in that place, making Gaius a Thessalonian, and Timothy a man
   of Derbe; and that alteration would be very tempting, were it not for
   the insurmountable statement, XVI 1, that Timothy was a Lystran.

   The reference to the Asiarchs is very important, both in respect of the
   nature of that office (on which it throws great light, though that
   opens up a wide and disputed field), and as a fact of Pauline history.
   The Asiarchs, or High Priests of Asia, were the heads of the imperial,
   political-religious organisation of the province in the worship of
   "Rome and the Emperors" (p. 134); and their friendly attitude is a
   proof both that the spirit of the imperial policy was not as yet
   hostile to the new teaching, and that the educated classes did not
   share the hostility of the superstitious vulgar to Paul. Doubtless,
   some of the Asiarchs had, in the ordinary course of dignity, previously
   held priesthoods of Artemis or other city deities; and it is quite
   probable that up to the present time even the Ephesian priests were not
   at all hostile to Paul. The eclectic religion, which was fashionable at
   the time, regarded new forms of cult with equanimity, almost with
   friendliness; and the growth of each new superstition only added to the
   influence of Artemis and her priests. My friend, Mr. J. N. Farquhar,
   Principal of the L.M.S. College, Calcutta, writes that he is struck
   with similar facts in the situation of mission work in India, and its
   relation to the priests and people.

   Luke, having stated the accusation against Paul, does not fail to show
   up its utter groundlessness in the eyes of responsible officials. The
   speech of the Town-clerk, which is given at length, is a very skillful
   and important document, in its bearing on the whole situation, and on
   Luke's plan (p. 304 f.). The Clerk was probably the most important
   official in Ephesus, and therefore in close contact with the court of
   the proconsul, who generally resided in that city; and his speech is a
   direct negation of the charges commonly brought against Christianity,
   as flagrantly disrespectful in action and in language to the
   established institutions of the State. He points out that the only
   permissible method of procedure for those who have complaints against a
   Christian is action before the courts of the province, or the assembly
   of the municipality; and he warns the rioters that they are bringing
   themselves into danger by their disorderly action.

   This address is so entirely an apologia of the Christians that we might
   almost take it as an example of the Thucydidean type of speech, put
   into the mouth of one of the actors, not as being precisely his words,
   but as embodying a statesmanlike conception of the real situation. At
   any rate, it is included by Luke in his work, not for its mere Ephesian
   connection, but as bearing on the universal question of the relations
   in which the Church stood to the Empire (p. 306). The well-known
   rescripts of Hadrian to Fundanus, and of Antoninus Pius to the Greek
   cities, take their stand on the same permanent and obvious ground,
   which at all times formed the one statesmanlike principle of action,
   and the basis for the Church's claim to freedom and toleration.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [42] exelei, lit. "he set about the voyage"; contrast XX 6,
   exepleusamen aorist.

   [43] In an inscription, Bulletin de Corresp. Hellen., 1887, p. 400.

   [44] In an inscription, Bulletin de Corresp. Hellen., 1887, p. 400.

   [45] I formerly erred as to the sense of Asia in XIX 26, 27, Church in
   R. E., p. 166.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIII.

  THE VOYAGE TO JERUSALEM

   1. THE SECOND EUROPEAN JOURNEY.

   (XX 1) AND AFTER THE RIOT CEASED, PAUL, HAVING SENT FOR THE DISCIPLES
   AND EXHORTED THEM, BADE THEM FAREWELL, AND DEPARTED TO MAKE HIS WAY
   INTO MACEDONIA. (2) AND HAVING MADE A PROGRESS THROUGH THOSE QUARTERS,
   AND EXHORTED THEM WITH MUCH PREACHING, HE WENT INTO GREECE. (3) AND HE
   SPENT THREE MONTHS there.

   Paul took a coasting vessel from Ephesus, we may be sure; and, as was
   often the case, he had to transship in Troas. Here "a door was opened
   to him" (II Cor. II 12). Doubtless he had to wait some time for a
   passage to Macedonia; for, though in January a passage could be easily
   obtained along the safe Asian coast, it was more difficult to find
   opportunity for the longer voyage over the open sea to Macedonia;
   perhaps none was found till general navigation began, March 5. It is
   probable that already in the voyages between Ephesus and Macedonia, the
   new teaching had effected a lodging in Troas (XIX 10);and in the delay
   there, Paul had a good opening. In Troas Paul had expected to meet
   Titus; and was much disappointed that he was not there. At the same
   time he was greatly dispirited by the strong opposition which had
   driven him prematurely from Ephesus (II Cor. I 8 f.); and was in a
   depressed frame of mind owing to ill-health (ib. IV 7 f.).

   Titus is the most enigmatic figure in early Christian history. His
   omission from Acts has been alluded to (P. 59). He enters on the stage
   of history for a short time in A.D. 45-6, and then we hear nothing of
   him, until we learn that Paul expected to find him in Troas in January
   or February 56. He was now on his way from Corinth to Macedonia; and he
   joined Paul after he had arrived at Philippi in February or March,
   bringing a detailed report of the state of the Corinthian Church. Now
   in II Cor. Titus is prominent to a degree unique in Paul's letters; he
   is named nine times, and always with marked affection and distinction.
   Why, then, is he never mentioned in I Cor.?. There is one satisfactory
   reason, and only one, so far as I can judge: he was the bearer of the
   first letter. [46] His special interest in Corinth is mentioned, VII
   15, VIII 16. He was eager to return on a second mission to Corinth,
   VIII 17, and along with him Paul sent the Brother whose praise in the
   delivery of the good tidings was spread over all the Churches (Luke,
   according to an early tradition), and another, who was selected on
   account of the confidence that he felt in the Corinthians. It may be
   safely assumed that the Titus of II Cor. is the same Titus that is
   mentioned in Gal II 1.

   Titus, then, had been sent on his first mission to Corinth in autumn
   55, probably by direct ship. He could not come back across the open sea
   during the winter (Nov. 10 to March 5), and must take a coasting voyage
   by Macedonia. Paul expected to find him in Troas; but he was detained
   too long, and met Paul in Philippi in February or early March 56; and
   he returned thence on a second mission to Corinth.

   As Titus was at hand in Ephesus about October 55, it is hardly open to
   doubt that he had been in Paul's company on the whole of the third
   journey. It is equally clear that he had not been with Paul on the
   first or the second journey, for he is mentioned in Gal. II 1 as a
   stranger to the Galatians, whose Greek birth had to be explained to
   them. Probably it was his Greek origin that had prevented Paul from
   taking him as a companion on earlier journeys.

   We have seen how careful Paul was to conciliate the Jews on his second
   journey; and we may fairly consider that the grumbling of the Jews in
   Jerusalem in 46 (even when Titus was bringing food to them) had warned
   Paul that it was not expedient to have Titus with him when he entered
   the synagogues of strange cities. For his companions on the second
   journey he selected Silas, a Jewish Roman, and Timothy, half-Greek,
   half-Jew. Finally, on his third journey, when he was putting down the
   Judaising tendency in Galatia, he took Titus with him by a carefully
   planned stroke of policy: one of the arguments by which the Judaisers
   proved that Judaic Christianity was the higher stage was that Paul had
   circumcised Timothy before promoting him to an office of trust. He
   replied by taking Titus with him to Galatia; and from II Cor. we gather
   that Titus proved one of the most congenial and useful of his
   assistants. The space which he fills in II Cor. [47] is a unique fact
   in Paul's letters; and in the loving and tender sympathy of Paul's
   language about him we may read a wish to compensate for the neglect
   that had during many years sacrificed him to the thankless policy of
   conciliating the Jews.

   The importance of Titus in subsequent years confirms the impression
   derived from II Cor. He seems to have remained in Europe when Paul went
   to Jerusalem in March 57. At a later time he was sent to Dalmatia, II
   Tim. IV 10; and near the end of Paul's career he was entrusted with the
   general oversight of the Churches in Crete, Tit. I 5.

   Paul spent the summer and autumn of 56 in Macedonia. He found Timothy
   waiting him either in Thessalonica or in Bercea; and they joined in
   addressing the second letter to the Corinthians, enforcing in a more
   personal way the instructions already sent through the three envoys who
   had come from Philippi. The common view (which is as old as the
   subscription added in some MSS. to the letter), that the envoys carried
   with them II Cor., seems improbable. In winter Paul went on to Hellas
   (the Greek term for the country forming the main part of the Roman
   province), and spent December, January. and February in Corinth.

   2. THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE FOUR PROVINCES.

   (3) AND WHEN HE HAD SPENT THREE MONTHS, AND A PLOT WAS LAID AGAINST HIM
   BY THE JEWS WHILE HE WAS ON THE POINT OF SETTING SAIL FOR SYRIA, HE
   ADOPTED THE PLAN OF MAKING HIS RETURN JOURNEY to Jerusalem THROUGH
   MACEDONIA. (4) AND THERE ACCOMPANIED HIM on the journey to Jerusalem
   SOPATER, SON OF PYRRHUS OF BEREA, AND on the part OF THE THESSALONIANS
   ARISTARCHUS AND SECUNDUS, AND GAIUS OF DERBE AND TIMOTHY, AND THE
   ASIANS TYCHICUS AND TROPHIMUS (NOW THESE Asian delegates, COMING TO
   MEET US, AWAITED US IN TROAS). (5) AND WE SAILED AWAY FROM PHILIPPI
   AFTER THE DAYS OF UNLEAVENED BREAD, AND CAME UNTO THEM TO TROAS.

   At the opening of navigation, Paul had arranged to sail from Corinth to
   Jerusalem, obviously with the intention of celebrating the Passover
   there; but the discovery of a Jewish plot to kill him altered his
   plans. The style of this plot can be easily imagined. Paul's intention
   must have been to take a pilgrim ship carrying Achaian and Asian Jews
   to the Passover (p. 264). With a shipload of hostile Jews, it would be
   easy to find opportunity to murder Paul. He therefore abandoned the
   proposed voyage and sailed for Macedonia, where he easily arrived in
   time to celebrate the Passover in Philippi.

   It is clear that the plot was discovered at the last moment, when
   delegates from the Churches had already assembled. The European
   delegates were to sail from Corinth, the Asian from Ephesus, where
   doubtless the pilgrim ship would call (as in 53, P. 264). When the plan
   was changed, word was sent to the Asian delegates; and they went as far
   as Troas to meet the others, for in ancient voyages it could be
   calculated with certainty that Paul's company would put in at that
   harbour.

   The purpose of this numerous company is not stated in this part of the
   text; but in XXIV 17, Paul says: "I came to bring alms to my nation,
   and offerings," and the reason is often alluded to in the Epistles to
   Corinth and Rome. In Rom. XV 25, written from Corinth about Jan. 57,
   Paul says: "Now I go unto Jerusalem, acting as an administrator of
   relief to the saints". The scheme of a general contribution collected
   week by week for a long time in all the Pauline Churches of Galatia,
   Asia, Macedonia, and Achaia, has been well described by Mr. Rendall
   (Expositor, Nov. 1893, p. 321). The great importance which Paul
   attached to this contribution, and to the personal distribution of the
   fund (daikonia), is attested, not merely by the long and careful
   planning of the scheme, and by the numerous body of delegates who
   carried it to Jerusalem, but also by his determination to conduct the
   delegates personally, in spite of all the dangers which, as he knew,
   awaited him there: "I go constrained by the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not
   knowing what shall befall me there, save that the Holy Spirit
   testifieth unto me in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions
   await me". It is evident that he thought this scheme the crowning act
   of his work in these four provinces; and as soon as it was over, his
   purpose was to go to Rome and the West (p. 255), and cease for the time
   his work in the Eastern provinces (XX 25).

   The scheme is not alluded to in the letter to the Galatian Churches:
   but it seems to have been inaugurated there by oral instructions during
   the third visit (I Cor. XVI 1). The mission of Timothy and of Titus in
   56 doubtless helped to carry it out in Europe. Luke evidently took it
   up with special zeal, and he was from an early date selected as one of
   the administrators who were to carry it to Jerusalem (II Cor. VIII 19).
   In the list, v. 4, Luke omits his own name, but suggests his presence
   by his familiar device. No representative from Achaia is on the list;
   but perhaps we may understand that the Corinthians had asked Paul
   himself to bear their contribution, the amount of which he praises (II
   Cor. IX 2).

   In v. 4 we have probably a case like XVI 19 f., in which the authority
   hesitated between two constructions, and left an unfinished sentence
   containing elements of two forms. The facts were probably as stated in
   our rendering; and it would lead too far to discuss the sentence, which
   perhaps never received the author's final revision.

   3. THE VOYAGE TO TROAS.

   (XX 6) WE SAILED AWAY FROM PHILIPPI AFTER THE DAYS OF UNLEAVENED BREAD,
   AND CAME UNTO THEM TO TROAS IN FIVE DAYS; AND THERE WE TARRIED SEVEN
   DAYS. (7) AND ON THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK WHEN WE WERE GATHERED
   TOGETHER TO BREAK BREAD, PAUL DISCOURSED WITH THEM, BEING ABOUT TO
   DEPART ON THE MORROW; AND HE PROLONGED HIS SPEECH UNTIL MIDNIGHT . . .
   (13) AND WE, GOING BEFORE TO THE SHIP, SET SAIL FOR ASSOS.

   In A.D. 57 Passover fell on Thursday, April 7. The company left
   Philippi on the morning of Friday, April 15, and the journey to Troas
   lasted till the fifth day, Tuesday, April 19. In Troas they stayed
   seven days, the first of which was April 19, and the last, Monday,
   April 25. Luke's rule is to state first the whole period of residence,
   and then some details of the residence (see pp. 153, 256, and XIX 10).
   On the Sunday evening just before the start, the whole congregation

   4. EUTYCHUS.

   (XX 7) AND UPON THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK, WHEN WE WERE GATHERED
   TOGETHER TO BREAK BREAD, PAUL DISCOURSED TO THEM, INTENDING TO GO AWAY
   ON THE MORROW; AND HE PROLONGED HIS SPEECH UNTIL MIDNIGHT. (8) AND
   THERE WERE MANY LIGHTS IN THE UPPER CHAMBER, WHERE WE WERE GATHERED
   TOGETHER. (9) AND THERE SAT IN THE WINDOW A CERTAIN YOUNG MAN NAMED
   EUTYCHUS, WHO WAS GRADUALLY OPPRESSED BY SLEEP AS PAUL EXTENDED HIS
   DISCOURSE FURTHER, AND BEING BORNE DOWN BY HIS SLEEP HE FELL FROM THE
   THIRD STORY TO THE GROUND, AND WAS LIFTED UP DEAD. (10) AND PAUL WENT
   DOWN AND FELL ON HIM, AND EMBRACING HIM SAID, "MAKE YE NO ADO; FOR HIS
   LIFE IS IN HIM". (11) AND HE WENT UP, AND BROKE BREAD AND ATE, AND
   TALKED WITH THEM A LONG WHILE, EVEN TILL BREAK OF DAY; AND THUS HE
   DEPARTED. (12) AND THEY BROUGHT THE LAD ALIVE, AND WERE NOT A LITTLE
   COMFORTED. (13) BUT WE, GOING BEFORE TO THE SHIP, SET SAIL FOR ASSOS,
   INTENDING TO TAKE PAUL ON BOARD FROM THENCE; FOR SO HE HAD ARRANGED,
   INTENDING HIMSELF TO GO BY LAND.

   In this case the author vouches that Eutychus was dead, implying
   apparently that, as a physician, he had satisfied himself on the point
   In XIV 19 he had no authority for asserting that Paul was dead, but
   only that his enemies considered him dead.

   The sequence of the narrative is remarkable: the young man fell: Paul
   declared he was not dead: Paul went upstairs again, partook of the
   common meal (conceived here as a sacrament), and conversed till break
   of day: they brought the young man living. But the interruption of the
   story of Eutychus's fate is intentional. The narrator was present in
   the upper chamber, and saw Eutychus fall, and heard Paul declare that
   he was not dead; but he does not claim to have been a witness of the
   man's recovery, and he marks the difference by a break in the
   narrative. The ship, having to round the projecting cape Lectum, would
   take longer time to reach Assos than the land journey required; and
   Paul stayed on to the last moment, perhaps to be assured of Eutychus's
   recovery, while the other delegates went on ahead in the ship. Thus the
   fact that Eutychus recovered is in a sense the final incident of the
   stay at Troas. The Bezan reading makes the sequence clearer: "and while
   they were bidding farewell, they brought the young man living, and they
   were comforted".

   There is a very harsh change of subject in v. 12; the persons who
   brought the youth are not those who were comforted (as Dr. Blass points
   out). A similar change of subject, but not quite so harsh, occurs in
   XIII 2-3. The word "brought," not "carried," implies that Eutychus was
   able to come with some help.

   5. THE VOYAGE TO CÆSAREIA.

   (14) AND WHEN HE MET US AT ASSOS, WE TOOK HIM BOARD, AND CAME TO
   MITYLENE; (15) AND SAILING FROM THENCE ON THE FOLLOWING DAY, WE REACHED
   a point on the mainland OPPOSITE CHIOS; AND ON THE MORROW WE STRUCK
   ACROSS TO SAMOS, AND [AFTER MAKING A STAY AT TROGYLLIA] ON THE NEXT DAY
   WE CAME TO MILETUS. (16) FOR PAUL HAD DECIDED TO SAIL PAST EPHESUS, TO
   AVOID SPENDING TIME IN ASIA; [48] FOR HE WAS HASTENING, IF IT WERE
   PENTECOST. (17) AND FROM MILETUS HE SENT TO EPHESUS, AND SUMMONED THE
   ELDERS OF THE CHURCH. (18) AND WHEN THEY WERE COME TO HIM, HE SAID UNTO
   THEM . . . (36) AND WHEN HE HAD THUS SPOKEN, HE KNEELED DOWN WITH THEM
   ALL, AND PRAYED. (37) AND THEY ALL WEPT SORE, AND FELL ON PAUL'S NECK,
   AND KISSED HIM, SORROWING MOST OF ALL FOR THE WORD WHICH HE HAD SPOKEN,
   THAT THEY WILL BEHOLD HIS FACE NO MORE. (38) AND THEY BROUGHT HIM ON
   HIS WAY UNTO THE SHIP. (XXI 1) AND WHEN IT CAME TO PASS THAT WE,
   TEARING OURSELVES FROM THEM, SET SAIL, WE MADE A STRAIGHT RUN TO COS,
   AND THE NEXT DAY TO RHODES, AND FROM THENCE TO PATARA [and Myra]. (2)
   AND, FINDING A SHIP GOING OVER SEA TO PHOENICE, WE WENT ON BOARD AND
   SET SAIL. (3) AND, HAVING SIGHTED CYPRUS, LEAVING IT ON OUR LEFT, WE
   SAILED UNTO SYRIA, AND LANDED AT TYRE; FOR THERE THE SHIP WAS TO
   UNLADE. (4) AND HAVING FOUND THE DISCIPLES, WE TARRIED THERE SEVEN
   DAYS; AND THESE SAID THROUGH THE SPIRIT TO PAUL NOT TO SET FOOT IN
   JERUSALEM. (5) AND WHEN IT CAME TO PASS THAT WE HAD FINISHED OUR TIME,
   WE DEPARTED AND WENT ON OUR JOURNEY; AND THEY ALL, WITH WIVES AND
   CHILDREN, BROUGHT US ON OUR WAY TILL WE WERE OUT OF THE CITY. AND
   KNEELING DOWN ON THE BEACH, WE PRAYED, (6) AND BADE EACH OTHER
   FAREWELL; AND WE WENT ON BOARD SHIP, BUT THEY RETURNED HOME AGAIN. (7)
   AND FINISHING THE short RUN FROM TYRE, WE REACHED PTOLEMAIS; AND WE
   SALUTED THE BRETHREN AND ABODE WITH THEM ONE DAY.

   The ship evidently stopped every evening. The reason lies in the wind,
   which in the Ægean during the summer generally blows from the north,
   beginning at a very early hour in the morning; in the late afternoon it
   dies away; at sunset there is a dead calm, and thereafter a gentle
   south wind arises and blows during the night. The start would be made
   before sunrise; and it would be necessary for all passengers to go on
   board soon after midnight in order to be ready to sail with the first
   breath from the north.

   In v. 14 our translation (agreeing with Blass) assumes that the reading
   sunebalen is correct; but the great MSS. read suneballen, and perhaps
   the imperfect may be used, implying that Paul did not actually enter
   Assos, but was descried and taken in by boat as he was nearing the
   city. On Monday, April 25, they reached Mitylene before the wind fell;
   and on Tuesday afternoon they stopped at a point opposite Chios
   (probably near Cape Argennum). Hence on Wednesday morning they ran
   straight across to the west point of Samos, and thence kept in towards
   Miletus; but when the wind fell, they had not got beyond the promontory
   Trogyllia at the entrance to the gulf, and there, as the Bezan Text
   mentions, they spent the evening. Early on Thursday, April 28, they
   stood across the gulf (which is now in great part filled up by the silt
   of the river Mæander) to Miletus. Here they found that they could
   reckon on a stay of some days, and Paul sent a messenger to Ephesus.
   The messenger could not reach Ephesus that day, for the land road round
   the gulf made a vast circuit, and the wind would prevent him from
   sailing across to Priene in the forenoon. Moreover, it would take some
   time to land, and to engage a messenger. In the early afternoon there
   would arise a sea-breeze blowing up the gulf (called in modern times
   Imbat, embates), which would permit the messenger to sail to the north
   side of the gulf. He would probably land at Priene, cross the hills,
   and thereafter take the coast road to Ephesus, which he might reach
   during the night. Some time would be required to summon the presbyters;
   and they could not travel so fast as a single chosen messenger. They
   would show good speed if they reached Priene in the evening and were
   ready to sail to Miletus with the morning wind. The third day of Paul's
   stay at Miletus, then, was devoted to the presbyters; and we cannot
   suppose that the ship left Miletus before Sunday morning, May 1, while
   it is possible that the start took place a day later.

   On that day they reached Cos, on May 2 Rhodes, May 3 Patara, May 4
   Myra, and, probably, May 7 Tyre. In Tyre they stayed seven days, and
   sailed on May 13 for Ptolemais, where they spent the day, and on May 14
   they reached Cæsareia. As Pentecost was on May 28, they had still a
   considerable time before them. If Paul remained several days in
   Cæsareia, then, the reason must be that there was still plenty of time
   to do so without endangering his purpose.

   We reach the same conclusion from observing the author's concise style.
   After stating the object of the journey in v. 16, he leaves the reader
   to gather from his silence that the object was attained. The fact was
   clear in his own mind, and he was content with one single incidental
   allusion to it, not for its own sake (he as a Greek felt little
   interest in Jewish festivals), but to explain a point in which he was
   interested, viz., the sailing past Ephesus without touching there.

   The statement in v. 16 has led to a common misconception that Paul was
   sailing in a vessel chartered by himself, whose stoppages he could
   control as he pleased. But if Paul had been able to fix where the
   vessel should stop, it was obviously a serious waste of time to go to
   Miletus and summon the Ephesian elders thither; the shorter way would
   have been to stop at Ephesus and there make his farewell address.
   Clearly the delay of three days at Miletus was forced on him by the
   ship's course, and the facts of the journey were these. From Neapolis
   they sailed in a ship bound for Troas. Here they had to transship; and
   some delay was experienced in finding a suitable passage. Paul would
   not voluntarily, have spent seven days at Troas: the length of a
   coasting voyage was too uncertain for him to waste so many days at the
   beginning, when he was hastening to Jerusalem. After a week, two
   chances presented themselves: one ship intended to make no break on its
   voyage, except at Miletus, the other to stop at Ephesus. The latter
   ship was, for some reason, the slower; either it was not to sail
   further south than Ephesus (in which case time might be lost there in
   finding a passage); or it was a slow ship, that intended to stop in
   several other harbours. The shortness of the time determined Paul to
   choose the ship that went straight to Miletus, and "to sail past
   Ephesus"; and the pointed statement proves that the question had been
   discussed, and doubtless the Ephesian delegates begged a visit to their
   city.

   To Luke the interest of Pentecost lay not in itself, but in its
   furnishing the reason why Paul did not go to Ephesus. There, as in so
   many other touches, we see the Greek, to whom the Jews were little more
   than "Barbaroi".

   We notice that Paul, having been disappointed in his first intention of
   spending Passover at Jerusalem, was eager at any rate to celebrate
   Pentecost there. For the purpose which he had at heart, the formation
   of a perfect unity between the Jewish and the non-Jewish sections of
   the Church, it was important to be in Jerusalem to show his respect for
   one of the great feasts.

   Modern discussion of the voyage to Cæsareia illustrates the unnecessary
   obscurity in which a remarkably accurate narrative has been involved by
   over-subtlety, want of experience of rough-and-ready travel, and
   inattention to the peculiar method of Luke as a narrator. As we have
   seen, only two numbers are at all doubtful: the length of the stay at
   Miletus, and the duration of the over-sea voyage to Tyre; but in each
   case a day more or less is the utmost permissible variation. We find
   that Paul had fully thirteen days to spare when he reached Cæsareia.
   Yet many excellent scholars have got so far astray in this simple
   reckoning of days as to maintain that Paul was too late. Even Weiss, in
   his edition (in many respects excellent), so lately as 1893, concludes
   that already in Tyre Paul found that it was impossible to reach
   Jerusalem in time. Yet, at a pinch, the journey from Tyre to Jerusalem
   could have been performed in four days.

   The farewell speech to the Ephesians, simple, pathetic, and
   characteristic of Paul as it. is, contains little that concerns our
   special purpose. Paul intimates clearly that this is his farewell
   before entering on his enterprise in the West: "Ye all shall no longer
   see my face". With a characteristic gesture he shows his hands: "these
   hands ministered unto my necessities".

   Incidentally we notice the ancient custom of reckoning time: the
   residence in Asia, which can hardly have been more than two years six
   months at the most, is estimated loosely as "three years". The clinging
   affection which is expressed in the farewell scene, and in the "tearing
   ourselves away" of XXI 1, makes a very pathetic picture.

   Myra is mentioned on this voyage in the Bezan Text, and there can be no
   doubt that the ship on which the company was embarked either entered
   the harbour of Myra, or, at least, went close to it before striking
   across the open sea west of Cyprus to the Syrian coast. The voyage may
   be taken as typical of the course which hundreds of ships took every
   year, along a route familiar from time immemorial. It had been a
   specially frequented route since the age of the earlier Seleucid and
   Ptolemaic kings, when, as Canon Hicks remarks, "there must have been
   daily communication between Cos and Alexandria ". [49]

   The harbour of Myra seems to have been the great port for the direct
   cross-sea traffic to the coasts of Syria and Egypt. It was the seat of
   the sailors god, to whom they offered their prayers before starting on
   the direct long course, and paid their vows on their safe arrival; this
   god survived in the Christianised form, St. Nicholas of Myra, the
   patron-saint of sailors, who held the same position in the maritime
   world of the Levant as St. Phokas of Sinope did in that of the Black
   Sea (where he was the Christianised form of Achilles Pontarches, the
   Ruler of the Pontos).

   Myra is termed by the pilgrim Sawulf (as I learn from Dr. Tomaschek)
   "the harbour of the Adriatic Sea, as Constantinople is of the Ægean
   Sea"; and this importance is hardly intelligible till we recognise its
   relation to the Syrian and Egyptian traffic. The prevailing winds in
   the Levant throughout the season are westerly; and these westerly
   breezes blow almost with the steadiness of trade-winds. Hence the
   ancient ships, even though they rarely made what sailors call "a long
   leg" across the sea, were in the habit of running direct from Myra to
   the Syrian, or to the Egyptian coast. On the return voyage an
   Alexandrian ship could run north to Myra, if the wind was nearly due
   west; but, if it shifted towards north-west (from which quarter the
   Etesian winds blew steadily for forty days from July 20), the ships of
   Alexandria ran for the Syrian coast. The same steady winds, which
   favoured the run from Myra to Tyre, made the return voyage direct from
   Tyre to Myra an impossibility. Hence the regular course for ships from
   Syria was to keep northwards past the east end of Cyprus till they
   reached the coast of Asia Minor; and then, by using the land winds
   which blow off the coast for some part of almost every day, and aided
   also to some extent by the current which sets steadily westward along
   the Karamanian coast (as it is now called), these traders from Syria
   worked their way along past Myra to Cnidos at the extreme south-western
   corner of Asia Minor.

   It may, then, be safely assumed that Myra was visited by Paul's ship,
   as the Bezan Text asserts. But the addition of "and Myra" is a mere
   gloss (though recording a true fact), for it implies that the
   transshipment took place at Myra. We need not hesitate to accept the
   authority of the great MSS. that Paul and his company found at Patara a
   ship about to start on the direct Syrian course, and went on board of
   it (probably because their ship did not intend to make the direct
   voyage, or was a slower vessel). Luke then hurries over the direct
   voyage, mentioning only the fact which specially interested him, that
   they sighted the western point of Cyprus. He did not mention Myra; he
   was giving only a brief summary of the voyage, and for some reason the
   visit to Myra did not interest him.

   Many circumstances might occur to deprive the visit of interest and to
   make Luke omit it (as he omits many other sights) from his brief
   summary of the voyage. Formerly I illustrated this by my own
   experience. I was in the port of Myra in the course of a voyage; yet I
   never saw either the town or the harbour, and would probably omit Myra,
   if I were giving a summary description of my experiences on that
   voyage.

   At Tyre the vessel stayed seven days unloading; it must therefore have
   been one of the larger class of merchant vessels; and probably only
   that class ventured to make the direct sea voyage from Lycia by the
   west side of Cyprus. Small vessels clung to the coast. As the same ship
   [50] was going on as far as Ptolemais, and as there was still abundant
   time for the rest of the journey, Paul remained until the allotted time
   of its stay was over, v. 5. None of the party seems to have known Tyre,
   for they had to seek out the Brethren there. The hearty welcome which
   they received from strangers, whose sole bond of union lay in their
   common religion, makes Luke dwell on this scene as showing the
   solidarity of feeling in the Church. There took place a kindly farewell
   on the shore at Tyre, as at Miletus; but the longing and sorrow of long
   personal friendship and love could not here be present to the same
   extent as there. The scenes are similar, and yet how different! Such
   touches of diversity amid resemblance could be given only by the
   eye-witness.

   The ship completed the short voyage to Ptolemais early; and the party
   spent the day with the Brethren; and went on to Cæsareia next day.
   Probably they went in the same ship. The emphasis laid on "finishing
   the voyage" from Tyre to Ptolemais is due to the fact that it was
   probably over about 10 A.M.

   6. CÆSAREIA AND JERUSALEM.

   (XXI 8) ON THE MORROW WE DEPARTED, AND CAME INTO CÆSAREIA. AND,
   ENTERING INTO THE HOUSE OF PHILIP THE EVANGELIST, WHO WAS ONE OF THE
   SEVEN, WE ABODE WITH HIM. (9) NOW THIS MAN HAD FOUR DAUGHTERS, VIRGINS,
   WHICH DID PROPHESY. (10) AND, AS WE TARRIED THERE SOME [51] DAYS, THERE
   CAME DOWN FROM JUDEA A CERTAIN PROPHET NAMED AGABUS. (11) AND COMING TO
   US AND TAKING PAUL'S GIRDLE, HE BOUND HIS OWN FEET AND HANDS AND SAID:
   "THUS SAITH THE HOLY SPIRIT, SO SHALL THE JEWS BIND AT JERUSALEM THE
   MAN THAT OWNETH THIS GIRDLE, AND DELIVER HIM INTO THE HANDS OF THE.
   GENTILES'". . . . (15) AND AFTER THESE DAYS, WE, HAVING EQUIPPED
   horses, PROCEEDED ON OUR WAY TO JERUSALEM. (16) AND THERE WENT WITH US
   ALSO some OF THE DISCIPLES FROM CÆSAREIA,

   CONDUCTING US TO the house OF ONE MNASON, AN EARLY DISCIPLE, WHERE WE
   SHOULD FIND ENTERTAINMENT. (17) AND WHEN WE ARRIVED AT JERUSALEM, THE
   BRETHREN RECEIVED US GLADLY. and these conducted us where we should
   find entertainment; and reaching a certain village, we were in the
   house of Mnason, an early disciple; and going out thence we came to
   Jerusalem, and the Brethren received us gladly.

   The length of the stay at Cæsareia is concealed, with Luke's usual
   defective sense of time, by the vague phrase, v. 10, hemeras pleious.
   The sense of this expression varies greatly according to the situation
   (cp. XXIV 17, with XIII 31, XXVII 20); but here it is not likely to be
   less than nine or ten.

   The party was therefore cutting down the time for the journey to the
   utmost. Evidently they desired to remain as long as possible with the
   Brethren; and the plan for the journey was arranged for them, so that
   with Cæsareian guidance and help it could be done with comfort and
   certainty when time necessitated departure. Now, it is an elementary
   principle of prudent living in Southern countries that one should avoid
   those great exertions and strains which in Northern countries we often
   take as an amusement. The customs of the modern peoples (whom we on
   superficial knowledge are apt to think lazy, but who are not so) show
   that this principle guides their whole life; and it may be taken as
   certain that in ancient time the same principle was followed. Moreover,
   Paul was accompanied by his physician, who fully understood the
   importance of this rule, and knew that Paul, subject as he was to
   attacks of illness, and constantly exposed to great mental and
   emotional strains, must not begin his work in Jerusalem by a hurried
   walk of sixty-four miles from Cæsareia, more especially as it is clear
   from a comparison of the Bezan with the Accepted Text that the journey
   was performed in two days. We conclude, then, that the journey was not
   performed on foot; and when we look at the words with this thought in
   our minds we find there the verb which means in classical Greek, "to
   equip or saddle a horse" Chrysostom took the word in that sense; [52]
   but the modern commentators have scorned or misunderstood him.

   Some of the Brethren from Cæsareia accompanied them as far as a village
   on the road, where they stayed for a night with Mnason of Cyprus, one
   of the earliest Christian converts. The next day the Brethren returned
   with the conveyances to Cæsareia, while Paul and his company performed
   the rest of the journey (which was probably not far) on foot. Time had
   passed rapidly, when a convert of A.D. 30 or 31 was "ancient" in 57;
   but the immense changes that had occurred made the Church of 30 seem
   divided by a great gulf from these Macedonian and Asian delegates as
   they approached Jerusalem.

   7. THE CRISIS IN THE FATE OF PAUL AND OF THE CHURCH.

   From the moment when Paul was arrested onwards, the narrative becomes
   much fuller than before. It still continues true to the old method of
   concentrating the reader's attention on certain selected scenes, which
   are described in considerable detail, while the intervening periods are
   dismissed very briefly. Thus XXI 17-XXIV 23 describes the events of
   twelve days, XXIV 24-27 of two years, XXV 1-XXVIII 7 of about five
   months, XXVIII 8-11 of three months. But the scenes selected for
   special treatment lie closer together than formerly; and it is beyond
   doubt that, on our hypothesis, the amount of space assigned to Paul's
   imprisonment and successive examinations marks this as the most
   important part of the book in the author's estimation. If that is not
   the case--if the large space devoted to this period is not deliberately
   intended by the author as proportionate to its importance--then the
   work lacks one of the prime qualities of a great history. It is
   essential to our purpose to establish that we are now approaching the
   real climax, and that what has hitherto been narrated leads up to the
   great event of the whole work. If we fail in that, we fail in the main
   object for which we are contending; and we should have to allow that
   Acts is a collection of episodic jottings, and not a real history in
   the true sense of the word.

   It must strike every careful reader that Luke devotes special attention
   throughout his work to the occasions on which Paul was brought in
   contact with Roman officials. Generally on these occasions, the
   relations between the parties end in a friendly way: the scene with the
   proconsul of Cyprus is the most marked case: but Gallio, too, dismissed
   the case against him, and the formal decision of a proconsul had such
   weight as a precedent that the trial practically resulted in a
   declaration of religious liberty for the province.

   To come to subordinate Roman officials, the "Prætors" of the colony
   Philippi, though treating him severely at first, ended by formally
   apologising and acknowledging his rights, and only begged of him as a
   favour to move on--a request which he instantly granted. In the
   colonies Antioch and Lystra he was treated severely, but the blame is
   laid entirely on the Jews, and the magistrates are not directly
   mentioned; while in both cases it is brought out in the narrative that
   condemnation was not pronounced on fair charges duly proved. But though
   the reader's attention is not drawn to the magistrates, there can be no
   doubt that, at least in Antioch, the magistrates took action against
   Paul; and there is some probability that in each place he was scourged
   by lictors (p. 107), though these and many other sufferings are passed
   over. In the first stages of his work in Asia Minor. he was in
   collision with Roman colonial officials; but these events are treated
   lightly, explained as due to error and extraneous influence, and the
   Roman character of the cities is not brought out. While the picture is
   not discoloured, yet the selection of details is distinctly guided by a
   plan.

   The clerk (Grammateus) of the city of Ephesus was not a Roman official,
   but, as the most important officer of the capital of the province, he
   was in closer relations with the Roman policy than ordinary city
   magistrates: and he pointedly acquitted Paul of any treasonable design
   against the State or against the established order of the city, and
   challenged the rioters to bring any charge against Paul before the
   Roman Courts. The Asiarchs, who were officials of the province, and
   therefore part of the Roman political system, were his friends, and
   showed special care to secure his safety at that time. Even the jailor
   at Philippi was an officer of Rome, though a very humble one; and he
   found Paul a friend in need, and became a friend in turn.

   The magistrates of ordinary Greek cities were not so favourable to Paul
   as the Roman officials are represented. At Iconium they took active
   part against him; and the silence about the magistrates of the colonies
   Antioch and Lystra is made more marked by the mention of those of
   Iconium. At Thessalonica the magistrates excluded him from the city as
   a cause of disorder. At Athens the Areopagus was contemptuous and
   undecided. The favourable disposition of Roman officials towards Paul
   is made more prominent by the different disposition of the ordinary
   municipal authorities.

   These facts acquire more meaning and more definite relation to the
   historian's purpose when we come to the last scenes of the book. We
   cannot but recognise how pointedly the Imperial officials are
   represented as Paul's only safeguard from the Jews, and how their
   friendly disposition to him is emphasised. Even Felix, one of the worst
   of Roman officials, is affected by Paul's teaching, and on the whole
   protects Paul, though his sordid motives are not concealed, and he
   finally left Paul bound, as "desiring to gain favour with the Jews,"
   XXIV 27; but at least there was no official action on the part of Felix
   against him. Festus, his successor, is described as just and fair
   towards Paul; he found in him "nothing worthy of death," and had
   difficulty in discovering any definite charge against him that he could
   report when sending him for trial before the supreme court of the
   Empire. The inferior officials, from the tribune Claudius Lysias, to
   the centurion Julius, are represented as very friendly. This is all the
   more marked, because nothing is said at any stage of the proceedings of
   kindness shown to Paul by any others; yet no one can doubt that the
   household of Philip and the general body of Christians in Cæsareia
   tried to do everything possible for him. We see then that the
   historian, out of much that might be recorded, selects for emphasis the
   friendliness of the Roman officials: in the climax of his subject he
   concentrates the reader's attention on the conduct of Romans to Paul,
   [53] and on their repeated statements that Paul was innocent in the
   eyes of Roman Imperial law and policy.

   Throughout the whole book, from the time when the centurion Cornelius
   is introduced, great art is shown in bringing out without any formal
   statement the friendly relations between the Romans and the new
   teaching, even before Paul became the leading spirit in its
   development. To a certain extent, of course, that lies in the subject
   matter, and the historian simply relates the facts as they occurred,
   without colouring them for his purpose; but he is responsible for the
   selection of details, and while he has omitted an enormous mass of
   details (some of which we can gather from other informants), he has
   included so many bearing on this point, as to show beyond all question
   his keen interest in it.

   Further, when we compare Luke with other authorities in their treatment
   of the same subject, we see how much more careful he is than they in
   bringing out the relations in which Christianity stood to the Imperial
   government. In the Third Gospel, Luke alone among the four historians
   records formally the attempt made by the Jews to implicate Jesus in
   criminal practices against the Roman Empire, [54] and the emphatic,
   thrice [55] repeated statement of Pilate acquitting Him of all fault
   (XXIII 2, 4, 14, 22) before the law.

   We must conclude, then, that the large space devoted to the trial of
   Paul in its various stages before the Roman Imperial tribunals is
   connected with a strongly marked interest and a clear purpose running
   through the two books of this history; and it follows that Luke
   conceived the trial to be a critical and supremely important stage in
   the development of the Church.

   The next question that faces us is whether Luke is justified as a
   historian in attaching such importance to this stage in the development
   of Christianity. Perhaps the question may be best answered by quoting
   some words used in a different connection and for a different purpose.
   "It is both justifiable and necessary to lay great stress on the trial
   of Paul. With the legal constructiveness and obedience to precedent
   that characterised the Romans, this case tried before the supreme court
   must have been regarded as a test case and a binding precedent, until
   some act of the supreme Imperial authority occurred to override it. If
   such a case came for trial before the highest tribunal in Rome, there
   must have been given an authoritative and, for the time, final judgment
   on the issues involved."

   But, further, it is obvious that the importance of the trial for Luke
   is intelligible only if Paul was acquitted. That he was acquitted
   follows from the Pastoral Epistles with certainty for all who admit
   their genuineness; while even they who deny their Pauline origin must
   allow that they imply an early belief in historical details which are
   not consistent with Paul's journeys before his trial, and must either
   be pure inventions or events that occurred on later journeys. I have
   elsewhere argued that the subsequent policy of Nero towards the Church
   is far more readily intelligible if Paul was acquitted. But, if he was
   acquitted, the issue of the trial was a formal decision by the supreme
   court of the Empire that it was permissible to preach Christianity: the
   trial, therefore, was really a charter of religious liberty, and
   therein lies its immense importance. It was, indeed, overturned by
   later decisions of the supreme court; but its existence was a highly
   important fact for the Christians.

   The importance of the preliminary stages of the trial lies in its
   issue; and it is obviously absurd to relate these at great length, and
   wholly omit the final result which gives them intelligibility and
   purpose. It therefore follows that a sequel was contemplated by the
   author, in which should be related the final stages of the trial, the
   acquittal of Paul, the active use which he made of his permission to
   preach, the organisation of the Church in new provinces, and the second
   trial occurring at the worst and most detested period of Nero's rule.
   That sequel demands a book to itself; and we have seen that the natural
   implication of Luke's expression in Acts I 1, if he wrote as correct
   Greek as Paul wrote, is that his work was planned to contain, a least,
   three books.

   This view of Luke's historical plan suits well the period at which he
   wrote. It is argued in Ch. XVII 2 that he was engaged in composing this
   book under Domitian, a period of persecution, when Christians had come
   to be treated as outlaws or brigands, and the mere confession of the
   name was recognised as a capital offence. The book was not an apology
   for Christianity: it was an appeal to the truth of history against the
   immoral and ruinous policy of the reigning Emperor, a temperate and
   solemn record, by one who had played a great part in them, of the real
   facts regarding the formation of the Church, its steady and unswerving
   loyalty in the past, its firm resolve to accept the facts of Imperial
   government, its friendly reception by many Romans, and its triumphant
   vindication in the first great trial at Rome. It was the work of one
   who had been trained by Paul to look forward to Christianity becoming
   the religion of the Empire and of the world who regarded Christianity
   as destined not to destroy but to save the Empire.

   8. FINANCES OF THE TRIAL.

   It has been asked where Paul got the money which he required to pay the
   expenses of four poor men (XXI 23), purifying themselves in the temple;
   and the suggestion has been made that the elders who advised him to
   undertake this expense, followed up their advice by giving him back
   some of the money which the delegates from the four provinces had just
   paid over to them. Without laying any stress on the silence of Luke as
   to any such action, we cannot believe that Paul would accept that money
   for his own needs, or that James would offer it. They were trustees of
   contributions destined for a special purpose; and to turn it to any
   other purpose would have been fraudulent. It is incredible that Paul,
   after laying such stress on the purpose of that contribution, and
   planning it for years (p. 288), should divert part of it to his own use
   the day after he reached Jerusalem.

   But several other facts show clearly that, during the following four
   years, Paul had considerable command of money. Imprisonment and a long
   lawsuit are expensive. Now, it is clear that Paul during the following
   four years did not appear before the world as a penniless wanderer,
   living by the work of his hands. A person in that position will not
   either at the present day or in the first century be treated with such
   marked respect as was certainly paid to Paul, at Cæsareia, on the
   voyage, and in Rome. The governor Felix and his wife, the Princess
   Drusilla, accorded him an interview and private conversation. King
   Agrippa and his Queen Berenice also desired to see him. A poor man
   never receives such attentions, or rouses such interest. Moreover,
   Felix hoped for a bribe from him; and a rich Roman official did not
   look for a small gift. Paul, therefore, wore the outward appearance of
   a man of means, like one in a position to bribe a Roman procurator. The
   minimum in the way of personal attendants that was allowable for a man
   of respectable position was two slaves; and, as we shall see, Paul was
   believed to be attended by two slaves to serve him. At Cæsareia he was
   confined in the palace of Herod; but he had to live, to maintain two
   attendants, and to keep up a respectable appearance. Many comforts,
   which are almost necessities, would be given by the guards, so long as
   they were kept in good humour, and it is expensive to keep guards in
   good humour. In Rome he was able to hire a lodging for himself and to
   live there, maintaining, of course, the soldier who guarded him.

   An appeal to the supreme court could not be made by everybody that
   chose. Such an appeal had to be permitted and sent forward by the
   provincial governor; and only a serious case would be entertained. But
   the case of a very poor man is never esteemed as serious; and there is
   little doubt that the citizen's right of appeal to the Emperor was
   hedged in by fees and pledges. There is always one law for the rich man
   and another for the poor: at least, to this extent, that many claims
   can be successfully pushed by a rich man in which a poor man would have
   no chance of success. In appealing to the Emperor, Paul was choosing
   undoubtedly an expensive line of trial. All this had certainly been
   estimated before the decisive step was taken. Paul had weighed the
   cost; he had reckoned the gain which would accrue to the Church if the
   supreme court pronounced in his favour; and his past experience gave
   him every reason to hope for a favourable issue before a purely Roman
   tribunal, where Jewish influence would have little or no power. The
   importance of the case, as described in the preceding section, makes
   the appeal more intelligible.

   Where, then, was the money procured? Was it from new contributions
   collected in the Churches? That seems most improbable, both from their
   general poverty, from Paul's personal character, and from the silence
   of Luke on the point. Luke himself was probably a man dependent on his
   profession for his livelihood. His name is not that of a man of high
   position. There seems no alternative except that Paul's hereditary
   property was used in those four years. As to the exact facts, we must
   remain in ignorance. If Paul hitherto voluntarily abstained from using
   his fortune, he now found himself justified by the importance of the
   case in acting differently. If, on the other hand, he had for the time
   been disowned by his family, then either a reconciliation had been
   brought about during his danger (perhaps originating in the bold
   kindness of his young nephew), or through death property had come to
   him as legal heir (whose right could not be interfered with by any
   will). But, whatever be the precise facts, we must regard Paul as a man
   of some wealth during these years.

   He appeared to Felix [56] and to Festus, then, as a Roman of Jewish
   origin of high rank and great learning, engaged in a rather foolish
   controversy against the whole united power of his nation (winch showed
   his high standing, as well as his want of good judgment). That is the
   spirit of Festus's words, "Paul! Paul! you are a great philosopher, but
   you have no common sense".

   On the details given of the incidents in Jerusalem and Cæsareia, I
   shall not enter. I am not at home on the soil of Palestine; and it
   seems better not to mix up second-hand studies with a discussion of
   incidents where I stand on familiar ground.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [46] Suggested as possible by Dr. Plumptre in Intro. to II Cor. p. 359.

   [47] II 13, VII 6 f., 13 f., VIII 6 f., 16-24, XII 18.

   [48] Literally, "that it might not come to pass that he spent time in
   Asia."

   [49] Paton and Hick's Inscriptions of Cos, p. xxxiii. I should hardly
   venture to speak so strongly; but Mr. Hicks is an excellent authority
   on that period.

   [50] in v. 2 "a ship," in v. 6 "the ship".

   [51] Literally, "more days," a considerable number of days.

   [52] He says labontes ta pros ten hodoiporian (i.e. hupozugia).

   [53] Luke says nothing about kindness shown to Paul by James and others
   in Jerusalem; but we do not (like Dean Farrar) gather that they were
   unfriendly.

   [54] Less formally, John XVIII 30.

   [55] John XVIII 38; Matthew XXVII 24.

   [56] Procuratorship of Felix. The remarkable contradiction between
   Josephus (who makes Cumanus governor of Palestine 48-52, Felix being
   his successor in 52), and Tacitus (who makes Felix governor of Samaria
   [and probably of Judea], contemporary with Cumanus as governor of
   Galilee, the latter being disgraced in 52, and the former acquitted and
   honoured at the same trial), is resolved by Mommsen in favour of
   Tacitus as the better authority on such a point; and most students of
   Roman history will agree with him.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIV.

  THE VOYAGE TO ROME

   In describing the voyage from Cæsareia to Malta, we are guided by the
   excellent work of James Smith, Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul (third
   edition, 1866); but as there are some points of interest which he has
   not explained satisfactorily, we shall briefly describe the voyage, and
   treat more elaborately such points as need to be added to Smith's
   results.

   1. CÆSAREIA TO MYRA.

   A convoy of prisoners was starting for Rome under charge of a centurion
   of the Augustan cohort, and a detachment of soldiers; and Paul was sent
   along with it. He, of course, occupied a very different position from
   the other prisoners. He was a man of distinction, a Roman citizen who
   had appealed for trial to the supreme court in Rome. The others had
   been in all probability already condemned to death, and were going to
   supply the perpetual demand which Rome made on the provinces for human
   victims to amuse the populace by their death in the arena.

   The cohorts of the Roman legions never bore surnames, and it would
   therefore seem that this "Augustan cohort" was one of the auxiliary
   cohorts, which had regularly one or more surnames. But the duty which
   is here performed by the centurion was never performed by an auxiliary
   officer, but only by an officer of a legion. It would therefore appear
   that an auxiliary officer is here represented in a position which he
   could not hold.

   But, when we recollect (1) that Luke regularly uses the terms of
   educated conversation, not the strict technical names, and (2) that he
   was a Greek who was careless of Roman forms or names, we shall not seek
   in this case to treat the Greek term (speira Sebaste) as a translation
   of a correct Roman name; but we shall look for a body in the Roman
   service which was likely to be called "the troop of the Emperor" by the
   persons in whose society Luke moved at the time. We give the answer to
   which Mommsen seems to incline Berlin Akad. Sitzungsber, 1895, p. 501,
   adding the evidence of Luke's style, but otherwise quoting Mommsen.
   First we ask what officer would be likely to perform the duty here
   assigned to Julius. It would naturally be a legionary centurion on
   detached service for communication between the Emperor and his armies
   in the provinces (as described on p. 348). That the centurion whom Luke
   alludes to was one of this body is confirmed by the fact that, when he
   reached Rome, he handed Paul over to his chief. We conclude, then, that
   the "troop of the Emperor" was a popular colloquial way of describing
   the corps of officer-couriers; and we thus gather from Acts an
   interesting fact, elsewhere unattested but in perfect conformity with
   the known facts.

   Luke uses the first person throughout the following narrative; and he
   was therefore in Paul's company. But how was this permitted? It is
   hardly possible to suppose that the prisoner's friends were allowed to
   accompany him. Pliny mentions a case in point (Epist. III 16). Paetus
   was brought a prisoner from Illyricum to Rome, and his wife Arria
   vainly begged leave to accompany him; several slaves were permitted to
   go with him as waiters, valets, etc., and Arria offered herself alone
   to perform all their duties; but her prayer was refused. The analogy
   shows how Luke and Aristarchus accompanied Paul: they must have gone as
   his slaves, not merely performing the duties of slaves (as Arria
   offered to do), but actually passing as slaves. In this way not merely
   had Paul faithful friends always beside him; his importance in the eyes
   of the centurion was much enhanced, and that was of great importance.
   The narrative clearly implies that Paul enjoyed much respect during
   this voyage, such as a penniless traveller without a servant to attend
   on him would never receive either in the first century or the
   nineteenth.

   In the harbour of Cæsareia there was no convenient ship about to sail
   for Rome; and the convoy was put on board of an Adramyttian ship which
   was going to make a voyage along the coast towns of the province Asia.
   Communication direct with Rome might be found in some of the great
   Asian harbours, or, failing any suitable ship in the late season, the
   prisoners might be taken (like Ignatius half a century later) by Troas
   and Philippi and the land road to Dyrrachium, and thence to Brundisium
   and Rome.

   The direct run from Lycia to the Syrian coast was often made, but it is
   hardly possible that a direct run from Syria back to Myra was ever
   attempted by ancient ships. They never ventured on such a run except
   when a steady wind was blowing which could be trusted to last. But
   westerly breezes blow with great steadiness through the summer months
   in the Levant; and it is certain that ancient ships westward bound
   sailed east of Cyprus, as the Adramyttian ship now did. Luke explains
   why they sailed on this side of Cyprus; and he must, therefore, have
   expected to take the other side. Now, a sailor or a person accustomed
   to these seas would not have thought of making any explanation, for the
   course of the ship was the normal one. But Luke had come to Sidon from
   Myra by the west side of Cyprus, and he, therefore, was impressed. with
   the difference, and (contrary to his. usual custom) he gives a formal
   explanation; and his explanation stamps him as a stranger to these
   seas.

   The ship worked slowly along the Cilician and Pamphylian coast, as the
   sailors availed themselves of temporary local land breezes and of the
   steady westward current that runs along the coast. The description
   given in the Periodoi of Barnabas of a voyage from Seleuceia in Syria
   to Cyprus in the face of a prevailing steady westerly wind, the work of
   a person familiar with the circumstances, illustrates perfectly the
   voyage on this occasion. The Adramyttian ship crept on from point to
   point up the coast, taking advantage of every opportunity to make a few
   miles, and lying at anchor in the shelter of the winding coast, when
   the westerly wind made progress impossible.

   Smith in his masterly work collects several other examples of the same
   course which was adopted by the Adramyttian ship. Modern sailing ships,
   even with their superior rig, have several times been forced by the
   steady westerly wind towards the north, keeping east of Cyprus, and
   using the breezes which blow at intervals from the Caramanian coast.

   In this description there is an addition made in the Later Syriac
   version and some other authorities, which Westcott and Hort put in the
   margin as one "which appears to have a reasonable probability of being
   the true reading". The ship, in this addition, is said to have spent
   fifteen days in beating along the Cyprio-Pamphylian coast. This
   addition obviously suits the situation, and may be unhesitatingly
   accepted as true, whether as written by Luke or as a well-informed
   gloss. Most probably it is Lukan, for Luke gives rough statements of
   the time throughout this voyage; and an exact estimate at this point is
   quite in his style. It perhaps dropped out of most MSS., as wanting
   interest for later generations. If we may judge from the Periodoi
   Barnabæ, the coasting voyage was accomplished comparatively rapidly as
   far as Myra (see also p. 320).

   In the harbour of Myra, the centurion found an Alexandrian ship on a
   voyage towards Italy. He embarked his convoy on board of this ship. It
   is characteristic of the style of Luke that he does not mention the
   class of ship or the reason of its voyage from Alexandria to Italy; but
   simply tells facts as they occur. Now, Egypt was one of the granaries
   of Rome; and the corn trade between Egypt and Rome was of the first
   importance and of great magnitude. There is, therefore, a reasonable
   probability that this ship was carrying corn to Rome; and this
   inference is confirmed by Luke himself, who mentions in v. 38 that the
   cargo was grain.

   A ship-captain familiar with the Levant informed me that he had known
   ships going west from Egypt keep well to the north, in order to avail
   themselves of the shelter of the Cretan coast. No ancient ship would
   have ventured to keep so much out to sea as to run intentionally from
   Egypt to Crete direct, and moreover the winds would rarely have
   permitted it; but it is probable that this Alexandrian ship had sailed
   direct to Myra across the Levant. The steady westerly Breezes which
   prevented ships from making the direct run from Sidon, were favourable
   for the direct run from Alexandria. Probably this course was a
   customary one during a certain season of the year from Alexandria to
   Italy. Any one who has the slightest knowledge of "the way of a ship in
   the sea," will recognise that, with a steady wind near west, this was
   the ideally best course; while if the breeze shifted a little towards
   the north, it would be forced into a Syrian port; and, as we know from
   other sources, that was often the case.

   As we saw (p. 298), Myra was one of the great harbours of the Egyptian
   service. It is, therefore, unnecessary and incorrect to say, as is
   often done, that the Alexandrian ship had been blown out of its course.
   The ship was on its regular and ordinary course, and had quite probably
   been making a specially good run, for in the autumn there was always
   risk of the wind shifting round towards the north, and with the wind
   N.W. the Alexandrian ships could only fetch the Syrian coast.

   A voyage which Lucian, in his dialogue The Ship, describes as made by a
   large Egyptian corn-ship, may be accepted as a fair description of what
   might occur in the first or second century; and it illustrates well the
   course of both the Alexandrian and the Adramyttian ship. Lucian's Ship
   attempted to run direct from Alexandria to Myra. It was off the west
   point of Cyprus (Cape Akamas) on the seventh day of its voyage, but was
   thence blown to Sidon by a west wind so strong that the ship had to run
   before it. On the tenth day from Sidon it was caught in a storm at the
   Chelidonian islands and nearly wrecked; ten days from Sidon to the
   islands would correspond to fully thirteen from Cæsareia to Myra.
   Thereafter its course was very slow; it failed to keep the proper
   course to the south of Crete; and at last it reached Piræus on the
   seventieth day from Alexandria.

   2. FROM MYRA TO FAIR HAVENS.

   (XXVII 7) AND WHEN WE HAD SAILED SLOWLY MANY DAYS, AND WERE COME WITH
   DIFFICULTY OFF CNIDOS, AS THE WIND DID NOT PERMIT our straight course
   ONWARDS, WE SAILED UNDER THE LEE OF CRETE, OFF Cape SALMONE; (8) AND
   COASTING ALONG IT WITH DIFFICULTY, WE CAME UNTO A CERTAIN PLACE CALLED
   FAIR HAVENS, NIGH TO WHICH WAS A CITY LASEA.

   From Myra the course of both the Adramyttian and the Alexandrian ship
   would coincide as far as Cnidos. But they found great difficulty in
   making the course, which implies that strong westerly winds blew most
   of the time. After a very slow voyage they came opposite Cnidos; but
   they were not able to run across to Cythera (a course that was
   sometimes attempted, if we can accept Lucian's dialogue The Ship, as
   rounded on possible facts) on account of strong northerly winds blowing
   steadily in the Ægean, and threatening to force any ship on the north
   coast of Crete, which was dangerous from its paucity of harbours
   Accordingly, the choice was open either to put in to Cnidos, and wait a
   fair wind, or to run for the east and south coast of Crete. The latter
   alternative was preferred in the advanced season; and they rounded the
   eastern promontory, Salmone (protected by it from a north-westerly
   wind), and began anew to work slowly to the west under the shelter of
   the land. They kept their course along the shore with difficulty until
   they reached a place named Fair Havens, near the city Lasea, which, as
   Smith has shown conclusively, is the small bay, two leagues east of
   Cape Matala, still bearing the same name (in the modern Greek dialect
   Limeonas Kalous); and there they lay for a considerable time. It is not
   stated in the narrative why they stayed so long at this point, but the
   reason is clear to a sailor or a yachtsman: as Smith points out, Fair
   Havens is the nearest shelter on the east of Cape Matala, whilst west
   of that cape the coast trends away to the north, and no longer affords
   any protection from the north or north-west winds, and therefore they
   could go no farther so long as the wind was in that quarter.

   The voyage to Cnidos had been slow and hard, and the course along Crete
   was made with difficulty. At the best that part of the voyage must
   always have been troublesome, and as the difficulty was unusually great
   in this case, we cannot allow less time between Myra and Fair Havens
   than from September 1 to 25. The arrival at Fair Havens is fixed by the
   narrative; and thus we get the approximate date, August 17, for the
   beginning of the voyage from Cæsareia.

   3. THE COUNCIL.

   (XXVII 9) AND WHEN A LONG TIME ELAPSED, AND SAILING WAS NOW DANGEROUS
   (AS THE FAST ALSO WAS ALREADY OVER), PAUL OFFERED HIS ADVICE (10) IN
   THESE WORDS: "SIRS, I PERCEIVE THAT THE VOYAGE IS LIKELY TO BE
   ACCOMPANIED WITH HARDSHIP AND MUCH LOSS, NOT MERELY TO SHIP AND CARGO,
   BUT ALSO TO OUR LIVES". (11) BUT THE CENTURION WAS INFLUENCED MORE BY
   THE SAILING-MASTER AND THE CAPTAIN THAN BY WHAT PAUL SAID. (12) AND, AS
   THE HAVEN WAS BADLY SITUATED FOR WINTERING IN, THE MAJORITY of the
   council APPROVED THE PLAN TO GET UNDER WEIGH FROM THENCE, AND ENDEAVOUR
   TO MAKE PHOENIX AS A STATION TO WINTER IN--A HARBOUR THAT FACES
   SOUTH-WEST AND NORTH-WEST.

   The great Fast fell in 59 on Oct. 5, and, as Paul and Aristarchus
   observed the Fast, Luke uses it as an indication of date. The dangerous
   season for navigation lasted from Sept. 14 to Nov. 11, when all
   navigation on the open sea was discontinued. The ship reached Fair
   Havens in the latter part of September, and was detained there by a
   continuance of unfavourable winds until after Oct. 5. We might be
   disposed to infer that the Feast of Tabernacles, Oct. 10, fell after
   they left Fair Havens, otherwise Luke would have mentioned it rather
   than the Fast, as making the danger more apparent. The picturesque
   ceremonies of the Tabernacles would have remained in Luke's mind; but
   at sea they were not possible; and the Fast was therefore the fact that
   impressed him, as it was observed by Paul and Aristarchus.

   In these circumstances a meeting was held to consider the situation, at
   which Paul was present, as a person of rank whose convenience was to
   some extent consulted, whose experience as a traveller was known to be
   great. It is characteristic of Luke's style not to mention formally
   that a council was held. He goes straight to what was the important
   point in his estimation, viz., Paul's advice; then he explains why
   Paul's advice was not taken; and in the explanation it comes out in
   what circumstances the advice was given. The whole scene forms, in
   point of narrative method, an exact parallel to the interview at Paphos
   (p. 75). We notice also that Luke as a mere servant could not have been
   present at the council, and depended on Paul's report; and his account
   follows the order in which Paul would describe the proceedings. We can
   imagine that Paul on coming forth, did not formally relate to his two
   friends that the council met, that the chairman laid the business
   before it, and so on, but burst forth with his apprehension that "they
   had made a mistake in not taking the prudent course".

   At the council it is implied that the centurion was president, while
   the captain and sailing-master were merely advisers. To our modern
   ideas the captain is supreme on the deck of his ship; and, even if he
   held a meeting to decide on such a point as the best harbour to lay up
   in, or consulted the wishes of a distinguished officer in the military
   service, yet the ultimate decision would lie with himself. Here the
   ultimate decision lies with the centurion, and he takes the advice of
   the captain. The centurion, therefore, is represented as the commanding
   officer, which implies that the ship was a Government ship, and the
   centurion ranked as the highest officer on board. That, doubtless, is
   true to the facts of the Roman service. The provisioning of the vast
   city of Rome, situated in a country where farming had ceased to pay
   owing to the ruinous foreign competition in grain, was the most serious
   and pressing department of the Imperial administration. Whatever else
   the Emperor might neglect, this he could not neglect and live. In the
   urban populace he was holding a wild beast by the ear; and, if he did
   not feed it, the beast would tear him to pieces. With ancient means of
   transport, the task was a hundred times harder than it would be now;
   and the service of ships on which Rome was entirely dependent was not
   left to private enterprise, but was a State department. It is,
   therefore, an error of the Authorised and Revised Versions to speak of
   the owner (naukleros) of this Alexandrian ship: [57] the ship belonged
   to the Alexandrian fleet in the Imperial service. The captains of the
   fleet [58] made dedications on account of safe passage at Ostia, and
   Seneca sat in his house at Puteoli and watched the advance ships sail
   in announcing the approach of the Alexandrian fleet (Ep. Mor. 77).
   Passengers were landed at Puteoli; but cargo was carried on to Ostia.
   As a general rule the ships sailed in fleets; but, of course,
   incidental reasons often kept one ship apart (as we see in XXVIII 11,
   and in the opening of Lucian's dialogue The Ship).

   Now, there was not in Rome that strict separation between the naval and
   the military services which now exists. There was only one service; the
   same person was at one moment admiral of a fleet, at another general of
   a land army and an officer might pass from one branch to the other. The
   land-service, however, ranked higher, and a legionary centurion was
   certainly of superior rank to the captain of a vessel of the
   Alexandrian fleet. In this case, then, the centurion sat as president
   of the council. Naturally, he would not interfere in navigation, for
   his life might pay the forfeit of any error, but the selection of a
   port for wintering in was more in his line. Now, it was the regular
   practice for all Roman officials, who often had to take responsibility
   in cases in which they were not competent alone to estimate all the
   facts, to summon a council (consilium) of experienced and competent
   advisers before coming to a decision. Such was the nature of the
   meeting here described.

   The centurion, very properly, was guided in this matter, against the
   advice of Paul, by the opinion of his professional advisers, who were
   anxious to get on as far as possible before navigation ceased on
   November 11, and it was resolved to take any fair opportunity of
   reaching the harbour of Phoenix, which was not only further on, but
   also better protected.

   In the council-scene, then, when we put events in their sequence in
   time, and add those facts of the situation which Luke assumes as
   familiar to his readers, we have a vivid and striking incident,
   agreeing with the general type of Roman procedure, and yet giving us
   information about life on board a Government transport such as we could
   not find in any other part of ancient literature.

   There has been a good deal of discussion as to the description of the
   harbour Phoenix, the modern Lutro, "the only secure harbour in all
   winds on the south coast of Crete ". This, however, faces the east, not
   the west. Smith tries to interpret the Greek words in that sense; but
   it must be observed that Luke never saw the harbour, and merely speaks
   on Paul's report of the professional opinion. It is possible that the
   sailors described the entrance as one in which inward-bound ships
   looked towards N.W. and S.W., and that in transmission from mouth to
   mouth, the wrong impression was given that the harbour looked N.W. and
   S.W.

   4. THE STORM.

   (XXVII 13) AND WHEN A MODERATE SOUTHERLY BREEZE AROSE, SUPPOSING THAT
   THEY HAD GOT THEIR OPPORTUNITY, [59] THEY WEIGHED ANCHOR AND SAILED
   ALONG THE CRETAN COAST CLOSE IN. (14) BUT AFTER NO LONG TIME THERE
   STRUCK DOWN FROM THE ISLAND A TYPHONIC WIND, WHICH GOES BY THE NAME
   EURAQUILO. (15) AND WHEN THE SHIP WAS CAUGHT BY IT, AND COULD NOT FACE
   THE WIND, WE GAVE WAY AND LET THE SHIP DRIVE. (16) AND, WHEN WE RAN
   UNDER THE LEE OF A SMALL ISLAND, CAUDA BY NAME, WE WERE ABLE WITH
   DIFFICULTY TO HAUL IN THE BOAT. (17) AND HAVING UNDERGIRDING IT; AND
   BEING IN TERROR LEST THEY BE CAST ON "THE GREAT QUICKSANDS," THEY
   REDUCED SAIL, AND LET THE SHIP DRIFT IN THAT POSITION (viz., laid-to
   under storm-sails).

   One morning, after the council, their chance came with a moderate south
   wind, which favoured their westerly voyage. At this point the writer
   says that they went close inshore; and this emphatic statement, after
   they had been on a coasting voyage for weeks, must in a careful writer
   have some special force. Cape Matala projected well out to the south
   about six miles west of Fair Havens, and it needed all their sailing
   power to clear it on a straight course. From Luke's emphasis we gather
   that it was for some time doubtful whether they could weather the
   point; and in the bright late autumn morning we can imagine every one
   gathered on the deck, watching the wind, the coast and the cape ahead.
   If the wind went round a point towards the west, they would fail; and
   the anxious hour has left its record in the single word of v. 13
   (asson), while the inability of some scribes or editors to imagine the
   scene has left its record in the alteration (thasson).

   After passing Cape Matala, they had before them a fair course with a
   favouring breeze across the broad opening of the Gulf of Messara. But
   before they had got halfway across the open bay, [60] there came a
   sudden change, such as is characteristic of that sea, where "southerly
   winds almost invariably shift to a violent northerly wind". There
   struck down from the Cretan mountains, which towered above them to the
   height of over 7000 feet, a sudden eddying squall from about east-
   north-east. Every one who has any experience of sailing on lakes or
   bays overhung by mountains will appreciate the epithet "typhonic,"
   which Luke uses. As a ship-captain recently said to me in relating an
   anecdote of his own experience in the Cretan waters, "the wind comes
   down from those mountains fit to blow the ship out of the water".

   An ancient ship with one huge sail was exposed to extreme danger from
   such a blast; the straining of the great sail on the single mast was
   more than the hull could bear; and the ship was exposed to a risk which
   modern vessels do not fear, foundering in the open sea. It appears that
   they were not able to slacken sail quickly; and, had the ship been kept
   up towards the wind, the strain would have shaken her to pieces. Even
   when they let the ship go, the leverage on her hull must have been
   tremendous, and would in a short time have sent her to the bottom.
   Paul, who had once already narrowly escaped from such a wreck, drifting
   on a spar or swimming for a night and a day (II Cor. XI 25), justified
   in his advice at Fair Havens not to run the risk of coasting further in
   the dangerous season on a coast where such sudden squalls are a common
   feature. In this case the ship was saved by getting into calmer water
   under the shelter of an island, Cauda (now Gozzo), about twenty-three
   miles to leeward.

   At this point Smith notices the precision of Luke's terminology. In v.
   4 they sailed under the lee of Cyprus, keeping northwards with a
   westerly wind on the beam (hupepleusamen); here they ran before a wind
   under the lee of Cauda (hupodramontes).

   The sailors knew that their only hope was in the smoother water behind
   Cauda, and kept her up accordingly with her head to the wind, so that
   she would make no headway, but merely drifted with her right side
   towards the wind ("on the starboard tack").

   Here three distinct operations were performed; and it is noteworthy
   that Luke mentions first among them, not the one which was the most
   important or necessary, but the one in which he himself took part,
   viz., hauling in the boat. In the light breeze it had been left to tow
   behind, and the squall had come down too suddenly to haul it in. While
   the other operations required skill, any one could haul on a rope, and
   Luke was pressed into the service. The boat was waterlogged by this
   time; and the historian notes feelingly what hard work it was to get it
   in, v. 16.

   While this was going on, ropes were got out, and the ship undergirded
   to strengthen her against the storm and the straining of her timbers.
   The scholars who discuss nautical subjects seem all agreed that
   undergirders were put longitudinally round the ship (i.e., horizontal
   girders passed round stem and stern). If any of them will show how it
   was possible to perform this operation during a storm, I shall be ready
   to accept their opinion; but meantime (without entering on the question
   what "undergirders," hupozomata, were in Athenian triremes) I must with
   Smith believe that cables were passed underneath round the ship
   transversely to hold the timbers together. This is a possible operation
   in the circumstances, and a useful one.

   Luke mentions last what a sailor would mention first, the most delicate
   and indispensable operation, viz., leaving up just enough of sail to
   keep the ship's head to the wind, and bringing down everything else
   that could be got down. It is not certain that he fully understood this
   operation, but perhaps the Greek (chalasantes to skeuos) might be taken
   as a technical term denoting the entire series of operations,
   slackening sail, but leaving some spread for a special purpose.

   This operation was intended to guard against the danger of being driven
   on the great quicksands of the African coast, the Syrtes. These were
   still far distant; but the sailors knew that at this late season the
   wind might last many days. The wind was blowing straight on the sands;
   and it was absolutely necessary, not merely to delay the ship's motion
   towards them, but to turn it in a different direction. In the Gulf of
   Messara, the wind had been an eddying blast under the mountains; but
   further out it was a steady, strong east-north-easterly gale.

   Dragging stones or weights at the end of ropes from the stern, which is
   the meaning elicited by some German commentators and writers on
   nautical matters, might be useful in other circumstances; but how that
   meaning can be got from the Greek words (chalasantes to skeuos), I
   confess that I cannot see. Moreover, as we have said, what the sailors
   wished was not merely to delay their course towards the Syrtes, but to
   turn their course in another direction.

   Accordingly, the ship drifted, with her head to the north, steadied by
   a low sail, making lee-way proportionate to the power of the wind and
   waves on her broadside. As Smith shows in detail, the resultant rate of
   motion would vary, according to the size of the ship and the force of
   the wind, between ¾ and 2 miles per hour; and the probable mean rate in
   this case would be about 1½ miles per hour; while the direction would
   approximate to 8° north of west. The ship would continue to drift in
   the same way as long as the wind blew the same, and the timbers and
   sails held; and at the calculated rates, if it was under Cauda towards
   evening, it would on the fourteenth night be near Malta.

   5. DRIFTING.

   (XXVII 18) AND, AS WE LABOURED EXCEEDINGLY WITH THE STORM, THE NEXT DAY
   THEY BEGAN TO THROW THE FREIGHT OVERBOARD, (19) AND ON THE THIRD DAY WE
   CAST OUT, WITH OUR OWN HANDS ACTUALLY, THE SHIP'S FURNITURE. (20) AND
   AS NEITHER SUN NOR STARS WERE VISIBLE FOR MANY DAYS, AND A SEVERE STORM
   WAS PRESSING HARD ON US, ALL HOPE THAT WE SHOULD BE SAVED WAS GRADUALLY
   TAKEN AWAY. (21) AND WHEN THERE HAD BEEN LONG ABSTINENCE FROM FOOD,
   THEN PAUL STOOD FORTH IN MIDST OF THEM, AND SAID: "THE RIGHT COURSE,
   GENTLEMEN, WAS TO HEARKEN TO ME, AND NOT TO SET (22) AND MY ADVICE TO
   YOU IN THE PRESENT IS TO TAKE HEART; FOR LOSS OF LIFE THERE SHALL BE
   NONE AMONG YOU, BUT OF THE SHIP. (23) FOR THERE STOOD BY ME THIS NIGHT
   AN ANGEL OF THE GOD WHOSE I AM, WHOM ALSO I SERVE, (24) SAYING: FEAR
   NOT, PAUL; THOU MUST STAND BEFORE CÆSAR; AND, LO! THERE HAVE BEEN
   GRANTED THEE BY GOD ALL THEY THAT SAIL WITH THEE'. (25) WHEREFORE TAKE
   HEART, GENTLEMEN; FOR I BELIEVE GOD, THAT IT SHALL BE SO AS IT HATH
   BEEN SPOKEN UNTO ME. (26) HOWBEIT WE MUST BE CAST ON SOME ISLAND."

   In their situation the great danger was of foundering through leakage
   caused by the constant straining due to the sail and the force of the
   waves on the broadside, which ancient vessels were not strong enough to
   stand. To lessen the danger, the sailors began to tighten the ship, by
   throwing away the cargo. On the day after, the whole company, Luke
   among them, sacrificed the ship's equipment. v. 19 is a climax; "with
   our own hands we threw away all the ship's fittings and equipment," the
   extreme act of sacrifice. The first person, used in the Authorised
   Version, occurs only in some less authoritative MSS., but greatly
   increases the effect. The sailors threw overboard part of the cargo;
   and the passengers and supernumeraries, in eager anxiety to do
   something, threw overboard whatever movables they found, which was of
   little or no practical use, but they were eager to do something. This
   makes a striking picture of growing panic; but the third person, which
   appears in the great MSS., is ineffective, and makes no climax.

   One of the miserable accompaniments of a storm at sea is the difficulty
   of obtaining food; and, if that is so in a modern vessel, it must have
   been much worse in an ancient merchant ship, inconveniently crowded
   with sailors and passengers. Moreover, the sacrifice of the ship's
   furniture must have greatly increased the difficulty of preparing food.

   Worse than all, the leakage was steadily growing from the straining of
   the mast, and yet they dared not cut the mast away, as it alone helped
   them to work off the dreaded African sands. Day after day the crew sat
   doing nothing, eating nothing, waiting till the ship should sink. In
   such a situation the experience of many cases shows that some
   individual, often one not hitherto prominent, and not rarely a woman,
   comes forward to cheer the company to the hope of escape and the
   courage of work; and many a desperate situation has been overcome by
   the energy thus imparted. In this case Paul stood forth in the midst of
   the helpless, panic-struck crowd. When caution was suitable (v. 10), he
   had been the prudent, cautious adviser, warning the council of
   prospective danger. But now, amidst panic and despair, he appears cool,
   confident, assured of safety; and he speaks in the only tone that could
   cheer such an audience as his, the tone of an inspired messenger. In a
   vision he has learned that all are to escape; and he adds that an
   island is to be the means of safety.

   6. LAND.

   (XXVII 27) BUT WHEN THE FOURTEENTH NIGHT WAS COME, AS WE WERE DRIVEN TO
   AND FRO IN THE ADRIA, TOWARDS MIDNIGHT THE SAILORS SURMISED THAT SOME
   LAND WAS NEARING THEM; (28) AND THEY SOUNDED, AND FOUND TWENTY FATHOMS;
   AND AFTER A LITTLE SPACE THEY SOUNDED AGAIN, AND FOUND FIFTEEN FATHOMS.
   (29) AND FEARING LEST HAPLY WE SHOULD BE CAST ON ROCKY GROUND THEY LET
   GO FOUR ANCHORS FROM THE STERN, AND PRAYED THAT DAY COME ON. (30) AND
   AS THE SAILORS WERE SEEKING TO MAKE THEIR ESCAPE FROM THE SHIP, AND HAD
   LOWERED THE BOAT INTO THE SEA, UNDER PRETENCE OF LAYING OUT ANCHORS
   FROM THE BOW, (31) PAUL SAID TO THE CENTURION AND THE SOLDIERS, "UNLESS
   THESE ABIDE IN THE SHIP, YOU CANNOT BE SAVED". (32) THEN THE SOLDIERS
   CUT AWAY THE ROPES OF THE BOAT AND LET HER FALL AWAY. (33) AND WHILE
   THE DAY WAS COMING ON, PAUL BESOUGHT THEM ALL TO TAKE SOME FOOD,
   SAYING: "THIS DAY IS THE FOURTEENTH DAY THAT YOU WATCH AND CONTINUE
   FASTING, AND HAVE TAKEN NOTHING. (34) WHEREFORE, I BESEECH YOU TO TAKE
   SOME FOOD, FOR THIS IS FOR YOUR SAFETY; FOR THERE SHALL NOT A HAIR
   PERISH FROM THE HEAD OF ANY OF YOU." (35) AND WHEN HE HAD SAID THIS HE
   TOOK BREAD AND GAVE THANKS TO GOD IN THE PRESENCE OF ALL; AND HE BRAKE
   IT, AND BEGAN TO EAT. (36) THEN WERE THEY ALL OF GOOD CHEER, AND
   THEMSELVES ALSO TOOK SOME FOOD. (37) AND WE WERE IN ALL ON THE SHIP 276
   SOULS. (38) AND WHEN THEY HAD EATEN ENOUGH, THEY PROCEEDED TO LIGHTEN
   THE SHIP, THROWING OUT THE WHEAT INTO THE SEA.

   Luke seems to have had the landsman's idea that they drifted to and fro
   in the Mediterranean. A sailor would have known that they drifted in a
   uniform direction; but it seems hardly possible to accept Smith's idea
   that the Greek word (diapheromenon) can denote a straight drifting
   course.

   The name Adria has caused some difficulty. It was originally narrower
   in application; but in the usage of sailors it grew wider as time
   passed, and Luke uses the term that he heard on shipboard, where the
   sailors called the sea that lay between Malta, Italy, Greece, and Crete
   "the Adria". As usual, Luke's terminology is that of life and
   conversation, not of literature. Strabo the geographer, who wrote about
   A.D. 19, says that the Ionian sea on the west of Greece was "a part of
   what is now called Adria," implying that contemporary popular usage was
   wider than ancient usage. In later usage the name was still more widely
   applied: in the fifth century "the Adria" extended to the coast of
   Cyrene; and mediæval sailors distinguished the Adriatic, as the whole
   Eastern half of the Mediterranean, from the Ægean sea (see p. 298).

   On the fourteenth midnight, the practised senses of the sailors
   detected that land was nearing: probably, as Smith suggests, they heard
   the breakers, and, as an interesting confirmation of his suggestion,
   one old Latin version reads "that land was resounding". [61] was now
   necessary to choose where they should beach the vessel; for the sound
   of the breakers warned them that the coast was dangerous. In the dark
   no choice was possible; and they therefore were forced to anchor. With
   a strong wind blowing it was doubtful whether the cables and anchors
   would hold; therefore, to give themselves every chance, they let go
   four anchors. Smith quotes from the sailing directions that in St.
   Paul's Bay (the traditional scene of the wreck), "while the cables hold
   there is no danger, as the anchors will never start". He also points
   out that a ship drifting from Cauda could not get into the bay without
   passing near the low rocky point of Koura, which bounds it on the east.
   The breakers here warned the sailors; and the charts show that after
   passing the point the ship would pass over 20 fathoms and then over 15
   fathoms depth on her course, W. by N.

   Anchoring by the stern was unusual; but in their situation it had great
   advantages. Had they anchored by the bow, the ship would have swung
   round from the wind; and, when afterwards they wished to run her
   ashore, it would have been far harder to manage her when lying with her
   prow pointing to the wind and away from the shore. But, as they were,
   they had merely to cut the cables, unlash the rudders, and put up a
   little foresail (v. 40); and they had the ship at once under command to
   beach her at any spot they might select.

   As the ship was now lying at anchor near some land, the sailors were
   about to save themselves by the boat and abandon the ship to its fate
   without enough skilled hands to work it; but Paul, vigilant ever,
   detected their design, and prevented it. Then, in order that the
   company might have strength for the hard work that awaited them at
   daybreak, he encouraged them once more with the assurance of safety,
   urged them to eat with a view thereto, and himself set the example.
   There is perhaps an intention in v. 35 to represent Paul as acting like
   Jesus at the last Passover; and the resemblance is more pointed if the
   words added in one MS. and some versions are original, "giving also to
   us". But it would be necessary to understand "us" to mean only Luke and
   Aristarchus (as Dr. Blass agrees); and this is harsh after the word has
   been so often used in a much wider sense. It is characteristic of
   Christianity in all periods to seek after resemblances between the
   Founder and any great hero of the faith at some crisis of history; and
   this addition seems a later touch to bring out the resemblance.

   7. PAUL'S ACTION ON THE SHIP.

   The account of the voyage as a whole is commonly accepted by critics as
   the most trustworthy part of Acts and as "one of the most instructive
   documents for the knowledge of ancient seamanship," (Holtzmann on XXVII
   4, p. 421). But in it many critics detect the style of the later hand,
   the supposed second-century writer that made the work out of good and
   early documents, and addressed his compilation to Theophilus. Many hold
   that this writer inserted vv. 21-26, and some assign to him also vv.
   33-35, because the character there attributed to Paul is quite
   different from his character in the genuine old document, especially
   vv. 10 and 31; in the original parts Paul is represented as a simple
   passenger, cautious to a degree, suffering from hunger, apprehensive of
   the future, keenly alive to prospective danger, and anxious to provide
   against it: on the other hand, in vv. 21-26 he knows that their safety
   is assured; he speaks as the prophet, not the anxious passenger; he
   occupies a position apart from, and on a higher plane than human.

   This is a fair hypothesis, and deserves fair and dispassionate
   consideration; no one whose mind is not already definitely made up on
   all questions can pass it by; and only those who feel that they
   understand the entire narrative in every turn and phrase and allusion
   would willingly pass it by, for every real student knows how frequently
   his knowledge is increased by changing his point of view.

   We may at once grant that the narrative would go on without any obvious
   awkwardness if 21-26 were omitted, which is of course true of many a
   paragraph describing some special incident in a historical work.

   But it is half-hearted and useless to cut out 21-26 as an interpolation
   without cutting out 33-38; there, too, Paul is represented as the
   prophet and the consoler on a higher plane, though he is also the mere
   passenger suffering from hunger, and alive to the fact that the safety
   of all depends on their taking food and being fit for active exertion
   in the morning. Some critics go so far as to cut out vv. 33-35. But it
   is not possible to cut these out alone; there is an obvious want of
   sequence between 32 and 36, and Holtzmann therefore seems to accept
   33-35. But if they are accepted I fail to see any reason for rejecting
   21-26; these two passages are so closely akin in purport and bearing on
   the context that they must go together; and all the mischief attributed
   to 21-26 as placing Paul on a higher plane is done in 33-35.

   Further, the excision of 21-26 would cut away a vital part of the
   narrative. (1) These verses contain the additional fact, natural in
   itself and assumed in v. 34 as already known, that the crew and
   passengers were starving and weak. (2) They fit well into the context,
   for they follow naturally after the spiritlessness described in v. 20,
   and Paul begins by claiming attention on the ground of his former
   advice (advice that is accepted by the critics as genuine because it is
   different in tone from the supposed interpolation). "In former
   circumstances," says he, "I gave you different, but salutary advice,
   which to your cost you disregarded; listen to me now when I tell you
   that you shall escape." The method of escape, the only method that a
   sailor could believe to be probable, is added as a concluding
   encouragement.

   But let us cut out every verse that puts Paul on a higher plane, and
   observe the narrative that would result: Paul twice comes forward with
   advice that is cautiously prudent, and shows keen regard to the chance
   of safety. If that is all the character he displayed throughout the
   voyage, why do we study the man and his fate? All experience shows that
   in such a situation there is often found some one to encourage the
   rest; and, if Paul had not been the man to comfort and cheer his
   despairing shipmates, he would never have impressed himself on history
   or made himself an interest to all succeeding time. The world's history
   stamps the interpolation-theory here as false.

   Moreover, the letters of Paul put before us a totally different
   character from this prudent calculator of chances. The Paul of Acts
   XXVII is the Paul of the Epistles: the Paul who remains on the
   interpolation theory could never have written the Epistles.

   Finally, the reason why the historian dwells at such length on the
   voyage lies mainly in vv. 21-26 and 33-38. In the voyage he pictures
   Paul on a higher plane than common men, advising more skillfully than
   the skilled mariners, maintaining hope and courage when all were in
   despair, and breathing his hope and courage into others, playing the
   part of a true Roman in a Roman ship, looked up to even by the
   centurion, and in his single self the saviour of the lives of all. But
   the interpolation-theory would cut out the centre of the picture.

   There remains no reason to reject vv. 21-26 which I can discover,
   except that it introduces the superhuman element. That is an argument
   to which I have no reply. It is quite a tenable position in the present
   stage of science and knowledge to maintain that every narrative which
   contains elements of the marvellous must be an unhistorical and
   untrustworthy narrative. But let us have the plain and honest reasons;
   those who defend that perfectly fair position should not try to throw
   in front of it as outworks flimsy and uncritical reasons, which cannot
   satisfy for a moment any one that has not his mind made up beforehand
   on that fundamental premise. But the superhuman element is inextricably
   involved in this book: you cannot cut it out by any critical process
   that will bear scrutiny. You must accept all or leave all.

   8. ON SHORE.

   (XXVII 39) AND WHEN IT WAS DAY THEY DID NOT RECOGNISE THE LAND; BUT
   THEY WERE AWARE OF A SORT OF BAY OR CREEK WITH A SANDY BEACH, AND THEY
   TOOK COUNSEL, IF POSSIBLE, TO DRIVE THE SHIP UP ON IT. (40.) AND
   CASTING OFF THE ANCHORS, THEY LEFT THEM IN THE SEA, WHILST LOOSING THE
   FASTENINGS OF THE RUDDERS, AND SETTING THE FORESAIL TO THE BREEZE, THEY
   HELD FOR, THE OPEN BEACH. (41) AND CHANCING ON A BANK BETWEEN TWO SEAS,
   THEY DROVE THE SHIP ON IT; AND THE PROW STRUCK AND REMAINED IMMOVABLE,
   BUT THE AFTER PART BEGAN TO BREAK UP FROM THE VIOLENCE. (42) AND THE
   SOLDIERS COUNSEL WAS TO KILL THE PRISONERS, LEST ANY SHOULD SWIM AWAY
   AND ESCAPE; (43) BUT THE CENTURION, WISHING TO SAVE PAUL, STAYED THEM
   FROM THEIR PURPOSE, AND BADE THEM THAT COULD SWIM TO LEAP OVERBOARD AND
   GET FIRST TO LAND, (44) AND THE REST, SOME ON PLANKS, AND SOME ON
   PIECES FROM THE SHIP. AND SO IT CAME TO PASS THAT ALL ESCAPED SAFE TO
   THE LAND.

   No description could be more clear and precise, selecting the essential
   points and omitting all others. Smith quotes some interesting parallels
   from modern narratives of shipwreck. Some doubt has arisen whether "the
   bank between two seas" was a shoal separated from the shore by deep
   water, or, as Smith says, a neck of land projecting towards the island
   of Salmonetta, which shelters St. Paul's Bay on the north-west. But the
   active term "drove the ship on it" (epekeilan) implies purpose, and
   decides in Smith's favour. The fact that they "chanced on a ridge
   between two seas" might at the first glance seem to imply want of
   purpose; but, as Smith points out, they could not, while lying at
   anchor, see the exact character of the spot. They selected a promising
   point, and as they approached they found that luck had led them to the
   isthmus between the island and the mainland. In their situation the
   main object was to get the ship close up to the shore, and safe from
   being rapidly and utterly smashed up by the waves. No place could have
   better favoured their purpose. The ship (which probably drew eighteen
   feet of water) "struck a bottom of mud, graduating into tenacious clay,
   into which the fore part would fix itself, and be held fast, while the
   stern was exposed to the force of the waves". Thus the foreship was
   held together, until every passenger got safe to dry land. Only the
   rarest conjunction of favourable circumstances could have brought about
   such a fortunate ending to their apparently hopeless situation; and one
   of the completest services that has ever been rendered to New Testament
   scholarship is James Smith's proof that all these circumstances are
   united in St. Paul's Bay. The only difficulty to which he has applied a
   rather violent solution is the sandy beach: at the traditional point
   where the ship was run ashore there is no sandy beach; but he considers
   that it is "now worn away by the wasting action of the sea". On this
   detail only local knowledge would justify an opinion,

   In v. 41 "the violence" is rate expression used by a person standing on
   the shore and watching the waves smash up the ship: he does not need to
   specify the kind of violence. This expression takes us on to the beach,
   and makes us gaze on the scene. The humblest scribe can supply kumaton
   here, and most of them have done so.

   9. MALTA.

   (XXVIII 1) AND WHEN WE WERE ESCAPED, THEN WE LEARNT THAT THE ISLAND IS
   CALLED MELITA. (2) AND THE BARBARIANS SHOWED US NO COMMON KINDNESS; FOR
   THEY KINDLED A FIRE, AND WELCOMED US ALL, BECAUSE OF THE PRESENT RAIN
   AND BECAUSE OF THE COLD. (3) BUT WHEN PAUL HAD GATHERED A BUNDLE OF
   STICKS AND LAID THEM ON THE FIRE, A VIPER CAME OUT BY REASON OF THE
   HEAT AND FASTENED ON HIS HAND. (4) AND WHEN THE BARBARIANS SAW THE
   BEAST HANGING FROM HIS HAND, THEY SAID TO ONE ANOTHER, "NO DOUBT THIS
   MAN IS A MURDERER, WHOM, THOUGH HE HATH ESCAPED FROM THE SEA, YET
   JUSTICE WILL NOT SUFFER TO LIVE". (5) HOWBEIT HE SHOOK OFF THE BEAST
   INTO THE FIRE, AND TOOK NO HARM. (6) BUT THEY EXPECTED THAT HE WOULD
   HAVE SWOLLEN OR FALLEN DOWN DEAD SUDDENLY; BUT WHEN THEY WERE LONG IN
   EXPECTATION AND BEHELD NOTHING AMISS COME TO HIM, THEY CHANGED THEIR
   MINDS, AND SAID THAT HE WAS A GOD. (7) NOW IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF THAT
   PLACE WERE LANDS BELONGING TO THE FIRST man OF THE ISLAND, NAMED
   POPLIUS, WHO RECEIVED US AND ENTERTAINED US THREE DAYS COURTEOUSLY. (8)
   AND IT WAS SO THAT THE FATHER OF POPLIUS LAY SICK OF A FEVER AND
   DYSENTERY; AND PAUL ENTERED IN UNTO HIM, AND PRAYED, AND LAYING HIS
   HANDS ON HIM HEALED HIM. (9) AND WHEN THIS WAS DONE THE REST ALSO WHICH
   HAD DISEASES IN THE ISLAND CAME AND WERE CURED; (10) WHO ALSO HONOURED
   US WITH MANY HONOURS, AND WHEN WE SAILED PUT ON BOARD SUCH THINGS AS WE
   NEEDED.

   The name Poplius is the Greek form of the prænomen Publius; but it is
   not probable that this official would be called by a simple prænomen.
   Poplius might perhaps be the Greek rendering of the nomen Popilius. Yet
   possibly the peasantry around spoke familiarly of "Publius" his
   prænomen simply; and Luke (who has no sympathy for Roman nomenclature)
   took the name that he heard in common use. The title "first"
   technically correct in Melita: it has inscriptional authority.

   Doubtless many of the sailors had been at Malta before, for eastern
   ships bound for Rome must have often touched at the island, v. 11. "But
   St. Paul's Bay is remote from the great harbour, and possesses no
   marked features by which it could be recognised" from the anchorage in
   the bay.

   The objections which have been advanced, that there are now no vipers
   in the island, and only one place where any wood grows, are too trivial
   to deserve notice. Such changes are natural and probable in a small
   island, populous and long civilised.

   The term "barbarians," v. 2, is characteristic of the nationality of
   the writer. It does not indicate rudeness or uncivilised habits, but
   merely non-Greek birth; and it is difficult to imagine that a Syrian or
   a Jew or any one but a Greek would have applied the name to the people
   of Malta, who had been in contact with Phoenicians and Romans for many
   centuries.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [57] The owners of private merchant ships were distinguished as emporoi
   from the captains, in a Delian inscription eis Bithunian emporoi kai
   naukleroi, Bulletin de Corresp. Hellen. 1880, p. 222.

   [58] oi naukleroi tou poreutikou Alexandreinou stulou, Kaibel,
   Inscript. Grac. in Italia, No. 918.

   [59] Literally, had got their purpose.

   [60] Seventeen miles from shore on their course, according Smith.

   [61] Resonare Gig. Compared with prosachein, B, as Prof. Rendel Harris
   suggests to me, this implies an early Greek reading prosechein.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XV.

  ST. PAUL IN ROME

   1 THE COMING TO ROME.

   (XXVIII 11) AFTER THREE MONTHS WE SET SAIL IN A SHIP OF ALEXANDRIA,
   WHICH HAD WINTERED IN THE ISLAND, WHOSE SIGN WAS "THE TWIN BROTHERS".
   (12) AND TOUCHING AT SYRACUSE, WE TARRIED THERE THREE DAYS. (13) AND
   FROM THENCE, BY TACKING, WE ARRIVED AT RHEGIUM. AND AFTER ONE DAY A
   SOUTH WIND SPRANG UP, AND ON THE SECOND DAY WE CAME TO PUTEOLI: (14)
   WHERE, FINDING BRETHREN, WE WERE CONSOLED AMONG THEM, REMAINING SEVEN
   DAYS; [62] AND THEREUPON WE CAME TO ROME. (15) AND FROM THENCE THE
   BRETHREN, HEARING THE NEWS ABOUT US, CAME TO MEET US AS FAR AS "APPIUS
   MARKET" AND "THREE TAVERNS": WHOM, WHEN PAUL SAW, HE THANKED GOD AND
   TOOK COURAGE. (16) AND WHEN WE ENTERED INTO ROME [the centurion
   delivered the prisoners to the stratopedarch, and] PAUL WAS SUFFERED TO
   ABIDE BY HIMSELF WITH THE SOLDIER THAT GUARDED HIM [outside of the
   camp]. . . . (30) HIRED DWELLING, AND RECEIVED ALL THAT WENT IN UNTO
   HIM, (31) AND PREACHED THE KINGDOM OF GOD, AND TAUGHT WHAT CONCERNED
   THE LORD JESUS CHRIST WITH ALL BOLDNESS, NONE FORBIDDING HIM (see note,
   p. 362).

   The wreck took place before the middle of November (p. 322); therefore
   they sailed from Malta in February. That is earlier than the usual
   beginning of over-sea navigation; but we may understand that favourable
   weather tempted them to an early start; and as the autumn was unusually
   tempestuous, it is probable that fine weather began early. Luke does
   not tell what sort of wind blew, leaving the reader to understand that
   it was from a southerly quarter (as otherwise no ancient ship would
   attempt the over-sea voyage). The wind fell and they had to wait three
   days in Syracuse. Then though the breeze was not from the south, they
   were able by good seamanship to work up to Rhegium [63] . Here, after
   one day, a south wind arose; and they sailed across to Puteoli,
   arriving there on the second day.

   The passage probably took not much over twenty-four hours, beginning
   one day and ending the following morning: with a following wind, these
   large merchant vessels sailed fast. The passengers landed in Puteoli;
   but the cargo, doubtless, was carried to Ostia, where it had to be
   transshipped to smaller vessels which could go up the Tiber to Rome.

   Luke mentions the name of the last vessel, but not of any of the
   others. The reason lies in the circumstances. He heard the news about
   the last vessel before he saw it; but he became acquainted with the
   others by seeing them. Probably the news that the Dioscuri, of the
   Alexandrian Imperial fleet, was lying in the great harbour, reached the
   shipwrecked party during the three days when they were in Poplius's
   house; and was so noted in Luke's memoranda. But he had not the
   sailor's mind, who thinks of his ship as a living friend, and always
   speaks of her by her name; hence the other ships were to him only means
   of conveyance, whereas the name of the Dioscuri was the first fact
   which he learned about her.

   Puteoli, as a great harbour, was a central point and a crossing of
   intercourse; and thus Christianity had already established itself
   there. All movements of thought throughout the Empire acted with
   marvellous rapidity on Rome, the heart of the vast and complicated
   organism; and the crossing-places or knots [64] on the main highways of
   intercourse with the East--Puteoli, Corinth, Ephesus, Syrian
   Antioch--became centres from which Christianity radiated. At Pompeii,
   which is not far from Puteoli, the Christians were a subject of gossip
   among loungers in the street before it was destroyed by the eruption of
   Vesuvius in 79.

   The double expression of arrival at Rome in vv. 14 and 16 is
   remarkable; and has caused much speculation among commentators. Blass
   is inclined to seek a change of text, giving the sense "we proceeded on
   our way (imperfect) to Rome, then we came to Appii Forum, etc., and
   finally we entered Rome ". Others prefer other interpretations. But the
   double expression seems due to the double sense that every name of a
   city-state bears in Greek: the word Rome might either include the
   entire territory of the city, the XXXV tribes as they were completed in
   B.C. 241, i.e., the whole ager Romanus, or be restricted to the walls
   and buildings. Thus v. 13, "we reached the state Rome," the bounds of
   which were probably pointed out as the party reached them; in 14, "we
   passed through two points in the ager Romanus"; and in 15, "we entered
   the (walls of) Rome" (see p. 111).

   It is evident that Paul, when he reached this crisis of his fate, was
   feeling dispirited; for the tendency to low spirits is always one of
   the most trying concomitants of his chronic disorder, as described in
   Ch. V § 2. The allusions to the consolation that he received from
   meeting Brethren at Puteoli, Appius's Forum, and the Three Taverns,
   must be taken as indications of some marked frame of mind. We have
   already observed him in a similar state of depression when he was in
   Troas and Philippi (p. 283 f.).

   When the party reached Rome, the centurion delivered his charge to his
   superior officer, who bears the title Chief of the Camp (Stratopedarch)
   in the Greek text. [65] This title has always hitherto been interpreted
   as denoting the Prefect of the Prætorian Guard, stationed in a large
   camp adjoining the wails of Rome. But that interpretation is not well
   suited either to the natural character of language or to the facts of
   the Roman service. The title could not properly designate an officer of
   such high rank; and the Prætorian Prefect would hardly be concerned
   with a comparatively humble duty like the reception of and
   responsibility for prisoners. The Greek title Stratopedarch very rarely
   occurs; and it remained for Mommsen, aided by the form given in an old
   Latin version, Princeps Peregrinorum, to explain who the officer really
   was, and to place the whole episode of Paul's Roman residence in a new
   light (see p. 315).

   Augustus had reduced to a regular system the maintenance of
   communications between the centre of control in Rome and the armies
   stationed in the great frontier provinces. Legionary centurions, called
   commonly frumentarii, went to and fro between Rome and the armies; and
   were employed for numerous purposes that demanded communication between
   the Emperor and his armies and provinces. They acted not only for
   commissariat purposes (whence the name), but as couriers, and for
   police purposes, and for conducting prisoners; and in time they became
   detested as agents and spies of Government. They all belonged to
   legions stationed in the provinces, and were considered to be on
   detached duty when they went to Rome; and hence in Rome they were
   "soldiers from abroad," peregrini. While in Rome they resided in a camp
   on the Cælian Hill, called Castra Peregrinorum; in this camp there were
   always a number of them present, changing from day to day, as some came
   and others went away. This camp was under command of the Princeps
   Peregrinorum; and it is clear that Stratopedarch in Acts is the Greek
   name for that officer (see p. 315). This whole branch of the service is
   very obscure. Marquardt considers that it was first organised by
   Hadrian; but Mommsen believes that it must have been instituted by
   Augustus.

   2. THE RESIDENCE IN ROME.

   Paul was treated in Rome with the utmost leniency. He was allowed to
   hire a house or a lodging in the city, and live there at his own
   convenience under the surveillance of a soldier who was responsible for
   his presence when required. A light chain fastened Paul's wrist to that
   of the soldier. No hindrance was offered to his inviting friends into
   his house, or to his preaching to all who came in to him; but he was
   not allowed to go out freely.

   After the depression of spirit in which Paul entered Rome, Acts
   concludes with a distinct implication of easier and more hopeful
   circumstances. His work went on unimpeded, while the rest after the
   fatigue and hardships of the voyage would be beneficial to his physical
   health (even though September might afterwards prove unhealthy); and
   thus the two chief reasons for his gloomy frame of mind on landing in
   Italy were removed. He regarded himself as "an ambassador in a chain"
   (Eph. VI 20); he asked for the prayers of the Colossians and the Asian
   Churches generally for his success in preaching; his tone is hopeful
   and full of energy and spirit for the work (1. c., Col. IV 3, 4); and
   he looked forward to acquittal and a visit to Colossai (Philem. 22). We
   may date these letters to Philemon, to Colossai, and to the Asian
   Churches generally (Eph.) near the middle of the long imprisonment; an
   accurate date is impossible, but for brevity's sake we may speak of
   their date as early in 61.

   The presence of many friends in Rome also cheered Paul. He had been
   permitted to take two personal attendants with him from Cæsareia; but
   though his other companions in Jerusalem were prevented from
   accompanying him in his voyage, some of them followed him to Rome.
   Timothy was with him during great part of his imprisonment, was sent on
   a mission to Philippi about the end of 61 (Phil. II 19), and thereafter
   seems to have had his headquarters in Asia, whence he was summoned by
   Paul to join him during his second imprisonment. Tychicus also joined
   Paul in Rome in 60, and was sent on a mission to Asia, and especially
   to the Churches of the Lycos valley, early in 61. They probably left
   Cæsareia when Paul sailed for Rome, visited on the way their own homes,
   and arrived in Rome not long after Paul himself.

   Moreover, Mark, who had become reconciled with Paul (probably during
   his residence at Jerusalem, or his imprisonment in Cæsareia), came also
   to Rome. He left Rome in 61, contemplating an extended tour in the
   province Asia, in the course of which he would probably visit Colossai.
   Oral instructions had been already sent to the Colossians, and,
   doubtless, other Pauline Churches (probably by Onesimus and Tychicus),
   to welcome him as Paul's deputy; and Paul writes to the Colossians a
   formal recommendation of him (IV 10). The terms in which Paul speaks
   suggest that he had not taken any active interest in the new Pauline
   Churches since the unfortunate quarrel in Pamphylia, and that there was
   likely to be some coldness towards him among the Pauline Christians.
   From this year, apparently, began a new era in Mark's life. His work
   seems to have lain in Asia during the next few years, for about the
   close of his life Paul bids Timothy (IV 11) bring Mark with him to
   Rome, implying that they were near each other; and Timothy was in
   Ephesus at the time. Probably Paul had been informed of Mark's desire
   to rejoin him in his troubles. At a later date Mark is associated with
   the greeting of I Peter V 13 to the Churches of the provinces of Asia
   Minor, in such a way as to imply personal acquaintance with them; and
   this wide range of work, though not easily reconcilable with the
   earlier dates assigned to that Epistle, suits naturally and well the
   date about 80 (Church in R.E., p. 280 f). On this view Mark after
   Paul's death must have devoted himself to work in the more easterly
   provinces of Asia Minor; and returned to Rome ten or twelve years
   later.

   It is remarkable that Luke has not a word to say about the process by
   which Christianity spread to Rome; but, according to the plan which we
   have already seen to be shadowed forth for the sequel of this history,
   the process would form part of the contemplated Third Book. That Book
   would naturally open with a brief statement of the western dispersion
   and the planting of Christianity in Italy, going back for the moment to
   an earlier date, just as in XI 27 the historian, when he has to include
   Antioch in the stage of his drama, turns back to the movement
   originating in Stephen's work. So here he brings Paul to Rome; and
   thereafter he would probably have made a new start with the Churches of
   the West and the new impulse imparted to them by Paul's acquittal. We
   are compelled to make some conjecture on this point; for no one can
   accept the ending of Acts as the conclusion of a rationally conceived
   history. Such an ending might exist in a diary, which has no
   determining idea, but not in a history; and we, who work on the
   hypothesis that Acts is a history, must strive to understand the
   guiding idea of an unfinished work.

   According to modern ideas, the rapidity with which every movement in
   the provinces influenced Rome is a sign of strong vitality and intimate
   union of the parts of that vast Empire. The Imperial policy fostered
   intercommunication and unity to the utmost; and it is not too much to
   say that travelling was more highly developed, and the dividing power
   of distance was weaker, under the Empire than at any time before or
   since, until we come down to the present century. But that fact, which
   we estimate as probably the best measure of material civilisation, was
   regarded with horror by the party of old Roman thought and manners,
   which was stubbornly opposed in mind to the Imperial rule, though it
   was powerless against it. They saw that the old Roman character was
   changed, and the old Roman ideals of life and government were
   destroyed, by the influx of provincial thoughts and manners. The
   Orontes was pouring its waters into the Tiber; Syrian and Greek vices
   were substituted for Roman virtues; and prominent among these vices
   were Judaism, Christianity, and other "debasing superstitions"

   The new movement made marked progress in the vast Imperial household;
   and Paul, in sending to the Philippian Church the greetings of the
   Roman Christians, says, "All the saints salute you, especially they
   that are of Cæsar's household ". This is quite to be expected. The
   Imperial household was at the centre of affairs and in most intimate
   relations with all parts of the Empire; and in it influences from the
   provinces were most certain to be felt early. There can be no doubt
   that Lightfoot is right in considering that Christianity effected an
   entrance into Cæesar's household before Paul entered Rome; in all
   probability he is right also in thinking that all the slaves of
   Aristobulus (son of Herod the Great) and of Narcissus (Claudius's
   favourite freedman) had passed into the Imperial household, and that
   members of these two familiæ are saluted as Christians by Paul (Rom.
   XVI 10 f.).

   3. SENECA AND PAUL.

   The question has been much discussed what relation, if any, existed
   between Seneca and Paul at this time. A tradition existed in the fourth
   century that they had been brought into close relation. It is, however,
   exceedingly doubtful whether this tradition had any other foundation
   than the remarkable likeness that many of Seneca's phrases and
   sentiments show to passages in the New Testament. But, however striking
   these extracts seem when collected and looked at apart from their
   context, I think that a careful consideration of them as they occur in
   the books, must bring every one to the conclusion advocated by
   Lightfoot, by Aubé, and by many others, that the likeness affords no
   proof that Seneca came into such relations with Paul as to be
   influenced in his sentiments by him: resemblances quite as striking
   occur in works written before Paul came Rome (according to the
   received, although not always absolutely certain, chronology of
   Seneca's works), as in those written after. Nor was it among the
   professed philosophers that Paul was likely to be listened to: they
   considered that they knew all he had to say, and could quote from their
   own lectures a good moral precept to set alongside of anything he could
   tell them.

   Yet there can be no doubt that some very striking parallels between
   Senecan and Pauline sayings occur; and this is true of Seneca to a
   greater extent than of any other non-Christian writer. It is possible
   that the philosophical school of Tarsus had exercised more influence on
   Paul than is commonly allowed; and it is certain that Seneca was
   influenced by Athenodorus of Tarsus. Lightfoot refers especially to the
   fact that both Paul and Seneca "compare life to a warfare, and describe
   the struggle after good as a contest with the flesh ". Seneca makes one
   long quotation from Athenodorus (de Clem., 4), and in it the idea that
   life is a warfare is worked out elaborately; and the saying (Ep. X),
   "So live with men, as if God saw you; so speak with God, as if men
   heard you," occurs immediately after a quotation from Athenodorus, [66]
   and seems to be a reflection in Seneca's words of Athenodorus's
   intention. Athenodorus lived much in Rome, and died there in Cato's
   house, 60-50 B.C.; but it is probable both that his system exercised
   great influence in the university of his own city, and that Paul's
   expression and language may contain traces of his university training
   in Tarsus.

   But though there is no reason to think that Seneca was influenced by
   Paul's language or thoughts, yet there is every reason to think that
   the liberal policy of the Empire at this period in religion was due to
   Seneca's broad views. It is certain that he had exercised very great
   influence on the Imperial policy, since his pupil Nero became Emperor
   in 54; and it is highly probable that the energy with which that policy
   was carried out in the East, and the generous freedom with which all
   religious questions were treated during that period, are due to
   Seneca's spirit. He is perhaps the only distinguished politician of the
   first century who shows some of the wide views of Hadrian; and it is
   remarkable that both Seneca and Hadrian were sprung from Spain, being
   thus thoroughly Roman and yet absolutely free from the old narrow Roman
   spirit. It is clear that, in the later years of Nero's reign, the
   Empire began to fall into dangerous disorganisation, while in his early
   years the government at home and abroad seems to have been remarkably
   successful; and it is not easy to account for the contrast, except by
   connecting the success with Seneca's guiding spirit. Now, the tone
   which marks the relations of the State to Paul throughout the period
   described in Acts, is quite different from that which began in A.D. 64
   and subsequently became intensified. Surely we can best account for the
   change by the disgrace and retirement of Seneca in 62: his spirit
   departed from the administration by rapid steps after that date.
   Circumstances had given him for a few years such influence as perhaps
   never again was exercised by a private citizen in the Empire. As a
   rule, the Emperors held the reins of government tight in their own
   hands, and allowed no subordinate to exert any influence on the general
   conduct of affairs; and there are many great Emperors, but only one
   great Minister under the Empire, Seneca.

   The household of Seneca during his ascendancy was likely to be brought
   into close relations with the great movements that were agitating the
   Empire. It is therefore natural to expect that the new religion should
   affect it in some degree, as it did the Imperial household. Nor are we
   left to mere conjecture on this point. A remarkable inscription of
   somewhat later date has been found at Ostia, "M. Annaeus Paulus to M.
   Annaeus Paulus Petrus, his very dear son:" the name "Paul Peter" must
   be taken as an indubitable proof of religion. These persons possibly
   belong to a family of freed men connected with the household of Seneca;
   but, assuming that, it is no more admissible to quote this inscription
   as corroborating Seneca's traditional subjection to Christianity, than
   it would be to quote the strong leaven of Christianity in Cæsar's
   household in proof of Cæsar's amenability to the same influence.

   4. THE TRIAL.

   It is doubtful why Paul's trial was so long delayed. Perhaps his
   opponents, despairing of obtaining his condemnation, preferred to put
   off the trial as long as possible; and there were then, as there are
   now, many devices in law for causing delay. Perhaps the case was being
   inquired into by the Imperial Office: the trial had to take place
   before the Emperor or one of his representatives (probably one of the
   two Prefects of the Prætorian Guard). The whole question of free
   teaching of an oriental religion by a Roman citizen must have been
   opened up by the case; and it is quite possible that Paul's previous
   proceedings were inquired into.

   The trial seems to have occurred towards the end of A.D. 61 Its
   earliest stages were over before Paul wrote to the Philippians, for he
   says, I 12, "the things which happened unto me have fallen out rather
   unto the progress of the Good News; so that my bonds became manifest in
   Christ in the whole Prætorium, and to all the rest; and that most of
   the Brethren in the Lord, being confident in my bonds, are more
   abundantly bold to speak the word of God without fear". This passage
   has been generally misconceived and connected with the period of
   imprisonment; and here again we are indebted to Mommsen for the proper
   interpretation. The Prætorium is the whole body of persons connected
   with the sitting in judgment, the supreme Imperial Court, doubtless in
   this case the Prefect or both Prefects of the Prætorian Guard,
   representing the Emperor in his capacity as the fountain of justice,
   together with the assessors and high officers of the court. The
   expression of the chapter as a whole shows that the trial is partly
   finished, and the issue as yet is so favourable that the Brethren are
   emboldened by the success of Paul's courageous and free-spoken defence
   and the strong impression which he evidently produced on the court; but
   he himself, being entirely occupied with the trial, is for the moment
   prevented from preaching as he had been doing when he wrote to the
   Colossians and the Asian Churches generally.

   That Philippians was written near the end of the imprisonment has been
   widely recognised, though the powerful opposition of Lightfoot has
   carried away the general current of opinion in England. When Paul was
   writing to the Church at Philippi, his custom of sending his
   subordinates on missions had stripped him of companions; and so he
   says, "I have no man like-minded (with Timothy) who will show genuine
   care for your state, for they all seek their own, not the things of
   Jesus Christ, but ye recognise his proved character" (Phil II 20 f.).
   It seems impossible to believe that Paul could have written like this,
   if he had had with him Tychicus, "faithful minister and fellow-servant
   in the Lord," Aristarchus, Mark, and above all Luke. Yet, if anything
   is sure about that period, it is that Aristarchus and Luke had been
   with Paul from his arrival in Rome till after Coloss., Philem. and Eph.
   were written, while Tychicus probably joined him with Timothy in 60. On
   our supposition, Mark and Tychicus had already been sent on missions to
   Asia; Luke is either the "true yoke-fellow" addressed in Phil IV 3, or
   was actually the bearer of the letter to Philippi; Aristarchus also had
   been sent on a mission during the summer of 61; and Epaphras naturally
   had returned to the Lycos valley. There remained some friends with Paul
   (IV 21), probably Demas among them (Col. IV 14, Philem. 24); but he did
   not feel sure of their thorough trustworthiness, and his doubt about
   Demas was afterwards justified (II Tim. IV 10). Hence his eagerness to
   get back to the company of real and trusty friends (II 24 ff.).

   Amid the general tone of hopefulness and confidence in Philippians,
   there are some touches of depression, which may be attributed to the
   absence of so many intimate friends, to the increased strain that the
   trial now proceeding must have put on his powers (p. 94 f.), and to the
   probable closer confinement necessitated by the trial, that he might
   always be accessible in case of need. There is more eagerness for the
   issue of the long proceedings manifest in Phil. than in the other
   letters from Rome; but it is part of human nature to be more patient
   when the end is still far off, and more excited and eager as the end
   approaches.

   The letter to Philippi was not called forth by any dangerous crisis
   there, as were the letters to Colossai and to the Asian Churches
   generally (Eph.). Hence Col. and Eph. "exhibit a more advanced stage in
   the development of the Church" than Phil. Lightfoot and others are
   indubitably right in that point; but their inference that Phil. was
   written earlier than the others does not follow. The tone of Col. and
   Eph. is determined by the circumstances of the Churches addressed. The
   great cities of Asia were on the highway of the world, which traversed
   the Lycos valley, and in them development took place with great
   rapidity. But the Macedonians were a simple-minded people in comparison
   with Ephesus and Laodiceia and Colossai, living further away from the
   great movements of thought. It was not in Paul's way to send to
   Philippi an elaborate treatise against a subtle speculative heresy,
   which had never affected that Church. His letter was called forth by
   the gifts which had been sent by the Philippians; it is a recognition
   of their thoughtful kindness; and hence it has a marked character,
   being "the noblest reflection of St. Paul's personal character and
   spiritual illumination, his large sympathies, his womanly tenderness,
   his delicate courtesy" (to use once more the words of Lightfoot). It is
   plain that he did not actually need the help that the), now sent; but
   his gratitude is as warm and genuine as if he had been in deep need,
   and he recurs to the former occasions when his real poverty had been
   aided by them. The freedom from anxiety about the development at
   Philippi, and the hearty affection for kind friends, make this in many
   respects the most pleasing of all Paul's letters.

   Though prepared to face death if need be, Paul was comparatively
   confident of the issue when he wrote to Philippi: "I have the confident
   conviction that I shall remain and abide for you all to your progress
   and joy of believing," and "I trust that I shall come to you shortly"
   That he was acquitted is demanded both by the plan evident in Acts (p.
   308) and by other reasons well stated by others.

   5. LAST TRIAL AND DEATH OF PAUL.

   His later career is concealed from us, for the hints contained in the
   Pastoral Epistles hardly furnish even an outline of his travels, which
   must have lasted three or four years, 62-65 A.D. At his second trial
   the veil that hides his fate is raised for the moment. On that occasion
   the circumstances were very different from his first trial. His
   confinement was more rigorous, for Onesiphorus had to take much trouble
   before obtaining an interview with the prisoner (II Tim. I 17): "he
   fared ill as far as bonds, like a criminal" (II 9). He had no hope of
   acquittal: he recognised that he was "already being poured forth as an
   offering, and the time of his departure was come". The gloom and
   hopelessness of the situation damped and dismayed all his friends: at
   his first hearing "all forsook" him; yet for the time he "was delivered
   out of the mouth of the lion". In every respect the situation thus
   indicated is the opposite of the circumstances described on the first
   trial. Phil. occupies the same place in the first as II Tim. in the
   second trial; but Phil. looks forward to a fresh career among the
   Churches, while II Tim. is the testament of a dying man. In one
   respect, however, the second trial was like the first. Paul again
   defended himself in the same bold and outspoken way as before,
   expounding the principles of his life to a great audience, "that all
   the Gentiles might hear".

   Yet the circumstances of this second trial are totally different from
   that "short way with the dissenters" which was customary under Domitian
   and Trajan and later Emperors. After his first examination Paul could
   still write to Asia bidding Timothy and Mark come to him, which shows
   that he looked forward to a considerable interval before the next stage
   of his trial. He was charged as a malefactor, crimes had to be proved
   against him, and evidence brought; and the simple acknowledgment that
   he was a Christian was still far from sufficient to condemn him, as it
   was under Domitian. It is a plausible conjecture of Conybeare and
   Howson that the first hearing, on which he was acquitted and "delivered
   out of the lion's mouth," was on the charge of complicity and sympathy
   with the incendiaries, who had burned Rome in 64; and that charge was
   triumphantly disproved. The trial in that case did not occur until the
   first frenzy of terror and rage against the supposed incendiaries was
   over; and some other species of crime had to be laid to the account of
   the Christians charged before the courts. The second and fatal charge,
   heard later, was doubtless that of treason, shown by hostility to the
   established customs of society, and by weakening the Imperial
   authority.

   If our conception of the trial is correct, the precedent of the first
   great trial still guided the courts of the empire (as we have elsewhere
   sought to prove). It had then been decided that the preaching of the
   new religion was not in itself a crime; and that legal offences must be
   proved against Christians as against any other subjects of the empire.
   That was the charter of freedom (p. 282) which was abrogated shortly
   after; and part of Luke's design was, as we have seen (p. 307), to
   record the circumstances in which the charter had been obtained, as a
   protest against the Flavian policy, which had overturned a well-weighed
   decision of the supreme court.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [62] The text of most MSS., "we were entreated to tarry with them seven
   days," seems irreconcilable with Paul's situation as a prisoner.
   However friendly Julius was to Paul, he was a Roman officer, with whom
   discipline and obedience to rule were natural. With Blass, we follow
   the text of the inferior MSS. (see p. 212).

   [63] Westcott and Hort prefer the text of the great MSS. perielontes,
   which could hardly mean more than "casting off," an unnecessary piece
   of information here, though important in XXVII.

   [64] Each of them may be called parodos, the epithet applied to Ephesus
   by Ignatius, Rom. 12, Church in R. E., p. 318 f.

   [65] Text of XXVIII 16. The failure in the great MSS. of the delivery
   of Paul to the Stratopedarch is a very clear case of omitting a Lukan
   detail, which had only a mundane interest; and the failure of similar
   details in XXVII 5, XVI 30, etc., may be estimated by the analogy of
   this case.

   [66] The owners of private merchant ships are distinguished as emporoi
   from the captains, in a Delian inscription eis Bithunian emporoi kai
   naukleroi, Bulletin de Corresp. Hellen. 1880, p. 222.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVI.

  CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY CHURCH HISTORY -- 30-40 A.D.

   1. THE STATE OF THE CHURCH IN A.D. 30.

   The chronological difficulty has probably weighed with many, as it has
   with Lightfoot (Ed. Gal. p. 124), in rejecting the identification which
   we advocate of the visit in Acts XI with that in Gal. II 1-10. It is
   therefore necessary to glance briefly at the chronology of the early
   chapters of Acts, in order to show that there is no real difficulty for
   those who (like Lightfoot) date the Crucifixion in A.D. 30. Our
   identification, if proved, would make it certain that the Death of
   Christ cannot be dated so late as 33.

   Luke's historical method required him in the opening of his Second Book
   to give a full account of the first condition of the Church in
   Jerusalem, and then to concentrate attention on the critical steps and
   persons by whom the Universal Church was moulded to the form it had in
   his time.

   In I, after a short preamble, connecting the narrative with the
   preceding book, he describes how the number of the Apostles was filled
   up. The organisation of the Church was always a subject of keen
   interest to Luke; he "evidently had the impression that the guidance of
   affairs rested with the Apostles in Jerusalem" (p. 53); and the
   appointment of this important official was in his estimation a matter
   of great moment. Peter took the lead; two were selected by common
   agreement and vote; and out of these the lot showed which was preferred
   by the Divine will.

   In II 1-42 the events of Pentecost (May 26, A.D. 30), and the effect
   produced on the character of the converts, are described; and the
   general state and conduct of this primitive Church is summed up in II
   43-47.

   The second part of II 47, "the Lord added to them day by day those that
   were being saved," is one of those phrases in which Luke often hits off
   a long, steady, uniform process. It is to be taken as a general
   description of subsequent progress in Jerusalem, during the course of
   which occurred the events next related.

   The space devoted by Luke to Pentecost shows that he considered the
   events of that day to be of the highest importance. On that day the
   Divine grace was given to the Apostles, qualifying them (p. 45) for the
   work which they were now required to perform since their Master had
   left them. Luke shows true historical insight in fixing the reader's
   attention on Pentecost. For the permanence of a movement of this kind,
   much depends on the successors of the first leader; and the issue is
   determined in the period following the leader's removal. Has the leader
   shown that electrical creative power that remoulds men and communicates
   his own spirit to his disciples, or will the movement be found
   leaderless and spiritless, when the originator is taken away? While the
   leader is with his disciples, they have little or no opportunity of
   showing independence and originality and capacity for command. When he
   is re moved from them, the first effect must be discouragement and a
   sense of emptiness, proportionate to the influence exerted by the
   leader. Then comes the real test, which determines the vitality and
   permanence of the movement. Has the spirit of the founder descended on
   his followers? With Luke, and with all the great leaders of the first
   century, that was the test of every new man and every new congregation:
   had the Spirit been granted to them?

   In the second month after their leader was taken away, on the day of
   Pentecost, the test was fulfilled in the primitive Church; and the
   capacity of his disciples to carry on his work was shown. They became
   conscious of the power that had been given them, and their new power
   was recognised by the multitude in their words and in their looks. The
   same impression of a transformed and recreated nature was made on the
   elders and scribes, when they examined Peter and John (IV 13 f., see
   § 2).

   By virtue of that Divine grace, "many wonders and signs were done by
   the Apostles," v. 43, during the following time. But it is vital to
   Luke's method not to rest contented with. that general statement, but
   to give one special, clear example of the power communicated to the
   Apostles and to the Church of which they were the leaders. It would be
   waste of time to regret that he passes over so much that we should like
   to know, and devotes so much space to a marvel that is to us a
   difficulty: our present aim is to understand the purpose of what he
   does say, not to long after what he omits.

   The example is given in III; the subsequent events of the same day are
   narrated IV 1-4; and the following day is described IV 5-31, when Peter
   and John, in whom the proof of Divine grace had been shown forth. were
   examined before a meeting of "the rulers and eiders and scribes". These
   are represented as realising now for the first time, v. 13, the change
   that had come over Peter and John, who from "unlearned and ignorant
   men" had been transformed into bold and eloquent preachers. Evidently.
   the historian conceives that this transformation, wrought at Pentecost,
   was now beginning to be generally felt; and therefore he is still (as
   we have said) describing the immediate issue of Pentecost. Thereafter
   comes a second general statement of the state and character of the
   primitive Church, startlingly similar to II 43-47.

   Thus the whole passage II 43-IV 35 hangs very closely together, and
   describes the Church in the period immediately succeeding May 26, A.D.
   30. Two episodes of this period, exemplifying the conduct of the true
   and the false convert, are described IV 36-V 11; and then comes a third
   general description of the state of the Church in this period V 12-16,
   followed by a statement of the attempt made by the Jewish leaders to
   coerce the Apostles into silence V 17-41.

   That at least two accounts by two different authorities underlie Luke's
   narrative, and have been worked up by him with little change, seems
   clear. It is, of course, obvious that he was entirely dependent for
   this period of his history on the authority of other persons; and we
   see in the Third Gospel how much he was influenced by the very language
   of his authorities, and how little change he made on their words. [67]

   2. TRUSTWORTHINESS OF THE NARRATIVE.

   Acts I-V. It is obvious that the trustworthiness of this part of Acts
   stands on quite a different footing from that of the Pauline narrative,
   which we have hitherto discussed. The author had means of knowing the
   later events with perfect accuracy (so far as perfection can be
   attained in history); but the means which helped him there fail in I-V,
   and the scene and surroundings were to him strange and remote (p. 19
   f.). He was here dependent entirely on others, and it was more
   difficult for him to control and make himself master of the evolution
   of events. We discern the same guiding hand and mind, the same clear
   historical insight seizing the great and critical steps, in the early
   chapters, as in the later; but the description of the primitive Church
   wants precision in the outline and colour in the details. It seems
   clear that the authorities on which Luke depended were not equally
   good; and here second-rate incidents are admitted along with first-rate
   in a way that has done his reputation serious injury in the estimation
   of those who begin to study Acts from this, its necessarily weakest
   part. One or two examples will bring out our meaning. First we take an
   incident related also by Matthew.

   Matthew XXVII 5-8 Acts I 18-19.
   AND HE WENT AWAY AND HANGED HIMSELF. AND THE CHIEF PRIESTS TOOK THE
   PIECES OF SILVER, AND SAID, "IT IS NOT LAWFUL TO PUT THEM INTO THE
   TREASURY, SINCE. IT IS THE PRICE OF BLOOD". AND THEY TOOK COUNSEL, AND
   BOUGHT WITH THEM THE POTTER'S FIELD, TO BURY STRANGERS IN. WHEREFORE
   THAT FIELD WAS CALLED THE FIELD OF BLOOD. UNTO THIS DAY. NOW THIS MAN
   OBTAINED A FIELD WITH THE REWARD OF HIS INIQUITY; AND FALLING HEADLONG,
   HE BURST ASUNDER IN THE MIDST, AND ALL HIS BOWELS GUSHED. AND IT BECAME
   KNOWN TO ALL THE DWELLERS AT JERUSALEM; INSOMUCH THAT IN THEIR LANGUAGE
   THAT FIELD WAS CALLED AKELDAMA, THAT IS, THE FIELD OF BLOOD.

   There can be no hesitation in accepting the vivid and detailed
   description which Matthew gives of this incident. But, if so, the
   account given in Acts cannot be accepted as having any claim to
   trustworthiness in any point of discrepancy. The character of this
   account is marked, and its origin obvious. It is a growth of popular
   fancy and tradition, which preserved the main facts, viz., the
   connection between the name, Field of Blood, and the price paid to the
   betrayer. But it is characteristic of popular tradition, while it
   preserves some central fact, to overlay it with fanciful accretions,
   which often conceal completely the historical kernel. In this case, we
   have the tale arrested at an early point in its growth, when its
   elements are still separable. The name Field of Blood had to be
   explained suitably to the remembered fact that it was bought with the
   betrayer's reward; but its meaning was mistaken. Popular fancy always
   craves for justice; it connected the name with the betrayer's
   punishment, took the Blood, which formed one element of the name, as
   the betrayer's blood, and evolved a myth which united fact and
   retributory justice in a moral apologue.

   It is a remarkable thing that popular tradition should so soon distort
   a tale so simple and so impressive. But oriental tradition never clings
   to fact with anything like the same tenacity as Greek tradition; and we
   know how much even the latter distorts and covers over the facts that
   it preserves. The oriental mind has little or nothing of the proper
   historical tone. It remembers facts, not for their own value, but for
   the lesson they can convey. It substitutes the moral apologue for
   history in the strict sense of the term, craving for the former, and
   possessing little regard for the latter. It acts with great rapidity,
   transforming the memory of the past within the lapse of a few years;
   and probably those who know the East best will find least difficulty in
   believing that the stow which Luke here gives might have been told him,
   when the Field of Blood was pointed out to him at Jerusalem in 57 A.D.

   But in this rapid transformation of fact in Eastern popular tradition
   lies the best safeguard of the historical student against it. He rarely
   needs to doubt, as he often must in Greece, whether any narrative is
   history or mere popular tradition. Greek tradition often has such a
   natural appearance that it is hard to say where fact ends and fancy
   begins. But oriental tradition is so free in its creation, so
   unfettered by any thought of suitability in the accessories, that it is
   marked off from history by a broad and deep gap. By history we mean
   narrative rounded on documents that are nearly contemporary with the
   actual facts, or on the accounts of eye-witnesses, not implying that
   "history" must be absolutely true. To give a true account even of a
   single incident that one has actually participated in is not within the
   power of all, for it needs education, skill in selection, and an eye to
   distinguish the relative importance of different points. To give a true
   account of a long series of incidents is, of course, much more
   difficult. No history is absolutely true; all give accounts that are
   more or less distorted pictures of fact. But the conception of history
   as an attempt to represent facts in correct perspective, even when it
   is poorly and feebly carried out, is a great and sacred possession,
   which we owe to the Greeks; and is a generically different thing from
   popular tradition, which aims either at the moral apologue, or the glow
   of an individual or a family, and regards faithfulness to actual facts
   as quite a secondary thing.

   The episode of Ananias and Sapphira V 1 f. excites reasonable
   suspicion. That Ananias should be carried forth and buried unknown to
   his family, unmourned by his kindred and friends, is not merely
   contrary to right conduct, but violates the deepest feelings of
   oriental life. That a man should be properly lamented and wept for by
   his family is and has always been a sacred right, which even crime does
   not forfeit. But the desire to bring into strong relief the
   unselfishness of the primitive Church has worked itself out in a moral
   apologue, which has found here an entrance alongside of real history.

   Again in II 5-11 another popular tale seems to obtrude itself. In these
   verses the power of speaking with tongues, which is clearly described
   by Paul as a species of prophesying (I Cor. XII 10 f., XIV 1 f.), is
   taken in the sense of speaking in many languages. Here again we observe
   the distorting influence of popular fancy. Yet alongside of these
   suspicious stories we find passages which show strongly the
   characteristic method of Luke; and the entire plan of the narrative,
   concentrating attention on the successive critical steps, is thoroughly
   Lukan. We take one example of a Lukan passage.

   The incident in IV 13 f. is especially characteristic of Luke's style;
   and it has been widely misunderstood. Zeller, Holtzmann, Meyer-Wendt
   and others, understand these verses to mean that the members of the
   Sanhedrim became aware only during the trial that Peter and John had
   been disciples of Jesus: which, as they justly point out, is most
   unnatural and unsuitable. But the force of the passage seems to be very
   different: the Jewish leaders perceived the bold and fluent speech of
   Peter and John, and yet they observed from their dress and style of
   utterance that they were not trained scholars; and they marvelled (for
   there was then probably an even more marked distinction than at the
   present day between the speech and thought of a fisherman or shepherd
   and of an educated person); and they further took cognisance of the
   fact that they were disciples of Jesus; and they gazed on the man that
   had been cured standing along with his preservers. These were the facts
   of the case: all were undeniable; and all were vividly brought before
   them. What conclusion could be drawn from them? The historian's point
   is that there was only one possible inference; and, as the Jewish
   leaders were unwilling to draw that inference, they perforce kept
   silence, not having wherewithal to dispute the obvious conclusion.

   Here, as usual, the historian does not himself draw the inference; but
   merely states the main facts, and leaves them to tell their own tale.
   But in no passage does he state the facts in more dramatic form. The
   conclusion lies close at hand, rig., that these illiterate fishermen
   had acquired the art and power of effective oratory through their
   having been the disciples of Jesus, and through the Divine grace and
   power communicated to them.

   We notice also that John's speech has not previously been mentioned,
   yet now it is assumed that he had spoken. This is characteristic of the
   writer's style, as we have seen it in the second part of the work. It
   is evident that Peter's single speech did not exhaust the proceedings
   at the trial; but Luke assumes that the reader conceives the general
   situation and the style of procedure in such trials; and he quotes the
   most telling utterance, and leaves the rest to the reader's
   imagination.

   We are struck with the marked difference of Acts I-V, not merely from
   the later chapters, but also from Luke's First Book, the Gospel. In
   composing his Book I, he had formal works of a historical kind to use
   for his authorities (Luke I 1); and he followed them very closely, not
   giving scope to his own method of narration or of grouping. But these
   formal works seem all to have ended either with the death or the
   ascension of the Saviour; and the most obscure and difficult period for
   a historian writing about 80-85 A.D. was the time that immediately
   succeeded the death of Jesus. Luke was dependent here on informal
   narratives, and on oral tradition; and, if we be right in our view that
   he did not live to put the last touches to his work, we may fairly
   suppose that the most difficult period was left the least perfect part
   of the whole. But we must content ourselves here with this slight
   indication of a view that would require much minute argument to state
   properly. There is a marked resemblance between I-V and XIX. In both,
   episodes that savour of popular fancy stand side by side with Lukan
   work of the best kind.

   3. APPOINTMENT OF STEPHEN AND THE SEVEN.

   The first distinct step in development from the primitive condition of
   the Church, when it was a mere small and almost unorganised community,
   was due to the pressure of poverty. In Jerusalem very poor Jews were
   numerous, and many of them had become Christian. Hence from the
   beginning the Church had to contend against a chronic state of want
   among its adherents. Probably we are apt to find a more communistic
   sense than Luke intended in II 44, IV 32; for II 4, IV 35 indicate
   judicious charity, and even the action of Barnabas in IV 37 looks more
   like charity than communism: [68] he and others sold their possessions
   and gave the money in trust to the Apostles for the good of the Church.
   In later years, as the Church spread, the pressure of need in Jerusalem
   acted as a bond to unite the scattered congregations in active
   ministration (pp. 49 f., 288); and at the beginning it stimulated the
   primitive Church to originate a better organisation.

   The difficulties in which the Church was placed, which would have
   killed a weakly life, only stimulated its vigour and its creative
   energy. This creative vitality is to the historian the most interesting
   side of the early Church; it was free from dead conservatism; it
   combined the most perfect reverence for its earliest form with the most
   perfect freedom to adapt that form to new exigencies; it did not stifle
   growth on the plea that it must remain exactly as it was. It was
   growing so rapidly that it burst through its earliest forms, before
   they could acquire any binding force, or fix themselves in the
   prejudices of its members. This free untrammeled expansion was the law
   of its life, and the Divine reality of its being. In later times, on
   the contrary, many of its adherents have maintained that its Divine
   life lies in its preserving unchanged from the beginning the form that
   was prescribed for it. Thus the view taken in Acts is that the Church's
   Divine character lies in the free unceasing growth of its form and
   institutions; but the common view of later times has been that its
   Divine character lies in the permanence and unchangeability of its form
   from the beginning onwards.

   At first Luke represents the superintendence and distribution of these
   charities as undertaken solely by the Apostles, who soon found that "it
   was not meet that they should forsake preaching and perform the
   ministration at tables" (VI 2). Moreover, in the pressure of claims and
   accumulation of duties, complaint was made that the widows among the
   Hellenist Jews were neglected in favour of the native Hebrews. It was
   therefore arranged that a new class of officers should be
   instituted,--for whom no name is here given, but who were the origin
   out of which the "Deacons" of the developed Church arose.

   It is a remarkable fact that the Elders are not mentioned here; and
   this is one of the points which show Luke's want of proper authorities
   about the primitive Church. When we come to a period, where his
   information was good, we find the Elders prominent, and specially in
   practical business matters (pp. 52, 166, 171); and there can be no
   doubt that this characteristic Jewish institution existed as a matter
   of course in the primitive Church. The superintendence of relief
   measures was recognised as peculiarly their province (XI 30). It seems
   clear that in the memory of tradition the Apostles had survived alone
   as being the far more prominent figures, while the first Elders had
   been almost forgotten.

   The new officers are here termed simply "Seven Men in charge of this
   duty" (i.e., septem viri mensis ordinandis). It would be easy to find
   Jewish analogies that would explain the original idea; but it would not
   be easy to find any Jewish analogy to explain the vitality and
   adaptability of the institution. We must turn to Roman organising
   methods to find anything that will explain the importance and lasting
   effect of this step. Roman ideas were in the air; and the vigorous life
   of the Church was shown in its power of seizing and adapting to its own
   purposes all that was strong and serviceable in the world. It suited
   itself to its surroundings, and used the existing political facts and
   ideas, "learning from the surrounding world everything that was
   valuable in it" (p. 149).

   The Seven who were appointed bear purely Greek names; and one was not a
   Jew, but a proselyte of Antioch. There can, therefore, be no doubt that
   a distinct step towards the Universalised Church was here made; it was
   already recognised that the Church was wider than the pure Jewish race;
   and the non-Jewish element was raised to official rank. Nikolaos was a
   proselyte of the higher and completer type (p. 43); and his case was
   therefore quite different in character from that of Cornelius (p. 42
   f.), who was only God-fearing. In the conferring of office on Nikolaos
   a distinct step was made; but it was quite in accordance with the
   principle of the extreme Judaistic party in the Church (p. 157). The
   case of Cornelius was a second and more serious step.

   The consequences of this first step in advance were soon apparent. The
   wider sympathies and wider outlook of Hellenistic Jews quickened the
   life of the young community; and Stephen, especially, was conspicuous
   for the boldness with which he advocated the faith and opposed the
   narrowness of Judaism, saying, as his accusers alleged, "that this
   Jesus or Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the
   customs which Moses delivered unto us ". Even though this is a
   perversion of Stephen's meaning, yet the form implies that Stephen had
   advanced beyond the previous position of the Apostles as regards their
   relation to Judaism.

   The critical point in chronology is to determine the date or Stephen's
   accusation and martyrdom. Luke gives us no clear evidence as to the
   length of the two periods that he describes, viz., (1) between
   Pentecost and the election of the Seven, (2) between the election and
   the death of Stephen. The latest date which our view leaves open is
   A.D. 33, for Paul's conversion followed shortly after Stephen's death,
   and in the fourteenth year after his conversion he visited Jerusalem
   for the second time, probably in 46 (though 45 is not absolutely
   excluded, pp. 51, 68). Can we suppose that the necessity for the
   admission of the Hellenistic Jews to official rank was felt already in
   A.D. 32, and that Stephen's brief career ended in 33? The space of two
   years has seemed sufficient to many scholars; some have been content
   with one. The difficulties which the primitive Church had to meet by
   appointing the Seven faced it from the first; and that step was
   probably forced on it very soon. The wider spirit shown in the
   selection of the Seven was likely to cause an early collision with
   Jewish jealousy; and the party which had cut off Jesus was not likely
   to suffer His followers to increase so rapidly without an effort to
   stop the movement. Now the persecution that caused and followed
   Stephen's death was the first attempt at coercion; the actions
   described in IV 5 f. and V 17 f. were mere warnings and threats, which
   naturally resulted soon in active measures. We cannot easily believe
   that repressive measures were delayed more than two or three years at
   the utmost; we should rather have expected them even sooner. It is
   therefore quite fair to date Stephen's death about two and a half or
   three years after the great Pentecost.

   4. PHILIP THE EVANGELIST AND PETER.

   After the death of Stephen, the history widens, and several threads
   appear in it. The foundation of a series of Churches over Judea and
   Samaria is first described; and the author's attention is directed
   chiefly on three steps in the progress towards the Universalised
   Church, the foundation of an extra-Judean Church in the city of
   Samaria, and the admission of an Ethiopian [69] and of a Roman
   centurion as Christians. These steps are connected with the names of
   Philip and Peter. The institution of a series of Churches in Palestine,
   a process which must have occupied a long time, is briefly but clearly
   indicated in VIII 40, IX 31-35, 42f; but Luke's personal interest in
   the expansion of a still purely Judaic Church was not great. Yet the
   episodes of Æneas and Dorcas, IX 33-42, show that, though the details
   seemed to Luke not required for his purpose, the spread of the Church
   over Palestine was conceived by him as an important step in history.
   These episodes are introduced, because they proved that the Divine
   power worked in the process whereby the Church of Jerusalem expanded
   into the Church of all Palestine. In the utter absence of statement as
   to Luke's authority for the two episodes, they cannot be placed by the
   historian on a higher level than general belief. It is remarkable that
   we have no knowledge whether Luke ever met Peter. The want of any
   reference to Peter in XXI 18 must, in our view, be taken as a proof
   that he was not in Jerusalem at the time.

   In the midst of the narrative describing this expansion is interposed
   an account of Saul's life during the three years 33-5; [70] and this
   arrangement is obviously intended to bring out the long period over
   which that process of expansion was spread. According to our theory it
   continued from A.D. 33 until it was checked to some extent by the
   development of the Pauline idea and the jealousy roused thereby among
   almost all Jews except the great and leading minds, which were able to
   rise more or less completely above it. Then came the supreme
   catastrophe of the great war, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
   suppression of "the Nation" of the Jews.

   The expansion of the Church beyond Palestine is first alluded to in XI
   19, where the dispersion of missionaries over Phoenice, Cyprus, and
   Syria is mentioned (Ch. III, § 1). It is remarkable that Luke never
   alludes to the development of the Church towards the south or east. Yet
   the dispersion that followed Stephen's death must have radiated in all
   directions; and II 7-11, and VIII 27 f., lead naturally to some general
   spread of the new teaching in all directions. It is obvious that Luke
   has not made it his object to write the history of the whole expansion
   of the Church; but selected the facts that bore on a narrower theme,
   viz., the steps by which the Church of Jerusalem grew into the Church
   of the Empire, and the position of the Church in the Empire. Egypt,
   Ethiopia, and the East and South are therefore excluded from his
   narrative.

   5. PAUL IN JUDEA AND ARABIA.

   The introduction of Paul is connected with the death of Stephen: he was
   then a young man, and probably was entering for the first time on
   public life. At this point the subjective touch in VIII 1, "Saul was
   consenting unto his death," is a clear indication that Luke's authority
   was Paul himself. The phrase is a confession of inward feeling, not a
   historian's account of action; and the words are Paul's own (XXII 20).
   A dramatic touch like this is, on our theory, deliberately calculated.
   Luke intends to set before his readers the scene at Cæsareia, where
   Philip narrated the story of Stephen and of his own early work, and
   Paul interposed the agonised confession of VIII 1 The narrative from VI
   9 to VIII 39 probably reproduces Philip's words very closely; while
   Luke has inserted touches, as VII 58, VIII 1, and adapted the whole to
   his plan. [71]

   The slight variations in the three accounts of Paul's conversion do not
   seem to be of any consequence. Luke did not seek to modify Paul's
   speeches in order to produce verbal conformity with the account which
   seemed to him to represent the facts fairly; but the spirit and tone
   and the essential facts are the same, IX 3-18, XXII 6-16, XXVI 12-18.

   Two difficulties, however, deserve notice in the account of Paul's
   conduct during the first years after his conversion. In the first
   place, why does Luke say nothing about Paul's journey into Arabia? But
   we have no authority for believing that the journey was of such
   importance as to require a place in this history, for Luke does not
   enumerate all the influences that moulded Paul's development. Paul's
   reference to the incident (Gal. I 17) is clear and complete in itself,
   if it was not a serious journey, but a small episode in his private
   life. "When it pleased God to call me to the work of my life, so far
   was I from needing counsel or instruction from Jerusalem, that I
   retired into Arabia, and came back again to Damascus." Damascus was at
   the time subject to the King of Arabia Petræa; and the natural
   interpretation is that a person describing incidents of his experience
   in Damascus means by Arabia the adjacent country on the east. Had this
   excursion been an important step in the development of Paul's thought
   (as Lightfoot inclines to think, when he sees in it a sojourn on Mount
   Sinai after the style of Moses), Luke might be expected to mention it
   and show how much underlies Paul's words; but, as he does not mention
   it, the fair inference is that there was no more in it than Paul says
   explicitly.

   Moreover, Luke divides Paul's stay in Damascus into two periods, a few
   days residence with the disciples IX 19, and a long period of preaching
   20-23. The quiet residence in the country for a time, recovering from
   the serious and prostrating effect of his conversion (for a man's life
   is not suddenly reversed without serious claim on his physical power),
   is the dividing fact between the two periods. The division is certainly
   very awkwardly and insufficiently indicated; but Luke everywhere shows
   similar weakness in indicating the temporal relations of events.

   In the second place, the accounts of Paul's first visit to Jerusalem,
   in the third year after his conversion, are obscure. In Gal. I 18 f.
   Paul says he went up to see Peter (evidently regarding him as the
   leading spirit in the development of the Church), and saw no other
   Apostle, except James the Lord's brother. But in Acts IX 28 f. "he was
   with the Apostles going in and going out at Jerusalem, preaching boldly
   in the name of the Lord. And he spake and disputed against the Grecian
   Jews; but they went about to kill him." In weighing this account we
   must bear in mind Luke's intention: he conceived the Apostles as the
   permanent governing body in Jerusalem (p. 53), and they dwarfed in his
   estimation any other administrative body in the primitive Church (p.
   374). Here, therefore, he speaks loosely of "the Apostles," meaning the
   governing body of the Church, without implying that they were all
   present in Jerusalem. It was one of his objects to insist on the
   agreement between Paul and the leaders of the Church; and he distinctly
   had, and communicates, the impression that the opposition of the
   extreme Judaistic party to Paul was factious, and was condemned by the
   leaders. It therefore seemed important to him to emphasise the harmony
   between Paul and the Jewish leaders at this first visit; and, though
   most of the Apostles were absent, yet the two real leaders were
   present. We certainly should not naturally infer from Luke's words that
   the visit lasted only fifteen days; but there is no real difficulty in
   supposing that Paul's life was at this time in danger from the first.
   He had deserted his former friends, and they would feel towards him the
   hatred that always pursues a deserter.

   On the other hand, XXVI 20 is distinctly in contradiction with all
   other authorities; but, as Dr. Blass points out, the Greek is
   solecistic, and his altered reading, "in every land to both Jews and
   Gentiles," seems to me to carry conviction with it. [72]

   The difficulty with regard to the interval between Paul's first and
   second visit to Jerusalem (which we consider to have been only eleven
   years, whereas many take it as fourteen, Gal. II 1) disappears when we
   take the Greek in its real sense. Paul says to the Galatians, "Then, in
   the third year, [73] I went up to Jerusalem... then, when the
   fourteenth year was ending ". The two reckonings go together, and are
   estimated from the same starting-point.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [67] Thus the particle men oun, so common in Acts, occurs only once in
   the Third Gospel, in a passage peculiar to Luke III 18. In XXII 56 he
   added the little touch atenisasa to the narrative as used by Matthew
   and Mark, see p. 39.

   [68] The story of Ananias points more to communism. Yet even here
   Peter's speech regards the act of a purely voluntary one, though V 2
   seems to represent it a duty.

   [69] He was evidently a proselyte (VIII 27), like Nikolaos.

   [70] We shall speak of 33 as the date of Stephen's death and Paul's
   conversion, acknowledging, however, that perhaps 32 is the proper year.

   [71] The enumeration of synagogues in VI 9, which does not agree with
   Luke's manner, was perhaps noted down verbatim (Expositor, July 1895,
   p. 35).

   [72] pasan te ten choran tes Ioudaias is not Lukan, and hardly Greek,
   read eis pasan choran Ioudaiois te.

   [73] "After three years" misrepresents the meaning.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVII.

  COMPOSITION AND DATE OF ACTS.

   1. HYPOTHESIS OF "THE TRAVEL DOCUMENT".

   We have seen that Luke represents himself as having been an eye-witness
   of some of the incidents which he describes; and we have inferred, from
   the pointed way in which he does this, that he was not an eye-witness
   of the rest. In the parts where he had no personal knowledge his
   trustworthiness depends on his authority in each case. In a former work
   I have tried to show that there lies behind the narrative of Paul's
   journeys a document originating "from a person acquainted with the
   actual circumstances," and therefore "composed under St. Paul's own
   influence". I was careful "to express his influence in the most general
   terms, and to avoid any theorising about the way in which it was
   exercised"; and I purposely left the question untouched whether the
   "Travel-Document" was composed by the author of Acts or by a different
   person; for my object then was to show that the document was a
   trustworthy record of facts, to avoid constructing a system, to
   investigate each fact independently on its own evidence, and to give no
   opening to the criticism that I was twisting the evidence at any point
   in order to suit an idea derived from elsewhere.

   In the present work the reasons on which the supposition of a
   "Travel-Document" was rounded are much strengthened; and we must now
   put the question in a more precise form. What is the relation between
   the "Travel-Document" and the completed text of Acts? To this the
   answer must be that the "Travel Document" was Luke's own written notes
   (supplemented by memory, and the education of further experience and
   reading and research). His diary, where he was an eye-witness, and his
   notes of conversation with Paul, and doubtless others also, were worked
   into the book of Acts suitably to the carefully arranged plan on which
   it is constructed. We have found traces of deep and strong emotion
   which must be understood as Paul's own feeling: the technical term for
   making a missionary progress through a district [74] is used only by
   Paul (I Cor. XVI 5) and by Luke in describing Paul's work; [75] while
   in describing the precisely similar work of other missionaries, he uses
   a different and a more usual Greek construction. [76] This line of
   investigation might be carried much further so as to show that Luke
   everywhere follows with minute care the best authority accessible to
   him; and in Acts especially Paul and Philip. As we have seen, Ch. XVI,
   § 2, the period in which he found greatest difficulty was that which
   intervened between the conclusion of his formal historical authorities
   for the life of the Saviour, and the beginning of the careful
   narratives which he had noted down from Paul and Philip about their own
   personal experiences.

   One episode, which bears all the marks of vivid personal witness, comes
   under neither of these categories, viz., the story of Peter's
   imprisonment and escape, XII. Here some other authority was used; and
   the narrative suggests distinctly that the authority was not Peter
   himself, but one of those in the house of Mary. John Mark, who is
   pointedly mentioned as being in Jerusalem, XII 25, and who was
   afterwards with Luke and Paul in Rome, was almost certainly (v. 12) the
   ultimate authority here.

   Luke added to these authorities an obvious acquaintance with Paul's own
   letters. He rarely states anything that is recorded in them; he assumes
   them as known; and he makes it one of his objects to set them in a
   clearer light.

   The whole of his materials he used with the true historical sense for
   the comparative importance of events and for the critical steps in a
   great movement, and also with a wide and careful study of the general
   history of the contemporary world (i.e., the Roman Empire). The
   research which Luke applied in the execution of his work is shown with
   especial clearness in the chronological calculations which he
   introduced in Book I (similar to those which he would probably have
   added in Book II, see p. 23). These calculations deserve fresh study
   with a view to estimate the work which the author has compressed into
   them. The accuracy of one of them (viz., the statement about Philip in
   Luke III 1) I have defended elsewhere, and, as I believe, on grounds
   which would carry conviction to every one, were it not that they are
   inconsistent with the dominant North-Galatian theory. Again the census
   (Luke II 1) under Quirinius is pointedly called the first, implying
   that it was the first of a series of census. A census is known to have
   been made in Syria by Quirinius in his second government, about 6 A.D.,
   which suggests that they were perhaps decennial. We have no other
   evidence as to a census in 5-4 B.C.; but when we consider how purely
   accidental is the evidence [77] for the second census, the want of
   evidence for the first seems to constitute no argument against the
   trustworthiness of Luke's statement. It is certain that the dependent
   kingdoms paid tribute to Rome exactly as if they had been part of the
   Empire; and it is in perfect accord with the methodical character of
   Augustus's administration that he should order such census to be made
   regularly throughout "the whole world". Incidentally we observe in this
   phrase that Luke's view is absolutely confined to the Roman Empire,
   which to him is "the world". Luke investigated the history of this
   series of census.

   2. DATE OF THE COMPOSITION OF ACTS.

   The elaborate series of synchronisms by which Luke dates the coming of
   John the Baptist are especially remarkable; and it is to them we turn
   for evidence as to the date of composition. On our view the Crucifixion
   took place at the Passover of A.D. 30, the fourth Passover in the
   public career of Jesus. Now John was six months older than Jesus; and
   his career began in his thirtieth year, a little before the coming of
   Jesus. Thus we reach the conclusion that the synchronisms of Luke III
   1, 2, are calculated for the summer (say July) of A.D. 26; and he calls
   this year the fifteenth of the reign of Tiberius, implying that he
   reckoned his reign to begin A.D. 12, when Tiberius was associated by
   Augustus in the Empire. But such a method of reckoning the reign of
   Tiberius was unknown. According to Roman reckoning, Tiberius, in July
   A.D. 26, was either in his twelfth year (reckoning from the death of
   his predecessor) or in his twenty-eighth year (reckoning his tenure of
   the tribunician power). No other way of reckoning his reign was ever
   employed by Romans. How then could Luke speak of his fifteenth year?
   There can hardly be any other reason than that the calculation was made
   under an Emperor whose years were reckoned from his association as
   colleague; so that Luke, being familiar with that method, applied it to
   the case of Tiberius. Now that was the case with Titus. His reign began
   from his association with his father on 1st July A.D. 71.

   We thus get a clue, though in itself an uncertain one, to suggest the
   date when Luke was at work. His chronological calculations were
   probably inserted as the finishing touches of Book I (p. 23), while
   Titus was reigning as sole Emperor, 79-81 A.D.; and the composition of
   that book belongs to the years immediately preceding, while the
   composition of Book II belongs to the years immediately following. This
   argument, taken by itself, would be insufficient; but it is confirmed
   by the impression which the book as a whole makes. Acts could not have
   been written so late as Trajan, when long persecution had altered the
   tone and feeling of the Church towards the State. It is the work of a
   man whose mind has been moulded in a more peaceful time. and who has
   not passed through a time like the reign of Domitian (p. 22). On the
   other hand, its tone is not that of assured conviction about the
   relation to the State, such as we observe in Paul's Epistles. It is the
   tone of one who seeks to prove a position that is doubtful and
   assailed, but still of one who believes that it may be proved. As we
   have seen, there runs through the entire work a purpose which could
   hardly have been conceived before the State had begun to persecute on
   political grounds. So long as Christians were proceeded against merely
   on the ground of crimes, which the accuser sought to prove by evidence
   (as was the case with Paul, p. 360), there was no necessity to
   establish that Christianity was legal. Defence then consisted in
   disproving the specific crimes charged against the individual
   Christian; but, after the Flavian policy had declared Christianity
   illegal and proscribed the Name, the first necessity for defence was to
   claim legal right.

   3. THEOPHILUS.

   It has an important bearing on Luke's attitude towards the Roman State
   that his work is addressed to a Roman officer, [78] who had become a
   Christian. We may safely say that in the first century a Roman official
   would hardly bear the name Theophilus; and therefore it must be a name
   given to him at baptism, and used or known only among the Christians.
   The fact that his public name is avoided, and only the baptismal name
   used, favours the supposition (though not absolutely demanding it) that
   it was dangerous for a Roman of rank to be recognised as a Christian.
   In the narrative of Acts there is not the slightest trace of private or
   baptismal names. These seem to have been adopted under the pressure of
   necessity and from the desire for concealment. Thus the very dedication
   of the work points to a developed state of the relations between Church
   and State, and carries us down to the time of Domitian.

   4. THE FAMILY OF LUKE.

   We have made it an object to collect the scanty traces of Luke's
   personality that remain in Acts; and we may therefore conclude our task
   by referring to the tradition about his birthplace. The later
   tradition, as it appears in Jerome, Euthalius, etc., declares that Luke
   was an Antiochian, [79] but it is practically certain that the
   authority for all the later statements is Eusebius. Eusebius, however,
   does not say that Luke was an Antiochian; he merely speaks of him as
   "being according to birth of those from Antioch". [80] This curious and
   awkward expression is obviously chosen in order to avoid the statement
   that Luke was an Antiochian; and it amounts to an assertion that Luke
   was not an Antiochian, but belonged to a family that had a connection
   with Antioch. Eusebius therefore had access to a more detailed and
   distinct tradition, which he reproduces in this brief form. The older
   tradition must have told that Luke had a family connection with
   Antioch; and Eusebius carefully restricts himself to that statement;
   but the tradition probably set forth the exact connection, and it is
   perhaps allowable to conclude our study with a conjecture.

   Antioch, as a Seleucid foundation, had almost certainly a Macedonian
   element in its population. It is now well established that the military
   strength of the Seleucid colonies lay usually in a contingent of
   Macedonians; and a considerable number of Seleucid cities style
   themselves Macedones on coins or inscriptions. It is quite probable
   that intercourse and connection may have been maintained between the
   Macedonian element in Antioch and their original home; and migrations
   to and fro are likely to have occurred between Macedonia and Antioch in
   the constant and easy intercourse of the centuries following the
   foundation. Thus it may very well have happened that Luke was a
   relative of one of the early Antiochian Christians; and this
   relationship was perhaps the authority for Eusebius's carefully guarded
   statement. Further, it is possible that this relationship gives the
   explanation of the omission of Titus from Acts, an omission which every
   one finds it so difficult [81] to understand. Perhaps Titus was the
   relative of Luke; and Eusebius found this statement in an old
   tradition, attached to II Cor. VIII 18, XII 18, where Titus and Luke
   (the latter not named by Paul, but identified by an early tradition)
   are associated as envoys to Corinth. Luke, as we may suppose, thought
   it right to omit his relative's name, as he did his own name, from his
   history. There is not sufficient evidence to justify an opinion; but
   this conjecture brings together an enigmatic expression in Eusebius and
   a serious difficulty in Acts, and finds in each a satisfactory solution
   of the other.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [74] Itinerating is the modern equivalent, I am told.

   [75] XIII 6, XIV 24, XV 3, 41, XVI 6, XVIII 23, XIX 1, 21, XX 2.

   [76] VIII 4, 40, XI 19, IX 32, Luke IX 6.

   [77] An inscription found in Venice is the sole authority. As the stone
   was lost, the inscription was pronounced a forgery, apparently for no
   reason except that it mentioned Quirinius's census. Even Mommsen
   refused to admit it as genuine, until, fortunately, part of the stone
   was rediscovered.

   [78] The epithet kratistos is technical and distinctive, and not a mere
   usitata appellatio hominum dignitate proestantium as even Blass takes
   it, on Acts XXIII 26. Luke uses it strictly here and in XXIV 3, XXVI
   25, implying equestrian rank. Some Greeks were not so accurate as Luke.

   [79] Antiocheus gar outos huparchon to genos, Euthalius in Migne, Patr.
   Gr. vol. 85, p 85, p. 633. Lucas medicus Antiochensis Jerome, Vir. Ill.

   [80] Loukas de to men genos on ton ap Antiocheias, Hist. Eccles. III 4.

   [81] We cannot agree with Lightfoot, who solves the difficulty by
   denying that Titus was important enough to deserve mention in Acts
   (Biblical Essays, p. 281).
     __________________________________________________________________

III. CHRONOLOGICAL INDEX TO THE LIFE OF ST. PAUL

   Entrance on public life (in his thirtieth year); see Preface, Ed. II.
   A.D. 30 or 31
   Events culminating in the death of Stephen pp. 363-376 30-33
   Journey to Damascus and Conversion 376, 378 note (year ending 2nd
   Sept.) 33
   Retirement into Arabia 380 34
   First visit to Jerusalem 381 35
   Residence in Tarsus, etc. 46 35-43
   Barnabas brings Saul to Antioch 45 43
   The Prophecy of Agabus 49 early in 44
   The famine in Jerusalem begins with failure of harvest 49-54, 68 45
   Second visit to Jerusalem 55-62 winter 45-46
   Return to Antioch 62-64 winter 46-47
   First journey ordered 64-67 not later than Passover, 29th March, 47
   In Cyprus 70-88 (Church p. 60 f.) till July 47
   In Pamphylia 89-97 (Church 16-18, 61-65) July 47
   In Pisidian Antioch 98-107 (Church 25-27, 66-68) till winter of 47
   In Iconium (Church 36-46, 68) till summer 48
   In Lystra 110-119, 128 (Church 47-54, 68 f.) till autumn 48
   In Derbe 120 (Church 54-55, 59) winter 48-49

   Return by stages through Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, and across Pisidia
   120-123 (Church 70-73)
   Feb.-May 49
   Short stay in Perga 124 (Church 72) June-July 49
   Return by Attalia to Syrian Antioch 125 August 49
   Third visit to Jerusalem: the Council 153-174 winter 49-50
   Second journey begins 176 after the Feast, 25th March to 1st April 50
   In Galatia 178-189 summer 50
   Across Asia to Troas 194-212, 225 f. about Oct. 50
   In Philippi 213-226, 235 till about Dec. 50
   In Thessalonica 227-231, 235 f. Dec. 50-May 51
   In Berea 232-234 May-July 51
   In Athens 234, 237-252, 260 f. August 51
   In Corinth 252-261, 264 Sept. 51 to March 53
   Arrival of Gallio 258 f. July 52
   Fourth visit to Jerusalem 263-266 at the Feast, 22nd-29th March 53
   Short visit to Syrian Antioch: epistle to Galatians 265, 184-192 May 53
   Third Journey begins 265 about June 53
   In Galatia 265 July and August 53
   In Ephesus, 265. 269-282 Oct. 53 to Jan. 56
   Wrote first Epistle to Corinthians 275 about Oct. 55
   In Troas 283 Feb. 56
   In Macedonia 286 till late autumn 56
   Wrote second Epistle to Corinthians 286 summer 56
   In Achaia three months 285 Dec. 56 to Feb. 57
   Journey to Philippi 287 March 57
   Start from Philippi for Troas on the way to Jerusalem 289 15th April 57
   Fifth visit to Jerusalem: arrival 295 (day before) Pentecost, 28th May
   57
   Imprisonment in Palestine June 57 to July 59
   Voyage to Rome 314-345 August 59 to Feb. 60
   In Rome 346-360 until end of 61
   Epistles to Colossians and Philemon 349 early in 61
   Epistle to Philippians 357 late in 61
   Trial and acquittal 356-360 end of 61
   Later travels 360 62-66
   Second trial 300-362 67
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Leviticus

   [1]17   [2]18

   Deuteronomy

   [3]1:1-3:22

   Isaiah

   [4]1:1-22   [5]1:18

   Amos

   [6]9:11   [7]9:12

   Matthew

   [8]20:26   [9]27:5-8   [10]27:24   [11]27:24

   Mark

   [12]16:9-20

   Luke

   [13]1:1   [14]2:1   [15]2:2   [16]2:24   [17]3:1   [18]3:1   [19]3:1
   [20]3:1   [21]3:1   [22]3:2   [23]3:18   [24]4:20   [25]9:6
   [26]11:26   [27]13:30   [28]14:18   [29]16:5   [30]16:12   [31]19:16
   [32]20:29   [33]22:56

   John

   [34]18:30   [35]18:38

   Acts

   [36]1   [37]1   [38]1:1   [39]1:1   [40]1:1-5:42   [41]1:1-5:42
   [42]1:1-5:42   [43]1:1-5:42   [44]1:1-5:42   [45]1:6   [46]1:8
   [47]1:11   [48]1:12-2:10   [49]1:13   [50]1:15   [51]1:17
   [52]1:18-19   [53]1:21   [54]1:25   [55]2:1-42   [56]2:4   [57]2:5-11
   [58]2:7-11   [59]2:10   [60]2:13   [61]2:43   [62]2:43-47
   [63]2:43-47   [64]2:43-4:35   [65]2:44   [66]2:47   [67]3:1   [68]3:1
   [69]3:3   [70]3:3   [71]3:4   [72]3:4   [73]3:23-24   [74]4:1-4
   [75]4:5   [76]4:5-31   [77]4:7   [78]4:10   [79]4:13   [80]4:13
   [81]4:13   [82]4:31   [83]4:32   [84]4:35   [85]4:36   [86]4:36-5:11
   [87]4:37   [88]5:1   [89]5:1   [90]5:1   [91]5:2   [92]5:11
   [93]5:12-16   [94]5:13   [95]5:14   [96]5:17   [97]5:17-41   [98]5:24
   [99]5:36   [100]6:1   [101]6:1-6   [102]6:2   [103]6:2-4   [104]6:3
   [105]6:4   [106]6:5   [107]6:9   [108]6:9   [109]6:9-8:39   [110]6:11
   [111]6:13   [112]6:15   [113]7:6   [114]7:12   [115]7:13   [116]7:15
   [117]7:58   [118]7:60   [119]8:1   [120]8:1   [121]8:1   [122]8:1
   [123]8:1   [124]8:1-4   [125]8:4   [126]8:6   [127]8:9   [128]8:10
   [129]8:14   [130]8:14   [131]8:16   [132]8:16-24   [133]8:17
   [134]8:18   [135]8:20   [136]8:25   [137]8:27   [138]8:27   [139]8:40
   [140]8:40   [141]9:3-18   [142]9:10   [143]9:11   [144]9:19
   [145]9:19   [146]9:20   [147]9:20-23   [148]9:23   [149]9:24
   [150]9:27   [151]9:27   [152]9:28   [153]9:28   [154]9:29   [155]9:29
   [156]9:30   [157]9:30   [158]9:30   [159]9:30   [160]9:31   [161]9:31
   [162]9:31   [163]9:31-35   [164]9:32   [165]9:32   [166]9:32
   [167]9:33   [168]9:33-42   [169]9:35   [170]9:36   [171]9:42
   [172]9:42   [173]10:1   [174]10:1   [175]10:17   [176]10:22
   [177]10:22   [178]10:35   [179]10:35   [180]10:41   [181]10:44
   [182]11:1   [183]11:1-18   [184]11:1-18   [185]11:2   [186]11:2
   [187]11:6   [188]11:19   [189]11:19   [190]11:19   [191]11:19
   [192]11:19-21   [193]11:20   [194]11:20   [195]11:21   [196]11:22
   [197]11:22   [198]11:23   [199]11:23   [200]11:24   [201]11:24
   [202]11:25   [203]11:25   [204]11:25   [205]11:25   [206]11:26
   [207]11:26   [208]11:27   [209]11:27   [210]11:27-30
   [211]11:27-12:25   [212]11:28   [213]11:28   [214]11:28   [215]11:28
   [216]11:28-30   [217]11:29   [218]11:29   [219]11:29   [220]11:29
   [221]11:30   [222]11:30   [223]11:30   [224]11:30   [225]11:30
   [226]11:30   [227]11:38   [228]12:1   [229]12:1   [230]12:10
   [231]12:12   [232]12:13   [233]12:14   [234]12:14   [235]12:17
   [236]12:18   [237]12:25   [238]12:25   [239]12:25   [240]12:25
   [241]12:25   [242]12:25   [243]12:25   [244]12:25   [245]12:25
   [246]12:25   [247]12:25   [248]12:25   [249]12:25   [250]12:25
   [251]12:25   [252]12:25   [253]12:25   [254]12:25   [255]12:25
   [256]13:1   [257]13:1   [258]13:1   [259]13:1   [260]13:1   [261]13:1
   [262]13:1   [263]13:1   [264]13:1   [265]13:1-11   [266]13:2
   [267]13:2   [268]13:2   [269]13:2   [270]13:2   [271]13:2
   [272]13:2-3   [273]13:3   [274]13:3   [275]13:3   [276]13:3
   [277]13:3   [278]13:3   [279]13:3   [280]13:3   [281]13:3   [282]13:3
   [283]13:4   [284]13:4   [285]13:4   [286]13:4   [287]13:5   [288]13:5
   [289]13:6   [290]13:6   [291]13:6   [292]13:6   [293]13:6   [294]13:6
   [295]13:6   [296]13:7   [297]13:8   [298]13:8   [299]13:9   [300]13:9
   [301]13:9   [302]13:10   [303]13:10   [304]13:11   [305]13:12
   [306]13:12   [307]13:13   [308]13:13   [309]13:13   [310]13:13
   [311]13:14   [312]13:14   [313]13:14   [314]13:14   [315]13:15
   [316]13:16   [317]13:27   [318]13:31   [319]13:38   [320]13:38
   [321]13:39   [322]13:40   [323]13:40-41   [324]13:41   [325]13:42
   [326]13:43   [327]13:43-44   [328]13:44   [329]13:44   [330]13:45
   [331]13:45   [332]13:46   [333]13:46   [334]13:46   [335]13:48
   [336]13:49   [337]13:49   [338]13:49   [339]13:49   [340]13:50
   [341]13:50   [342]13:51   [343]13:52   [344]14:1   [345]14:1
   [346]14:1   [347]14:1   [348]14:2   [349]14:2   [350]14:2   [351]14:2
   [352]14:2   [353]14:2   [354]14:2   [355]14:2   [356]14:3   [357]14:3
   [358]14:3   [359]14:3   [360]14:3   [361]14:4   [362]14:4   [363]14:4
   [364]14:4   [365]14:4   [366]14:4-7   [367]14:5   [368]14:5
   [369]14:5   [370]14:6   [371]14:6   [372]14:6   [373]14:6   [374]14:6
   [375]14:6   [376]14:6   [377]14:6   [378]14:7   [379]14:7   [380]14:7
   [381]14:7   [382]14:8   [383]14:8   [384]14:8   [385]14:9
   [386]14:11   [387]14:12   [388]14:12   [389]14:12   [390]14:13
   [391]14:13   [392]14:14   [393]14:14   [394]14:15   [395]14:15
   [396]14:16   [397]14:17   [398]14:18   [399]14:19   [400]14:19
   [401]14:19   [402]14:19   [403]14:20   [404]14:21   [405]14:21
   [406]14:22   [407]14:22   [408]14:22   [409]14:22   [410]14:23
   [411]14:23   [412]14:24   [413]14:24   [414]14:24   [415]14:24
   [416]14:24   [417]14:24   [418]14:25   [419]14:25   [420]14:25
   [421]14:26   [422]14:26   [423]14:26   [424]14:26   [425]14:26
   [426]14:27   [427]14:27   [428]14:27   [429]14:27   [430]14:27
   [431]14:27   [432]14:27   [433]14:28   [434]14:28   [435]14:28
   [436]14:28   [437]14:238   [438]15:1   [439]15:1   [440]15:1
   [441]15:1   [442]15:1   [443]15:1   [444]15:1   [445]15:1   [446]15:1
   [447]15:1   [448]15:1   [449]15:1   [450]15:1   [451]15:1   [452]15:2
   [453]15:2   [454]15:2   [455]15:2   [456]15:2   [457]15:2   [458]15:2
   [459]15:3   [460]15:3   [461]15:3   [462]15:3   [463]15:4   [464]15:4
   [465]15:4   [466]15:4   [467]15:4   [468]15:5   [469]15:5   [470]15:6
   [471]15:6   [472]15:6   [473]15:7   [474]15:12   [475]15:12
   [476]15:12   [477]15:13   [478]15:14   [479]15:15   [480]15:16
   [481]15:17   [482]15:18   [483]15:18   [484]15:19   [485]15:20
   [486]15:21   [487]15:21   [488]15:22   [489]15:22   [490]15:23
   [491]15:24   [492]15:24   [493]15:24   [494]15:25   [495]15:25
   [496]15:26   [497]15:27   [498]15:28   [499]15:28   [500]15:29
   [501]15:30   [502]15:31   [503]15:32   [504]15:32   [505]15:33
   [506]15:33   [507]15:33-34   [508]15:34   [509]15:34   [510]15:34
   [511]15:34   [512]15:34   [513]15:35   [514]15:36   [515]15:36
   [516]15:36   [517]15:36   [518]15:37   [519]15:37   [520]15:38
   [521]15:38   [522]15:38   [523]15:39   [524]15:40   [525]15:40
   [526]15:40   [527]15:41   [528]15:41   [529]15:41   [530]15:41
   [531]15:41   [532]16:1   [533]16:1   [534]16:1   [535]16:1
   [536]16:1   [537]16:1-3   [538]16:1-3   [539]16:1-3   [540]16:1-3
   [541]16:2   [542]16:2   [543]16:2   [544]16:2   [545]16:2   [546]16:2
   [547]16:3   [548]16:4   [549]16:4   [550]16:4   [551]16:5   [552]16:5
   [553]16:5   [554]16:6   [555]16:6   [556]16:6   [557]16:6   [558]16:6
   [559]16:6   [560]16:6   [561]16:6   [562]16:7   [563]16:7   [564]16:8
   [565]16:8   [566]16:8   [567]16:8   [568]16:8   [569]16:9
   [570]16:10   [571]16:11   [572]16:11   [573]16:11   [574]16:13
   [575]16:13   [576]16:14   [577]16:14   [578]16:15   [579]16:16
   [580]16:17   [581]16:17   [582]16:18   [583]16:19   [584]16:19
   [585]16:19   [586]16:19   [587]16:20   [588]16:20   [589]16:21
   [590]16:22   [591]16:22   [592]16:23   [593]16:24   [594]16:24
   [595]16:25   [596]16:26   [597]16:27   [598]16:28   [599]16:28
   [600]16:29   [601]16:30   [602]16:30   [603]16:30   [604]16:31
   [605]16:32   [606]16:33   [607]16:34   [608]16:35   [609]16:36
   [610]16:37   [611]16:37   [612]16:37   [613]16:38   [614]16:39
   [615]16:40   [616]17   [617]17:1   [618]17:1   [619]17:2   [620]17:2
   [621]17:2   [622]17:2   [623]17:3   [624]17:4   [625]17:4   [626]17:4
   [627]17:4   [628]17:4   [629]17:6   [630]17:7   [631]17:7   [632]17:8
   [633]17:9   [634]17:10   [635]17:11   [636]17:11   [637]17:12
   [638]17:12   [639]17:12   [640]17:13   [641]17:14   [642]17:14
   [643]17:15   [644]17:15   [645]17:15   [646]17:15   [647]17:15
   [648]17:16   [649]17:17   [650]17:17   [651]17:18   [652]17:18
   [653]17:18   [654]17:18   [655]17:18   [656]17:18   [657]17:18
   [658]17:18-34   [659]17:19   [660]17:19   [661]17:19-34   [662]17:20
   [663]17:21   [664]17:21   [665]17:22   [666]17:22   [667]17:22
   [668]17:22-23   [669]17:23   [670]17:23   [671]17:23   [672]17:23
   [673]17:24   [674]17:24   [675]17:25   [676]17:26   [677]17:26
   [678]17:27   [679]17:28   [680]17:29   [681]17:30   [682]17:31
   [683]17:31   [684]17:32   [685]17:32   [686]17:33   [687]17:33
   [688]17:34   [689]18:1   [690]18:1   [691]18:1   [692]18:1
   [693]18:2   [694]18:2   [695]18:2   [696]18:3   [697]18:3   [698]18:4
   [699]18:5   [700]18:5   [701]18:5   [702]18:5   [703]18:6   [704]18:7
   [705]18:7   [706]18:8   [707]18:8   [708]18:8   [709]18:9
   [710]18:10   [711]18:11   [712]18:12   [713]18:13   [714]18:14
   [715]18:15   [716]18:16   [717]18:17   [718]18:17   [719]18:17
   [720]18:18   [721]18:18   [722]18:18   [723]18:18   [724]18:18
   [725]18:19   [726]18:20   [727]18:21   [728]18:21   [729]18:21
   [730]18:21   [731]18:21   [732]18:22   [733]18:22   [734]18:22
   [735]18:22   [736]18:22   [737]18:23   [738]18:23   [739]18:23
   [740]18:23   [741]18:23   [742]18:23   [743]18:23   [744]18:27
   [745]19:1   [746]19:1   [747]19:1   [748]19:1   [749]19:1   [750]19:1
   [751]19:2-7   [752]19:8   [753]19:9   [754]19:9   [755]19:9
   [756]19:10   [757]19:10   [758]19:10   [759]19:10   [760]19:10
   [761]19:10   [762]19:11-20   [763]19:14   [764]19:14   [765]19:16
   [766]19:19   [767]19:21   [768]19:21   [769]19:21   [770]19:21
   [771]19:22   [772]19:22   [773]19:23   [774]19:23-41   [775]19:26
   [776]19:27   [777]19:28   [778]19:34   [779]20:1   [780]20:1
   [781]20:1   [782]20:1-4   [783]20:2   [784]20:2   [785]20:2
   [786]20:3   [787]20:3   [788]20:4   [789]20:4   [790]20:4   [791]20:4
   [792]20:4   [793]20:4   [794]20:4   [795]20:5   [796]20:6   [797]20:6
   [798]20:6   [799]20:6   [800]20:6   [801]20:6   [802]20:7   [803]20:7
   [804]20:8   [805]20:8   [806]20:9   [807]20:10   [808]20:11
   [809]20:12   [810]20:12   [811]20:13   [812]20:13   [813]20:14
   [814]20:14   [815]20:15   [816]20:16   [817]20:16   [818]20:16
   [819]20:17   [820]20:17   [821]20:18   [822]20:24   [823]20:25
   [824]20:28   [825]20:34   [826]20:34   [827]20:36   [828]20:37
   [829]20:38   [830]21:1   [831]21:1   [832]21:1   [833]21:2
   [834]21:2   [835]21:3   [836]21:4   [837]21:5   [838]21:5   [839]21:6
   [840]21:6   [841]21:7   [842]21:8   [843]21:8   [844]21:9
   [845]21:10   [846]21:10   [847]21:11   [848]21:15   [849]21:16
   [850]21:16   [851]21:16   [852]21:17   [853]21:17-24:23   [854]21:18
   [855]21:19   [856]21:23   [857]21:30   [858]21:39   [859]21:39
   [860]22:3   [861]22:6-16   [862]22:12   [863]22:17   [864]22:17
   [865]22:17   [866]22:17   [867]22:17   [868]22:17   [869]22:17-21
   [870]22:18   [871]22:18   [872]22:18   [873]22:18   [874]22:19
   [875]22:20   [876]22:20   [877]22:20   [878]22:21   [879]22:21
   [880]22:21   [881]22:25   [882]22:25   [883]23:1   [884]23:2
   [885]23:4   [886]23:14   [887]23:16   [888]23:19   [889]23:22
   [890]23:26   [891]23:35   [892]23:35   [893]24:3   [894]24:17
   [895]24:17   [896]24:22   [897]24:23   [898]24:24-27   [899]24:27
   [900]25:1-28:7   [901]25:13   [902]26:12-18   [903]26:17   [904]26:20
   [905]26:26   [906]26:37   [907]27   [908]27   [909]27:1   [910]27:4
   [911]27:4   [912]27:5   [913]27:5   [914]27:7   [915]27:8   [916]27:9
   [917]27:10   [918]27:10   [919]27:10   [920]27:11   [921]27:12
   [922]27:13   [923]27:13   [924]27:14   [925]27:15   [926]27:16
   [927]27:16   [928]27:17   [929]27:18   [930]27:19   [931]27:19
   [932]27:20   [933]27:20   [934]27:20   [935]27:21   [936]27:21-26
   [937]27:21-26   [938]27:21-26   [939]27:21-26   [940]27:21-26
   [941]27:21-26   [942]27:21-26   [943]27:21-26   [944]27:21-26
   [945]27:22   [946]27:23   [947]27:24   [948]27:25   [949]27:26
   [950]27:27   [951]27:29   [952]27:30   [953]27:31   [954]27:31
   [955]27:32   [956]27:32   [957]27:33   [958]27:33-35   [959]27:33-35
   [960]27:33-35   [961]27:33-35   [962]27:33-38   [963]27:33-38
   [964]27:34   [965]27:34   [966]27:35   [967]27:35   [968]27:36
   [969]27:36   [970]27:38   [971]27:38   [972]27:39   [973]27:40
   [974]27:40   [975]27:41   [976]27:41   [977]27:42   [978]27:43
   [979]27:44   [980]28:1   [981]28:1   [982]28:2   [983]28:2
   [984]28:3   [985]28:4   [986]28:5   [987]28:6   [988]28:7   [989]28:8
   [990]28:8-11   [991]28:9   [992]28:10   [993]28:11   [994]28:11
   [995]28:11   [996]28:12   [997]28:13   [998]28:13   [999]28:14
   [1000]28:14   [1001]28:14   [1002]28:14   [1003]28:15   [1004]28:15
   [1005]28:16   [1006]28:16   [1007]28:16   [1008]28:30   [1009]28:30

   Romans

   [1010]1:19-32   [1011]9:1-5   [1012]12:8   [1013]15:24   [1014]15:24
   [1015]15:25   [1016]16:3   [1017]16:3   [1018]16:10

   1 Corinthians

   [1019]1:1   [1020]1:2   [1021]1:12   [1022]2:2   [1023]4:12
   [1024]4:17   [1025]4:17   [1026]8:4   [1027]8:8   [1028]9:20
   [1029]12:10   [1030]12:28   [1031]14:1   [1032]15:32   [1033]15:32
   [1034]15:32   [1035]16:1   [1036]16:1   [1037]16:5   [1038]16:5
   [1039]16:9   [1040]16:9   [1041]16:19

   2 Corinthians

   [1042]1:8   [1043]1:8   [1044]1:16   [1045]2:12   [1046]2:12
   [1047]3:7   [1048]3:13   [1049]4:7   [1050]8:18   [1051]8:18
   [1052]8:19   [1053]8:19   [1054]8:19   [1055]9:2   [1056]11:1
   [1057]11:8   [1058]11:9   [1059]11:23   [1060]11:25   [1061]11:25
   [1062]12:2-4   [1063]12:7   [1064]12:7   [1065]12:7   [1066]12:8
   [1067]12:14   [1068]12:14   [1069]12:18   [1070]13:1   [1071]13:1

   Galatians

   [1072]1:1   [1073]1:2   [1074]1:6   [1075]1:8-10   [1076]1:10
   [1077]1:13   [1078]1:16   [1079]1:17   [1080]1:18   [1081]1:21
   [1082]1:21   [1083]1:22   [1084]1:23   [1085]2:1   [1086]2:1
   [1087]2:1   [1088]2:1   [1089]2:1   [1090]2:1   [1091]2:1-4
   [1092]2:1-10   [1093]2:1-10   [1094]2:1-10   [1095]2:1-10
   [1096]2:1-10   [1097]2:1-10   [1098]2:1-14   [1099]2:2   [1100]2:2
   [1101]2:2   [1102]2:3   [1103]2:3   [1104]2:4   [1105]2:4   [1106]2:5
   [1107]2:6   [1108]2:7   [1109]2:8   [1110]2:9   [1111]2:9   [1112]2:9
   [1113]2:9   [1114]2:10   [1115]2:10   [1116]2:10   [1117]2:11-14
   [1118]2:11-14   [1119]2:11-14   [1120]2:11-14   [1121]2:11-14
   [1122]2:11-14   [1123]2:12   [1124]2:12   [1125]2:12   [1126]2:12
   [1127]2:12   [1128]2:12   [1129]2:14   [1130]3:1   [1131]3:1
   [1132]4:13   [1133]4:13   [1134]4:14   [1135]4:14   [1136]5:11
   [1137]184   [1138]265

   Ephesians

   [1139]4:22   [1140]5:16   [1141]6:4   [1142]6:20

   Philippians

   [1143]1:1   [1144]1:12   [1145]2:19   [1146]2:20   [1147]2:24
   [1148]3:5   [1149]3:6   [1150]3:8   [1151]4:3   [1152]4:8
   [1153]4:15   [1154]4:15   [1155]4:16   [1156]4:21   [1157]357

   Colossians

   [1158]3:11   [1159]3:21   [1160]4:3   [1161]4:4   [1162]4:5-6
   [1163]4:6   [1164]4:10   [1165]4:14   [1166]4:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [1167]1:1   [1168]1:1-2:20   [1169]2:9   [1170]2:9   [1171]2:9
   [1172]2:14-16   [1173]3:1   [1174]3:1   [1175]3:2   [1176]5:12

   1 Timothy

   [1177]3:1

   2 Timothy

   [1178]1:17   [1179]2:9   [1180]3:11   [1181]3:11   [1182]4:10
   [1183]4:10   [1184]4:11   [1185]4:14   [1186]4:19

   Titus

   [1187]1:5   [1188]1:5   [1189]1:5   [1190]1:5-7

   Philemon

   [1191]1:22   [1192]1:24   [1193]1:349

   Hebrews

   [1194]9:12

   1 Peter

   [1195]1:1   [1196]1:1   [1197]5:13

   Revelation

   [1198]2:20
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * [1199]aneste legon
     * [1200]anestesan sunzetountes
     * [1201]aner tis
     * [1202]apelusan
     * [1203]asebeia
     * [1204]asson
     * [1205]atenizein
     * [1206]atenisasa
     * [1207]archontes
     * [1208]Agtiochaane chora
     * [1209]Antiochize chora
     * [1210]Areios Pagos
     * [1211]Areios Pagos en Eleusini logous epoiesato
     * [1212]edokei proseuche eina
     * [1213]embates
     * [1214]enekopsen
     * [1215]enomizomen proseuche einai
     * [1216]exelei,
     * [1217]exepleusamen
     * [1218]exelthen kai diercheto
     * [1219]exelthn dierchomenos
     * [1220]eomizeto proseuche einai
     * [1221]epanankes
     * [1222]epekeilan
     * [1223]episkopoi
     * [1224]epithueni
     * [1225]epoiesen ex henos, horisas
     * [1226]hekatontarchen rhegeonarion
     * [1227]emporoi
     * [1228]ephe kai ekeleusen
     * [1229]ephe keleusas
     * [1230]he ex Areiou Pagou boule
     * [1231]he Itouraion
     * [1232]hemeras pleious
     * [1233]ekouen
     * [1234]ekousen
     * [1235]Isaurike (chora),
     * [1236]Itoupaia
     * [1237]Itouraia
     * [1238]Itouraias
     * [1239]ho Arkeuthes potamos kai ho Orontes kai ho Labotas
     * [1240]ho Areios Pagos
     * [1241]hodos
     * [1242]hupebalon andras legontas
     * [1243]hupepleusamen
     * [1244]hupodramontes
     * [1245]hupozugia
     * [1246]hupozomata
     * [1247]Antiocheus gar outos huparchon to genos
     * [1248]Galatike chora
     * [1249]Lustran
     * [1250]Lustran
     * [1251]Lustrois
     * [1252]Lustrois
     * [1253]Leukios
     * [1254]Limeonas Kalous
     * [1255]Loukios
     * [1256]Loukas
     * [1257]Loukas de to men genos on ton ap Antiocheias
     * [1258]Mura
     * [1259]Muran
     * [1260]Murran
     * [1261]Muron
     * [1262]Makedona
     * [1263]Makedonas
     * [1264]Saulos ho kai Paulos
     * [1265]Seberos ton apo tes anothen Phrugias
     * [1266]Phrugia chora
     * [1267]Phrugian
     * [1268]daikonia
     * [1269]diakonoi
     * [1270]dielthon kai ekoluthesan
     * [1271]dielthon ten Ph. k. G. chopan koluthentes
     * [1272]diakonia
     * [1273]diakonein,
     * [1274]diapheromenon
     * [1275]dielthontes
     * [1276]dielthontes holen ten neson
     * [1277]dielthontes ten neson achri Paphou
     * [1278]diodeusantes
     * [1279]diogmos
     * [1280]eis Bithunian emporoi kai naukleroi
     * [1281]eis pasan choran Ioudaiois te.
     * [1282]eiselthen ephapax eis ta hagia aionian lutrosin heuramenos
     * [1283]egeonarion
     * [1284]thasson
     * [1285]thlipsis
     * [1286]kai tines ex auton epeisthesan. kai proseklerothesan to Paulo
       kai Sila polloi ton sebomenon. kai ellenon plethos polu. gunaikon
       te ton proton ouk oligai,
     * [1287]kai
     * [1288]katentesan aspasamenoi
     * [1289]kratistos
     * [1290]kumaton
     * [1291]logou
     * [1292]labontes ta pros ten hodoiporian
     * [1293]men oun
     * [1294]megale Artemis
     * [1295]naukleros
     * [1296]xunetos
     * [1297]oi ek peritome
     * [1298]oi naukleroi tou poreutikou Alexandreinou stulou
     * [1299]pantes
     * [1300]parodos
     * [1301]polis
     * [1302]pule
     * [1303]pasan te ten choran tes Ioudaias
     * [1304]parelthen
     * [1305]parekalei
     * [1306]pareklethemen par autois, etimeinantes
     * [1307]perielontes
     * [1308]potamon
     * [1309]proteron
     * [1310]proteros
     * [1311]proteros -- protos
     * [1312]proton
     * [1313]protos
     * [1314]presbuteroi
     * [1315]proistamenoi
     * [1316]prosachein
     * [1317]proseichon legontes
     * [1318]prosechein
     * [1319]pulon
     * [1320]sebomenoi ton theon
     * [1321]sophos
     * [1322]speira Sebaste
     * [1323]strategoi,
     * [1324]sumparalabon
     * [1325]sumparalambeno
     * [1326]sunebalen
     * [1327]suneballen
     * [1328]sunelthon kai egagon
     * [1329]sunekdemous
     * [1330]ten Galatiken choran kai Phrugian,
     * [1331]ten Mbra(n)
     * [1332]ten Phrugian kai Galatiken choran
     * [1333]ten proteran anastrothen
     * [1334]to Kanobikon kai herakleotikon
     * [1335]to Mendesion stoma kai to Tanitikon
     * [1336]to de Bolbitinon stoma kai to Boukolikon
     * [1337]to proteron
     * [1338]ton proton logon
     * [1339]tes Itouraias kai Trachonitidos choras
     * [1340]tes Lukanoias
     * [1341]ton parakeimenon Arabion ethnon Nabataion te kai
       Chaulotopaion kai Agraion
     * [1342]tais ekklesiais
     * [1343]te
     * [1344]phoboumenoi
     * [1345]chalasantes to skeuos
     * [1346]cheirotonesantes
     * [1347]chorai
     * [1348]choristheis ek ton Athenon
     * [1349](eis) ten Muran
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * [1350]Castra Peregrinorum
     * [1351]Prætorium
     * [1352]Princeps Peregrinorum
     * [1353]Regiones
     * [1354]Resonare
     * [1355]ager Romanus
     * [1356]amicus
     * [1357]antemeridianis horis discipuli occupant
     * [1358]cives
     * [1359]civis Romanus
     * [1360]civitas
     * [1361]cognomen
     * [1362]coloni
     * [1363]comes
     * [1364]comites
     * [1365]consilium
     * [1366]conventus Civium Romanorum
     * [1367]corona
     * [1368]dimittere
     * [1369]frumentarii
     * [1370]incolæ
     * [1371]nomen
     * [1372]peregrini
     * [1373]prænomen
     * [1374]prætor
     * [1375]prætores
     * [1376]quidam
     * [1377]re incognita
     * [1378]septem viri mensis ordinandis
     * [1379]tria nomina
     * [1380]usitata appellatio hominum dignitate proestantium
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p7.5
   2. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p7.6
   3. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p30.2
   4. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p30.3
   5. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p30.1
   6. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p37.1
   7. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p37.1
   8. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p39.1
   9. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p14.10
  10. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p10.1
  11. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.5
  12. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p51.1
  13. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p23.2
  14. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p6.2
  15. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.3
  16. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p27.2
  17. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p47.2
  18. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.15
  19. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p5.1
  20. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p6.1
  21. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p8.1
  22. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p8.1
  23. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p12.3
  24. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.6
  25. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.15
  26. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.4
  27. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.5
  28. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.6
  29. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.7
  30. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p52.1
  31. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.8
  32. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.9
  33. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p12.4
  34. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.2
  35. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.4
  36. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p18.1
  37. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p34.1
  38. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p61.1
  39. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p4.1
  40. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p13.1
  41. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p14.1
  42. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p14.2
  43. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p23.1
  44. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p23.3
  45. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p25.1
  46. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p21.2
  47. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p16.1
  48. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p21.1
  49. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p56.5
  50. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p28.1
  51. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.9
  52. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p14.12
  53. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p6.5
  54. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.9
  55. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p5.1
  56. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p25.3
  57. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p19.1
  58. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p36.2
  59. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p16.2
  60. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p7.4
  61. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p9.1
  62. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p5.2
  63. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p10.5
  64. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p11.1
  65. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p25.1
  66. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p6.1
  67. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p3.2
  68. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p10.1
  69. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.7
  70. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p22.1
  71. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.5
  72. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.1
  73. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p22.3
  74. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p10.2
  75. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p32.1
  76. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p10.3
  77. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p21.2
  78. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p31.1
  79. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p8.1
  80. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p10.4
  81. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p20.1
  82. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p22.2
  83. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p25.2
  84. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p25.4
  85. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p6.1
  86. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p11.2
  87. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p25.5
  88. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p3.3
  89. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.3
  90. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p18.1
  91. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p25.7
  92. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p15.2
  93. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p11.3
  94. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p23.1
  95. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p23.2
  96. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p32.2
  97. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p11.4
  98. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p23.3
  99. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.19
 100. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.4
 101. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p19.1
 102. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p27.1
 103. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.3
 104. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p6.1
 105. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.10
 106. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p56.3
 107. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.12
 108. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.8
 109. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.4
 110. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.14
 111. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.16
 112. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p23.4
 113. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p7.5
 114. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.3
 115. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p7.5
 116. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p4.2
 117. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.5
 118. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.4
 119. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.7
 120. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.5
 121. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.1
 122. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.3
 123. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.6
 124. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.5
 125. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.12
 126. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p7.6
 127. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.4
 128. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.17
 129. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.6
 130. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.9
 131. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p4.3
 132. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p7.6
 133. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p4.4
 134. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.21
 135. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.6
 136. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.6
 137. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p34.2
 138. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p36.3
 139. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p34.3
 140. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.12
 141. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p39.1
 142. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.5
 143. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p5.2
 144. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p49.3
 145. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p41.1
 146. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p7.1
 147. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p41.2
 148. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p49.3
 149. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.2
 150. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p14.1
 151. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p22.1
 152. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p49.2
 153. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p42.2
 154. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.5
 155. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.9
 156. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p16.1
 157. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p16.3
 158. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p17.2
 159. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p17.4
 160. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.7
 161. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.4
 162. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p105.6
 163. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p34.4
 164. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.7
 165. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.10
 166. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.14
 167. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.5
 168. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p34.5
 169. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.7
 170. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.5
 171. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.7
 172. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p34.4
 173. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.2
 174. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.6
 175. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.5
 176. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p6.2
 177. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p6.6
 178. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p5.1
 179. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p6.1
 180. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p91.3
 181. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.8
 182. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p2.1
 183. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.3
 184. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p33.1
 185. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p8.3
 186. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p33.2
 187. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.4
 188. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p2.1
 189. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p9.1
 190. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p36.1
 191. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.13
 192. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p4.1
 193. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p2.2
 194. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p50.1
 195. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p2.3
 196. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p11.1
 197. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.6
 198. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p11.2
 199. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p41.2
 200. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p11.3
 201. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p48.1
 202. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p16.2
 203. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p17.1
 204. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p17.3
 205. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p11.4
 206. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p27.1
 207. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p11.5
 208. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p21.1
 209. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p16.1
 210. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p17.2
 211. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p17.1
 212. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p47.1
 213. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p54.1
 214. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p28.1
 215. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p38.1
 216. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p17.1
 217. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p21.3
 218. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.2
 219. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.5
 220. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p33.1
 221. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p21.4
 222. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p24.1
 223. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p33.1
 224. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p39.1
 225. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p6.2
 226. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p28.1
 227. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p21.2
 228. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p25.1
 229. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p4.1
 230. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.2
 231. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p4.3
 232. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.6
 233. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.6
 234. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.7
 235. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.8
 236. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p7.7
 237. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p16.4
 238. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p50.2
 239. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p21.5
 240. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p24.2
 241. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.3
 242. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.6
 243. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p33.2
 244. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p39.2
 245. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p51.3
 246. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p51.4
 247. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.3
 248. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p5.1
 249. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.2
 250. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.8
 251. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p28.2
 252. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.8
 253. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p56.4
 254. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p17.2
 255. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p4.2
 256. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p31.1
 257. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p53.1
 258. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p49.1
 259. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p89.2
 260. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.7
 261. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.3
 262. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p28.4
 263. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p37.1
 264. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p5.2
 265. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p15.1
 266. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p53.3
 267. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p57.1
 268. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p59.2
 269. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.4
 270. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.6
 271. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.4
 272. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p24.2
 273. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p53.4
 274. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p57.2
 275. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p58.1
 276. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p58.4
 277. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p59.1
 278. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.4
 279. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p61.1
 280. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p93.2
 281. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.5
 282. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.6
 283. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p7.1
 284. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p61.2
 285. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p2.1
 286. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.4
 287. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.4
 288. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p2.2
 289. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p8.1
 290. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.1
 291. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p19.2
 292. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p6.1
 293. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p2.3
 294. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p71.2
 295. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.4
 296. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.2
 297. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.4
 298. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p29.1
 299. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.1
 300. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.5
 301. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p26.2
 302. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.6
 303. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p29.1
 304. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.7
 305. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p14.8
 306. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p72.1
 307. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.1
 308. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p2.1
 309. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p28.1
 310. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.8
 311. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.2
 312. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p2.2
 313. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p28.1
 314. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p59.1
 315. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.3
 316. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.4
 317. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p31.1
 318. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p46.4
 319. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p32.1
 320. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p42.2
 321. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p32.2
 322. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p32.3
 323. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p42.3
 324. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p57.3
 325. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.5
 326. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.6
 327. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p31.1
 328. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.7
 329. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p28.2
 330. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.8
 331. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p29.1
 332. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p22.1
 333. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.9
 334. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p7.2
 335. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.10
 336. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p44.2
 337. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p43.1
 338. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p44.1
 339. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.11
 340. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p35.3
 341. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.12
 342. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.13
 343. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p26.14
 344. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p49.1
 345. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p50.1
 346. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p51.2
 347. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p29.2
 348. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p49.2
 349. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p50.2
 350. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p51.1
 351. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p51.2
 352. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.1
 353. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.2
 354. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.3
 355. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p46.2
 356. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p50.3
 357. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p51.3
 358. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.1
 359. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.2
 360. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.4
 361. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p49.3
 362. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p50.4
 363. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p51.1
 364. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.5
 365. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p65.1
 366. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p51.2
 367. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p49.4
 368. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.5
 369. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p65.2
 370. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p49.5
 371. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p57.1
 372. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p58.1
 373. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p58.2
 374. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p63.1
 375. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p64.1
 376. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p65.3
 377. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.2
 378. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p57.2
 379. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p61.3
 380. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p63.1
 381. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p65.4
 382. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.5
 383. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p71.1
 384. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p85.1
 385. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.2
 386. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.1
 387. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.2
 388. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.4
 389. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p88.1
 390. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.15
 391. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.19
 392. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.16
 393. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.20
 394. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.17
 395. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p75.21
 396. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p76.1
 397. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p76.2
 398. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p76.3
 399. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p84.1
 400. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p85.2
 401. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p85.3
 402. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p5.2
 403. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p84.2
 404. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p84.3
 405. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p97.1
 406. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p88.2
 407. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p94.1
 408. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.22
 409. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p20.1
 410. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p88.3
 411. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.1
 412. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p96.1
 413. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p15.1
 414. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p15.2
 415. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.7
 416. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p8.1
 417. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.5
 418. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p3.1
 419. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p96.2
 420. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.2
 421. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p57.4
 422. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.5
 423. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p96.3
 424. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.4
 425. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p32.2
 426. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p15.1
 427. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p48.2
 428. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p55.1
 429. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p41.1
 430. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p96.4
 431. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p2.1
 432. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p8.1
 433. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p2.2
 434. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p3.1
 435. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p3.5
 436. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p14.17
 437. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p3.4
 438. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p9.2
 439. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.1
 440. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.2
 441. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p30.4
 442. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p41.1
 443. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.3
 444. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p5.2
 445. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p2.3
 446. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.1
 447. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.3
 448. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p14.9
 449. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.6
 450. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p38.2
 451. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.2
 452. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p58.3
 453. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p58.5
 454. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p2.4
 455. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p12.2
 456. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p19.2
 457. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p23.2
 458. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.4
 459. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p57.5
 460. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p2.5
 461. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.7
 462. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.6
 463. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p16.5
 464. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.7
 465. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.5
 466. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p30.1
 467. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p32.1
 468. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p8.5
 469. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p30.2
 470. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p30.3
 471. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.4
 472. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.5
 473. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p19.2
 474. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p38.1
 475. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p30.5
 476. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p29.2
 477. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p30.6
 478. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.1
 479. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.2
 480. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.3
 481. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.4
 482. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.5
 483. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.7
 484. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.8
 485. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.9
 486. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p35.10
 487. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p36.1
 488. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.1
 489. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p55.2
 490. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.2
 491. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p14.11
 492. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p23.2
 493. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.4
 494. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p38.1
 495. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.5
 496. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.6
 497. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.7
 498. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p7.4
 499. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.8
 500. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p41.9
 501. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.1
 502. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.2
 503. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.3
 504. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p48.2
 505. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.4
 506. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.2
 507. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.9
 508. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.5
 509. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.1
 510. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.5
 511. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.7
 512. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.10
 513. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.6
 514. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p47.7
 515. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p49.2
 516. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p52.1
 517. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p7.3
 518. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p52.2
 519. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p56.5
 520. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p4.1
 521. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p57.5
 522. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p52.3
 523. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p52.4
 524. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p50.6
 525. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p52.5
 526. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p56.1
 527. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p45.1
 528. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p45.3
 529. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.2
 530. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p105.3
 531. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.6
 532. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.3
 533. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p2.1
 534. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p3.1
 535. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p20.2
 536. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.7
 537. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p61.4
 538. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.7
 539. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p30.1
 540. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p7.1
 541. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.6
 542. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p2.2
 543. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p5.1
 544. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p6.3
 545. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p7.2
 546. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p7.4
 547. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p2.3
 548. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p45.2
 549. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p56.6
 550. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p2.4
 551. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p104.3
 552. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p105.4
 553. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p2.5
 554. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.8
 555. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p71.3
 556. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p2.6
 557. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p2.1
 558. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.13
 559. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p12.2
 560. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p13.1
 561. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.7
 562. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p71.3
 563. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p2.2
 564. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p2.3
 565. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p12.1
 566. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p57.4
 567. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.3
 568. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.4
 569. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p2.4
 570. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p2.5
 571. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p3.3
 572. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p3.5
 573. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p29.1
 574. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.3
 575. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p2.1
 576. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p2.2
 577. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p7.1
 578. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p2.3
 579. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p9.1
 580. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p9.2
 581. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.6
 582. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p9.3
 583. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p13.1
 584. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p14.1
 585. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p22.5
 586. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p16.2
 587. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p13.2
 588. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p14.1
 589. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p13.3
 590. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p19.1
 591. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p13.4
 592. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p13.5
 593. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p13.6
 594. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p21.1
 595. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.1
 596. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.2
 597. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.3
 598. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p15.2
 599. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.4
 600. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.5
 601. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.6
 602. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p25.1
 603. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p9.4
 604. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.7
 605. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.8
 606. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.9
 607. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p20.10
 608. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p27.1
 609. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p27.2
 610. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p55.1
 611. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p27.3
 612. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p30.1
 613. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p27.4
 614. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p27.5
 615. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p27.6
 616. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p25.2
 617. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p33.1
 618. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p35.1
 619. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p56.7
 620. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p35.2
 621. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p38.1
 622. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p62.1
 623. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p35.3
 624. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p35.4
 625. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p35.6
 626. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p36.2
 627. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p37.1
 628. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p14.2
 629. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p41.2
 630. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p30.4
 631. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p41.3
 632. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p41.4
 633. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p41.5
 634. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p51.1
 635. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p36.4
 636. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p51.2
 637. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p43.1
 638. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p51.3
 639. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p14.1
 640. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p51.4
 641. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p3.6
 642. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p51.5
 643. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p41.1
 644. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p51.6
 645. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p54.1
 646. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p57.1
 647. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p57.5
 648. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p2.1
 649. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p2.2
 650. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p8.1
 651. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p18.1
 652. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p35.2
 653. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p14.1
 654. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p15.1
 655. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p16.1
 656. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p20.1
 657. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p23.1
 658. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p24.1
 659. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p14.2
 660. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p23.1
 661. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p18.1
 662. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p14.3
 663. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p14.4
 664. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p27.2
 665. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p14.5
 666. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p21.1
 667. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.1
 668. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p20.2
 669. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p2.3
 670. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p4.1
 671. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.2
 672. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p31.3
 673. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p5.1
 674. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.3
 675. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.4
 676. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.7
 677. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.5
 678. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.6
 679. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.7
 680. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.8
 681. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.9
 682. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p42.4
 683. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.10
 684. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p15.2
 685. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.11
 686. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p14.6
 687. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.12
 688. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.13
 689. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p11.1
 690. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p12.1
 691. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p30.14
 692. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p35.1
 693. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p12.2
 694. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p35.2
 695. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p16.1
 696. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p35.3
 697. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p36.1
 698. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p35.4
 699. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p54.3
 700. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p33.2
 701. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p35.5
 702. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p31.1
 703. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p42.1
 704. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p26.1
 705. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p42.2
 706. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p26.1
 707. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p42.3
 708. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p46.1
 709. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p42.4
 710. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p42.5
 711. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p42.6
 712. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p48.1
 713. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p48.2
 714. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p48.3
 715. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p48.4
 716. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p48.5
 717. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p22.4
 718. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p46.1
 719. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p48.6
 720. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p3.2
 721. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p32.3
 722. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.1
 723. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p3.2
 724. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p15.1
 725. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.6
 726. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.7
 727. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.8
 728. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p5.1
 729. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.8
 730. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p9.2
 731. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p9.5
 732. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.9
 733. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.6
 734. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.9
 735. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p9.1
 736. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p9.3
 737. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.9
 738. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p61.5
 739. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.5
 740. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.11
 741. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.10
 742. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.10
 743. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.8
 744. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p6.2
 745. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p28.1
 746. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.11
 747. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p9.4
 748. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p19.1
 749. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p23.4
 750. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.9
 751. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p20.1
 752. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p19.2
 753. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p19.3
 754. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p21.1
 755. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.3
 756. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p43.2
 757. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p19.4
 758. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p25.1
 759. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.3
 760. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p3.2
 761. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p19.1
 762. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p23.2
 763. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p30.2
 764. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p22.1
 765. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p22.2
 766. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p22.1
 767. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p39.1
 768. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p25.2
 769. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p28.1
 770. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.9
 771. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p25.3
 772. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p31.2
 773. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p23.1
 774. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p23.3
 775. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p35.3
 776. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p35.3
 777. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p37.1
 778. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p37.1
 779. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p33.5
 780. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p20.3
 781. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p2.1
 782. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p33.3
 783. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p33.5
 784. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p2.2
 785. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.10
 786. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p2.3
 787. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p11.1
 788. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p33.4
 789. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.1
 790. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.5
 791. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.6
 792. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p11.2
 793. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p15.3
 794. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p16.1
 795. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p11.3
 796. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p3.4
 797. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p32.1
 798. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p18.1
 799. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.4
 800. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p3.1
 801. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p18.1
 802. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p18.2
 803. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.1
 804. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p93.1
 805. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.2
 806. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.3
 807. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.4
 808. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.5
 809. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.6
 810. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p24.1
 811. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p18.3
 812. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p21.7
 813. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.1
 814. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p28.1
 815. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.2
 816. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.3
 817. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p30.1
 818. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p31.1
 819. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.2
 820. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.5
 821. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.6
 822. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.7
 823. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p14.4
 824. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.3
 825. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p15.1
 826. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p21.2
 827. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.7
 828. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.8
 829. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.9
 830. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p20.4
 831. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.10
 832. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p36.1
 833. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.11
 834. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p42.2
 835. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.12
 836. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.13
 837. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.14
 838. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p42.4
 839. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.15
 840. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p42.3
 841. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p26.16
 842. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.6
 843. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.1
 844. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.2
 845. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.3
 846. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p46.1
 847. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.5
 848. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.6
 849. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p6.3
 850. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.27
 851. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.7
 852. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p45.12
 853. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p50.1
 854. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p34.6
 855. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.8
 856. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p64.1
 857. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p22.3
 858. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p5.1
 859. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p3.1
 860. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p6.2
 861. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p39.2
 862. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p6.4
 863. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p45.1
 864. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p49.1
 865. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p51.2
 866. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p51.5
 867. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.1
 868. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.8
 869. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p46.2
 870. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p45.2
 871. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.1
 872. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.4
 873. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p51.1
 874. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p45.3
 875. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p45.4
 876. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p48.1
 877. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p38.2
 878. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p45.5
 879. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p48.1
 880. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.1
 881. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p30.2
 882. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p31.3
 883. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.3
 884. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.6
 885. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.6
 886. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.6
 887. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p11.1
 888. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p22.2
 889. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p57.6
 890. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p11.4
 891. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.3
 892. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.9
 893. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p11.5
 894. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p14.1
 895. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p46.3
 896. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p7.7
 897. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p21.2
 898. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p50.2
 899. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p55.1
 900. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p50.3
 901. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.5
 902. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p39.3
 903. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.2
 904. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p43.1
 905. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p11.6
 906. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.10
 907. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p61.1
 908. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p20.5
 909. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p3.3
 910. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p34.1
 911. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p55.1
 912. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.4
 913. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p9.3
 914. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p17.1
 915. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p17.3
 916. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p21.1
 917. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p21.2
 918. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p46.1
 919. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p55.4
 920. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p21.3
 921. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p21.4
 922. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p30.1
 923. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p31.1
 924. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p30.3
 925. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p30.4
 926. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p30.5
 927. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p36.1
 928. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p30.6
 929. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.1
 930. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.2
 931. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p44.1
 932. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p59.3
 933. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p46.5
 934. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.3
 935. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.4
 936. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p57.1
 937. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.1
 938. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.6
 939. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.7
 940. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p59.1
 941. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p62.1
 942. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p63.1
 943. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p55.2
 944. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p55.5
 945. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.5
 946. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.6
 947. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.7
 948. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.8
 949. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p43.9
 950. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.1
 951. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.2
 952. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.3
 953. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.4
 954. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p55.4
 955. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.4
 956. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.5
 957. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.6
 958. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.3
 959. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.5
 960. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.8
 961. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p55.3
 962. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.2
 963. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p62.2
 964. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p59.2
 965. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.7
 966. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.8
 967. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p53.1
 968. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p58.4
 969. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.9
 970. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p12.1
 971. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p48.11
 972. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p65.1
 973. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p65.2
 974. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p52.1
 975. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p65.3
 976. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p67.1
 977. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p65.4
 978. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p65.5
 979. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p65.6
 980. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.1
 981. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p20.6
 982. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.2
 983. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p73.1
 984. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.3
 985. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.4
 986. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.5
 987. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.6
 988. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.7
 989. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.8
 990. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p50.4
 991. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.9
 992. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p69.10
 993. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p71.1
 994. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.1
 995. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p24.7
 996. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.2
 997. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.3
 998. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p7.4
 999. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.4
1000. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p7.1
1001. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p7.5
1002. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.23
1003. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.6
1004. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p7.7
1005. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.7
1006. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p7.2
1007. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p9.2
1008. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p21.1
1009. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p2.8
1010. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p31.1
1011. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p50.1
1012. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.6
1013. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p40.1
1014. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p28.2
1015. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p14.2
1016. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p4.2
1017. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p15.3
1018. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p18.1
1019. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p52.1
1020. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p103.2
1021. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p33.1
1022. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p35.2
1023. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p21.3
1024. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.8
1025. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p31.3
1026. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p42.2
1027. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p36.1
1028. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p35.1
1029. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p19.2
1030. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p56.6
1031. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p19.3
1032. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p48.1
1033. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p32.1
1034. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p32.3
1035. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p8.1
1036. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p15.1
1037. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.7
1038. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p3.2
1039. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p35.1
1040. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p32.2
1041. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p4.1
1042. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p38.1
1043. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p3.3
1044. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.5
1045. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p35.2
1046. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p3.1
1047. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.8
1048. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.8
1049. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p3.4
1050. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p18.2
1051. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p14.2
1052. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p32.2
1053. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p91.5
1054. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p15.2
1055. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p15.4
1056. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p52.6
1057. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p10.3
1058. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p10.2
1059. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p45.4
1060. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p47.2
1061. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p33.1
1062. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p43.1
1063. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p17.1
1064. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p21.1
1065. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p15.2
1066. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p17.1
1067. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p33.1
1068. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.1
1069. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p14.3
1070. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p33.2
1071. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p29.2
1072. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p60.3
1073. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p105.5
1074. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p31.2
1075. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p15.1
1076. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p11.2
1077. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p103.1
1078. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p14.2
1079. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p40.1
1080. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p42.1
1081. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p16.4
1082. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p16.4
1083. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p105.5
1084. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p27.3
1085. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.1
1086. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.3
1087. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.5
1088. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p4.6
1089. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p6.1
1090. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p44.1
1091. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p16.1
1092. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p9.1
1093. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p46.1
1094. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.2
1095. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p7.2
1096. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.1
1097. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p2.2
1098. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p16.2
1099. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.2
1100. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p36.1
1101. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p47.6
1102. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.3
1103. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p35.1
1104. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.4
1105. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p16.2
1106. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.5
1107. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.6
1108. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.7
1109. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.8
1110. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.9
1111. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p37.1
1112. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p41.3
1113. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p28.3
1114. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p34.10
1115. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p36.2
1116. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p38.1
1117. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p16.3
1118. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p16.1
1119. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.1
1120. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p19.1
1121. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p22.2
1122. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p23.1
1123. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p8.4
1124. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p12.1
1125. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p14.13
1126. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p17.9
1127. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p23.4
1128. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p33.3
1129. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p14.19
1130. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p35.1
1131. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p42.1
1132. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.10
1133. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.10
1134. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p20.1
1135. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p77.1
1136. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p11.1
1137. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xxi-p1.43
1138. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xxi-p1.43
1139. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.12
1140. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p43.2
1141. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p13.1
1142. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p13.1
1143. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.4
1144. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p26.1
1145. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p14.1
1146. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.1
1147. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.7
1148. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p6.1
1149. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p13.3
1150. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p12.1
1151. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.2
1152. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p43.4
1153. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p10.1
1154. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p10.1
1155. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p39.2
1156. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.3
1157. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xxi-p1.93
1158. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p53.1
1159. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p13.2
1160. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p13.2
1161. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p13.2
1162. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p43.1
1163. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#ix-p43.3
1164. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p15.1
1165. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p27.1
1166. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.4
1167. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p36.3
1168. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p39.1
1169. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p10.4
1170. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p39.3
1171. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p21.4
1172. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p44.1
1173. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p54.2
1174. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p9.1
1175. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p9.1
1176. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.7
1177. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p92.2
1178. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p32.1
1179. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p32.2
1180. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p45.5
1181. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p47.1
1182. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p8.1
1183. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.6
1184. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p15.2
1185. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p36.1
1186. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p15.2
1187. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p91.1
1188. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p92.1
1189. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p8.2
1190. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.8
1191. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p13.3
1192. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p27.5
1193. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xxi-p1.89
1194. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p28.1
1195. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p43.2
1196. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xi-p8.2
1197. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p15.3
1198. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p6.1
1199. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.20
1200. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.13
1201. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.1
1202. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p61.3
1203. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p17.1
1204. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p31.2
1205. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p16.9
1206. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p12.5
1207. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p14.2
1208. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.7
1209. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p61.1
1210. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p21.6
1211. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p21.7
1212. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p4.2
1213. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p28.4
1214. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p49.1
1215. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p4.4
1216. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.3
1217. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p2.5
1218. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.26
1219. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.11
1220. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p4.3
1221. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p42.1
1222. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p66.1
1223. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.1
1224. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p78.1
1225. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.8
1226. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p39.1
1227. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p21.2
1228. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.25
1229. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.4
1230. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p21.5
1231. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p5.3
1232. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p46.2
1233. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p73.1
1234. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p73.2
1235. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.4
1236. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p5.5
1237. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p5.2
1238. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.17
1239. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.7
1240. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p21.4
1241. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p33.3
1242. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.15
1243. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p34.2
1244. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p34.3
1245. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p47.3
1246. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p37.1
1247. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p13.2
1248. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p61.2
1249. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.9
1250. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.1
1251. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.8
1252. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p68.4
1253. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p37.4
1254. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p18.1
1255. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p37.5
1256. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p37.6
1257. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p13.4
1258. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.7
1259. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.5
1260. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.6
1261. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.8
1262. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.2
1263. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.4
1264. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.3
1265. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p35.1
1266. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.3
1267. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.12
1268. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p14.3
1269. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.1
1270. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.2
1271. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.1
1272. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.5
1273. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p32.1
1274. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p49.1
1275. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p11.2
1276. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p8.2
1277. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p12.1
1278. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p33.2
1279. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p45.3
1280. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p21.3
1281. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p43.4
1282. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p28.2
1283. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p39.3
1284. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p31.3
1285. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p45.2
1286. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p35.7
1287. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.14
1288. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.6
1289. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p11.2
1290. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p67.2
1291. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p29.6
1292. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p47.2
1293. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p12.2
1294. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p37.2
1295. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p24.1
1296. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p15.2
1297. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p8.2
1298. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p24.6
1299. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p58.2
1300. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p6.2
1301. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p100.1
1302. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.1
1303. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p43.3
1304. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p57.3
1305. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p12.2
1306. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.24
1307. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p3.2
1308. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p3.1
1309. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.5
1310. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.11
1311. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.14
1312. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.4
1313. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p46.10
1314. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p89.1
1315. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p90.5
1316. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p51.3
1317. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.18
1318. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p51.4
1319. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p80.4
1320. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p7.3
1321. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p15.3
1322. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p5.1
1323. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p14.3
1324. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p39.7
1325. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#x-p56.3
1326. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p28.2
1327. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvi-p28.3
1328. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p9.28
1329. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p39.3
1330. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.10
1331. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.2
1332. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.1
1333. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.11
1334. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.4
1335. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.8
1336. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.9
1337. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.9
1338. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iv-p45.1
1339. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.16
1340. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.6
1341. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p4.6
1342. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p105.2
1343. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p56.2
1344. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p7.2
1345. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p22.1
1346. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p91.4
1347. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.2
1348. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p11.2
1349. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p69.3
1350. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p10.3
1351. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p26.3
1352. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p10.4
1353. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p41.1
1354. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p51.2
1355. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p7.6
1356. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p28.1
1357. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#iii-p32.1
1358. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p5.4
1359. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p31.1
1360. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#v-p5.3
1361. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xv-p16.2
1362. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p45.1
1363. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p28.2
1364. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vii-p20.1
1365. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p25.1
1366. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#viii-p102.1
1367. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p27.1
1368. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#vi-p61.4
1369. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p10.1
1370. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p16.2
1371. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p70.2
1372. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xviii-p10.2
1373. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xvii-p70.3
1374. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiv-p50.3
1375. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p14.4
1376. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p22.2
1377. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xiii-p31.2
1378. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xix-p29.1
1379. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xii-p35.1
1380. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/paul_roman/cache/paul_roman.html3#xx-p11.3
