     __________________________________________________________________

         Title: Aids to Reflection
    Creator(s): Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1772-1834)
   Print Basis: Swords, Stanford, and Co, New York, c1839
        Rights: Public Domain
    LC Call no: PR4480 .A4 1839
   LC Subjects:

                English literature

                19th century, 1770/1800-1890/1900
     __________________________________________________________________

                               PRELIMINARY ESSAY.

BY THE REV. JOHN M'VICKAR.

   In the following reprint of Coleridge's "Aids to Reflection" as
   recently put forth in London, by his nephew and executor, with the
   author's final amendments, the Preface therein adopted of the earlier
   American edition of 1829, has been after full consideration dropped. It
   is due to the American public as well as to the extended reputation of
   that Preface, and of its able author, the Key. Dr. James Marsh, to
   state the reasons which in the judgment of the present editor have
   rendered its republication inexpedient in connexion with the present
   stereotype edition, addressed as the work now is generally to the
   Church at large, but more especially to the members of that communion
   of which its eminent and lamented author was an affectionate and
   faithful son.

   The reasons are as follows:
    1. That such Preface is mainly occupied in justifying Coleridge and
       his philosophy against objections which have no place except on the
       Calvinistic scheme of Divinity. But these obviously are
       difficulties in the way of the reception not of Coleridge's but of
       his commentator's opinions, objections therefore not with churchmen
       but with dissenters from the Church.
    2. That it inculcates what is deemed a false and dangerous principle,
       viz. that some system of metaphysical pbilosophy

   [continue]is essential to soundness in Christian doctrine. "For myself"
   says Dr. Marsh, "I am fully convinced that we can have no right views
   of Theology till we have right views of the human mind," (Preface p.
   23.) Now this certainly is not the creed of the Church nor the spirit
   of its formularies, and as surely it is not the principle inculcated by
   his author. "Religion," says Coleridge, "has no speculative
   dogmas-Christianity is not a theory, or a speculation; but a life:--not
   a philosophy of life, but a life and a living process," (p. 150).
   3. That it tends to a misapprehension of Coleridge's Religious views by
   identifying them with "what among us," says Dr. Marsh, "are termed the
   Evangelical Doctrines of Religion," (p. 14.) Now this term used as a
   party name, in which sense alone it can be here understood, is one
   peculiarly inappropriate as applied to Coleridge--for not only does he
   everywhere magnify those doctrines which such teachers are understood
   to make light of; viz., the necessity of union with the one viable
   Church, and of communion in its spiritual sacraments, and the sin of
   schism in separating from it; not only too does he decry what such
   doctrine is understood to elevate, viz., that "the baptized," to use
   Coleridge's own words, "are each individually to be called, converted,
   and chosen, with all the corollaries from this assumption, the watching
   for signs and sensible assurances, the frames, and the states, and the
   feelings, and the sudden conversions"--doctrines, says he, which have
   "never been in any age taught or countenanced by any known or
   accredited Christian church, or by any body and succession of learned
   Divines"--not only does he thus teach in double opposition to them, but
   he further expressly discards the name, and speaks with but little
   respect of what he terms "the contagious fever-boils of the (most
   unfitly so called) Evangelicals," (p. 242, note). Now, whether right or
   wrong in his judgment of them, our author certainly, at least, is not
   to be ranked under the same distinctive appellation with them. 4. That
   its unqualified eulogium of Coleridge and his opinions renders it an
   unsafe guide for young and enthusiastic minds, and may lead many of its
   readers, as it certainly tends to lead all, into a dangerous over trust
   on human and private authority in the interpretation of Divine truth.
   Fully sharing with Dr. Marsh as the present editor does, in his
   affectionate admiration of the genius and writings of Coleridge, and in
   his belief of their growing and happy influence on the rising
   generation, and acknowledging in common with him that debt incalculable
   which all feel as due to one whose words have been to their spirit
   "words of power," still must he follow Coleridge, and teach others to
   follow him as a fallible leader, with thoughtful and wary steps, and
   not only so, but as one who hath actually left behind him slippery as
   well as safe footprints, in the path of Religious inquiry.

   And lastly, it is rejected as being a Preface which takes too much
   knowledge for granted on the part of the reader, to answer the present
   demand of an edition fitted for popular use. At the time it was
   written, Coleridge was a living teacher, and his speculations known and
   sought after only by the philosophic or professional student. Now his
   teaching has become the heritage of the public--his name that of an
   established classic, and his deep disquisitions are passing into the
   hands of thousands, to whom without some preparatory instruction, they
   are little better than a sealed book. Under such changed circumstances
   a new Preface, and one of another character, was obviously needed.

   Such are the reasons which to the present editor have seemed
   imperiously to demand from him, with all the humility he felt for the
   task, a new, plainer, and more catholic Introduction to Coleridge's
   "Aids to Reflection."

   In entering upon it, he would fain avoid all idea of competition with
   his predecessor, as being well aware that his own chief fitness for the
   task, and certainly his only vantage ground in it, arises from his
   being of "kin" in church and doctrine with the author whose philosophy
   of both he presumes to comment upon. Than the writer of the rejected
   Preface, he is well aware, too, that few on this side the Atlantic have
   more deeply studied, none more eloquently eulogized this same Christian
   philosophy--and had Dr. Marsh been but as free to deduce from it its
   necessary results in Church and doctrine, untrammelled by the
   conditions of a self-constituted ministry, and the fetters of an
   incongruous metaphysical creed, as he was conclusive in his proof of
   the premises from which such conclusions flow--had it been thus--none
   can feel more convincingly than the present editor that in such case
   there would have been neither room nor demand for his present more
   humble labors.

   With this prolonged explanation rendered indispensable by the
   circumstances of the case, he now proceeds to the task before him.

   Historical Rise of the Philosophy of Coleridge.--Among the great
   thinkers of the generation now recently past away--few, if any can be
   named, no one certainly among those using the English language as the
   medium of thought--who has left behind him so deep and wide an
   intellectual impress as Coleridge--or given to the rising generation a
   stronger spiritual impulse. Nor have we as yet seen in all probability
   either its extent or depth. It has in truth but just begun to take hold
   upon the public sentiment. Hitherto Coleridge's teaching has formed but
   here and there an individual mind--or at best, built up some limited,
   unobserved fraternity of deep and quiet thinkers. It now, on the
   contrary, begins to indoctrinate the mass of the educated--to enter
   into general reasoning--bids fair to become the prevailing system
   taught in Protestant Christendom, and in the estimate of many is to be
   regarded as among the foremost means now obviously preparing, under the
   Providence of God, for bringing back an unspiritual age to an earlier,
   purer, and more Christian philosophy. Whatever estimate may be formed
   of its value, there can be no doubt of its spreading influence.

   The story of its past slow progress is soon told. It began, as is well
   known, within the narrow circle of Coleridge's personal admirers, and
   with audience not always "fit tho' few." With the public at large
   Coleridge was from his earliest years a contemned or feared man--an
   enthusiast, a disorganizer, or a mystic--in youth decried as a
   leveller, in manhood as a homeless wanderer, in age as a religious
   dreamer--and it may not be denied but that some passages of both his
   public and private life as well as not a few of both his earlier and
   later tenets gave too good ground, at least on a superficial view, for
   such scornful estimate of the man and his opinions.

   Under such load of contumely, deepened by his characteristic
   peculiarities of style and thought, no wonder that the occasional works
   put forth by him whether in prose or verse, with all their rare
   learning, sweet eloquence, and deep spiritual power, qualities now
   universally accorded to them, fell almost still-born from the
   press--like their author at once condemned and scorned--"published" as
   remarked by his English editor "but not publici juris." To this rule if
   there was any exception, it relates to the present work "Aids to
   Reflection," and he never failed, his nephew tells us, to make " a
   special remark" if he found his visitor to have read the "Friend," or
   any other of his less known publications. Such, with some gradual
   enlargement of his philosophic circle, and a corresponding though slow
   advance of influence, continued to be Coleridge's literary position
   through life. Acknowledged genius and contemned opinions--his society
   courted but his books unread, and his teaching except over a chosen
   few, unfelt and unregarded.

   His conversational powers on the other hand, or rather (for it was not
   con-versation) his deep discursive and eloquent soliloquies on all
   subjects brought before him by his visitors, whether of taste,
   politics, philosophy or Religion--these were from the very first both
   felt and acknowledged to be of magical influence. To these outpourings
   of a deeply learned but still more deeply self-communing spirit, and
   which, river-like, seemed to gather strength and volume as they flowed
   on in their solitary magnificence--his visitors were wont to listen in
   charmed and mostly silent amazement--for independently of the
   fascination of thought, their senses too, were taken prisoner; the
   richest melodies of musical utterance, features serene and passive, as
   of some sculptured demigod, and an eye inspiring awe from its
   statue-like, objectless gaze, all conspired to give to Coleridge when
   thus encircled somewhat of the power, as well as the appearance of an
   oracular Python, giving forth in solemn chant its mystic, and not
   always safely interpreted response, to questions reverently propounded
   by almost worshippers, for his solution. Under this aspect at least,
   Coleridge appeared to some who had casual access to his society, rather
   as a brilliant meteor flashing forth dark light, than as a steadfast
   luminary, by whose guidance Christians might safely walk; and there was
   unquestionably much in his manner, as well as somewhat in his
   occasional judgments, that might well excuse such hasty conclusion.*

   But with the removal by death of this highly gifted mind, has come a
   more adequate sense of its value and loss, and a new era has
   consequently commenced in the history of its influence. Being dead, the
   Teacher now speaketh more truly than during life. Prejudice has died
   with the breathing man, and with the living voice and its enchantment,
   has passed away all possibility of future misapprehension. Coleridge
     __________________________________________________________________

   *In the columns of the Churchman, April 7th, 1832, the present editor
   has detailed an evening spent with Coleridge under such circumstances,
   in the month of June, 1830, in company with Irving the Scotch preacher,
   who had come to consult him touching the modern miracle, of the "gift
   of tongues." now stands forth revealed to us in his works, and in his
   works alone. By them he is to be judged, and that verdict is already
   rendered. Hardly has the world of letters and philosophy, had time
   thoughtfully to peruse them, before with one voice it has united in
   ranking their author first among the deep thinkers of his own age and
   nation, and second to none in any, for his profound insight into the
   laws of our moral and spiritual being, and his clear, eloquent, and
   Christian exposition of the truths and duties that flow from them.
   Therefore in critical estimation is he already numbered with the
   greatest and wisest, that have ever been esteemed the lights and guides
   of the earth, and all that is now needed, as we think, to make his fame
   as wide as it is lofty, is what by degrees is actually effecting both
   in England and this country, through the medium of stereotype editions,
   and familiar explanations.

   Nor will this triumph, we may confidently predict, of the vital
   principles of Coleridge's Philosophy, be either a partial or a
   temporary one; for it is the triumph not of opinions over opinions, but
   of principles over principles. It is not therefore an impression
   passively received, that subsequent impressions may efface, but it is
   the reception into the mind, of living truths--seeds sown in it--light
   kindled and the spirit of a better age recalled. It is something in
   short, which the needs of the heart of man as well as the demands of
   his reason, will not suffer, soon or ever again, we may hope, to be
   covered up and buried, as it has long been, whether under the flood of
   an epicurean, and basely material philosophy, or the shifting sands of
   phenomenal metaphysics, measuring spiritual things by the unspiritual
   faculty that judgeth according to sense, or the crumbling structure of
   a merely prudential, and a falsely named, rational faith, or last, but
   not least, under the modern baseless fabric of the Gospel of Christ
   without the Church of Christ--Christianity without its exponent. What
   limit will eventually be set to the influence of this philosophy, or
   with what rapidity it will be found to advance, not, we mean in its
   "hay and stubble," but in its gold that stands the fire--that time
   alone will show. For the present, it is our willing part to labor
   within our narrow path, to remove or to level such obstructions as
   ignorance, error, or prejudice may have heretofore raised against it in
   our country.

   Difficulties of Coleridge as arising from the character of his
   writings.--The chief Prose works of Coleridge are his "Friend,"
   "Biographia Literaria," "Lay Sermons," "Church and State," and "Aids to
   Reflection." To these are now to be added his equally valuable though
   less connected disquisitions, which under the title of "Literary
   Remains," are at present in the course of publication in London,
   consisting of the contents of his various Note-Books, Marginal
   Annotations, &c., his usual desultory mode of writing, together with
   his "Table-Talk," so far at least as such record of his
   thoughts--genuine and valuable as it is, may be admitted into the list.
   It is a work at least to which may be justly applied his own eulogium
   of another--that "his sands were seed pearl." But in all these, one and
   the same difficulty meets the student, and that is, a frequent
   reference by the author to what the reader continually wants but can
   nowhere find, a clear, connected view of Coleridge's System of
   Philosophy. His speculations are all fragmentary, fractional parts as
   it were, of some great unity ever brooding in his teeming mind, but
   never sufficiently developed to be connectedly brought forth. The
   fulfilment however of such virtual promise under the title of
   "Philosophy reconciled with the Christian Religion," or as he entitles
   it more at large in the work before us, "The Assertion of Religion as
   necessarily involving Revelation, and of Christianity, as the only
   Revelation of permanent and universal validity;" this is well known to
   have occupied for many years much of his thoughts, being often alluded
   to in his writings, as in the present, where he terms it, "the
   principal labor of my life since manhood;" still more frequently and
   openly promised to his enquiring friends, and the hope of its
   completion, never finally abandoned by himself or despaired of by
   others, up to the very day of his death. But unhappily for the student,
   we may say, for the world, that hope is now past, and it will be a bold
   hand that shall undertake to build up that "temple" as he often
   reverently termed it, which such a master hand, after preparing the
   materials and laboring for years at the foundation, either faultered to
   attempt or failed to accomplish.

   Such at any rate, is the aspect of Coleridge's recorded mind, and it is
   the feature from which springs much doubtless, of the earlier interest,
   as well as permanent difficulty of his writings. They awaken in the
   mind of the student, somewhat of the feelings that belong to the
   delighted yet bewildered traveller in "the gorgeous East," as he muses
   and mourns over the rich and scattered fragments of some unfinished
   temple in the desert, to which war or death seems to have put a hasty
   termination. The deep and solid foundations he sees are laid, and here
   and there perhaps a solitary column of granite or porphyry erected,
   giving promise by its enduring material, and its massive and fair
   proportions, and its richly sculptured capital, and its hieroglyphic
   frieze and base, what in grandeur and beauty the finished structure
   would have been, but leaving all else, whether of parts or finish, to
   vain and puzzled conjecture.

   Such is the first aspect of Coleridge to the inquiring unsatisfied eye
   of the student, and for such disappointment in the midst of his
   admiration, he must prepare himself. How far this is a remediable
   defect in the writings of Coleridge, or how far it is but the necessary
   fate of all inquirers who seek to sound the depths of their own spirit,
   and to grasp by the power of reason, the circle within which reason is
   itself contained--this may be variously decided. That there are within
   us, secrets we cannot unravel and depths we cannot sound, no mind ever
   felt more deeply or reverently than that of Coleridge, but still it is
   the very aim of his philosophy to bring us up to the verge of such
   insoluble problem and perhaps its occasional result however unintended,
   sometimes to tempt the arrogant or over-musing mind beyond it. But this
   is a different question from the attempt to reduce into order, and
   carry out into scientific arrangement, the unconnected truths so
   profusely scattered throughout his works. This surely may be done,
   though as surely, it is no easy task, since its accomplishment
   necessarily involves every question of mental and spiritual philosophy,
   and demands in them all that the solution given appear alike the
   product of reason, and the teaching of revelation. Such task it is
   evident can be successfully grappled with, only by one who shall be at
   the same time the deepest of philosophers and the most spiritual and
   learned of Christians.

   But there is another hope, which is, that such development may be the
   maturing growth of many minds in many years--the fruit in short in an
   age yet to come, of the seed which Coleridge and his co-thinkers sowed
   in their own, ripening into all the fulness of spiritual truth under
   that higher teaching whence philosopher as well as Christian derives
   his truest light. In the meantime it must be the comfort of the
   solitary unaided student, to believe and trust that the same unity of
   plan, which was ever present to the mind of the author, will be by
   degrees transferred to, and impressed upon that of his thoughtful,
   docile, and loving reader, and that however such reader may fail to be
   able to put it forth in words for the benefit of others, it will not be
   wanting in his own inmost thoughts, for his own spiritual good; there
   working out within him, what his author ever and chiefly aimed at,
   namely, that the heart and the reason, the one awakened, and the other
   enlightened, should become a united temple of praise and love, to the
   honor of God, and the glory of the Redeemer, and meet for the gracious
   indwelling of the Spirit of all truth: preparing it for such a
   philosophy as "flashed conviction on the mind of a Galen and kindled
   meditation into a hymn of praise."

   "Aids to Reflection," and True Method of Studying It.--In taking up the
   following work, the reader who would not be disappointed, must
   understand previously what he has to expect. It is not then, a work of
   amusement, to be read lightly, nor of connected science to be studied
   continuously, but one to be read, studied and above all meditated upon
   in its separate truths, just as they are found to strike in upon the
   mind. Each "aphorism" is as a torch by itself, having its own circle of
   light, and is therefore to be separately dwelt upon by the student, and
   tested by his own repeated inward experience, until he see the light
   and feel its truth, and not only so but can lay hold upon it as a
   reality, and upon conviction is ready to give it a place in his
   previously established trains of reasoning and to incorporate it into
   his actual stock of settled principles in thought and action. In this
   way, and in this way alone, will the work become to the reader what in
   its title it promises, "aids to reflection." Nor must the student
   expect too much on the first perusal of a single aphorism or even of
   the whole work; a reflecting mind, says our author, is not a "flower
   that grows wild or comes up of its own accord." But if sincere let him
   go on--try one aphorism--try another--open the volume at
   hazard--persevere, until at length he find some deep spiritual truth to
   strike home--then indeed may he pause, for then begins the reign of
   Coleridge over the thoughtful mind. The reader then for the first time
   recognizes him as his " Master," for he finds that under his teaching,
   he can now speak what before he had only thought; that he has got
   embodied some new truth, a new steppingstone for his foot to rest upon
   amid the dark waters. The author who is found to exercise such power
   over the mind, will soon come, notwithstanding all difficulties of
   interpretation, to be rightly valued by the student; and if such
   teaching bear on truths nearest the heart, giving to the mind a new and
   firmer hold on those already received or new and clearer light to guide
   it in its further search, such a writer will be at once recognized, not
   only as a teacher, but as a friend, and there will be quickly
   established, between the reader and such mind a sense of spiritual
   relationship, alike loving and reverential, and such as will not
   afterwards be lightly severed.

   That such is, in truth, the influence of Coleridge's mind, over that of
   his reader, and more especially in this present work, is of course a
   matter of individual experience, but from the numbers on both sides of
   the Atlantic, who have openly acknowledged such obligation and the
   greater number who from its rapid sale it may be judged, are silently
   benefitting by it, the editor feels justified in asserting such to be
   its essential character and influence, and consequently, in
   recommending its adoption to all who prize for themselves the
   possession of such a spiritual monitor and guide.

   But after all, the work, with ordinary readers will still have its
   obscurities and its incomprehensible passages; as for instance, the
   geometrical bi-polar theory of thought, contained in note, p. 130--the
   algebraic formula, p. 250--the logical synopsis, p. 258, as well as
   some other occasional touches of transcendental metaphysics. To all
   this, the only answer is, "pass them over"--"go on"--let not the truth
   you do feel, be lost upon either your heart or intellect through
   prejudice of that which you do not feel--take the lesson you do
   understand, and give your author credit for a meaning even when you
   perceive it not, and in time you may come to see a deep truth where you
   now see nothing but mystic words.

   General Argument of "Aids to Reflection."--The general scheme of the
   work, though not always or easily traceable in it, partly from the
   moral nature of the argument addressing itself rather to the heart than
   to the logical faculty, and partly from the unconnected " aphorisms" by
   which it is carried on, is shortly as follows.

   Addressing himself to the unspiritual but not un-intellectual mind,
   Coleridge takes up the religious argument on the supposed reader's
   professed principles of worldly calculation. First, then, comes
   Religion, contemplated in the form of prudence; Christened but not
   Christianized. This is in general the thoughtful mind's first step in
   the course of conviction: the man stands firm in religion as a matter
   of policy. Then, "awakened by the cock-crow, (a sermon, a calamity, a
   sick bed or a providential escape) the Christian pilgrim sets out in
   the morning twilight, while yet the truth is below the horizon," (p.
   18). Travelling onward, he is led up to a higher point in his spiritual
   course--to "the purifying and remedial virtues"--to religion
   contemplated under the form of Morality--a holier prudence, than what
   he first professed, then becomes his guide, even "the steward faithful
   and discreet"--the eldest servant in the family of Faith, and the Ruler
   over all its household." Last and highest of all, comes Religion,
   viewed as "spiritual Christianity," morality ascending from uprightness
   "to God-likeness," and giving to faith its repose by the doctrine of a
   personal Saviour and communion with his life-giving spirit. This is
   Religion contemplated in its true form, seeking its summit in the
   imitation of the Divine nature, in the sincere love of the true as
   truth, of the good as good, and of God as both in one; and leading the
   man to "all the acts, exercises, and disciplines of mind, will, and
   affection that are requisite or conducive to the great design of
   redemption from the form of the evil one, and of his second creation,
   or birth in the divine image." (p. 22.)

   To the reflecting mind of the supposed pilgrim in these his advancing
   stages of "Prudence," "Morality," and "Spiritual Religion," are
   addressed the successive aphorisms with their commentaries, that
   constitute the body of the work--deduced in each instance from the
   predominant faculty under which the man is then walking--that is.

   In his first stage of Prudence, from the sense and sensuous
   understanding.

   In the second or that of Morally, from the heart and conscience, and,

   In the third or Spiritual state, from the reason and the will.

   Such is the argument of the work, though much of its completeness must
   doubtless come from the reader's own power of thought in supplying what
   is left deficient and connecting what stands disunited. To do this,
   however, will be found among the most valuable exercises of Reflection,
   which the work itself can call forth, and is therefore, as such,
   seriously recommended to the student. But before passing to another
   head, it is proper here to note, for the caution of its less learned,
   or more easily guided readers, that in some minor points, in this work,
   unconnected with the leading argument, Coleridge's judgment is not to
   be commended. "Among these spots on the sun," to apply the author's own
   figure, which as obstructing neither its light nor heat, might have
   been passed over without notice, but for the natural tendency of the
   human mind to make a God of the luminary that gives it light, may be
   indicated the following--our author's allegorized view of the
   historical circumstances of the fall of man, (p. 144). His defective
   argument and unjustifiable admissions on the subject of Infant Baptism,
   as given in his conference with a Baptist, (p. 283,) and most striking
   of all his false and dangerous estimate, of perhaps the moral worth,
   certainly the spiritual teaching of one whom he addresses as " Friend,
   pure of heart and fervent," even the Scotch preacher, Edward Irving--"a
   mighty wrestler" says he "in the cause of spiritual Religion and Gospel
   morality, in whom more than in any other contemporary I seem to see the
   spirit of Luther revived,"(p. 297, Note). Nor was this as already noted
   the limit of Coleridge's delusion touching a friend for whom his fond
   affection seems to have strangely blinded his judgment. Such lapses of
   wisdom on the part of those whom God seems to have set forth as
   peculiarly lights and guides upon earth, it is painful to have
   witnessed and still more painful to be called upon to record--but, the
   less willingly, the more scrupulously should it be done, and it is even
   perhaps so permitted, lest Christians should perchance be tempted in
   their reverential love to transfer unto fallible man that submission of
   mind due only to God, his Church, and his word.

   General Nature and Originality of Coleridge's Philosophy.--The
   Philosophy of Coleridge, if at least by such name his teaching is to be
   called, has been too much looked at both in England and this country in
   the light of novelty. It has been both cried up and cried down on this
   argument, and the most popular of the objections against it and
   conclusive ones had it been true, have been drawn from this its
   supposed character. But such is neither its merit nor its demerit. It
   is an old and not a novel school of Philosophy. It was that of Plato,
   and many other ancient Sages so far forth at least as the speculations
   of teachers, unenlightened by Revelation, can be said to symbolize with
   those of a Christian. "Nor were our great divines," says Coleridge,
   "ashamed of this learned discipline, to which they had submitted their
   minds under Aristotle and Tully, but brought the purified products as
   sacrificial gifts to Christ. They baptized the logic and manly rhetoric
   of ancient Greece." (Notes on Donne.)

   Among Christian teachers too, in every age of Christendom, it has been,
   that of the deepest and the worthiest--the great fathers of the
   Church--the soundest Doctors in the schools of Rome--the early
   Reformers both in England and on the continent, and above all, the
   greatest Divines in the Church of England in the days of her glory--in
   the golden age of her Hookers and Barrows and Cudworths and Taylors,
   these all agree in it; nor is even this its highest authority. It is
   the philosophy, so far as such name is applicable to revealed teaching
   of scripture itself. St. Paul and St. John, with reverence be it said,
   are the pillars of this school--the spiritual truths they teach, when
   translated into man's language constitute that Christian philosophy now
   to some so strange, but which in earlier ages of the Church, was not
   only the current faith, but of the very heart and soul of Christendom.

   With the abuse of the Protestant principle, the right of private
   judgment in the interpretation of scripture, and more especially with
   its greatest exemplification, the defection of the Puritans in England
   from the unity of the Church in the 17th century, when the name of
   Calvin was brought in to sanction novelties which Calvin himself had
   not taught, came the first and fatal step in that disunion of reason
   from revelation and of philosophy from Christian doctrine, which the
   principles of Coleridge now go to reconcile. The fundamental error then
   fallen into by sectarian teachers, was the substitution of the
   "understanding" for the "reason," or in other words of "each man's
   notions" for "all men's wisdom." Hence came necessarily contempt for
   Christian antiquity--contempt for the voice of the Church and her
   institutions, contempt, in short for all Christian authority, except
   that written word which with singular inconsistency, such reasoners
   received as the word of God solely upon the teaching of that Church
   which they abandoned and its authority which they rejected. Hence
   followed of course, in that spirit of reckless independence which
   taught schism to be no sin, what the elder philosophy could not have
   received, Christianity without its teacher--the truth without its
   "pillar and ground," a church without unity--a ministry without
   origin--sacraments without binding power--and to close all, metaphysics
   or the speculations of the "understanding" elevated into that high
   place in the interpretation of Christian doctrine from which Christian
   philosophy, the reason of the Church, ("quod semper, quod ubique, quod
   ab omnibus"), had just been dethroned. Under this newly discovered
   guide, came forth a new creed, and one not merely without harmony, but,
   in irreconcilable contrariety to the first teachings of reason and to
   the fundamental laws of conscience--Christianity and Redemption were no
   longer to be held as they had been, convertible terms, but the
   doctrines of a partial redemption and unconditional salvation and a
   will without freedom and grace irresistible, the metaphysical
   conclusions in short of the puzzled understanding, were made to
   proclaim a never-ending war between reason and revelation, a war which
   the philosophy of Coleridge, and of such reasoners as he--the better
   wisdom of an elder age, can alone reduce into permanent and harmonious
   peace.

   From this deep fountain of error, came many streams--First, was fed
   from it the dark pool of fatalism; the whole host of necessitarian
   arguers, whether infidel or sectarian having ever since drawn their
   sharpest arrows from this quiver--proceeding to demonstrate by the
   "understanding," in the face of reason and of conscience, the
   impossibility of that freedom which in the very moment of
   demonstration, the man was himself exerting. With such reasoners came
   too, the perversion of "original sin" into "hereditary guilt," thus
   "throwing the darkness of storms," says Coleridge, "on an awful fact in
   human nature, which in itself had only the darkness of negations."
   (Notes on Jeremy Taylor).

   Hence too, in a shallower stream, flowed the metaphysics of
   Locke--shallow through the substitution of the "understanding," for the
   "reason," being but a vain attempt to build up the temple of spiritual
   truth, apart from the light of reason, on the sandy foundations of
   experience. As its tendency was to unspiritualize the mind, so has its
   result been perhaps to give birth to, certainly to nourish the infidel
   age that followed, and to clothe materialism with the outward trappings
   of philosophy.

   Hence too at a later day, came that second flood of Epicurean teaching,
   which under the authority of Paley, has degraded the very name of
   Ethical science--a system of morals forsooth, built up without even a
   mention of reason or conscience. In parallel stream and from the same
   source has flowed also the Socinian error--revelation without
   mysteries--an error that could find no foothold in Christendom, till, a
   false philosophy had confounded the "reason" with the "sensuous
   understanding." The spiritual reason in man stumbles not at revealed
   mysteries, for it feels itself to be a mystery--but his understanding
   knows none such, it must be able always to con-ceive, that which it
   re-ceives--therefore it is, that a system of divinity, which looks to
   the understanding, rather than the reason will ever be found willing to
   reject as fable, or to degrade into metaphor, those spiritual truths
   which it can neither digest nor translate.

   Over this darkening flood of error has come lastly in our own day, the
   benumbing influences of a mechanical age--forgetting and learning from
   a base philosophy to deny, amid its mighty conquests over material
   nature those immaterial powers, super-natural--above and beyond
   nature--by which alone the hand of art has achieved its conquests.

   Under such accumulation of rubbish, philosophical and doctrinal, truths
   ancient and long held and essential to a Faith at once spiritual and
   rational, became trodden down in the minds of men, and hidden, but not
   lost. They were still within the heart of man, in his conscience and in
   his reason, in his prayers, and in his inextinguishable wants. Such
   living truths were not always to be denied a voice, and in our own day
   we find, as if by common impulse, that in every nation of Protestant
   Christendom, they have spoken, and with a reaction as irrepressible as
   it has been simultaneous, they have come forth "conquering," and we
   believe "to conquer." This better philosophy has already found an abode
   in Germany and a resting-place in France, but above all in England it
   is now rapidly building up its citadel and its home, in the threefold
   union,--the cord that cannot easily be broken--of learning, orthodoxy,
   and a spiritual creed. Into the heart of Americans too it has entered
   widely if not deeply. It has already penetrated the school and the
   pulpit--it has begun by Christianizing education, it is going on to
   spiritualize philosophy, and it will find doubtless in time, its
   completion, in a demonstrated union of reason and revelation, in
   connection with the teaching of the Apostolic Church of Christ.

   Under the view thus given, the claims of Coleridge as the originator of
   this philosophy, whether urged by friends or charged by enemies, must,
   it is obvious, be greatly moderated. In such regenerating movement of
   the race, no individual mind governs, nor, however zealous, can any man
   be esteemed more than a co-worker. Among such foremost ones, however,
   Coleridge stands in England, at least, preeminent. In his case, the
   kindling spark, whencesoever it came, fell on an ardent and mighty
   mind, one alike fitted for the task, and willing for the encounter to
   which it called him, and that girded himself to it early and
   heartfully, and for twenty years, as he himself tells us, bore him, on
   though without fruit, yet in hope, "casting his bread upon the waters."

   But still this pre-eminence excludes not his fellow laborers, among
   whom another layman, the late Alexander Knox, though within a narrower
   circle, deserves to be recorded, as well as not a few divines of the
   Church of England, recent or living, more especially from the.
   university of Oxford, whence this earlier and sounder philosophy had
   never been wholly cast out.

   Leading Principles in Coleridge's Philosophy.--Distinction between the
   reason and the understanding.--The fundamental postulate of Coleridge's
   reasonings, is that the Reason in man, variously defined by him, as the
   "light of the mind," the "organ of wisdom," "the source of universal
   and necessary principles," is a power that sees by its own light, and
   is therefore, essentially distinct from the "understanding," or "the
   faculty that judges according to sense." "In no former part of the
   volume" says Coleridge, when he comes to read of this point, "has the
   author felt the same anxiety to obtain a patient attention; for he does
   not hesitate to avow, that on his success in establishing the validity
   of the distinction between the Reason and the Understanding he rests
   his hopes of carrying the reader along with him through all that is to
   follow," (p. 163). "Till this distinction be seen," is elsewhere his
   language "nothing can be seen aright." "Till this great truth be
   mastered, and with the sight, that is insight, other truths may
   casually take possession of the mind, but the mind cannot possess
   them." (Notes on Donne).

   In this sense of its importance his editor, as may be judged from what
   he has already said, fully concurs. That such distinction will
   eventually be granted by every reflecting reader, there can be little
   doubt. His first, and indeed, only difficulty, he will find to lie, not
   in the distinction of the things themselves, "the light" from the
   faculty that holds the light, for that we all familiarly make on a
   thousand occasions, but, simply in the appropriation of terms which by
   long use and common custom, have become confounded, at least with
   ordinary thinkers. But this obviously is a minor difficulty, and bears
   not at all on the real question. On that point, reflecting, religious
   men cannot long or far differ, now and never have, for it is the
   question whether the living soul of man be dependant or not for its
   light of truth on the dying body, since, if not, it follows of course
   that the mind must have its own primitive stock of a knowledge not of
   this world, and which gives to it its fundamental laws of being--its
   informing processes of thought,--the moulds into which it casts the
   impressions of the outward senses, and the weights by which it tries
   them. This is the "light of reason" "the image in which man was
   created"--"that through the being of which he became a living
   soul."--"this is that house not made with hands," of which Coleridge
   ever so eloquently speaks, in which the reflecting mind even here on
   earth can dwell and find it, "not vacant but gloriously furnished."

   But in addition to, and in power of this, its primitive possession of
   ideas of obligation and duty, and truth, and order, and goodness, the
   mind gains through experience a new stock, relating to things of time
   and space, and this is "understanding"--man is reason--he possesses
   understanding.

   Reason therefore, is fixed--Understanding is discursive--Reason appeals
   but to itself, Understanding finds its authority elsewhere--Reason is
   imperative--its word is law--Understanding is relative--its language is
   expediency--the accommodation of means to ends. Reason is the seat of
   ideas. Understanding of conceptions--Reason gives birth to experience,
   and experience, in turn, trains up the Understanding--Reason makes man
   "wise," a moral, a religious being and fitted under grace for the
   spiritual things of eternity--Understanding on the other hand, makes
   man "knowing"--the conqueror of this world, not of the next, and fitted
   but for the occupations and enjoyments of time and space. Love, duty
   goodness, faith, the spiritual and the willing mind, all belong to the
   Reason of our nature--art and its triumphs, the world and its glory,
   time and its employments, belong to the equally needful, but still
   unquestionably lower and distinct faculty, the "understanding" of our
   nature.

   Now in these views Coleridge undoubtedly runs counter to Locke and his
   school, but as he agrees with older and far higher authorities--he is
   not to be charged herein, as is often done, with either heresy or
   novelty. "It is what" says he, "no man can learn from another, but
   which (were it possible,) I might have learned from Plato, Kepler, and
   Bacon; from Luther, Hooker, Pascal, Leibnitz and Fenelon," (p. 175.
   note).

   To this it may be further added, that it is a distinction which has
   been forgotten by dissenters rather than by churchmen, and that however
   novel it may now sound to such religious reasoners as have consecrated
   to themselves the shallow metaphysics of modern times* yet has it never
   been
     __________________________________________________________________

   *It is the confession of Dr. Marsh, in his Preface, that Brown's
   philosophy had received the sanction of their "highest ecclesiastical
   authorities." a strange language unto those familiar with the elder
   divines of the Church of England, and who hold not to the speculations
   of individual minds in opposition to the common teaching of the Church
   Catholic.

   Distinction between Nature and Will.--Between these, Coleridge teaches
   not so truly distinction as contrariety---"Nature" is that which is
   necessitated, bound by the law of antecedent and consequent, a linked
   chain of causes and effects; "will" on the other hand, as the exponent
   of Spirit is that which alone, in creation, is not bound, but
   free--self-moved--not a matter of mechanism, and consequently not a
   "nature." An enslaved will is, therefore, a will which by its own act,
   has admitted to a certain extent, a nature within it. Such is the
   natural man, but though a creaturely will cannot be free, yet the will
   in a rational creature, may cease to be creaturely, and through grace
   go forth into the glorious liberty of the Gospel. Now the terms in
   which this exposition of the necessary freedom of the will, as "will"
   is made by our author, may sound somewhat novel, but the substance of
   it is common to all Christian philosophy and doctrine, with the
   solitary exception of the maintainers of religious fatalism, and the
   other forms of what is falsely termed "high Calvinism." Against such,
   and such only, does Coleridge stand in irreconcilable hostility. "The
   doctrine of modern Calvinism," says he, "as laid down by Jonathan
   Edwards and the late Dr. Williams, which represents a will absolutely
   passive, clay in the hands of a potter, destroys all will, takes away
   its essence and definition . . . with such a system, not the wit of
   man, nor all the theodicies ever framed by human ingenuity, before and
   since the celebrated attempt of Leibnitz, can reconcile the sense of
   responsibility nor the fact of the difference in kind between regret
   and remorse," (p. 115).

   It is for the solution of this insoluble problem, that Dr. Marsh, in
   his preface so vainly labours. His reason justifies what his creed
   rejects, and to reconcile Coleridge with Calvinism, is that fruitless
   task which places him ever in a false position with regard to his own
   faith, and in a needless one in the light of all others.

   Distinction between objective and subjective truths.--These are terms
   borrowed from the schools, being old and convenient terms for a sound
   and necessary distinction. "Objective" relates to things as they are in
   themselves; "Subjective" as they appear to be through the medium of our
   senses, or the laws of the perceiving mind,--Thus the colours of
   nature, to take one of the many forms of merely phenomenal existence,
   have but a subjective not objective reality, and may be said to exist
   but in reference to the eye that sees them. Truth on the contrary, as
   all that belongs to spirit, has a reality objective not merely
   subjective. Its existence does not depend on our perceptions, nor is it
   at all modified by them. But to apply this--Horne Tooke in analyzing
   truth into what one "troweth" or thinketh, gave it but a subjective
   existence, changing with every man's opinion. The teaching of Locke,
   too, though less unsound, tended obviously to the same fatal
   result--all truths with him, being "conclusions" of the logical
   understanding, not objects to the spiritual reason. Even the ideas of
   God, eternity, duty, &c, are not positive but negative thoughts,
   arrived at by the process of successive exclusions. The Socinian creed,
   too, is another form of the same error, denying existence to whatever
   cannot be contemplated under the intelligible forms of our own
   subjective understandings.

   Now what infidels had thus rejected, and false philosophy anatomized
   into negatives, and the worldly mind is ever ready to evaporate into
   metaphor, for these despised truths of our moral and spiritual nature,
   Coleridge has but reclaimed their earlier and higher rank in philosophy
   as being actual objects to the eye of the spiritual reason, "living
   truths" "eternal verities," spiritual things" that are spiritually
   discerned, and the only realities which abide unchanged in this
   phenomenal existence. This it is that renders the teaching of Coleridge
   a truly religious philosophy, not in a mystical but in a Christian
   sense, for it looks at and addresses man as the scriptures do, directly
   in his spiritual as well as in his intellectual nature, and brings
   before him the laws and truths and wants of his spiritual being, as
   familiarly and objectively as it does those which relate and are
   present to his senses. Hence follows the important discrimination, and
   one marked out with peculiar felicity by Coleridge, between the
   figurative and the symbolic language of scripture--its figures as being
   addressed to the "understanding," and intended for illustration of the
   nature, its symbols as addressed to the reason, or spiritual part of
   man, and intended for conviction of the truth, of that spoken of. "I do
   not regard" says he, "the words born again and spiritual life as
   figures or metaphors," these are the truths he adds, which the natural
   man, (that is the sensuous understanding), cannot receive because they
   are spiritually discerned." The influence of this ever present
   distinction over the mind of the habitual student of Coleridge is one
   more easily felt than explained--he finds it eventually, to give, as it
   were substance to what before were shadowy thoughts, and to secure for
   them a corresponding hold on his spirit, whether looked at in
   meditation or appealed to in action.

   Doctrinal views of Coleridge as exhibited in "Aids to
   Reflection."--That Coleridge in heart as well as profession, after some
   early wanderings, settled down a faithful member of the church of
   England, cannot now be for a moment doubted, however it may have once
   been, by any one familiar with his writings. Her articles and homilies
   we find to have been the subject of his most frequent and deepest
   meditations--her spiritual influence over the land, his affectionate
   boast and earnest prayer, and her coming dubious fortunes the source of
   his most painful anxieties. "No man can justly blame me" is elsewhere
   his touching language, though borrowed from another at the dose of one
   of his own eloquent eulogiums, "for honouring my spiritual mother, the
   church of England; in whose womb I was conceived, at whose breast I was
   nourished, and in whose bosom I hope to die," (Remains).

   The doctrines contained in this work, are therefore those not of
   "evangelical dissenters," but of the Church of England, as exhibited in
   her articles, liturgy and sacraments, though still under that wise,
   because necessary, freedom of interpretation which she scripturally
   permits to all her individual members. But though it is, indeed, part
   of her glory that she ties up the reason and conscience by no
   metaphysical subtleties, yet is it also her higher boast that in every
   age, the majority of her sons, and the ablest of her teachers, have
   concurred in one common system of church doctrine: now, with them
   Coleridge substantially and in general, most closely agrees. But as
   this is a point on which suspicion has been cast by his previous
   American editor, in applying to him a term popularly used to
   contra-distinguish those who make light of the necessity of a visible
   church and its binding sacraments and of the sin of schism in departing
   from it, it is due to our author to exhibit in his own words this
   attachment and conformity to the Church of England, in her spiritual,
   sacramental and catholic character.

   Of the Church of Christ, he teaches its visible nature, unity and
   necessity--"a church visible," says he, is the "exponent" of
   Christianity. "My fixed principle is, that Christianity without a
   visible church exercising spiritual authority is vanity and
   dissolution," (p. 230, note).

   Of this one catholic apostolic Church he holds that of England to be
   the purest branch. "Enough for me" is his language, "if in my heart of
   hearts, free from all fear of man or lust of preferment, I believe (as
   I do,) the Church of England to be the most Apostolic Church . . . and
   that the imperfections in its liturgy are but spots in the sun, which
   impede neither its light nor its heat," (p. 300, note).

   Touching its great principle, regard for early authority, his language
   is, "the Church of England has preserved the golden mean between the
   superstitious reverence of tbe Romapists and the avowed contempt of the
   Sectarians for the writings of the fathers, and the authority and
   unimpeached traditions of the Church during the first three or four
   centuries," (p. 303, note).

   Of separation from it, (speaking of a conscientious dissenter), he
   says, "such person must think of schism under another point of view
   than that in which I have been taught to contemplate it by St. Paul in
   his epistles to the Corinthians," (p. 297).

   On the right of private judgment, his language is equally orthodox and
   liberal. "I condemn not the exercise or deny the right of individual
   judgment. I condemn only the pretended right of every individual
   competent or incompetent to interpret scripture in a sense of his own,
   in opposition to the judgment of the church, and where the interpreter
   judges in ignorance or in contempt of uninterrupted tradition, the
   unanimous consent of fathers and councils, and the universal faith of
   the church in all ages," (p. 230, note).

   On the still higher question of Redemption in its extent and covenanted
   means, his language is that of the great Divines of the church of
   England in the manhood of its divinity. "That redemption is an opus
   perfectum, a finished work, the claim to which is conferred by baptism;
   that a Christian cannot speak or think as if his redemption by the
   blood, and his justification by the righteousness of Christ alone, were
   future or contingent events, but must both say and think, 'I have been
   redeemed,' 'I am justified;' lastly that for as many as are received
   into his church by baptism, Christ has condemned sin in the flesh, has
   made it dead in law, that is, no longer imputable as guilt, has
   destroyed the objective reality of sin--these are truths--the most
   certain and necessary articles of faith, and the effectual preaching of
   which Luther declares to be the appropriate criterion, stantis vel
   cadentis Ecclesiae," (p. 242, note).

   But as within the unbroken unity of the Church there are naturally
   perhaps necessarily leading differences of doctrinal teaching according
   as the supremacy of the end, that is the work of the spirit upon the
   heart, or the equal acknowledged necessity of covenanted means, that
   is, union with the visible church and its life-giving sacraments, are
   magnified and pressed home upon the believer, it becomes an interesting
   question, into which scale the authority of Coleridge and his advancing
   philosophy, is likely to be cast. The answer is, that it recognizes no
   division, and admits of no distinction, but as his English editor
   remarks, kindles for those extremes that lead to it "an
   unextinguishable beacon of warning or of guidance!" Its great principle
   is, (teaching as all the formularies of the Church teach), that unto
   sinful man the appointed means are the end, and that the infidel, that
   is, the faithless, mind alone, will draw a distinction between
   them--the end is every thing and the means are everything--Nowhere
   therefore can be found among teachers, ranking, to use the popular
   term, as low-churchmen, deeper views than Coleridge gives of revealed
   truth, or a more experimental insight into the mysteries of personal
   spiritual religion, whether viewed in its origin, as from the
   inworkings of God's holy spirit, or in its nature, as bringing back
   into the enslaved will its lost freedom, or in its fruits, as giving to
   the life, holiness, to the heart, peace, and to the soul its foretaste
   of better things. To the Saviour alone he looks and trusts. "When the
   soul," says he, "is beleagured by enemies, weakness on the walls,
   treachery at the gates, and corruption in the citadel, then by faith
   she says 'Lamb of God' slain from the foundation of the world! Thou art
   my strength, I look to thee for deliverance! and thus she overcomes,
   steadfast by faith," (p. 240). "The Christian preacher," he elsewhere
   adds, "ought to preach Christ and Christ alone, and all things in him
   and by him. He should abjure every argument that is not a link in the
   chain of which Christ is the staple and the staple ring," (Notes on
   Donne).

   Such is his intent, nay absorbing gaze upon Christ as the end of the
   Christian life, yet viewed safely because not arrogantly but through
   the means appointed. In the teacher therefore he maintains the
   necessity of that union of learning with orthodoxy, which leaves no
   room for discretionary independence, and in the private Christian, that
   deference to the authority of the Church, which bridles the license of
   self-will, and in all, that union with it and reliance upon it through
   its covenanted sacraments, which are the only sure means of grace and
   spiritual advancement.

   If it be further asked, what aspect the teaching of Coleridge bears
   towards the theology which under the title of the "Oxford Tracts," has
   recently awakened so much misplaced alarm among well-meaning churchmen
   both in England and America, the answer is, that it is that of friendly
   travellers, on roads different indeed, but not diverse, setting out in
   their journey from distant points, but guided by the same compass and
   tending to the same haven. These Tracts, to which too much honour we
   think has been done in regarding them as the "moving power," instead of
   among the "leading indications" of that change that has already come
   over the spirit of English churchmen and which slumbers awhile in the
   heart before it comes forth in words, are as their name imports,
   "Tracts for the Times," even as the writings of Coleridge might be
   appropriately termed. Both are warring against the same modern errors,
   both fighting for the same deep, despised, ancient truths, and both
   exposing and refuting the same logical fallacies--the one in the
   Church, the other in philosophy, and thus both labouring in a common
   cause, to bring back an unreflecting, arrogant, all
   things-understanding age to the docile, reflecting, mystery-admitting
   spirit of earlier and better times. It were an interesting task to draw
   out, as might be done in parallel columns, these striking accordances,
   in language as well as sentiment, between writers, who seem at first
   sight to have so little in common as Coleridge and the Oxford divines,
   and it would afford a new and certainly no feeble argument in favour of
   those common principles, in which the thoughtful mind is found to take
   refuge as in an impregnable fortress, when driven by error or
   infidelity to seek the grounds of its faith, either in philosophy or
   religion. But it would swell our Preface too far to carry out this
   speculation, suffice it to say, both are evidently the product of the
   same widespread reaction,--both go to change the current of the age, in
   the same direction, and however the one may occasionally lead the
   solitary musing mind unto the very borders of mysticism, or the other
   delude some reverential spirit into an overestimate of exploded forms
   or monkish asceticism, still may we believe in them both as mighty
   elements of good, and chosen instruments of power, working out under
   the overruling providence of God deeper and more abiding changes upon
   earth than either friends or enemies seem to look at.

   Summary of the beneficial tendencies of "Aids to Reflection" on the
   mind of the student.

   In Habits of Thought.--It tends to awaken in the student the power of,
   and taste for, self-conscious reflection--and this it does not by
   verbal directions, which are a vain thing to arouse thought, but by the
   author going before his reader in the path of self-knowledge, showing
   him the way, giving him the result, and thus enabling him to retrace
   for himself, the steps by which it has been reached. Thus does the
   student by degrees become familiar with his own mind and with all the
   objects and processes of thinking.

   In habits of Language.--It tends to give him an equivalent precision.
   From Coleridge's command over his reader's mind, the student first
   comes to know the power of words, and with his author to esteem them
   not dead, but "living" things, even the embodied and articulated spirit
   of our race. Thence he proceeds from Coleridge's example, to learn the
   secret of that power, viz, to use them as "seeds of thought," and
   always therefore, to have in his own mind "realities" corresponding to
   the terms he uses.

   In Mental Philosophy, or what the mind can know of its own
   structure.--It tends to make the student not theoretically but
   practically wise, enabling him, not so much to talk learnedly, as to
   think rightly. It teaches therefore, no formal system of metaphysics,
   for all such are necessarily but delusive pictures of an
   incomprehensible nature, but it furnishes for his adoption a few clear
   fundamental principles which upon trial he will find in striking
   agreement with the teaching of scripture, with his own inward
   experience, and with the highest and best philosophy of every age. Now
   these simple, but deep truths, as being common to the nature of man,
   become to him who is familiar with their application, master-keys by
   which to unlock the thoughts and read the minds of others as well as
   his own.

   In Ethical Philosophy, or the Science of Duty.--It tends to give to the
   mind of the student both clearness and conclusiveness. It gives
   clearness by its peculiarly accurate discrimination between near-lying
   principles of action, as for instance, in giving the boundary lines
   that distinguish though without separating prudence from morality, and
   morality from religion. And still more does it tend to give
   conclusiveness by resting all his moral convictions on the primary
   truths of his inward nature, on the first dictates of conscience, the
   clear light of reason and the essential responsibilities of a
   self-conscious will, and thus freeing his moral reasonings from all
   those metaphysical entangling subtleties by which the understanding is
   both able and apt to perplex the simplest and clearest conclusions of
   duty.

   In Christian Philosophy, or Revelation viewed in the light of a
   Rational nature.--Here it tends to give to the student's faith a
   demonstrative character, by identifying the truths of revelation, not
   indeed with prior discoveries of reason, but still with its highest
   subsequently enlightened conclusions, and with all the fundamental laws
   of our common humanity. "In no case" is its settled principle "can true
   reason and a right faith stand opposed to each other." "I am one," says
   Coleridge, "who do not dare to decry the religious instincts of
   humanity as a baseless dream."

   In Spiritual Religion, or Revelation viewed as the Gospel, i. e., "good
   tidings to the sinner."--It tends to fix the student's thoughts, not
   upon himself but upon "Christ and him crucified." It teaches him to
   look upon Redemption as an accomplished work, purchased for all men and
   made available to all and each who truly seek it, through the operation
   of God's spirit, working, where they are given, through the covenanted
   means of grace, a visible church of divine origin, spiritual binding
   sacraments, prayer having power, and a gradual growth in grace through
   quiet and loving obedience.

   In the mysteries of Faith.--It tends to give repose to the Christian
   student's belief, not however, by explaining mysteries to his
   understanding, but by justifying them to his reason. As being spiritual
   truths, it teaches with St. Paul, that they are to be spiritually
   discerned, cognizable therefore, not by the faculty that judges
   according to sense but solely by the inner man, the inward spiritual
   light of the mind. It teaches further, that they become stumbling
   blocks to our faith, only when detached from the living truths of
   scripture, and looked into by us curiously and unwisely, relatively to
   God's nature, for which end, they were not given, rather than to man
   and his duties, for whose guidance they were alone intended.

   In the perusal of Scripture.--It tends to unite in the mind of the
   student, the deepest gratitude with the highest reverence, inspiring
   him, to use Coleridge's own language, with "an implicit and
   anticipating faith," making "the wisdom of love to precede the love of
   wisdom," "learning as children learn, believing, in order to acquire a
   reason for their belief." The result of such teaching is to make the
   mind hold fast to scripture in its plain and simple words, and not to
   be hasty to explain into metaphor, whatsoever in it passes, as all
   spiritual truth does pass "man's understanding."

   In the Temper of our Faith.--It tends to inspire a cheerful Christian
   confidence, full of hope, full of trust, flowing, not from ourselves,
   but from Him who hath loved us, and given us the earnest of his spirit.
   "We are not always to be looking to or brooding over ourselves either
   for accusation or for confidence, but in the place of "this servile
   thrall-like fear," says Coleridge, borrowing the words of Milton, "we
   are to substitute that adoptive and cheerful boldness which our new
   alliance with God requires of us as Christians."

   In the Christian's religious estimate of others.--It tends to unite in
   his mind, charity with orthodoxy. "Resist every false doctrine," is its
   principle, "and call no man heretic." "The false doctrine," says
   Coleridge, "does not make the man a heretic, but an evil heart can make
   any doctrine heretical." "Scripture is given to teach us our duty, not
   to enable us to sit in judgment on the souls of our fellow creatures."

   And lastly, What man owes to the light of the Gospel.--Coleridge shall
   say in his own powerful words, "Not therefore, that there is a life to
   come, and a future state; but what each individual soul may hope for
   itself therein; and on what grounds: and that this state has been
   rendered an object of aspiration and fervent desire, and a source of
   thanksgiving and exceeding great joy; and by whom, and through whom,
   and for whom, and by what means, and under what conditions--these are
   the peculiar and distinguishing fundamentals of the Christian Faith;
   These are the revealed lights and obtained privileges of the Christian
   Dispensation. Not alone the knowledge of the boon, but the precious
   inestimable boon itself, is the grace and truth that came by Jesus
   Christ. I believe Moses, I believe Paul; but I believe in Christ."

   Such in fine is the character of the work now affectionately
   recommended by its present editor to the Christian confidence of all
   who seek to build up their faith "in the clear light of their own
   self-consciousness." It is sent forth for the benefit of such
   trustfully, as by one who has himself tried it; it is sent forth in
   humility as by one who feels that his task of commentator has been
   above him, and yet is it sent forth without fear, as being with a
   Christian's prayer and in a Christian's confidence, that what has been
   rightly intended, will be made available under the light of a better
   wisdom and the guidance of a Higher Teacher to the spiritual good of
   those who seek that good in the only temper in which it is ever to be
   found, the temper of faith, of love, and of humility.

   Columbia College,

   New-York, Nov., 1, 1839.
     __________________________________________________________________

                              THE AUTHOR'S ADDRESS

TO THE READER.

   Fellow-Christian! the wish to be admired as a fine writer held a very
   subordinate place in my thoughts and feelings in the composition of
   this Volume. Let then its comparative merits and demerits, in respect
   of style and stimulancy, possess a proportional weight, and no more, in
   determining your judgment for or against its contents. Read it through:
   then compare the state of your mind, with the state in which your mind
   was, when you first opened the book. Has it led you to reflect? Has it
   supplied or suggested fresh subjects for reflection? Has it given you
   any new information? Has it removed any obstacle to a lively conviction
   of your responsibility as a moral agent? Has it solved any
   difficulties, which had impeded your faith as a Christian? Lastly, has
   it increased your power of thinking connectedly--especially on the
   scheme and purpose of the Redemption by Christ? If it have done none of
   these things, condemn it aloud as worthless: and strive to compensate
   for your own loss of time, by preventing others from wasting theirs.
   But if your conscience dictates an affirmative answer to all or any of
   the preceding questions, declare this, too, aloud, and endeavour to
   extend my utility.

   Marinus

   VICO

   LACTANTIUS
     __________________________________________________________________

                             THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

   An Author has three points to settle: To what sort his work belongs,
   for what description of readers it is intended, and the specific end or
   object, which it is to answer. There is indeed a preliminary question
   respecting the end which the writer himself has in view, whether the
   number of purchasers, or the benefit of the readers. But this may be
   safely passed by; since where the book itself or the known principles
   of the writer do not supersede the question, there will seldom be
   sufficient strength of character for good or for evil to afford much
   chance of its being either distinctly put or fairly answered.

   I shall proceed therefore to state as briefly as possible the
   intentions of the present volume in reference to the three
   first-mentioned points, namely, What? For whom? For what?

   I. What? The answer is contained in the title-page. It belongs to the
   class of didactic works. Consequently, those who neither wish
   instruction for themselves, nor assistance in instructing others, have
   no interest in its contents.

   II. For whom? Generally, for as many in all classes as wish for aid in
   disciplining their minds to habits of reflection; for all, who desirous
   of building up a manly character in the light of distinct
   consciousness, are content to study the principles of moral
   architecture on the several grounds of prudence, morality, and
   religion. And lastly, for all who feel an interest in the position
   which I have undertaken to defend, this, namely, that the Christian
   Faith is the perfection of human intelligence,--an interest
   sufficiently strong to insure a patient attention to the arguments
   brought in its support.

   But if I am to mention any particular class or description of readers,
   who were prominent in my thought during the composition of the volume,
   my reply must be; that it was especially designed for the studious
   young at the close of their education or on their first entrance into
   the duties of manhood and the rights of self-government. And of these,
   again, in thought and wish I destined the work (the latter and larger
   portion, at least) yet more particularly to students intended for the
   ministry; first, as in duty bound, to the members of our Universities:
   secondly, (but only in respect of this mental precedency second) to all
   alike of whatever name, who have dedicated their future lives to the
   cultivation of their race, as pastors, preachers, missionaries, or
   instructors of youth.

   III. For what? The worth of an author is estimated by the ends, the
   attainment of which he proposed to himself by the particular work;
   while the value of the work depends on its fitness, as the means. The
   objects of the present volume are the following, arranged in the order
   of their comparative importance.
   1. To direct the reader's attention to the value of the science of
   words, their use and abuse, and the incalculable advantages attached to
   the habit of using them appropriately, and with a distinct knowledge of
   their primary, derivative, and metaphorical senses. And in furtherance
   of this object I have neglected no occasion of enforcing the maxim,
   that to expose a sophism and to detect the equivocal or double meaning
   of a word is, in the great majority of cases, one and the same thing.
   Horne Tooke entitled his celebrated work,

   winged words: or language, not only the vehicle of thought but the
   wheels. With my convictions and views, for

   that is, words select and determinate, and for

   that is, living words. The wheels of the intellect I admit them to be:
   but such as Ezekiel beheld in the visions of God as he sat among the
   captives by the river of Chebar. Whithersoever the Spirit was to go,
   the wheels went, and thither was their Spirit to go: for the Spirit of
   the living creature was in the wheels also.
   2. To establish the distinct characters of prudence, morality, and
   religion: and to impress the conviction, that though the second
   requires the first, and the third contains and supposes both the
   former; yet still moral goodness is other and more than prudence or the
   principle of expediency; and religion more and higher than morality.
   For this distinction the better Schools even of Pagan Philosophy
   contended.
   3. To substantiate and set forth at large the momentous distinction
   between reason and understanding. Whatever is achievable by the
   understanding for the purposes of worldly interest, private or public,
   has in the present age been pursued with an activity and a success
   beyond all former experience, and to an extent which equally demands my
   admiration and excites my wonder. But likewise it is, and long has
   been, my conviction, that in no age since the first dawning of science
   and philosophy in this island have the truths, interests, and studies
   which especially belong to the reason, contemplative or practical, sunk
   into such utter neglect, not to say contempt, as during the last
   century. It is therefore one main object of this volume to establish
   the position, that whoever transfers to the understanding the primacy
   due to the reason, loses the one and spoils the other.
   4. To exhibit a full and consistent scheme of the Christian
   Dispensation, and more largely of all the peculiar doctrines of the
   Christian Faith; and to answer all the objections to the same, which do
   not originate in a corrupt will rather than an erring judgment; and to
   do this in a manner intelligible for all who, possessing the ordinary
   advantages of education, do in good earnest desire to form their
   religious creed in the light of their own convictions, and to have a
   reason for the faith which they profess. There are indeed mysteries, in
   evidence of which no reasons can be brought. But it has been my
   endeavour to show, that the true solution of this problem is, that
   these mysteries are reason, reason in its highest form of
   self-affirmation.

   Such are the special objects of these Aids to Reflection. Concerning
   the general character of the work, let me be permitted to add the few
   following sentences. St. Augustine, in one of his Sermons, discoursing
   on a high point of theology, tells his auditors--Sic accipite, ut
   mereamini intelligere. Fides enim debet praecedere intellectum, ut sit
   intellectus fidei praemium. Now without a certain portion of gratuitous
   and (as it were) experimentative faith in the writer, a reader will
   scarcely give that degree of continued attention, without which no
   didactic work worth reading can be read to any wise or profitable
   purpose. In this sense, therefore, and to this extent, every author,
   who is competent to the office he has undertaken, may without arrogance
   repeat St. Augustine's words in his own right, and advance a similar
   claim on similar grounds. But I venture no further than to imitate the
   sentiment at a humble distance, by avowing my belief that he, who seeks
   instruction in the following pages, will not fail to find entertainment
   likewise; but that whoever seeks entertainment only will find neither.

   Reader!--You have been bred in a land abounding with men, able in arts,
   learning, and knowledges manifold, this man in one, this in another,
   few in many, none in all. But there is one art, of which every man
   should be master, the art of reflection. If you are not a thinking man,
   to what purpose are you a man at all? In like manner, there is one
   knowledge, which it is every man's interest and duty to acquire,
   namely, self-knowledge: or to what end was man alone, of all animals,
   endued by the Creator with the faculty of self-consciousness? Truly
   said the Pagan moralist,

   e caelo descendit,

   But you are likewise born in a Christian land: and Revelation has
   provided for you new subjects for reflection, and new treasures of
   knowledge, never to be unlocked by him who remains self-ignorant.
   Self-knowledge is the key to this casket; and by reflection alone can
   it be obtained. Reflect on your own thoughts, actions, circumstances,
   and--which will be of especial aid to you in forming a habit of
   reflection,--accustom yourself to reflect on the words you use, hear,
   or read, their birth, derivation and history. For if words are not
   things, they are living powers, by which the things of most importance
   to mankind are actuated, combined, and humanized. Finally, by
   reflection you may draw from the fleeting facts of your worldly trade,
   art, or profession, a science permanent as your immortal soul; and make
   even these subsidiary and preparative to the reception of spiritual
   truth, "doing as the dyers do, who having first dipt their silks in
   colours of less value, then give them the last tincture of crimson in
   grain."
     __________________________________________________________________

                              AIDS TO REFLECTION.

INTRODUCTORY APHORISMS.

  APHORISM I.

   In philosophy equally as in poetry, it is the highest and most useful
   prerogative of genius to produce the strongest impressions of novelty,
   while it rescues admitted truths from the neglect caused by the very
   circumstance of their universal admission. Extremes meet. Truths, of
   all others the most awful and interesting, are too often considered as
   so true, that they lose all the power of truth, and lie bed-ridden in
   the dormitory of the soul, side by side with the most despised and
   exploded errors.

  APHORISM II.

   There is one sure way of giving freshness and importance to the most
   common-place maxims--that of reflecting on them in direct reference to
   our own state and conduct, to our own past and future being.

  APHORISM III.

   To restore a common-place truth to its first uncommon lustre, you need
   only translate it into action. But to do this, you must have reflected
   on its truth.

  APHORISM IV.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   It is the advice of the wise man, "Dwell at home," "or, with yourself;
   and though there are very few that do this, yet it is surprising that
   the greatest part of mankind cannot be prevailed upon, at least to
   visit themselves sometimes; but, according to the saying of the wise
   Solomon, The eyes of the fool are in the ends of the earth."

   A reflecting mind, says an ancient writer, is the spring and source of
   every good thing.--"Omnis boni principium intellectus
   cogitabundus."--It is at once the disgrace and the misery of men, that
   they live without forethought. Suppose yourself fronting a mirror. Now
   what the objects behind you are to their images at the same apparent
   distance before you, such is reflection to forethought. As a man
   without forethought scarcely deserves the name of a man, so forethought
   without reflection is but a metaphorical phrase for the instinct of a
   beast.

  APHORISM V.

   As a fruit-tree is more valuable than any one of its fruits singly, or
   even than all its fruits of a single season, so the noblest object of
   reflection is the mind itself, by which we reflect:

   And as the blossoms, the green, and the ripe, fruit of an orange-tree
   are more beautiful to behold when on the tree and seen as one with it,
   than the same growth detached and seen successively, after their
   importation into another country and different clime; so it is with the
   manifold objects of reflection, when they are considered principally in
   reference to the reflective power, and as part and parcel of the same.
   No object, of whatever value our passions may represent it, but becomes
   foreign to us as soon as it is altogether unconnected with our
   intellectual, moral, and spiritual life. To be ours, it must be
   referred to the mind, either as motive, or consequence, or symptom.

  APHORISM VI.

   Leighton

   He who teaches men the principles and precepts of spiritual wisdom,
   before their minds are called off from foreign objects, and turned
   inward upon themselves, might as well write his instructions, as the
   Sybil wrote her prophecies, on the loose leaves of trees, and commit
   them to the mercy of the inconstant winds.

  APHORISM VII.

   In order to learn, we must attend: in order to profit by what we have
   learned, we must think--that is, reflect. He only thinks who reflects
   [1] .

  APHORISM VIII.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   It is a matter of great difficulty, and requires no ordinary skill and
   address, to fix the attention of men on the world within them, to
   induce them to study the processes
     __________________________________________________________________

   [continue]and superintend the works which they are themselves carrying
   on in their own minds; in short, to awaken in them both the faculty of
   thought [1] and the inclination to exercise it. For alas! the largest
   part of mankind are nowhere greater strangers than at home.

  APHORISM IX.

   Life is the one universal soul, which by virtue of the enlivening
   Breath, and the informing Word, all organized bodies have in common,
   each after its kind. This, therefore, all animals possess, and man as
   an animal. But, in addition to this, God transfused into man a higher
   gift, and specially imbreathed:--even a living (that is,
   self-subsisting) soul, a soul having its life in itself. "And man
   became a living soul." He did not merely possess it; he became it. It
   was his proper being, his truest self, the man in the man. None then,
   not one of human kind, so poor and destitute, but there is provided for
   him, even in his present state, a house not built with hands. Aye, and
   spite of the philosophy (falsely so called) which mistakes the causes,
   the conditions, and the occasions of our becoming conscious of certain
   truths and realities for the truths and realities themselves--a
     __________________________________________________________________

   [continue]house gloriously furnished. Nothing is wanted but the eye,
   which is the light of this house, the light which is the eye of this
   soul. This seeing light, this enlightening eye, is reflection [1] . It
   is more, indeed, than is ordinarily meant by that word; but it is what
   a Christian ought to mean by it, and to know, too, whence it first
   came, and still continues to come--of what light even this light is but
   a reflection. This, too, is thought; and all thought is but unthinking
   that does not flow out of this, or tend towards it.

  APHORISM X.

   Self-superintendence! that any thing, should overlook itself! Is not
   this a parodox, and hard to understand? It is, indeed, difficult, and
   to the imbruted sensualist a direct contradiction: and yet most truly
   does the poet exclaim,


   --Unless above himself he can

   Erect himself, how mean a thing is man!

  APHORISM XI.

   An hour of solitude passed in sincere and earnest prayer, or the
   conflict with, and conquest over, a single passion or "subtle bosom
   sin," will teach us more of thought, will more effectually awaken the
   faculty, and form the habit, of reflection, than a year's study in the
   schools without them.

  APHORISM XII.

   In a world, the opinions of which are drawn from outside shows, many
   things may be paradoxical, (that is,
     __________________________________________________________________

   [continue]contrary to the common notion) and nevertheless true nay,
   because they are true. How should it be otherwise, as long as the
   imagination of the worldling is wholly occupied by surfaces, while the
   Christian's thoughts are fixed on the substance, that which is and
   abides, and which, because it is the substance [1] , the outward senses
   cannot recognise. Tertullian had good reason for his assertion, that
   the simplest Christian (if indeed a Christian) knows more than the most
   accomplished irreligious philosopher.

  COMMENT.

   Let it not, however, be forgotten, that the powers of the understanding
   and the intellectual graces are precious gifts of God; and that every
   Christian, according to the opportunities vouchsafed to him, is bound
   to cultivate the one and to acquire the other. Indeed, he is scarcely a
   Christian who willfully neglects so to do. What says the apostle? Add
   to your faith knowledge, and to knowledge manly energy, for this is the
   proper rendering of and not virtue, at least in the present and
   ordinary acceptation of the word [2] .
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XIII.

   Never yet did there exist a full faith in the Divine Word (by whom
   light, as well as immortality, was brought into the world) which did
   not expand the intellect, while it purified the heart;--which did not
   multiply the aims and objects of the understanding, while it fixed and
   simplified those of the desires and passions [1] .

  COMMENT.

   If acquiescence without insight; if warmth without light; if an
   immunity from doubt, given and guaranteed by a resolute ignorance; if
   the habit of taking for granted the words of a catechism, remembered or
   forgotten; if a mere sensation of positiveness substituted--I will not
   say for the sense of certainty, but--for that calm assurance, the very
   means and conditions of which it supersedes; if a belief that seeks the
   darkness, and yet strikes no root, immoveable as the limpet from the
   rock, and, like the limpet, fixed there by mere force of adhesion;--if
   these suffice to make men Christians, in what sense could the apostle
   affirm that believers receive, not indeed worldly wisdom, that comes to
   nought, but the wisdom of God, that we might know and comprehend the
   things that are freely given to us of God? On what grounds could he
   denounce the sincerest fervour of spirit as defective,
     __________________________________________________________________

   [continue]where it does not likewise bring forth fruits in the
   understanding?

  APHORISM XIV.

   In our present state, it is little less than impossible that the
   affections should be kept constant to an object which gives no
   employment to the understanding, and yet cannot be made manifest to the
   senses. The exercise of the reasoning and reflecting powers, increasing
   insight, and enlarging views, are requisite to keep alive the
   substantial faith in the heart.

  APHORISM XV.

   In the state of perfection, perhaps, all other faculties may be
   swallowed up in love, or superseded by immediate vision; but it is on
   the wings of the cherubim, that is (according to the interpretation of
   the ancient Hebrew doctors) the intellectual powers and energies, that
   we must first be borne up to the "pure empyrean." It must be seraphs,
   and not the hearts of imperfect mortals, that can burn unfuelled and
   self-fed. Give me understanding (is the prayer of the royal Psalmist)
   and I shall observe thy law with my whole heart.--Thy law is
   exceedingly broad--that is, comprehensive, pregnant, containing far
   more than the apparent import of the words on a first perusal. It is my
   meditation all the day.

  COMMENT.

   It is worthy of especial observation, that the Scriptures are
   distinguished from all other writings pretending to inspiration, by the
   strong and frequent recommendations of knowledge, and a spirit of
   inquiry. Without reflection, it is evident that neither the one can be
   acquired nor other exercised.

  APHORISM XVI.

   The word rational has been strangely abused of late times. This must
   not, however, disincline us to the weighty consideration, that
   thoughtfulness, and a desire to bottom all our convictions on grounds
   of right reason, are inseparable from the character of a Christian.

  APHORISM XVII.

   A reflecting mind is not a flower that grows wild, or comes up of its
   own accord. The difficulty is indeed greater than many, who mistake
   quick recollection for thought, are disposed to admit; but how much
   less than it would be, had we not been born and bred in a Christian and
   Protestant land, few of us are sufficiently aware. Truly may we, and
   thankfully ought we to, exclaim with the Psalmist: The entrance of thy
   words giveth light; it giveth understanding even to the simple.

  APHORISM XVIII.

   Examine the journals of our zealous missionaries, I will not say among
   the Hottentots or Esquimaux, but in the highly civilized, though
   fearfully uncultivated, inhabitants of ancient India. How often, and
   how feelingly, do they describe the difficulty of rendering the
   simplest chain of thought intelligible to the ordinary natives, the
   rapid exhaustion of their whole power of attention, and with what
   distressful effort it is exerted while it lasts! Yet it is among these
   that the hideous practices of self-torture chiefly prevail. O if folly
   were no easier than wisdom, it being often so very much more grievous,
   how certainly might these unhappy slaves of superstition be converted
   to Christianity! But, alas! to swing by hooks passed through the back,
   or to walk in shoes with nails of iron pointed upwards through the
   soles--all this is so much less difficult, demands so much less
   exertion of the will than to reflect, and by reflection to gain
   knowledge and tranquillity!

  COMMENT.

   It is not true, that ignorant persons have no notion of the advantages
   of truth and knowledge. They confess, they see and bear witness to,
   these advantages in the conduct, the immunities, and the superior
   powers of the possessors. Were they attainable by pilgrimages the most
   toilsome, or penances the most painful, we should assuredly have as
   many pilgrims and self-tormentors in the service of true religion, as
   now exist under the tyranny of papal or Brahman superstition.

  APHORISM XIX.

   In countries enlightened by the gospel, however, the most formidable
   and (it is to be feared) the most frequent impediment to men's turning
   the mind inwards upon themselves, is that they are afraid of what they
   shall find there. There is an aching hollowness in the bosom, a dark
   cold speck at the heart, an obscure and boding sense of a somewhat,
   that must be kept out of sight of the conscience; some secret lodger,
   whom they can neither resolve to eject or retain [1] .
     __________________________________________________________________

   Graces vouchsafed in a Christian land.


   Lord! with what care hast thou begirt us round!

   Parents first season us. Then schoolmasters

   Deliver us to laws. They send us bound

   To rules of reason Holy messengers;

  COMMENT.

   Few are so obdurate, few have sufficient strength of character, to be
   able to draw forth an evil tendency or immoral practice into distinct
   consciousness, without bringing it in the same moment before an awaking
   conscience. But for this very reason it becomes a duty of conscience to
   form the mind to a habit of distinct consciousness. An unreflecting
   Christian walks in twilight among snares and pitfalls! He entreats the
   heavenly Father not to lead him into temptation, and yet places himself
   on the very edge of it, because he will not kindle the torch which his
   Father had given into his hands, as a mean of prevention and lest he
   should pray too late.

  APHORISM XX.

   Among the various undertakings of men, can there be mentioned one more
   important, can there be conceived one more sublime, than an intention
   to form the human mind anew after the divine image? The very intention,
   if it be sincere, is a ray of its dawning.

   The requisites for the execution of this high intent may be comprised
   under three heads; the prudential, the moral, and the spiritual:
     __________________________________________________________________


   Pulpits and Sundays; sorrow dogging sin;

   Afflictions sorted; anguish of all sizes;

   Fine nets and stratagems to catch us in!

   Bibles laid open; millions of surprises;

   Blessings beforehand; ties of gratefulness;

   The sound of glory ringing in our ears:

   Without, our shame; within, our consciences;

   Angels and grace; eternal hopes and fears!

   Yet all these fences, and their whole array,

   One cunning bosom sin blows quite away.

  APHORISM XXI.

   First, Religious Prudence.--What this is, will be best explained by its
   effects and operations. Prudence consists in the service of religion,
   in the prevention or abatement of hindrances and distractions; and
   consequently in avoiding, or removing, all such circumstances as, by
   diverting the attention of the workman, retard the progress and hazard
   the safety of the work. It is likewise (I deny not) a part of this
   unworldly prudence, to place ourselves as much and as often as it is in
   our power so to do, in circumstances directly favourable to our great
   design; and to avail ourselves of all the positive helps and
   furtherances which these circumstances afford. But neither dare we, as
   Christians, forget whose and under what dominion the things are, quae
   nos circumstant, that is, which stand around us. We are to remember;
   that it is the world that constitutes our outward circumstances; that
   in the form of the world, which is evermore at variance with the divine
   form (or idea) they are cast and moulded; and that of the means and
   measures which prudence requires in the forming anew of the divine
   image in the soul, the far greater number suppose the world at enmity
   with our design. We are to avoid its snares, to repel its attacks, to
   suspect its aids and succours, and even when compelled to receive them
   as allies within our trenches, yet to commit the outworks alone to
   their charge, and to keep them at a jealous distance from the citadel.
   The powers of the world are often christened, but seldom christianized.
   They are but proselytes of the outer gate: or, like the Saxons of old,
   enter the land as auxiliaries, and remain in it as conquerors and
   lords.

  APHORISM XXII.

   The rules of prudence in general, like the laws of the stone tables,
   are for the most part prohibitive. Thou shalt not is their
   characteristic formula: and it is an especial part of Christian
   prudence that it should be so. Nor would it be difficult to bring under
   this head, all the social obligations that arise out of the relations
   of the present life, which the sensual understanding

   Romans viii, 6,) is of itself able to discover, and the performance of
   which, under favourable circumstances, the merest worldly
   self-interest, without love or faith, is sufficient to enforce; but
   which Christian prudence enlivens by a higher principle, and renders
   symbolic and sacramental. (Ephesians v, 32).

  COMMENT.

   This then, under the appellation of prudential requisites, comes first
   under consideration: and may be regarded as the shrine and frame-work
   for the divine image, into which the worldly human is to be
   transformed. We are next to bring out the divine portrait itself, the
   distinct features of its countenance, as a sojourner among men; its
   benign aspect turned towards its fellow-pilgrims, the extended arm, and
   the hand that blesseth and healeth.

  APHORISM XXIII.

   The outward service

   of ancient religion, the rites, ceremonies and ceremonial vestments of
   the
     __________________________________________________________________

   *See the epistle of St. James, c. i, v. 26, 27, where, in the
   authorized version, the Greek word

   is falsely rendered religion: whether by mistake of the translator, or
   from the intended sense having become obsolete, I cannot decide. At all
   events, for the English reader old law, had morality for their
   substance. They were the letter, of which morality was the spirit; the
   enigma, of which morality was the meaning. But morality itself is the
   service and ceremonial (cultus exterior, of the Christian religion. The
   scheme of grace and truth that became** through Jesus Christ, the faith
   that looks down into the perfect law of liberty, has "light for its
   garment:" its very "robe is righteousness."
     __________________________________________________________________

   of our times it has the effect of an erroneous translation. It not only
   obscures the connexion of the passage, and weakens the peculiar force
   and sublimity of the thought, rendering it comparatively flat and
   trivial, almost indeed tautological, but has occasioned this particular
   verse to be perverted into a support of a very dangerous error; and the
   whole epistle to be considered as a set-off against the epistles and
   declarations of St. Paul, instead of (what in fact it is) a masterly
   comment and confirmation of the same. I need not inform the religious
   reader, that James, c. i, v. 27, is the favourite text and most boasted
   authority of those divines who represent the Redeemer of the world as
   little more than a moral reformer, and the Christian faith as a code of
   ethics, differing from the moral system of Moses and the prophets by an
   additional motive; or rather, by the additional strength and clearness
   which the historical fact of the resurrection has given to the same
   motive.

   **The Greek word

   unites in itself the two senses of began to exist and was made to
   exist. It exemplifies the force of the middle voice, in distinction
   from the verb reflex. In answer to a note on John i, 2, in the
   Unitarian version of the New Testament, I think it worth noticing, that
   the same word is used in the very same sense by Aristophanes in that
   famous parody on the cosmogonies of the mythic poets, or the creation
   of the finite, as delivered, or supposed to be delivered, in the
   Cabiric or Samqthracian mysteries, in the Comedy of the Birds.

   --------

   James, c. i, v. 25. The Greek word,

   signifies the incurvation or bending of the body in the act of looking
   down into; as, for instance, in the endeavour to see the reflected
   image of a star in the water at the bottom of a well. A more happy or
   forcible word could not have been chosen to express the nature and
   ultimate object of reflexion, and to enforce the necessity of it, in
   order to discover the living fountain and spring-head of the evidence
   of the Christian faith in the believer himself, and at the same time

  COMMENT.

   Herein the apostle places the pre-eminence, the peculiar and
   distinguishing excellence of the Christian religion. The ritual is of
   the same kind,

   though not of the same order, with the religion itself--not arbitrary
   or conventional, as types and hieroglyphics are in relation to the
   things expressed by them; but inseparable, consubstantiated (as it
   were), and partaking therefore of the same life, permanence, and
   intrinsic worth with its spirit and principle.

  APHORISM XXIV.

   Morality is the body, of which the faith in Christ is the soul--so far
   indeed its earthly body, as it is adapted to its state of warfare on
   earth, and the appointed form and instrument of its communion with the
   present world; yet not "terrestrial," nor of the world, but a celestial
   body, and capable of being transfigured from glory to glory, in
   accordance with the varying circumstances and outward relations of its
   moving and informing spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   to point out the seat and region, where alone it is to be found.
   Quantum sumus, scimus. That which we find within ourselves, which is
   more than ourselves, and yet the ground of whatever is good and
   permanent therein, is the substance and life of all other knowledge.

   N. B. The Familists of the sixteenth century, and similar enthusiasts
   of later date, overlooked the essential point, that it was a law, and a
   law that involved its own end

   or law that perfects or completes itself; and therefore, its
   obligations are called, in reference to human statutes, imperfect
   duties, i. e., incoercible from without. They overlooked that it was a
   law that portions out

   to allot or make division of) to each man the sphere and limits, within
   which it is to be exercised--which as St. Peter notices of certain
   profound passages in the writings of St. Paul, (St. Paul, (2 Pet. c.
   iii, v. 16,)

  APHORISM XXV.

   Wo to the man, who will believe neither power, freedom, nor morality,
   because he nowhere finds either entire, or immixed with sin, thraldom
   and infirmity. In the natural and intellectual realms, we distinguish
   what we cannot separate; and in the moral world, we must distinguish in
   order to separate. Yea, in the clear distinction of good from evil the
   process of separation commences.

  COMMENT.

   It was customary with religious men in former times, to make a rule of
   taking every morning some text, or aphorism*, for their occasional
   meditation during the day, and thus to fill up the intervals of their
   attention to business. I do not point it out for imitation, as knowing
   too well, how apt these self-imposed rules are to degenerate into
   superstition or hollowness: otherwise I would have recommended the
   following as the first exercise.

  APHORISM XXVI.

   It is a dull and obtuse mind, that must divide in order to distinguish;
   but it is a still worse, that distinguishes
     __________________________________________________________________

   *In accordance with a preceding remark, on the use of etymology in
   disciplining the youthful mind to thoughtful habits, and as consistent
   with the title of this work, "Aids to Reflection,: I shall offer no
   apology for the following and similar notes:--

   Aphorism, determinate position, from the Greek ap, from; and horizein,
   to bound, or limit; whence our horizon. In order to get the full sense
   of a word, we should first present to our minds the visual image that
   forms its primary meaning. Draw lines of different colours round the
   different counties of England, and then cut out each separately, as in
   the common play-maps that children take to pieces and put together--so
   that each district can be contemplated apart from the rest, as a whole
   in itself. This twofold act of circumscribing, and detaching, when it
   is exerted by the mind on subjects of reflection and reason, is to
   aphorize, and the result an aphorism. in order to divide. In the
   former, we may contemplate the source of superstition and idolatry;**
   in the latter of schism, heresy, and a seditious and sectarian spirit.?

  APHORISM XXVII.

   Exclusively of the abstract sciences, the largest and worthiest portion
   of our knowledge consists of aphorisms and the greatest and best of men
   is but an aphorism.

  APHORISM XXVIII.

   On the prudential influence which the fear or foresight of the
   consequences of his actions, in respect of his own loss or gain, may
   exert on a newly converted believer.

   Prepautionary Remark.--I meddle not with the dispute respecting
   conversion, whether, and in what sense, necessary in all Christians. It
   is sufficient for my purpose, that a very large number of men, even in
   Christian countries, need to be converted, and that not a few, I trust,
   have been. The tenet becomes fanatical and dangerous, only when rare
   and extraordinary exceptions are made to be the general rule;--when
   what was vouchsafed to the apostle of the Gentiles by especial
     __________________________________________________________________

   **

   --Damasc. de Myst. Egypt; that is, They divided the intelligible into
   many and several individualities.

   From

   Though well aware of its formal and apparent derivation from haireO, I
   am inclined to refer both words to airo, as the primitive term,
   containing the primary visual image, and therefore should explain
   haeresis as a wilful raising into public notice, an uplifting (for
   display) of any particular opinion differing from the established
   belief of the church at large, and making it a ground of schism, that
   is division.

   ?I mean these words in their large and philosophic sense in relation to
   the spirit, or originating temper and tendency, and not to any one mode
   under which, or to any one class, in or by which, it may be displayed.
   A seditious spirit may (it is possible, though not probable) exist in
   the council-chamber of a palace as strongly as in a mob in Palace-Yard;
   and a sectarian spirit in a cathedral, no less than in a conventicle.
   grace, and for an especial purpose, namely, a conversion[^*] begun and
   completed in the same moment, is demanded or expected of all men, as a
   necessary sign and pledge of their election. Late observations have
   shown, that under many circumstances the magnetic needle, even after
   the disturbing influence has been removed, will keep wavering, and
   require many days before it points aright, and remains steady to the
   pole. So is it ordinarily with the soul, after it has begun to free
   itself from the disturbing forces of the flesh, and the world, and to
   convert[^] itself towards God.

  APHORISM XXIX.

   Awakened by the cock-crow (a sermon, a calamity, a sick bed, or a
   providential escape) the Christian pilgrim sets out in the morning
   twilight, while yet the truth (the )

   is below the horizon. Certain necessary consequences of his past life
   and his present undertaking will be seen by the refraction of its
   light: more will be apprehended and conjectured. The phantasms, that
   had predominated during the hours of darkness, are still busy. Though
   they no longer present themselves as distinct forms, they yet remain as
   formative motions in the pilgrim's soul, unconscious of its own
   activity and over-mastered by its own workmanship.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [^*] Whereas Christ's other disciples had a breeding under him, St.
   Paul was born an apostle; not carved out, as the rest, by degrees and
   in course of time, but a fusile apostle, an apostle poured out and cast
   in a mould. As Adam was a perfect man in an instant, so was St. Paul a
   perfect Christian. The same spirit was the lightning that melted, and
   the mould that received, and shaped him.--Donne's Sermons--quoted from
   memory.

   [^] From the Latin, convertere, that is, by an act of the will to turn
   towards the true pole, at the same time (for this is the force of the
   prepositive con,) that the understanding is convinced and made aware of
   its existence and direction. Things take the signature of thought. The
   shapes of the recent dream become a mould for the objects in the
   distance, and these again give an outwardness and sensation of reality
   to the shapings of the dream. The bodings inspired by the long habit of
   selfishness, and self-seeking cunning, though they are now commencing
   the process of their purification into that fear which is the beginning
   of wisdom, and which, as such, is ordained to be our guide and
   safeguard, till the sun of love, the perfect law of liberty, is fully
   arisen--these bodings will set the fancy at work, and haply, for a
   time, transform the mists of dim and imperfect knowledge into
   determinate superstitions. But in either case, whether seen clearly or
   dimly, whether beholden or only imagined, the consequences contemplated
   in their bearings on the individual's inherent[^*] desire of happiness
   and dread of pain become motives; and (unless all distinction in the
   words be done away with, and either prudence or virtue be reduced to a
   superfluous synonyme, a redundancy in all the languages of the
   civilized world) these motives, and the acts and forbearances directly
   proceeding from them, fall under the head of prudence, as belonging to
   one or other of its three very distinct species.

   I. It may be a prudence, that stands in opposition to a higher moral
   life, and tends to preclude it, and to prevent the soul from ever
   arriving at the hatred of sin for its own exceeding sinfulness (Rom.
   vii, 13): and this is an evil prudence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [^*]The following extract from Leighton's Theological Lectures, sect.
   II, may serve as a comment on this sentence:

   "The human mind, however shunned and weakened by the Fall, still
   retains some faint idea of the good it has lost; a kind of languid
   sense of its misery and indigence, with affections suitable to these
   obscure notions. This at least is beyond all doubt and indisputable,
   that all men

   II. Or it may be a neutral prudence, not incompatible with spiritual
   growth: and to this we may, with especial propriety, apply the words of
   our Lord, What is not against us is for us. It is therefore an
   innocent, and (being such) a proper, and commendable prudence.

   III. Or it may lead and be subservient to a higher principle than
   itself. The mind and conscience of the individual may be reconciled to
   it, in the foreknowledge of the higher principle, and with yearning
   towards it that implies a foretaste of future freedom. The enfeebled
   convalescent is reconciled to his crutches, and thankfully makes use of
   them, not only because they are necessary for his immediate support,
   but likewise, because they are the means and conditions of exercise,
   and by exercise, of establishing, gradatim paulatim, that strength,
   flexibility, and almost spontaneous obedience of the muscles, which the
   idea and cheering presentiment of health hold out to him. He finds
   their value
     __________________________________________________________________

   wish well to themselves; nor can the mind divest itself of this
   propensity, without divesting itself of its being. This is what the
   schoolmen mean when in their manner of expression they say, that 'the
   will (voluntas, not arbitrium) is carried towards happiness not simply
   as will, but as nature.'"

   I venture to remark that this position, if not more certainly, would be
   more evidently true, if instead of beatitude, the word indolentia (that
   is, freedom from pain, negative happiness) had been used. But this
   depends on the exact meaning attached to the term self, of which more
   in another place. One conclusion, however, follows inevitably from the
   preceding position, namely, that this propensity can never be
   legitimately made the principle of morality, even because it is no part
   or appurtenance of the moral will; and because the proper object of the
   moral principle is to limit and control this propensity, and to
   determine in what it may be, and in what it ought to be, gratified;
   while it is the business of philosophy to instruct the understanding,
   and the office of religion to convince the whole man, that otherwise
   than as a regulated, and of course therefore a subordinate, end, this
   propensity, innate and inalienable though it be, can never be realized
   or fulfilled. in their present necessity, and their worth as they are
   the instruments of finally superseding it. This is a faithful, a wise
   prudence, having, indeed, its birth-place in the world, and the wisdom
   of this world for its father; but naturalized in a better land, and
   having the wisdom from above for its sponsor and spiritual parent. To
   steal a dropt feather from the spicy nest of the phoenix, (the fond
   humour, I mean, of the mystic divines and allegorizers of holy writ),
   it is the son of Terah from Ur of the Chaldees, who gives a tithe of
   all to the King of Righteousness, without father, without mother,
   without descent, and receives a blessing on the remainder.

   IV. Lastly, there is a prudence that co-exists with morality, as
   morality co-exists with the spiritual life: a prudence that is the
   organ of both, as the understanding is to the reason and the will, or
   as the lungs are to the heart and brain. This is a holy prudence, the
   steward faithful and discreet (Luke xii, 42), the eldest servant in the
   family of faith, born in the house, and made the ruler over his lord's
   household.

   Let not then, I entreat you, my purpose be misunderstood; as if, in
   distinguishing virtue from prudence, I wished to divide the one from
   the other. True morality is hostile to that prudence only, which is
   preclusive of true morality. The teacher, who subordinates prudence to
   virtue, cannot be supposed to dispense with virtue; and he, who teaches
   the proper connexion of the one with the other, does not depreciate the
   lower in any sense; while by making it a link of the same chain with
   the higher, and receiving the same influence, he raises it.

   In general, morality may be compared to the consonant; prudence to the
   vowel. The former cannot be uttered (reduced to practice) but by means
   of the latter.

  APHORISM XXX.

   What the duties of morality are, the apostle instructs the believer in
   full, comprising them under the two heads of negative and positive;
   negative to keep himself pure from the world; and positive, beneficence
   from lovingkindness, that is, love of his fellow-men (his kind) as
   himself.

  APHORISM XXXI.

   Last and highest come the spiritual, comprising all the truths, acts,
   and duties, that have an especial reference to the timeless, the
   permanent, the eternal, to the sincere love of the true, as truth, of
   the good, as good: and of God as both in one. It comprehends the whole
   ascent from uprightness (morality, virtue, inward rectitude) to
   godlikeness, with all the acts, exercises, and disciplines of mind,
   will, and affection, that are requisite or conducive to the great
   design of our redemption from the form of the evil one, and of our
   second creation or birth in the divine image.**
     __________________________________________________________________

   **It is worthy of observation, and may furnish a fruitful subject for
   future reflection, how nearly this scriptural division coincides with
   the Platonic, which, commencing with the prudential, or the habit of
   act and purpose proceeding from enlightened self-interest, [qui animi
   imperio, corporis servitio, rerum auxilio, in proprium sui commodum et
   sibi providus utitur, hunc esse prodentem statuimus,] ascends to the
   moral, that is, to the purifying and remedial virtues; and seeks its
   summit in the imitation of the divine nature. In this last division,
   answering to that which we have called the spiritual, Plato includes
   all those inward acts and aspirations, waitings, and watchings, which
   have a growth in godlikeness for their immediate purpose, and the union
   of the human soul with the supreme good as their ultimate object. Nor
   was it altogether without grounds that several of the Fathers ventured
   to believe that Plato had some dim conception of the necessity of a
   divine mediator, whether through some indistinct echo of the
   patriarchal faith, or some rays of light refracted from the Hebrew
   prophets through a Phoenician

  APHORISM XXXII.

   It may be an additional aid to reflection, to distinguish the three
   kinds severally, according to the faculty to which each corresponds,
   the part of our human nature which is more particularly its organ.
   Thus: the prudential corresponds to the sense and the understanding;
   the moral to the heart and the conscience; the spiritual to the will
   and the reason, that is, to the finite will reduced to harmony with,
   and in subordination to, the reason, as a ray from that true light
   which is both reason and will, universal reason, and will absolute.
     __________________________________________________________________

   medium (to which he may possibly have referred in his phrase,

   the wisdom delivered from God), or by his own sense of the mysterious
   contradiction in human nature between the will and the reason, the
   natural appetences and the not less innate law of conscience, (Romans
   ii, 14, 15), we shall in vain attempt to determine. It is not
   impossible that all three may have co-operated in partially unveiling
   these awful truths to this plank from the wreck of paradise thrown on
   the shores of idolatrous Greece, to this divine philosopher,

   Che in quella schiera ando piu presso al segno

   Al qual aggiunge, a chi dal cielo e dato.

   Petrarch. Del Trionfo della Fama, cap. iii, 1, 5, 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] The indisposition, nay, the angry aversion to think, even in
   persons who are most willing to attend, and on the subjects to which
   they are giving studious attention, as political economy, biblical
   theology, classical antiquities, and the like,--is the phenomenon that
   forces itself on my notice afresh, every time I enter into the society
   of persons in the higher ranks. To assign a feeling and a determination
   of will, as a satisfactory reason for embracing or rejecting this or
   that opinion or belief, is of ordinary occurrence, and sure to obtain
   the sympathy and the suffrages of the company. And yet to me this seems
   little less irrational than to apply the nose to a picture, and to
   decide on its genuineness by the sense of smell.

   [1] Distinction between thought and attention. --By thought is here
   meant the voluntary reproduction in our minds of those states of
   consciousness, or (to use a phrase more familiar to the religious
   reader) of those inward experiences, to which, as to his best and most
   authentic documents, the teacher of moral or religious truth refers us.
   In attention, we keep the mind passive: in thought, we rouse it into
   activity. In. the former, we submit to an impression we keep the mind
   steady, in order to receive the stamp. In the latter, we seek to
   imitate tho artist, while we ourselves make a copy or duplicate of his
   work. We may learn arithmetic, or the elements of geometry, by
   continued attention alone; but self-knowledge, or an insight into the
   laws and constitution of the human mind and the grounds of religion and
   true morality, in addition to the effort of attention requires the
   energy of thought.

   [1] The dianoia of St. John, 1 Ep. v, 20, inaccurately rendered
   understanding in our translation. To exhibit the full force of the
   Greek word, we must say, a power of discernment by reason.

   [1] Quod stat subtus, that which stands beneath, and (as it were)
   supports, the appearance. In a language like ours, where so many words
   are derived from other languages, there are few modes of instruction
   more useful or more amusing than that of accustoming young people to
   seek for the etymology, or primary meaning of the words they use. There
   are cases, in which more knowledge of more value may be conveyed by the
   history of a word, than by the history of a campaign.

   [2] I am not ashamed to confess that I dislike the frequent use of the
   word virtue, instead of righteousness, in the pulpit: and that in
   prayer or preaching before a Christian community, it sounds too much
   like pagan philosophy. The passage in St. Peter's epistle, is the only
   scripture authority that can be pretended for its use, and I think it
   right, therefore, to notice, that it rests, either on an oversight of
   the translators, or on a change in the meaning of the word since their
   time.

   [1] The effects of a zealous ministry on the intellects and
   acquirements of the labouring classes are not only attested by Baxter,
   and the Presbyterian divines, but admitted by Bishop Burnet, who,
   during his mission in the west of Scotland, was "amazed to find a poor
   commonalty so able to argue," &c. But we need not go to a sister church
   for proof or example. The diffusion of light and knowledge through this
   kingdom, by the exertions of the bishops and clergy, by Episcopalians
   and Puritans, from Edward VI, to the Restoration, was as wonderful as
   it is praiseworthy, and may be justly placed among the most remarkable
   facts of history.

   [1] The following sonnet was extracted by me from Herbert's Temple, in
   a work long since out of print, for the purity of the language and the
   fulness of the sense. But I shall be excused, I trust, in repeating it
   here for higher merits and with higher purposes, as a forcible comment
   on the words in the text.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  REFLECTIONS.

INTRODUCTORY TO

MORAL AND RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
     __________________________________________________________________

  ON SENSIBILITY.

   If prudence, though practically inseparable from morality, is not to be
   confounded with the moral principle; still less may sensibility, that
   is, a constitutional quickness of sympathy with pain and pleasure, and
   a keen sense of the gratifications that accompany social intercourse,
   mutual endearments, and reciprocal preferences, be mistaken, or deemed
   a substitute, for either. Sensibility is not even a sure pledge of a
   good heart, though among the most common meanings of that many-meaning
   and too commonly misapplied expression.

   So far from being either morality, or one with the moral principle, it
   ought not even to be placed in the same rank with prudence. For
   prudence is at least an offspring of the understanding; but sensibility
   (the sensibility, I mean, here spoken of) is for the greater part a
   quality of the nerves, and a result of individual bodily temperament.

   Prudence is an active principle, and implies a sacrifice of self,
   though only to the same self projected, as it were, to a distance. But
   the very term sensibility, marks its passive nature; and in its mere
   self, apart from choice and reflection, it proves little more than the
   coincidence or contagion of pleasurable or painful sensations in
   different persons.

   Alas! how many are there in this over-stimulated age, in which the
   occurrence of excessive and unhealthy sensitiveness is so frequent, as
   even to have reversed the current meaning of the word, nervous. How
   many are there whose sensibility prompts them to remove those evils
   alone, which by hideous spectacle or clamorous outcry are present to
   their senses and disturb their selfish enjoyments. Provided the
   dunghill is not before their parlour window, they are well contented to
   know that it exists, and perhaps as the hotbed on which their own
   luxuries are reared. Sensibility is not necessarily benevolence. Nay,
   by rendering us tremblingly alive to trifling misfortunes, it
   frequently prevents it, and induces an effeminate selfishness instead,


   -----pampering the coward heart

   With feelings all too delicate for use.

   Sweet are the tears, that from a Howard's eye

   Drop on the cheek of one, he lifts from earth:

   And he, who works me good with unmoved face,

   Does it but half. He chills me, while he aids,

   My benefactor, not my brother man.

   But even this, this cold benevolence,

   Seems worth, seems manhood, when there rise before me

   The sluggard pity's vision-weaving tribe,

   Who sigh for wretchedness yet shun the wretched,

   Nursing in some delicious solitude

   Their slothful loves and dainty sympathies.

   Lastly, where virtue is, sensibility is the ornament and becoming
   attire of virtue. On certain occasions it may almost be said to
   become** virtue. But sensibility and all the amiable qualities may
   likewise become, and too often have become, the panders of vice, and
   the instruments of seduction.

   So must it needs be with all qualities that have their rise only in
   parts and fragments of our nature. A man of warm passions may sacrifice
   half his estate to rescue a friend from prison: for he is naturally
   sympathetic, and the more social part of his nature happened to be
   uppermost. The same man shall afterwards exhibit the same disregard of
   money in an attempt to seduce that friend's wife or daughter.

   All the evil achieved by Hobbes and the whole school of materialists
   will appear inconsiderable if it be compared with the mischief effected
   and occasioned by the sentimental philosophy of Sterne, and his
   numerous imitators. The vilest appetites and the most remorseless
   inconstancy towards their objects, acquired the titles of the heart the
   irresistible feelings, the too tender sensibility: and if the frosts of
   prudence, the icy chains of human law thawed and vanished at the genial
   warmth of human nature, who could help it? It was an amiable weakness!

   About this time, too, the profanation of the word, Love, rose to its
   height. The French naturalists, Buffon
     __________________________________________________________________

   **There sometimes occurs an apparent play on words, which not only to
   the moralizer, but even to the philosophical etymologist, appears more
   than a mere play. Thus in the double sense of the word, become. I have
   known persons so anxious to have their dress become them, as to convert
   it at length into their proper self, and thus actually to become the
   dress. Such a one, (safeliest spoken of by the neuter pronoun), I
   consider as but a suit of live finery. It is indifferent whether we
   say, it becomes he, or, he becomes it. and others, borrowed it from the
   sentimental novelists: the Swedish and English philosophers took the
   contagion; and the muse of science condescended to seek admission into
   the saloons of fashion and frivolity, rouged like a harlot, and with
   the harlot's wanton leer. I know not how the annals of guilt could be
   better forced into the service of virtue, than by such a comment on the
   present paragraph, as would be afforded by a selection from the
   sentimental correspondence produced in courts of justice within the
   last thirty years, fairly translated into the true meaning of the
   words, and the actual object and purpose of the infamous writers.

   Do you in good earnest aim at dignity of character? By all the
   treasures of a peaceful mind, by all the charms of an open countenance,
   I conjure you, O youth! turn away from those who live in the twilight
   between vice and virtue. Are not reason, discrimination, law, and
   deliberate choice, the distinguishing characters of humanity? Can aught
   then worthy of a human being proceed from a habit of soul, which would
   exclude all these and (to borrow a metaphor from paganism) prefer the
   den of Trophonius to the temple and oracles of the God of light? Can
   any thing manly, I say, proceed from those, who for law and light would
   substitute shapeless feelings, sentiments, impulses, which as far as
   they differ from the vital workings in the brute animals owe the
   difference to their former connexion with the proper virtues of
   humanity; as dendrites derive the outlines, that constitute their value
   above other clay-stones, from the casual neighbourhood and pressure of
   the plants, the names of which they assume! Remember, that love itself
   in its highest earthly bearing, as the ground of the marriage union,**
   becomes love by an inward fiat of the will, by a completing and sealing
   act of moral election, and lays claim to permanence only under the form
   of duty.
     __________________________________________________________________

   **It might be a mean of preventing many unhappy marriages, if the youth
   of both sexes had it early impressed on their minds, that marriage
   contracted between Christians is a true and perfect symbol or mystery;
   that is, the actualizing faith being supposed to exist in the
   receivers, it is an outward sign co-essential with that which it
   signifies, or a living part of that, the whole of which it represents.
   Marriage, therefore, in the Christian sense (Ephesians v. 22-33,) as
   symbolical of the union of the soul with Christ the Mediator, and with
   God through Christ, is perfectly a sacramental ordinance, and not
   retained by the reformed churches as one of the sacraments, for two
   reasons; first, that the sign is not distinctive of the church of
   Christ, and the ordinance not peculiar, nor owing its origin to the
   gospel dispensation; secondly, that it is not of universal obligation,
   nor a means of grace enjoined on all Christians. In other and plainer
   words, marriage does not contain in itself an open profession of
   Christ, and it is not a sacrament of the church, but only of certain
   individual members of the church. It is evident, however, that neither
   of these reasons affect or diminish the religious nature and dedicative
   force of the marriage vow, or detract from the solemnity in the
   apostolic declaration: This is a great mystery.

   The interest, which the state has in the appropriation of one woman to
   one man, and the civil obligations therefrom resulting, form an
   altogether distinct consideration: When I meditate on the words of the
   apostle, confirmed and illustrated as they are, by so many harmonies in
   the spiritual structure of our proper humanity, (in the image of God,
   male and female created he the man), and then reflect how little claim
   so large a number of legal cohabitations have to the name of Christian
   marriages--I feel inclined to doubt, whether the plan of celebrating
   marriages universally by the civil magistrate, in the first instance,
   and leaving the religious covenant, and sacramental pledge to the
   election of the parties themselves, adopted during the republic in
   England, and in our own times by the French legislature, was not in
   fact, whatever it might be in intention, reverential to Christianity.
   At all events, it was their own act and choice, if the parties made bad
   worse by the profanation of a gospel mystery.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             PRUDENTIAL APHORISMS.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM I.

     Leighton and Coleridge.

   With respect to any final aim or end, the greater part of mankind live
   at hazard. They have no certain harbour in view, nor direct their
   course by any fixed star. But to him that knoweth not the port to which
   he is bound, no wind can be favourable; neither can he who has not yet
   determined at what mark he is to shoot, direct his arrow aright.

   It is not, however, the less true that there is a proper object to aim
   at; and if this object be meant by the term happiness, (though I think
   that not the most appropriate term for a state, the perfection of which
   consists in the exclusion of all hap, that is, chance), I assert that
   there is such a thing as human happiness, as summum bonum or ultimate
   good. What this is, the Bible alone shows clearly and certainly, and
   points out the way that leads to the attainment of it. This is that
   which prevailed with St. Augustine to study the Scriptures, and engaged
   his affection to them. "In Cicero, and Plato, and other such writers,"
   says he, "I meet with many things acutely said, and things that excite
   a certain warmth of emotion, but in none of them do I find these words,
   Come unto

   me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."
   **

COMMENT.

   Felicity, in its proper sense is but another word for fortunateness, or
   happiness; and I can see no advantage in the improper use of words,
   when proper terms are to be found, but, on the contrary, much mischief.
   For, by familiarizing the mind to equivocal expressions, that is, such
   as may be taken in two or more different meanings, we introduce
   confusion of thought, and furnish the sophist with his best and
   handiest tools. For the juggle of sophistry consists, for the greater
   part, in using a word in one sense in the premiss, and in another sense
   in the conclusion. We should accustom ourselves to think, and reason,
   in precise and steadfast terms, even when custom, or the deficiency, or
   the corruption of the language will not permit the same strictness in
   speaking. The mathematician finds this so necessary to the truths which
   he is seeking, that his science begins with, and is founded on, the
   definition of his terms. The botanist, the chemist, the anatomist, &c,
   feel and submit to this necessity at all costs, even at the risk of
   exposing their several pursuits to the ridicule of the many, by
   technical terms, hard to be remembered, and alike quarrelsome to the
   ear and the tongue. In the business of moral and religious reflection,
   in the acquisition of clear and distinct conceptions of our duties, and
   of the relations in which we stand to God, our neighbour, and
   ourselves, no such difficulties occur. At the utmost we have only
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** Apud Ciceronem et Platonem, aliosque ejusmodi scriptores, multa sunt
   acute dicta, et leniter calentia, sed in iis omnibus hoc non invenio,
   Venite ad me, &c. (Matt. xii, 28). to rescue words, already existing
   and familiar, from the false or vague meanings imposed on them by
   carelessness, or by the clipping and debasing misusage of the market.
   And surely happiness, duty, faith, truth, and final blessedness, are
   matters of deeper and dearer interest for all men, than circles to the
   geometrician, or the characters of plants to the botanist, or the
   affinities and combining principle of the elements of bodies to the
   chemist, or even than the mechanism (fearful and wonderful though it
   be!) of the perishable tabernacle of the soul can be to the anatomist.
   Among the aids to reflection, place the following maxim prominent: let
   distinctness in expression advance side by side with distinction in
   thought. For one useless subtlety in our elder divines and moralists, I
   will produce ten sophisms of equivocation in the writings of our modern
   preceptors: and for one error resulting from excess in distinguishing
   the indifferent, I could show ten mischievous delusions from the habit
   of confounding the diverse.

   Whether you are reflecting for yourself, or reasoning with another,
   make it a rule to ask yourself the precise meaning of the word, on
   which the point in question appears to turn; and if it may be (that is,
   by writers of authority has been) used in several senses, then ask
   which of these the word is at present intended to convey. By this mean,
   and scarcely without it, you will at length acquire a facility in
   detecting the quid pro quo. And believe me, in so doing you will enable
   yourself to disarm and expose four-fifths of the main arguments of our
   most renowned irreligious philosophers, ancient and modern. For the
   quid pro quo is at once the rock and quarry, on and with which the
   strongholds of disbelief, materialism, and (more pernicious still)
   epicurean morality, are built.

APHORISM II.

     Leighton

   If we seriously consider what religion is, we shall find the saying of
   the wise king Solomon to be unexceptionably true: Her ways are ways of
   pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

   Doth religion require any thing of us more than that we live soberly,
   righteously, and godly in this present world? Now what, I pray, can be
   more pleasant or peaceable than these? Temperance is always at leisure,
   luxury always in a hurry: the latter weakens the body and pollutes the
   soul, the former is the sanctity, purity, and sound state of both. It
   is one of Epicurus's fixed maxims, "That life can never be pleasant
   without virtue."

  COMMENT.

   In the works of moralists, both Christian and Pagan, it is often
   asserted (indeed there are few common-places of more frequent
   recurrence) that the happiness even of this life consists solely, or
   principally in virtue; that virtue is the only happiness of this life;
   that virtue is the truest pleasure, &c.

   I doubt not that the meaning, which the writers intended to convey by
   these and the like expressions, was true and wise. But I deem it safer
   to say, that in all the outward relations of this life, in all our
   outward conduct and actions, both in what we should do, and in what we
   should abstain from, the dictates of virtue are the very same with
   those of self-interest; tending to, though they do not proceed from,
   the same point. For the outward object of virtue being the greatest
   producible sum of happiness of all men, it must needs include the
   object of an intelligent self-love, which is the greatest possible
   happiness of one individual; for what is true of all must be true of
   each. Hence, you cannot become better, (that is, more virtuous), but
   you will become happier: and you cannot become worse, (that is, more
   vicious), without an increase of misery (or at the best a proportional
   loss of enjoyment) as the consequence. If the thing were not
   inconsistent with our well being, and known to be so, it would not have
   been classed as a vice. Thus what in an enfeebled and disordered mind
   is called prudence, is the voice of nature in a healthful state: as is
   proved by the known fact, that the prudential duties, (that is, those
   actions which are commanded by virtue because they are prescribed by
   prudence), the animals fulfil by natural instinct.

   The pleasure that accompanies or depends on a healthy and vigorous body
   will be the consequence and reward of a temperate life and habits of
   active industry, whether this pleasure were or were not the chief or
   only determining motive thereto. Virtue may, possibly, add to the
   pleasure a good of another kind, a higher good, perhaps, than the
   worldly mind is capable of understanding, a spiritual complacency, of
   which in your present sensualized state you can form no idea. It may
   add, I say, but it cannot detract from it. Thus the reflected rays of
   the sun that give light, distinction, and endless multiformity to the
   mind, give at the same time the pleasurable sensation of warmth to the
   body.

   If then the time has not yet come for any thing higher, act on the
   maxim of seeking the most pleasure with the least pain: and, if only
   you do not seek where you yourself know it will not be found, this very
   pleasure and this freedom from the disquietude of pain may produce in
   you a state of being directly and indirectly favourable to the
   germination and up-spring of a nobler seed. If it be true, that men are
   miserable because they are wicked, it is likewise true, that many are
   wicked because they are miserable. Health, cheerfulness, and easy
   circumstances, the ordinary consequences of temperance and industry,
   will at least leave the field clear and open, will tend to preserve the
   scales of the judgment even: while the consciousness of possessing the
   esteem, respect, and sympathy of your neighbours, and the sense of your
   own increasing power and influence, can scarcely fail to give a tone of
   dignity to your mind, and incline you to hope nobly of your own being.
   And thus they may prepare and predispose you to the sense and
   acknowledgment of a principle differing, not merely in degree but in
   kind, from the faculties and instincts of the higher and more
   intelligent species of animals, (the ant, the beaver, the elephant),
   and which principle is therefore your proper humanity. And on this
   account and with this view alone may certain modes of pleasurable or
   agreeable sensation, without confusion of terms, be honoured with the
   title of refined, intellectual, ennobling pleasures. For pleasure (and
   happiness in its proper sense is but the continuity and sum total of
   the pleasure which is allotted or happens to a man, and hence by the
   Greeks called eutuchia, that is, good-hap, or more religiously
   eudaimonia, that is, favourable providence)--pleasure, I say, consists
   in the harmony between the specific excitability of a living creature,
   and the exciting causes correspondent thereto. Considered therefore
   exclusively in and for itself, the only question is quantum, not quale?
   How much on the whole? the contrary, that is, the painful and
   disagreeable, haying been subtracted. The quality is a matter of taste:
   et de gustibus non est disputandum. No man can judge for another.

   This, I repeat, appears to me a safer language than the sentences
   quoted above (that virtue alone is happiness; that happiness consists
   in virtue, &c,) sayings which I find it hard to reconcile with other
   positions of still more frequent occurrence in the same divines, or
   with the declaration of St. Paul: "If in this life only we have hope,
   we are of all men most miserable."

   At all events, I should rely far more confidently on the converse,
   namely, that to be vicious is to be miserable. Few men are so utterly
   reprobate, so imbruted by their vices, as not to have some lucid, or at
   least quiet and sober, intervals; and in such a moment, dum desaeviunt
   irae, few can stand up unshaken against the appeal to their own
   experience--what have been the wages of sin? what has the devil done
   for you? What sort of master have you found him? Then let us in
   befitting detail, and by a series of questions that ask no loud, and
   are secure against any false, answer, urge home the proof of the
   position, that to be vicious is to be wretched: adding the fearful
   corollary, that if even in the body, which as long as life is in it can
   never be wholly bereaved of pleasurable sensations, vice is found to be
   misery, what must it not be in the world to come? There, where even the
   crime is no longer possible, much less the gratifications that once
   attended it--where nothing of vice remains but its guilt and its
   misery--vice must be misery itself, all and utter misery.--So best, if
   I err not, may the motives of prudence be held forth, and the impulses
   of self-love be awakened, in alliance with truth, and free from the
   danger of confounding things (the laws of duty, I mean, and the maxims
   of interest) which it deeply concerns us to keep distinct, inasmuch as
   this distinction and the faith therein are essential to our moral
   nature, and this again the ground-work and pre-condition of the
   spiritual state, in which the humanity strives after godliness and, in
   the name and power, and through the prevenient and assisting grace, of
   the Mediator, will not strive in vain.

   The advantages of a life passed in conformity with the precepts of
   virtue and religion, and in how many and various respects they
   recommend virtue and religion even on grounds of prudence, form a
   delightful subject of meditation, and a source of refreshing thought to
   good and pious men. Nor is it strange if, transported with the view,
   such persons should sometimes discourse on the charm of forms and
   colours to men whose eyes are not yet couched; or that they
   occasionally seem to invert the relations of cause and effect, and
   forget that there are acts and determinations of the will and
   affections, the consequences of which may be plainly foreseen, and yet
   cannot be made our proper and primary motives for such acts and
   determinations, without destroying or entirely altering the distinct
   nature and character of the latter. Sophron is well informed that
   wealth and extensive patronage will be the consequence of his obtaining
   the love and esteem of Constantia. But if the foreknowledge of this
   consequence were, and were found out to be, Sophron's main and
   determining motive for seeking this love and esteem; and if Constantia
   were a woman that merited, or was capable of feeling, either the one or
   the other; would not Sophron find (and deservedly too) aversion and
   contempt in their stead? Wherein, if not in this, differs the
   friendship of worldlings from true friendship? Without kind offices and
   useful services, wherever the power and opportunity occur, love would
   be a hollow pretence. Yet what noble mind would not be offended, if he
   were thought to value the love for the sake of the services, and not
   rather the services for the sake of the love!

APHORISM III.

   Though prudence in itself is neither virtue nor spiritual holiness, yet
   without prudence, or in opposition to it, neither virtue nor holiness
   can exist.

APHORISM IV.

   Art thou under the tyranny of sin? a slave to vicious habits? at enmity
   with God, and a skulking fugitive from thy own conscience? O, how idle
   the dispute, whether the listening to the dictates of prudence from
   prudential and self-interested motives be virtue or merit, when the not
   listening is guilt, misery, madness, and despair! The best, the most
   Christianlike pity thou canst show, is to take pity on thy own soul.
   The best and most acceptable service thou canst render, is to do
   justice and show mercy to thyself.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         MORAL AND RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.

   The exactest knowledge of things, is, to know them in their causes; it
   is then an excellent thing, and worthy of their endeavours who are most
   desirous of knowledge, to know the best things in their highest causes;
   and the happiest way of attaining to this knowledge, is, to possess
   those things, and to know them in experience.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM IV.

     Leighton

   It is one main point of happiness, that he that is happy doth know and
   judge himself to be so. This being the peculiar good of a reasonable
   creature, it is to be enjoyed in a reasonable way. It is not as the
   dull resting of a stone, or any other natural body in its natural
   place; but the knowledge and consideration of it is the fruition of it,
   the very relishing and tasting of its sweetness.

  REMARK.

   As in a Christian land we receive the lessons of morality in connexion
   with the doctrines of revealed religion, we cannot too early free the
   mind from prejudices widely spread, in part through the abuse, but far
   more from ignorance, of the true meaning of doctrinal terms, which,
   however they may have been perverted to the purposes of fanaticism, are
   not only scriptural, but of too frequent occurrence in Scripture to be
   overlooked or passed by in silence. The following extract, therefore,
   deserves attention, as clearing the doctrine of salvation, in connexion
   with the divine foreknowledge, from all objections on the score of
   morality, by the just and impressive view which the Archbishop here
   gives of those occasional revolutionary moments, that turn of the tide
   in the mind and character of certain individuals, which (taking a
   religious course, and referred immediately to the author of all good)
   were in his day, more generally than at present, entitled effectual
   calling. The theological interpretation and the philosophic validity of
   this apostolic triad, election, salvation, and effectual calling, (the
   latter being the intermediate) will be found among the comments on the
   aphorisms of spiritual import. For my present purpose it will be
   sufficient if only I prove that the doctrines are in themselves
   innocuous, and may be both holden and taught without any practical
   ill-consequences, and without detriment to the moral frame.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM V.

     Leighton.

   Two links of the chain (namely, election and salvation) are up in
   heaven in God's own hand; but this middle one (that is, effectual
   calling) is let down to earth, into the hearts of his children, and
   they laying hold on it have sure hold on the other two: for no power
   can sever them. If, therefore, they can read the characters of God's
   image in their own souls, those are the counterpart of the golden
   characters of his love, in which their names are written in the book of
   life. Their believing writes their names under the promises of the
   revealed book of life (the Scriptures) and thus ascertains them, that
   the same names are in the secret book of life which God hath by himself
   from eternity. So that finding the stream of grace in their hearts,
   though they see not the fountain whence it flows, nor the ocean into
   which it returns, yet they know that it hath its source in their
   eternal election, and shall empty itself into the ocean of their
   eternal salvation.

   If election, effectual calling, and salvation, be inseparably linked
   together, then, by any one of them a man may lay hold upon all the
   rest, and may know that his hold is sure; and this is the way wherein
   we may attain, and ought to seek, the comfortable assurance of the love
   of God. Therefore make your calling sure, and by that your election;
   for that being done, this follows of itself. We are not to pry
   immediately into the decree, but to read it in the performance. Though
   the mariner sees not the pole-star, yet the needle of the compass which
   points to it, tells him which way he sails: thus the heart that is
   touched with the loadstone of divine love, trembling with godly fear,
   and yet still looking towards God by fixed believing, interprets the
   fear by the love in the fear, and tells the soul that its course is
   heavenward, towards the haven of eternal rest. He that loves, may be
   sure he was loved first; and he that chooses God for his delight and
   portion, may conclude confidently, that God hath chosen him to be one
   of those that shall enjoy him, and be happy in him for ever; for that
   our love and electing of him is but the return and repercussion of the
   beams of his love shining upon us.

   Although from present unsanctification, a man cannot infer that he is
   not elected; for the decree may, for part of a man's life, run (as it
   were) underground; yet this is sure, that that estate leads to death,
   and unless it be broken, will prove the black line of reprobation. A
   man hath no portion amongst the children of God, nor can read one word
   of comfort in all the promises that belong to them, while he remains
   unholy.

  REMARK.

   In addition to the preceding, I select the following paragraphs as
   having nowhere seen the terms, spirit, the gifts of the spirit, and the
   like, so effectually vindicated from the sneers of the sciolist on the
   one hand, and protected from the perversions of the fanatic on the
   other. In these paragraphs the Archbishop at once shatters and
   precipitates the only draw-bridge between the fanatical and the
   orthodox doctrine of grace, and the gifts of the spirit. In Scripture
   the term, spirit, as a power or properly seated in the human soul,
   never stands singly, but is always specified by a genitive case
   following; this being a Hebraism instead of the adjective which the
   writer would have used if he had thought, as well as written, in Greek.
   It is the spirit of meekness (a meek spirit) or the spirit of chastity,
   and the like. The moral result, the specific form and character in
   which the Spirit manifests its presence, is the only sure pledge and
   token of its presence; which is to be, and which safely may be,
   inferred from its practical effects, but of which an immediate
   knowledge or consciousness is impossible; and every pretence to such
   knowledge is either hypocrisy or fanatical delusion.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM VI.

     Leighton.

   If any pretend that they have the Spirit, and so turn away from the
   straight rule of the Holy Scriptures, they have a spirit indeed, but it
   is a fanatical spirit, the spirit of delusion and giddiness: but the
   Spirit of God, that leads his children in the way of truth, and is for
   that purpose sent them from heaven to guide them thither, squares their
   thoughts and ways to that rule whereof it is author, and that word
   which was inspired by it, and sanctifies them to obedience. He that
   saith I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the
   truth is not in him. (1 John ii, 4.)

   Now this Spirit which sanctifieth, and sanctifieth to obedience, is
   within us the evidence of our election, and the earnest of our
   salvation. And whoso are not sanctified and led by this Spirit, the
   Apostle tells us what is their condition: If any man have not the
   Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. The stones which are appointed for
   that glorious temple above, are hewn, and polished, and prepared for it
   here; as the stones were wrought and prepared in the mountains, for
   building the temple at Jerusalem.

  COMMENT.

   There are many serious and sincere Christians who have not attained to
   a fulness of knowledge and insight, but are well and judiciously
   employed in preparing for it. Even these may study the master-works of
   our elder divines with safety and advantage, if they will accustom
   themselves to translate the theological terms into their moral
   equivalents; saying to themselves--This may not be all that is meant,
   but this is meant, and it is that portion of the meaning, which belongs
   to me in the present stage of my progress. For example: render the
   words, sanctification of the Spirit, or the sanctifying influenced of
   the Spirit, by purity in life and action from a pure principle.

   He needs only reflect on his own experience to be convinced, that the
   man makes the motive, and not the motive the man. What is a strong
   motive to one man, is no motive at all to another. If, then, the man
   determines the motive, what determines the man--to a good and worthy
   act, we will say, or a virtuous course of conduct? The intelligent
   will, or the self-determining power? True, in part it is; and therefore
   the will is pre-eminently the spiritual constituent in our being. But
   will any reflecting man admit, that his own will is the only and
   sufficient determinant of all he is, and all he does? Is nothing to be
   attributed to the harmony of the system to which he belongs, and to the
   pre-established fitness of the objects and agents, known and unknown,
   that surround him, as acting on the will, though, doubtless, with it
   likewise? a process, which the coinstantaneous yet reciprocal action of
   the air and the vital energy of the lungs in breathing may help to
   render intelligible.

   Again: in the world we see every where evidences of a unity, which the
   component parts are so far from explaining, that they necessarily
   pre-suppose it as the cause and condition of their existing as those
   parts; or even of their existing at all. This antecedent unity, or
   cause and principle of each union, it has since the time of Bacon and
   Kepler been customary to call a law. This crocus, for instance, or any
   other flower, the reader may have in sight or choose to bring before
   his fancy. That the root, stem, leaves, petals, &c, cohere to one
   plant, is owing to an antecedent power or principle in the seed, which
   existed before a single particle of the matters that constitute the
   size and visibility of the crocus, had been attracted from the
   surrounding soil, air, and moisture. Shall we turn to the seed? Here,
   too, the same necessity meets us. An antecedent unity (I speak not of
   the parent plant, but of an agency antecedent in the order of operance,
   yet remaining present as the conservative and reproductive power) must
   here too be supposed. Analyse the seed with the finest tools, and let
   the solar microscope come in aid of your senses, what do you find?
   Means and instruments, a wondrous fairy tale of nature, magazines of
   food, stores of various sorts, pipes, spiracles, defences--a house of
   many chambers, and the owner and inhabitant invisible! Reflect further
   on the countless millions of seeds of the same name, each more than
   numerically differenced from every other: and further yet, reflect on
   the requisite harmony of all surrounding things, each of which
   necessitates the same process of thought, and the coherence of all of
   which to a system, a world, demands its own adequate antecedent unity,
   which must therefore of necessity be present to all and in all, yet in
   no wise excluding or suspending the individual law or principle of
   union in each. Now will reason, will common sense, endure the
   assumption, that it is highly reasonable to believe a universal power,
   as the cause and pre-condition of the harmony of all particular wholes,
   each of which involves the working principle of its own union--that it
   is reasonable, I say, to believe this respecting the aggregate of
   objects, which, without a subject, (that is, a sentient and intelligent
   existence) would be purposeless: and yet unreasonable and even
   superstitious or enthusiastic to entertain a similar belief in relation
   to the system of intelligent and self-conscious beings, to the moral
   and personal world? But if in this, too, in the great community of
   persons, it is rational to infer a one universal presence, a one
   present to all and in all, is it not most irrational to suppose that a
   finite will can exclude it?

   Whenever, therefore, the man is determined (that is, impelled and
   directed) to act in harmony of intercommunion, must not something be
   attributed to this all-present power as acting in the will? and by what
   fitter names can we call this than The Law, as empowering; The Word, as
   informing; and The Spirit, as actuating?

   What has been here said amounts (I am aware) only to a negative
   conception; but this is all that is required for a mind at that period
   of its growth which we are now supposing, and as long as religion is
   contemplated under the form of morality. A positive insight belongs to
   a more advanced stage: for spiritual truths can only spiritually be
   discerned. This we know from revelation, and (the existence of
   spiritual truths being granted) philosophy is compelled to draw the
   same conclusion. But though merely negative, it is sufficient to render
   the union of religion and morality conceivable; sufficient to satisfy
   an unprejudiced inquirer, that the spiritual doctrines of the Christian
   religion are not at war with the reasoning faculty, and that they do
   not run on the same line, or radius, with the understanding, yet
   neither do they cut or cross it. It is sufficient, in short, to prove,
   that some distinct and consistent meaning may be attached to the
   assertion of the learned and philosophic Apostle, that the Spirit
   beareth witness with our spirit, that is, with the will, as the
   supernatural in man and the principle of our personality--of that, I
   mean, by which we are responsible agents; persons, and not merely
   living things.*

   It will suffice to satisfy a reflecting mind, that even at the porch
   and threshold of revealed truth there is a great and worthy sense in
   which we may believe the Apostle's assurance, that not only doth the
   Spirit aid our infirmities; that is, act on the will by a pre-disposing
   influence from without, as it were, though in a spiritual manner, and
   without suspending or destroying its freedom (the possibility of which
   is proved to us in the influences of education, of providential
   occurrences, and, above all, of example) but that in regenerate souls
   it
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Whatever is comprised in the chain and mechanism of cause and effect,
   of course necessitated, and having its necessity in some other thing,
   antecedent or concurrent--this is said to be natural; and the aggregate
   and system of all such things is Nature. It is, therefore, a
   contradiction in terms to include in this the free-will, of which the
   verbal definition is--that which originates an act or state of being.
   In this sense, therefore, which is the sense of St. Paul, and indeed of
   the New Testament throughout, spiritual and supernatural are
   synonymous. may act in the will; that uniting and becoming one* with
   our will or spirit it may make intercession for us; nay, in this
   intimate union taking upon itself the form of our infirmities, may
   intercede for us with groanings that cannot he uttered. Nor is there
   any danger of fanaticism or enthusiasm as the consequence of such a
   belief, if only the attention be carefully and earnestly drawn to the
   concluding words of the sentence (Romans viii. 26); if only the due
   force and the full import be given to the term unutterable or
   incommunicable, in St. Paul's use of it. In this, the strictest and
   most proper use of the term, it signifies, that the subject, of which
   it is predicated, is something which I cannot, which from the nature of
   the thing it is impossible that I should communicate to any human mind
   (even of a person under the same condition with myself) so as to make
   it in itself the object of his direct and immediate consciousness. It
   cannot be the object of my own direct and immediate consciousness; but
   must be inferred. Inferred it may be from its workings; it cannot be
   perceived in them. And, thanks to God! in all points in which the
   knowledge is of high and necessary concern to our moral and religious
   welfare, from the effects it may safely be inferred by us, from the
   workings it may be assuredly known; and the Scriptures furnish the
   clear and unfailing rules for directing the inquiry, and for drawing
   the conclusion. If any reflecting mind be surprised that the aids of
   the
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Some distant and faint similitude of this, that merely as a similitude
   may be innocently used to quiet the fancy, provided it be not imposed
   on the understanding as an analogous fact, or as identical in kind, is
   presented to us in the power of the magnet to awaken and strengthen the
   magnetic power in a bar of iron, and (in the instance of the compound
   magnet) acting in and with the latter. divine Spirit should be deeper
   than our consciousness can reach, it must arise from the not having
   attended sufficiently to the nature and necessary limits of human
   consciousness. For the same impossibility exists as to the first acts
   and movements of our own will--the farthest distance our recollection
   can follow back the traces never leads us to the first foot-mark--the
   lowest depth that the light of our consciousness can visit even with a
   doubtful glimmering, is still at an unknown distance from the ground:
   and so, indeed, must it be with all truths, and all modes of being that
   can neither be counted, coloured, or delineated. Before and after, when
   applied to such subjects, are but allegories, which the sense or
   imaginations supplies to the understanding. The position of the
   Aristoteleans, nihil in intellectu quod non prius in sensu, on which
   Mr. Locke's Essay is grounded, is irrefragable: Locke erred only in
   taking half the truth for a whole truth. Conception is consequent on
   perception. What we cannot imagine, we cannot, in the proper sense of
   the word, conceive.

   I have already given one definition of nature. Another, and differing
   from the former in words only, is this: Whatever is representable in
   the forms of time and space, is nature. But whatever is comprehended in
   time and space, is included in the mechanism of cause and effect. And
   conversely, whatever, by whatever means, has its principle in itself,
   so far as to originate its actions, cannot be contemplated in any of
   the forms of space and time; it must, therefore, be considered as
   spirit or spiritual by a mind in that stage of its development which is
   here supposed, and which we have agreed to understand under the name of
   morality or the moral state: for in this stage we are concerned only
   with the forming of negative conceptions, negative convictions; and by
   spiritual I do not pretend to determine what the will is, but what it
   is not--namely, that it is not nature. And as no man who admits a will
   at all, (for we may safely presume, that no man not meaning to speak
   figuratively, would call the shifting current of a stream the will* of
   the river), will suppose it below nature, we may safely add, that it is
   supernatural; and this without the least pretence to any positive
   notion or insight.

   Now morality accompanied with convictions like these, I have ventured
   to call religious morality. Of the importance I attach to the state of
   mind implied in these convictions, for its own sake, and as the natural
   preparation for a yet higher state and a more substantive knowledge,
   proof more than sufficient, perhaps, has been given in the length and
   minuteness of this introductory discussion, and in the foreseen risk
   which I run of exposing the volume at large to the censure which every
   work, or rather which every writer, must be prepared to undergo, who,
   treating of subjects that cannot be seen, touched, or in any other way
   made matters of outward sense, is yet anxious both to attach to and to
   convey a distinct meaning by, the words he makes use of--the censure of
   being dry, abstract, and (of all qualities most scaring and opprobrious
   to the ears of the present generation) metaphysical: though how it is
   possible that a work not physical, that is, employed on objects known
   or believed on the evidence of senses, should be other than
   metaphysical, that is, treating on subjects, the evidence of which is
   not derived from the senses, is a problem
     __________________________________________________________________

   *"The river windeth at his own sweet will."

   Wordsworth's exquisite Sonnet on Westminster Bridge at sunrise.
   But who does not see that here the poetic charm arises from the known
   and felt impropriety of the expression, in the technical sense, of the
   word impropriety, among grammarians? which critics of this order find
   it convenient to leave unsolved.

   The author of the present volume, will, indeed, have reason to think
   himself fortunate, if this be all the charge! How many smart
   quotations, which (duly cemented by personal allusions to the author's
   supposed pursuits, attachments, and infirmities) would of themselves
   make up a review of the volume, might be supplied with the works of
   Butler, Swift, and Warburton. For instance: "It may not be amiss to
   inform the public, that the compiler of the Aids to Reflection, and
   commenter on a Scotch Bishop's Platonico-Calvinistic commentary on St.
   Peter, belongs to the sect of the Aeolists, whose fruitful imaginations
   led them into certain notions, which although in appearance very
   unaccountable, are not without their mysteries and their meanings;
   furnishing plenty of matter for such, whose converting imaginations
   dispose them to reduce all things into types; who can make shadows, no
   thanks to the sun; and then mould them into substances, no thanks to
   philosophy; whose peculiar talent lies in fixing tropes and allegories
   to the letter, and refining what is literal into figure and
   mystery."--Tale of the Tub, sect. xi.

   And would it were my lot to meet with a critic, who, in the might of
   his own convictions, and with arms of equal point and efficiency from
   his own forge, would come forth as my assailant; or who, as a friend to
   my purpose, would set forth the objections to the matter and pervading
   spirit of these aphorisms, and the accompanying elucidations. Were it
   my task to form the mind of a young man of talent, desirous to
   establish his opinions and belief on solid principles, and in the light
   of distinct understanding, I would commence his theological studies,
   or, at least, that most important part of them respecting the aids
   which religion promises in our attempts to realize the ideas of
   morality, by bringing together all the passages scattered throughout
   the writings of Swift and Butler, that bear on enthusiasm, spiritual
   operations, and pretences to the gifts of the spirit, with the whole
   train of new lights, raptures, experiences, and the like. For all that
   the richest wit, in intimate union with profound sense and steady
   observation, can supply on these topics, is to be found in the works of
   these satirists; though unhappily alloyed with much that can only tend
   to pollute the imagination.

   Without stopping to estimate the degree of caricature in the portraits
   sketched by these bold masters, and without attempting to determine in
   how many of the enthusiasts brought forward by them in proof of the
   influence of false doctrines, a constitutional insanity, that would
   probably have shown itself in some other form, would be the truer
   solution, I would direct my pupil's attention to one feature common to
   the whole group--the pretence, namely, of possessing, or a belief and
   expectation grounded on other men's assurances of their possessing, an
   immediate consciousness, a sensible experience, of the Spirit in and
   during its operation on the soul. It is not enough that you grant them
   a consciousness of the gifts and graces infused, or an assurance of the
   spiritual origin of the same, grounded on their correspondence to the
   Scripture promises, and their conformity with the idea of the divine
   giver. No! they all alike, it will be found lay claim (or at least look
   forward) to an inward perception of the Spirit itself and of its
   operating.

   Whatever must be misrepresented in order to be ridiculed, is in fact
   not ridiculed; but the thing substituted for it. It is a satire on
   something else, coupled with a lie on the part of the satirist, who
   knowing, or having the means of knowing the truth, chose to call one
   thing by the name of another. The pretensions to the supernatural,
   pilloried by Butler, sent to Bedlam by Swift, and (on their
   re-appearance in public) gibbetted by Warburton, and anatomized by
   Bishop Lavington, one and all have this for their essential character,
   that the Spirit is made the immediate object of sense or sensation.
   Whether the spiritual presence and agency are supposed cognizable by
   indescribable feeling or unimaginable vision by some specific visual
   energy; whether seen or heard, or touched, smelt, and tasted--for in
   those vast storehouses of fanatical assertion, the volumes of
   ecclesiastical history and religious auto-biography, instances are not
   wanting even of the three latter extravagancies;--this variety in the
   mode may render the several pretensions more or less offensive to the
   taste; but with the same absurdity for the reason, this being derived
   from a contradiction in terms common and radical to them all alike, the
   assumption of a something essentially supersensual, that is
   nevertheless the object of sense, that is, not supersensual.

   Well then!--for let me be allowed still to suppose the reader present
   to me, and that I am addressing him in the character of companion and
   guide--the positions recommended for your examination not only do not
   involve, but exclude, this inconsistency. And for aught that hitherto
   appears, we may see with complacency the arrows of satire feathered
   with wit, weighted with sense, and discharged by a strong arm, fly home
   to their mark. Our conceptions of a possible spiritual communion,
   though they are but negative, and only preparatory to a faith in its
   actual existence, stand neither in the level or the direction of the
   shafts.

   If it be objected, that Swift and Warburton did not choose openly to
   set up the interpretations of later and more rational divines against
   the decisions of their own church, and from prudential considerations
   did not attack the doctrine in toto: that is their concern (I would
   answer) and it is more charitable to think otherwise. But we are in the
   silent school of reflection, in the secret confessional of thought.
   Should we lie for God, and that to our own thoughts?--They indeed, who
   dare do the one, will soon be able to do the other. So did the
   comforters of Job: and to the divines, who resemble Job's comforters,
   we will leave both attempts.

   But (it may be said) a possible conception is not necessarily a true
   one; nor even a probable one, where the facts can be otherwise
   explained. In the name of the supposed pupil I would reply--That is the
   very question I am preparing myself to examine; and am now seeking the
   vantage ground where I may best command the facts. In my own person, I
   would ask the objector, whether he counted the declarations of
   Scripture among die facts to be explained. But both for myself and my
   pupil, and in behalf of all rational inquiry, I would demand that the
   decision should not be such, in itself or in its effects, as would
   prevent our becoming acquainted with the most important of these facts;
   nay, such as would, for the mind of the decider, preclude their very
   existence. Unless ye believe, says the prophet, ye cannot understand.
   Suppose (what is at least possible) that the facts should be consequent
   on the belief, it is clear that without the belief the materials, on
   which the understanding is to exert itself, would be wanting.

   The reflections that naturally arise out of this last remark, are those
   that best suit the stage at which we last halted, and from which we now
   recommence our progress--the state of a moral man, who has already
   welcomed certain truths of religion, and is inquiring after other and
   more special doctrines: still, however, as a moralist, desirous indeed,
   to receive them into combination with morality, but to receive them as
   its aid, not as its substitute. Now, to such a man I say,--Before you
   reject the opinions and doctrines asserted and enforced in the
   following extract from Leighton, and before you give way to the
   emotions of distaste or ridicule, which the prejudices of the circle in
   which you move, or your own familiarity with the mad perversions of the
   doctrine by fanatics in all ages, have connected with the very words,
   spirit, grace, gifts, operations, &c, re-examine the arguments advanced
   in the first pages of this introductory comment, and the simple and
   sober view of the doctrine, contemplated in the first instance as a
   mere idea of the reason, flowing naturally from the admission of an
   infinite omnipresent mind as the ground of the universe. Reflect again
   and again, and be sure that you understand the doctrine before you
   determine on rejecting it. That no false judgments, no extravagant
   conceits, no practical ill-consequences need arise out of the belief of
   the spirit, and its possible communion with the spiritual principle in
   man, or can arise out of the right belief, or are compatible with the
   doctrine truly and scripturally explained, Leighton, and almost every
   single period in the passage here transcribed from him, will suffice to
   convince you.

   On the other hand, reflect on the consequences of rejecting it. For
   surely it is not the act of a reflecting mind, nor the part of a man of
   sense to disown and cast out one tenet, and yet persevere in admitting
   and clinging to another that has neither sense nor purpose, that does
   not suppose and rest on the truth and reality of the former! If you
   have resolved that all belief of a divine comforter present to our
   inmost being and aiding our infirmities, is fond and fanatical--if the
   Scriptures promising and asserting such communion are to be explained
   away into the action of circumstances, and the necessary movements of
   the vast machine, in one of the circulating chains of which the human
   will is a petty link--in what better light can prayer appear to you,
   than the groans of a wounded lion in his solitary den, or the howl of a
   dog with his eyes on the moon? At the best, you can regard it only as a
   transient bewilderment of the social instinct, as a social habit
   misapplied! Unless indeed you should adopt the theory which I remember
   to have read in the writings of the late Dr. Jebb, and for some
   supposed beneficial re-action of praying on the prayer's own mind,
   should practise it as a species of animal magnetism to be brought about
   by a wilful eclipse of the reason, and a temporary make-believe on the
   part of the self-magnetizer!

   At all events, do not pre-judge a doctrine, the utter rejection of
   which must oppose a formidable obstacle to your acceptance of
   Christianity itself, when the books, from which alone we can learn what
   Christianity is arid what it teaches, are so strangely written, that in
   a series of the most concerning points, including (historical facts
   excepted) all the peculiar tenets of the religion, the plain and
   obvious meaning of the words, that in which they were understood by
   learned and simple for at least sixteen centuries, during the far
   larger part of which the language was a living language, is no
   sufficient guide to their actual sense or to the writer's own meaning!
   And this, too, where the literal and received sense involves nothing
   impossible, or immoral, or contrary to reason. With such a persuasion,
   deism would be a more consistent creed. But, alas! even this will fail
   you. The utter rejection of all present and living communion with the
   universal spirit impoverishes deism itself, and renders it as cheerless
   as atheism, from which indeed it would differ only by an obscure
   impersonation of what the atheist receives unpersonified under the name
   of fate or nature.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM VII.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   The proper and natural effect, and in the absence of all disturbing or
   intercepting forces, the certain and sensible accompaniment of peace
   (or reconcilement) with God, is our own inward peace, a calm and quiet
   temper of mind. And where there is a consciousness of earnestly
   desiring, and of having sincerely striven after the former, the latter
   may be considered as a sense of its presence. In this case, I say, and
   for a soul watchful and under the discipline of the gospel, the peace
   with a man's self may be the medium or organ through which the
   assurance of his peace with God is conveyed. We will not therefore
   condemn this mode of speaking, though we dare not greatly recommend it.
   Be it, that there is, truly and in sobriety of speech, enough of just
   analogy in the subjects meant, to make this use of the words, if less
   than proper, yet something more than metaphorical; still we must be
   cautious not to transfer to the object the defects or the deficiency of
   the organ, which must needs partake of the imperfections of the
   imperfect beings to whom it belongs. Not without the co-assurance of
   other senses and of the same sense in other men, dare we affirm that
   what our eye beholds is verily there to be beholden. Much less may we
   conclude negatively, and from the inadequacy, or the suspension, or
   from every other affection of sight infer the non-existence, or
   departure, or changes of the tiling itself. The chameleon darkens in
   the shade of him that bends over it to ascertain its colours. In like
   manner, but with yet greater caution, ought we to think respecting a
   tranquil habit of the inward life, considered as a spiritual sense as
   the medial organ in and by which our peace with God, and the lively
   working of his grace on our spirit, are perceived by us. This peace
   which we have with God in Christ, is inviolable; but because the sense
   and persuasion of it may be interrupted, the soul that is truly at
   peace with God may for a time be disquieted in itself, through weakness
   of faith, or the strength of temptation, or the darkness of desertion,
   losing sight of that grace, that love and light of God's countenance,
   on which its tranquillity and joy depend. Thou didst hide thy face,
   saith David, and I was troubled. But when these eclipses are over, the
   soul is revived with new consolation, as the face of the earth is
   renewed and made to smile with the return of the sun in the spring; and
   this ought always to uphold Christians in the saddest times, namely,
   that the grace and love of God towards them depend not on their sense,
   nor upon any thing in them, but is still in itself, incapable of the
   smallest alteration.

   A holy heart that gladly entertains grace, shall find that it and peace
   cannot dwell asunder; while an ungodly man may sleep to death in the
   lethargy of carnal presumption and impenitency; but a true, lively,
   solid peace, he cannot have. There is no peace to the wicked, saith my
   God, Isa. lvii, 21.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM VIII.

  WORLDLY HOPES.

   Leighton.

   Worldly hopes are not living, but lying hopes; they die often before
   us, and we live to bury them, and see our own folly and infelicity in
   trusting to them; but at the utmost, they die with us when we die, and
   can accompany us no farther. But the lively hope, which is the
   Christian's portion, answers expectation to the full, and much beyond
   it, and deceives no way but in that happy way of far exceeding it.

   A living hope, living in death itself! The world dares say no more for
   its device than Dum spiro spero; but the children of God can add, by
   virtue of this living hope, Dum exspiro spero.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM IX.

  THE WORLDLING'S FEAR.

   Leighton.

   It is a fearful thing when a man and all his hopes die together. Thus
   saith Solomon of the wicked, Prov. xi, 7, When he dieth, then die his
   hopes; (many of them before, but at the utmost then,* all of them;) but
   the righteous hath hope in his death. Prov. xiv, 32.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM X.

  WORLDLY MIRTH.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon
   nitre, so is he that singeth songs
     __________________________________________________________________

   *One of the numerous proofs against those who with a strange
   inconsistency hold the Old Testament to have been inspired throughout,
   and yet deny that the doctrine of a future state is taught therein. to
   a heavy heart. Prov. xxv, 20. Worldly mirth is so far from curing
   spiritual grief, that even worldly grief, where it is great and takes
   deep root is not allayed but increased by it. A man who is full of
   inward heaviness, the more he is encompassed about with mirth, it
   exasperates and enrages his grief the more; like ineffectual weak
   physic, which removes not the humour, but stirs it and makes it more
   unquiet. But spiritual joy is seasonable for all estates; in
   prosperity, it is pertinent to crown and sanctify all other enjoyments,
   with this which so far surpasses them; and in distress, it is the only
   Nepenthe, the cordial of fainting spirits: so Psal. iv, 7, He hath put
   joy into my heart. This mirth makes way for itself, which other mirth
   cannot do. These songs are sweetest in the night of distress.

   There is something exquisitely beautiful and touching in the first of
   these similes: and the second, though less pleasing to the imagination,
   has the charm of propriety, and expresses the transition with equal
   force and liveliness. A grief of recent birth is a sick infant that
   must have its medicine administered in its milk, and sad thoughts are
   the sorrowful hearth's natural food. This is a complaint that is not to
   be cured by opposites, which for the most part only reverse the
   symptoms while they exasperate the disease--or like a rock in the mid
   channel of a river swollen by a sudden rain-flush from the mountain,
   which only detains the excess of waters from their proper outlet, and
   makes them foam, roar, and eddy. The soul in her desolation hugs the
   sorrow close to her, as her sole remaining garment: and this must be
   drawn off so gradually, and the garment to be put in its stead so
   gradually slipt on and feel so like the former, that the sufferer shall
   be sensible of the change only by the refreshment. The true spirit of
   consolation is well content to detain the tear in the eye, and finds a
   surer pledge of its success in the smile of resignation that dawns
   through that, than in the liveliest shows of a forced and alien
   exhilaration.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XI. Plotinus thanked God, that his soul was not tied to an immortal
body.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XII.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   What a full confession do we make of our dissatisfaction with the
   objects of our bodily senses, that in our attempts to express what we
   conceive the best of beings, and the greatest of felicities to be, we
   describe by the exact contraries of all, that we experience here--the
   one as infinite, incomprehensible, immutable, &c, the other as
   incorruptible, undefiled, and that passeth not away. At all events,
   this coincidence, say rather, identity of attributes is sufficient to
   apprize us, that to be inheritors of bliss, we must become the children
   of God.

   This remark of Leighton's is ingenious and startling. Another, and more
   fruitful, perhaps more solid, inference from the fact would be, that
   there is something in the human mind which makes it know (as soon as it
   is sufficiently awakened to reflect on its own thoughts and notices)
   that in all finite quantity there is an infinite, in all measure of
   time an eternal; that the latter are the basis, the substance, the true
   and abiding reality of the former; and that as we truly are, only as
   far as God is with us, so neither can we truly possess (that is, enjoy)
   our being or any other real good, but by living in the sense of his
   holy presence.

   A life of wickedness is a life of lies; and an evil being, or the being
   of evil, the fest and darkest mystery.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XIII.

    THE WISEST USE OF THE IMAGINATION.

   Leighton.

   It is not altogether unprofitable; yea, it is great wisdom in
   Christians to be arming themselves against such temptations as may
   befall the hereafter, though they have not as yet met with them; to
   labour to overcome them before-hand, to suppose the hardest things that
   may be incident to them, and to put on the strongest resolutions they
   can attain unto. Yet all that is but an imaginary effort; and therefore
   there is no assurance that the victory is any more than imaginary, too,
   till it come to action, and then, they that have spoken and thought
   very confidently, may prove but (as one said of the Athenians) fortes
   in tabula, patient and courageous in picture or fancy; and,
   notwithstanding all then: arms, and dexterity in handling them by way
   of exercise, may be foully defeated when they are to fight in earnest.

  APHORISM XIV.

    THE LANGUAGE OF SCRIPTURE.

   The word of God speaks to men, and therefore it speaks the language of
   the children of men. This just and pregnant thought was suggested to
   Leighton by Gen. xxii, 12. The same text has led me to unfold and
   expand the remark.--On moral subjects, the Scriptures speak in the
   language of the affections which they excite in us; on sensible
   objects, neither metaphysically, as they are known by superior
   intelligences; nor theoretically, as they would be seen by us were we
   placed in the sun; but as they are represented by our human senses in
   our present relative position. Lastly, from no vain, or worse than
   vain, ambition of seeming to walk on the sea of mystery in my way to
   truth, but in the hope of removing a difficulty that presses heavily on
   the minds of many who in heart and desire are believers, and which long
   pressed on my own mind, I venture to add: that on spiritual things, and
   allusively to the mysterious union or conspiration of the divine with
   the human in the spirits of the just, spoken of in Rom. vii, 27, the
   word of God attributes the language of the spirit sanctified to the
   Holy One, the Sanctifier.

   Now the spirit in man (that is, the will) knows its own state in and by
   its acts alone: even as in geometrical reasoning the mind knows its
   constructive faculty in the act of constructing, and contemplates the
   act in the product (that is, the mental figure or diagram) which is
   inseparable from the act and co-instantaneous.

   Let the reader join these two positions; first, that the divine Spirit
   acting in the human will is described as one with the will so filled
   and actuated: secondly, that our actions are the means, by which alone
   the will becomes assured of its own state: and he will understand,
   though he may not perhaps adopt my suggestion, that the verse, in which
   God speaking of himself, says to Abraham, Now I know that thou fearest
   God, seeing thou has not withheld thy son, thy only son, from me--may
   be more than merely figurative. An accommodation I grant; but in the
   thing expressed, and not altogether in the expressions. In arguing with
   infidels, or with the weak in faith, it is a part of religious
   prudence, no less than of religious morality, to avoid whatever looks
   like an evasion. To retain the literal sense, wherever the harmony of
   Scripture permits, and reason does not forbid, is ever the honester,
   and, nine times in ten, the more rational and pregnant interpretation.
   The contrary plan is an easy and approved way of getting rid of a
   difficulty; but nine times in ten a bad way of solving it. But alas!
   there have been too many commentators who are content not to understand
   a text themselves, if only they can make the reader believe they do.

   Of the figures of speech in the sacred volume, that are only figures of
   speech, the one of most frequent occurrence is that which describes an
   effect by the name of its most usual and best-known cause: the passages
   for instance, in which grief, fury, repentance, &c, are attributed to
   the Deity. But these are far enough from justifying the (I had almost
   said, dishonest) fashion of metaphorical glosses, in as well as out of
   the church; and which our fashionable divines have carried to such an
   extent, as in the doctrinal part of their creed, to leave little else
   but metaphors. But the reader who wishes to find this latter subject,
   and that of the aphorism, treated more at large, is referred to Mr.
   Southey's Omniana, vol. ii, p. 7-12, and to the note in p. 62-67, of
   the author's second Lay Sermon.

  AMORISM XV.

    THE CHRISTIAN NO STOIC.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   Seek not altogether to dry up the stream of sorrow, but to bound it and
   keep it within its banks. Religion doth not destroy the life of nature,
   but adds to it a life more excellent; yea, it doth not only permit, but
   requires some feeling of afflictions. Instead of patience, there is in
   some men an affected pride of spirit suitable only to the doctrine of
   the Stoics as it is usually taken. They strive not to feel at all the
   afflictions that are on them; but where there is no feeling at all,
   there can be no patience.

   Of the sects of ancient philosophy the Stoic is, perhaps, the nearest
   to Christianity. Yet even to this sect Christianity is fundamentally
   opposite. For the Stoic attaches the highest honour (or rather,
   attaches honour solely) to the person that acts virtuously in spite of
   his feelings, or who has raised himself above the conflict by their
   extinction; while Christianity instructs us to place small reliance on
   a virtue that does not begin by bringing the feelings to a conformity
   with the commands of the conscience. Its especial aim, its
   characteristic operation, is to moralize the affections. The feelings,
   that oppose a right act, must be wrong feelings. The act, indeed,
   whatever the agent's feelings might be, Christianity would command: and
   under certain circumstances would both command and commend it--command
   it, as a healthful symptom in a sick patient; and commend it, as one of
   the ways and means of changing the feelings, or displacing them by
   calling up the opposite.

  COROLLARIES TO APHORISM XV.

   I. The more consciousness in our thoughts and words, and the less in
   our impulses and general actions, the better and more healthful the
   state both of head and heart. As the flowers from an orange tree in its
   time of blossoming, that burgeon forth, expand, fall, and are momently
   replaced, such is the sequence of hourly and momently charities in a
   pure and gracious soul. The modern fiction which depictures the son of
   Cytherea with a bandage round his eyes, is not without a spiritual
   meaning. There is a sweet and holy blindness in Christian love even as
   there is a blindness of life, yea, and of genius, too, in the moment of
   productive energy.

   II. Motives are symptoms of weakness, and supplements for the deficient
   energy of the living principle, the law within us. Let them then be
   reserved for those momentous acts and duties in which the strongest and
   best balanced natures must feel themselves deficient, and where
   humility, no less than prudence, prescribes deliberation. We find a
   similitude of this, I had almost said a remote analogy, in organized
   bodies. The lowest class of animals or protozoa, the polypi for
   instance, have neither brain nor nerves. Their motive powers are all
   from without. The sun, light, the warmth, the air are their nerves and
   brain. As life ascends, nerves appear; but still only as the conductors
   of an external influence; next are seen the knots or ganglions, as so
   many foci of instinctive agency, that imperfectly imitate the yet
   wanting centre. And now the promise and token of a true individuality
   are disclosed; both the reservoir of sensibility and the imitative
   power that actuates the organs of motion, (the muscles) with the
   net-work of conductors, are all taken inward and appropriated; the
   spontaneous rises into the voluntary, and finally after various steps
   and a long ascent, the material and animal means and conditions are
   prepared for the manifestations of a free will, having its law within
   itself and its motive in the law--and thus bound to originate its own
   acts, not only without, but even against, alien stimulants. That in our
   present state we have only the dawning of this inward sun (the perfect
   law of liberty) will sufficiently limit and qualify die preceding
   position, if only it have been allowed to produce its two-fold
   consequence--the excitement of hope and the repression of vanity.

  APHORISM XVI.

   Leighton.

   As excessive eating or drinking both makes the body sickly and lazy,
   fit for nothing but sleep, and besots the mind, as it clogs up with,
   crudities the way through which the spirits should pass*, bemiring
   them, and making them move heavily, as a coach in a deep way; thus doth
   all immoderate use of the world and its delights wrong the soul in its
   spiritual condition, makes it sickly and feeble, full of spiritual
   distempers and inactivity, benumbs the graces of the Spirit, and fills
   the soul with sleepy vapours, makes it grow secure and heavy in
   spiritual exercises, and obstructs the way and motion of the Spirit of
   God, in the soul. Therefore, if you would be spiritual, healthful, and
   vigorous, and enjoy much of the consolations of Heaven, be sparing and
   sober in those of the earth, and what you abate of the one, shall be
   certainly made up in the other.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XVII.
     __________________________________________________________________

INCONSISTENCY.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   It is a most unseemly and unpleasant thing, to see a man's life full of
   ups and downs, one step like a Christian, and another like a worldling;
   it cannot choose but both pain himself and mar the edification of
   others.
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Technical phrases of an obsolete system will yet retain their places,
   nay, acquire universal currency, and become sterling in the language,
   when they at once represent the feelings, and give an apparent solution
   of them by visual images easily managed by the fancy. Such are many
   terms and phrases from the humoral physiology long exploded, but which
   are far more popular than any description would be from the theory that
   has taken its place.

   The same sentiment, only with a special application to the maxims and
   measures of our cabinet statesmen, has been finely expressed by a sage
   poet of the preceding generation, in lines which no generation will
   find inapplicable or superannuated.

   God and the world we worship both together, Draw not our laws to Him,
   but His to ours; Untrue to both, so prosperous in neither.

   The imperfect will brings forth but barren flowers! Unwise as all
   distracted interests be, Strangers to God, fools in humanity: Too good
   for great things, and too great for good, While still "I dare not"
   waits upon "I wou'd."
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XVII CONTINUED.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE ORDINARY MOTIVE TO INCONSISTENCY.

   Leighton.

   What though the polite man count thy fashion a little odd and too
   precise, it is because he knows nothing above that model of goodness
   which he hath set himself, and therefore approves of nothing beyond it:
   he knows not God, and therefore doth not discern and esteem what is
   most like Him. When courtiers come down into the country, the common
   home-bred people possibly think their habit strange; but they care not
   for that, it is the fashion at court. What need, then, that Christians
   should be so tender-foreheaded, as to be put out of countenance because
   the world looks on holiness as a singularity? It is the only fashion in
   the highest courts yea, of the King of kings himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XVIII.
     __________________________________________________________________

    SUPERFICIAL RECONCILIATIONS, AND SELF-DECEIT IN FORGIVING.

   When, after variances, men are brought to an agreement, they are much
   subject to this, rather to cover their remaining malices with
   superficial verbal forgiveness, than to dislodge them and free the
   heart of them. This is a poor self-deceit. As the philosopher said to
   him, who being ashamed that he was espied by him in a tavern in the
   outer room, withdrew himself to the inner, he called after him, "That
   is not the way out; the more you go that way, you will be the further
   in!" So when hatreds are upon admonition not thrown out, but retire
   inward to hide themselves, they grow deeper and stronger than before;
   and those constrained semblances of reconcilement are but a false
   healing, do but skin the wound over and therefore it usually breaks
   forth worse again.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XIX.
     __________________________________________________________________

  OF THE WORTH AND THE DUTIES OF THE PREACHER.

   Leighton.

   The stream of custom and our profession bring us to the preaching of
   the Word, and we sit out our hour under the sound; but how few consider
   and prize it as the great ordinance of God for the salvation of souls,
   the beginner and the sustainer of the divine life of grace within us!
   And certainly, until we have these thoughts of it, and seek to feel it
   thus ourselves, although we hear it most frequently, and let slip no
   occasion, yea, hear it with attention and some present delight, yet
   still we miss the right use of it, and turn it from its true end while
   we take it not as that ingrafted word which is able to save our souls.
   James i, 21.

   Thus ought they who preach to speak the word; to endeavour their utmost
   to accommodate it to this end, that sinners may be converted, begotten
   again, and believers nourished and strengthened in their spiritual
   life; to regard no lower end, but aim steadily at that mark.

   Their hearts and tongues ought to be set on fire with holy zeal for God
   and love to souls, kindled by the Holy Ghost, that came down on the
   apostles in the shape of fiery tongues.

   And those that hear should remember this as the end of their hearing,
   that they may receive spiritual life and strength by the word. For
   though it seems a poor despicable business, that a frail, sinful man
   like yourselves should speak a few words in your hearing, yet, look
   upon it as the way wherein God communicates happiness to those who
   believe, and works that believing unto happiness, alters the whole
   frame of the soul, and makes a new creation as it begets it again to
   the inheritance of glory. Consider it thus, which is its true notion;
   and then, what can be so precious?
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XX.

   Leighton.

   The difference is great in our natural life, in some persons
   especially; that they who in infancy were so feeble, and wrapped up as
   others in swaddling clothes, yet afterwards come to excel in wisdom and
   in the knowledge of sciences, or to be commanders of great armies, or
   to be kings: but the distance is far greater and more admirable,
   betwixt the small beginnings of grace, and our after perfection, that
   fulness of knowledge that we look for, and that crown of immortality
   which all they are born to who are born of God.

   But as in the faces or actions of some children, characters and
   presages of their after-greatness have appeared (as a singular beauty
   in Moses' face, as they write of him, and as Cyrus was made king among
   the shepherds' children with whom he was brought up, &c,) so also,
   certainly, in these children of God, there be some characters and
   evidences that they are bom for Heaven by their new birth. That
   holiness and meekness, that patience and faith which shine in the
   actions and sufferings of the saints, are characters of their Father's
   image, and show their high original, and foretel their glory to come;
   such a glory as doth not only surpass the world's thoughts, but the
   thoughts of the children of God themselves. 1 John iii, 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   This aphorism would, it may seem, have been placed more fitly in the
   chapter following. In placing it here, I have been determined by the
   following convictions: 1. Every state, and consequently that which we
   hate described as the state of religious morality, which is not
   progressive, is dead or retrograde. 2. As a pledge of this progression,
   or, at least, as the form in which the propulsive tendency shows
   itself, there are certain hopes, aspirations, yearnings, that with more
   or less of consciousness, rise and stir in the heart of true morality
   as naturally as the sap in the full-formed stem of a rose flows towards
   the bud, within which the flower is maturing. 3. No one, whose own
   experience authorizes him to confirm the truth of this statement, can
   have been conversant with the volumes of religious biography, can have
   perused (for instance) the lives of Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Wishart,
   Sir Thomas More, Bernard Gilpin, Bishop Bedel, or of Egede, Swartz, and
   the missionaries of the frozen world, without an occasional conviction,
   that these men lived under extraordinary influences, which in each
   instance and in all ages of the Christian era bear the same characters,
   and both in the accompaniments and the results evidently refer to a
   common origin. And what can this be? is the question that must needs
   force itself on the mind in the first moment of reflection on a
   phenomenon so interesting and apparently so anomalous. The answer is as
   necessarily contained in one or the other of two assumptions. These
   influences are either the product of delusion, insania amabilis, and
   the reaction of disordered nerves), or they argue the existence of a
   relation to some real agency, distinct from what is experienced or
   acknowledged by the world at large, for which as not merely natural on
   the one hand, and yet not assumed to be miraculous* on the other, we
   have no apter name than spiritual. Now, if neither analogy justifies
   nor the moral feelings permit the former assumption and we decide
   therefore in favour of the reality of a state other and higher than the
   mere moral man, whose religion consists in morality, has attained under
   these convictions, can the existence of a transitional state appear
   other than probable? or that these very convictions, when accompanied
   by correspondent dispositions and stirrings of the heart, are among the
   marks and indications of such a state? And thinking it not unlikely
   that among the readers of this volume, there may be found some
   individuals, whose inward state, though disquieted by doubts and
   oftener still perhaps by blank misgivings, may, nevertheless, betoken
   the commencement of a transition
     __________________________________________________________________

   *In check of fanatical pretensions, it is expedient to confine the term
   miraculous, to cases where the senses are appealed to, in proof of
   something that transcends, or can be a part of, the experience derived
   from the senses.

   For let it not be forgotten, that morality, as distinguished from
   prudence, implying, (it matters not under what name, whether of honour,
   or duty, or conscience, still, I say, implying), and being grounded in,
   an awe of the invisible and a confidence therein beyond (nay,
   occasionally in apparent contradiction to) the inductions of outward
   experience, is essentially religious. from a not irreligious morality
   to a spiritual religion, with a view to their interests I placed this
   aphorism under the present head.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXI.

   Leighton.

   The most approved teachers of wisdom, in a human way, have required of
   their scholars, that to the end their minds might be capable of it,
   they should be purified from vice and wickedness. And it was Socrates'
   custom, when any one asked him a question, seeking to be informed by
   him, before he would answer them, he asked them concerning their own
   qualities and course of life.
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XXII.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Knowledge not the ultimate end of religious pursuits.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   The hearing and reading of the word, under which I comprise theological
   studies generally, are alike defective when pursued without increase of
   knowledge, and when pursued chiefly for increase of knowledge. To seek
   no more than a present delight, that evanisheth with the sound of the
   words that die in the air, is not to desire the word as meat, but as
   music, as God tells the prophet Ezekiel of his people, Ezek. xxxiii,
   32. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a
   pleasant voice and can play well upon an instrument; for they hear thy
   words, and they do them not. To desire the word for the increase of
   knowledge, although this is necessary and commendable, and, being
   rightly qualified, is a part of spiritual accretion, yet, take it as
   going no further, it is not the true end of the word. Nor is the
   venting of that knowledge in speech and frequent discourse of the word
   and the divine truths that are in it; which, where it is governed with
   Christian prudence, is not to be despised, but commended; yet,
   certainly, the highest knowledge, and the most frequent and skilful
   speaking of the word severed from the growth here mentioned, misses the
   true end of the word. If any one's head or tongue should grow apace,
   and all the rest stand at a stay, it would certainly make him a
   monster; and they are no other, who are knowing and discoursing
   Christians, and grow daily in that respect, but not at all in holiness
   of heart and life, which is the proper growth of the children of God.
   Apposite to their case is Epictetus's comparison of the sheep; they
   return not what they eat in grass, but in wool.
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XXIII.
     __________________________________________________________________

    THE SUM OF CHURCH HISTORY.

   Leighton.

   In times of peace, the Church may dilate more, and build as it were
   into breadth, but in times of trouble, it arises more in height; it is
   then built upwards: as in cities where men are straitened, they build
   usually higher than in the country.
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XXIV.
     __________________________________________________________________

    WORTHY TO BE FRAMED AND HUNG UP IN THE LIBRARY OF EVERY THEOLOGICAL STUDENT.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   Where there is a great deal of smoke and no clear flame, it argues much
   moisture in the matter, yet it witnesseth certainly that there is fire
   there; and therefore dubious questioning is a much better evidence,
   than that senseless deadness which most take for believing. Men that
   know nothing in sciences, have no doubts. He never truly believed, who
   was not made first sensible and convinced of unbelief.

   Never be afraid to doubt, if only you have the disposition to believe,
   and doubt in order that you may end in believing the truth. I will
   venture to add in my own name and from my own conviction the following:
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXV.

   He, who begins by loving Christianity, better than truth, will proceed
   by loving his own sect or church better than Christianity, and end in
   loving himself better than all.
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XXVI.
     __________________________________________________________________

    THE ABSENCE OF DISPUTES, AND A GENERAL AVERSION TO RELIGIOUS CONTROVERSIES,
    NO PROOF OF TRUE UNANIMITY.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   The boasted peaceableness about questions of faith too often proceeds
   from a superficial temper, and not seldom from a supercilious disdain
   of whatever has no marketable use or value, and from indifference to
   religion itself. Toleration is a herb of spontaneous growth in the soil
   of indifference; but the weed has none of the virtues of the medicinal
   plant, reared by humility in the garden of zeal. Those, who regard
   religions as matters of taste, may consistently include all religious
   differences in the old adage, de gustibus non est disputandum. And many
   there be among these of Gallio's temper, who care for none of these
   things, and who account all questions in religion, as he did, but
   matters of words and names. And by this all religions may agree
   together. But that were not a natural union produced by the active heat
   of the spirit, but a confusion rather, arising from the want of it; not
   a knitting together, but a freezing together, as cold congregates all
   bodies how heterogeneous soever, sticks, stones, and water; but heat
   makes first a separation of different things, and then unites those
   that are of the same nature.

   Much of our common union of minds, I fear, proceeds from no other than
   the aforementioned causes, want of knowledge, and want of affection to
   religion. Yon that boast you live conformably to the appointments of
   the Church, and that no one hears of your noise, we may thank the
   ignorance of your minds for that kind of quietness.

   The preceding extract is particularly entitled to our serious
   reflections, as in a tenfold degree more applicable to the present
   times than to the age in which it was written. We all know, that lovers
   are apt to take offence and wrangle on occasions that perhaps are but
   trifles, and which assuredly would appear such to those who regard love
   itself as folly. These quarrels may, indeed, be no proof of wisdom; but
   still, in the imperfect state of our nature the entire absence of the
   same, and this, too, on far more serious provocations, would excite a
   strong suspicion of a comparative indifference in the parties who can
   love so coolly where they profess to love so well. I shall believe our
   present religious tolerancy to proceed from the abundance of our
   charity and good sense, when I see proofs that we are equally cool and
   forbearing as litigants and political partizans.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXVII.

   The influence of worldly views, (or what are called a man's prospects
   in life), the bane of the Christian Ministry.

   Leighton.

   It is a base, poor thing for a man to seek himself; far below that
   royal dignity that is here put upon Christians, and that priesthood
   joined with it. Under the law, those who were squint-eyed were
   incapable of the priesthood: truly, this squinting toward our own
   interest, the looking aside to that, in God's affairs especially, so
   deforms the face of the soul, that makes it altogether unworthy the
   honour of this spiritual priesthood. Oh! this is a large task, an
   infinite task. The several creatures bear their part in this; the sun
   says somewhat, and moon and stars, yea, the lowest have some share in
   it; the very plants and herbs of the field speak of God; and yet, the
   very highest and best, yea, all of them together, the whole concert of
   heaven and earth cannot show forth all His praise to the full. No, it
   is but a part, the smallest part of that glory, which they can reach.
     __________________________________________________________________

  APHORISM XXVIII.

   Despise none; despair of none.

   Leighton.

   The Jews would not willingly tread upon the smallest piece of paper in
   their way, but took it up; for possibly, said they, the name of God may
   be on it. Though there was a little superstition in this, yet truly
   there is nothing but good religion in it, if we apply it to men.
   Trample not on any; there maybe some work of grace there, that thou
   knowest not of. The name of God may be written upon that soul thou
   treadest on; it may be a soul that Christ thought so much of, as to
   give his precious blood for it; therefore despise it not.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXIX.

   Men of least merit most apt to be contemptuous, because most ignorant
   and most overweening of themselves.

   Leighton.

   Too many take the ready course to deceive themselves; for they look
   with both eyes on the failings and defects of others, and scarcely give
   their good qualities half an eye, while, on the contrary, in
   themselves, they study to the full their own advantages, and their
   weaknesses and defects, (as one says,) they skip over, as children do
   their hard words in their lesson, that are troublesome to read; and
   making this uneven parallel, what wonder if the result be a gross
   mistake of themselves!
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXX.

   Vanity may strut in rags, and humility be arrayed in purple and fine
   linen.

   Leighton.

   It is not impossible that there may be in some an affected pride in the
   meanness of apparel, and in others, under either neat or rich attire, a
   very humble unaffected mind: using it upon some of the forementioned
   engagements, or such like, and yet, the heart not at all upon it.
   Magnus qui fictilibus utitur tanquam argento, nec ille minor qui
   argento tanquam fictilibus, says Seneca: Great is he who enjoys his
   earthenware as if it were plate, and not less great is the man to whom
   all his plate is no more than earthenware.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXI.

   Of the detraction among religious professors.

   They who have attained to a self-pleasing pitch of civility or formal
   religion, have usually that point of presumption with it, that they
   make their own size the model and rule to examine all by. What is below
   it, they condemn indeed as profane; but what is beyond it, they account
   needless and affected preciseness: and therefore are as ready as others
   to let fly invectives or bitter taunts against it, which are the keen
   and poisoned shafts of the tongue, and a persecution that shall be
   called to a strict account.

   The slanders, perchance, may not be altogether forged or untrue; they
   may be the implements, not the inventions, of malice. But they do not
   on this account escape the guilt of detraction. Rather, it is
   characteristic of the evil spirit in question, to work by the advantage
   of real faults; but these stretched and aggravated to the utmost. It is
   not expressible how deep a wound a tongue sharpened to this work will
   give, with no noise and a very little word. This is the true white
   gunpowder, which the dreaming projectors of silent mischiefs and
   insensible poisons sought for in the laboratories of art and nature, in
   a world of good; but which was to be found in its most destructive form
   in "the world of evil, the tongue."
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXII.

   The remedy.

   Leighton

   All true remedy must begin at the heart; otherwise it will be but a
   mountebank cure, a false imagined conquest. The weights and wheels are
   there, and the clock strikes according to their motion. Even he that
   speaks contrary to what is within him, guilefully contrary to his
   inward conviction and knowledge, yet speaks conformably to what is
   within him in the temper and frame of his heart, which is double, a
   heart and a heart, as the Psalmist hath it, Psal. xii, 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXIII.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   It is an argument of a candid ingenuous mind, to delight in the good
   name and commendations of others; to pass by their defects and take
   notice of their virtues; and to speak and hear of those willingly, and
   not endure either to speak or hear of the other; for in this indeed you
   may be little less guilty than the evil speaker, in taking pleasure in
   it, though you speak it not. He that willingly drinks in tales and
   calumnies, will, from the delight he hath in evil hearing, slide
   insensibly into the humour of evil speaking. It is strange how most
   persons dispense with themselves in this point, and that in scarcely
   any societies shall we find a hatred of this ill, but rather some
   tokens of taking pleasure in it; and until a Christian sets himself to
   an inward watchfulness over his heart, not suffering in it any thought
   that is uncharitable, or vain self-esteem, upon the sight of others'
   frailties, he will still be subject to somewhat of this, in the tongue
   or ear at least. So then, as for the evil of guile in the tongue, a
   sincere heart, truth in the inward parts, powerfully redresses it;
   therefore it is expressed, Psal. XV, 2, That speaketh the truth from
   his heart; thence it flows. Seek much after this, to speak nothing with
   God, nor men, but what is the sense of a single unfeigned heart. O
   sweet truth! excellent but rare sincerity! he that loves that truth
   within, and who is himself at once the truth and the life, He alone can
   work it there! Seek it of him.

   It is characteristic of the Roman dignity and sobriety, that, in the
   Latin, to favour with the tongue (favere lingua) means, to be silent.
   We say. Hold your tongue! as if it were an injunction, that could not
   be carried into effect but by manual force, or the pincers of the
   forefinger and thumb! And verily--I blush to say it--it is not women
   and Frenchmen only that would rather have their tongues bitten than
   bitted, and feel their souls in a strait-waistcoat, when they are
   obliged to remain silent.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXIV.

   On the passion for new and striking thoughts.

   Leighton.

   In conversation seek not so much either to vent thy knowledge, or to
   increase it, as to know more spiritually and effectually what thou dost
   know. And in this way those mean despised truths, that every one thinks
   he is sufficiently seen in, will have a new sweetness and use in them,
   which thou didst not so well perceive before (for these flowers cannot
   be sucked dry,) and in this humble sincere way thou shalt grow in grace
   and in knowledge, too.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXV.

   The radical difference between the good man and the vicious man.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   The godly man hates the evil he possibly by temptation hath been drawn
   to do, and loves the good he is frustrated of, and, having intended,
   hath not attained to do. The sinner, who hath his denomination from sin
   as his course, hates the good which sometimes he is forced to do, and
   loves that sin which many times he does not, either wanting occasion
   and means, so that he cannot do it, or through the check of an
   enlightened conscience possibly dares not do; and though so bound up
   from the act, as a dog in a chain, yet the habit, the natural
   inclination and desire in him, is still the same, the strength of his
   affection is carried to sin. So in the weakest sincere Christian, there
   is that predominant sincerity and desire of holy walking, according to
   which he is called a righteous person, the Lord is pleased to give him
   that name, and account him so, being upright in heart, though often
   failing.

   Leighton adds, "There is a righteousness of a higher strain." I do not
   ask the reader's full assent to this position: I do not suppose him as
   yet prepared to yield it. But thus much he will readily admit, that
   here, if anywhere, we are to seek the fine line which, like stripes of
   light in light, distinguishes, not divides, the summit of religious
   morality from spiritual religion.

   "A righteousness (Leighton continues,) that is not in him, but upon
   him. He is clothed with it." This, Reader! is the controverted
   doctrine, so warmly asserted and so bitterly decried under the name of
   "imputed righteousness. Our learned Archbishop, you see, adopts it; and
   it is on this account principally, that by many of our leading
   churchmen his orthodoxy has been more than questioned, and his name put
   in the list of proscribed divines, as a Calvinist. That Leighton
   attached a definite sense to the words above quoted, it would be
   uncandid to doubt; and the general spirit of his writings leads me to
   presume that it was compatible with the eternal distinction between
   things and persons, and therefore opposed to modern Calvinism. But what
   it was, I have not (I own) been able to discover. The sense, however,
   in which I think he might have received this doctrine, and in which I
   avow myself a believer in it, I shall have an opportunity of showing in
   another place. My present object is to open out the road by the removal
   of prejudices, so far at least as to throw some disturbing doubts on
   the secure taking-for-granted, that the peculiar tenets of the
   Christian faith asserted in the articles and homilies of our national
   Church are in contradiction to the common sense of mankind. And with
   this view, (and not in the arrogant expectation or wish, that a mere
   ipse dixit should be received for argument) I here avow my conviction,
   that the doctrine of imputed righteousness, rightly and scripturally
   interpreted, is so far from being either irrational or immoral, that
   reason itself prescribes the idea in order to give a meaning and an
   ultimate object to morality; and that the moral law in the conscience
   demands its reception in order to give reality and substantive
   existence to the idea presented by the reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

ASPHORISM XXXVI.

   Your blessedness is not,--no, believe it, it is not where most of you
   seek it, in things below you. How can that be? It must be a higher good
   to make you happy
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   Every rank of creatures, as it ascends in the scale of creation, leaves
   death behind it or under it. The metal at its height of being seems a
   mute prophecy of the coming vegetation, into a mimic semblance of which
   it crystallizes. The blossom and flower, the acme of vegetable life,
   divides into correspondent organs with reciprocal functions, and by
   instinctive motions and approximations seems impatient of that fixure,
   by which it is differenced in kind from the flower-shaped Psyche, that
   flutters with free wing above it. And wonderfully in the insect realm
   doth the irritability, the proper seat of instinct, while yet the
   nascent sensibility is subordinated thereto-- most wonderfully, I say,
   doth the muscular life in the insect, and the musculo-arterial in the
   bird, imitate and typically rehearse the adaptive understanding, yea,
   and the moral affections and charities, of man. Let us carry ourselves
   back, in spirit, to the mysterious week, the teeming work-days of the
   creator: as they rose in vision before the eye of the inspired
   historian of the generations of the heaven and the earth, in the days
   that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens. And who that hath
   watched their ways with an understanding heart, could, as the vision
   evolving, still advanced towards him, contemplate the filial and loyal
   bee; the home building, wedded, and divorceless swallow; and above all
   the manifoldly intelligent** ant tribes, with their commonwealths and
   confederacies, their warriors and miners, the husbandfolk, that fold in
   their tiny flocks on the honeyed leaf, and the virgin sisters with the
   holy instincts of maternal love, detached and in selfless purity--and
   not say to himself. Behold the shadow of approaching humanity, the sun
   rising from behind, in the kindling mom of creation! Thus all lower
   natures find their highest good in semblances and seekings of that
   which is higher and better. All things strive to ascend, and ascend in
   their striving. And shall man alone stoop? Shall his pursuits and
   desires, the reflections of his inward life, be like the reflected
   image of a tree on the edge of a pool, that grows downward, and seeks a
   mock heaven in the unstable element beneath it, in neighbourhood with
   the slim water-weeds and oozy bottom-grass that are yet better than
   itself and more noble, in as far as substances that appear as shadows
   are preferable to shadows mistaken for substance! No! it must be a
   higher good to make you happy. While you labour for any thing below
   your proper humanity, you seek a happy life in the region of death.
   Well saith the moral poet--

   Unless above himself he can

   Erect himself, how mean a thing is man!
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** See Huber on Bees, and on Ants.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXVII.

   Leighton.

   There is an imitation of men that is impious and wicked, which consists
   in taking the copy of their sins. Again, there is an imitation which
   though not so grossly evil, yet, is poor and servile, being in mean
   things, yea, sometimes descending to imitate the very imperfections of
   others, as fancying some comeliness in them: as some of Basil's
   scholars, who imitated his slow speaking, which he had a little in the
   extreme, and could not help. But this is always laudable, and worthy of
   the best minds, to be imitators of that which is good, wheresover they
   find it; for that stays not in any man's person, as the ultimate
   pattern, but rises to the highest grace, being man's nearest likeness
   to God, His image and resemblance, bearing His stamp and
   superscription, and belonging peculiarly to Him, in what hand soever it
   be found, as carrying the mark of no other owner than Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXVIII.

   Leighton.

   Those who think themselves high-spirited, and will bear least, as they
   speak, are often, even by that, forced to bow most, or to burst under
   it; while humility and meekness escape many a burden, and many a blow,
   always keeping peace within, and often without, too.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXXIX.

   Leighton.

   Our condition is universally exposed to fears and troubles, and no man
   is so stupid but he studies and projects for some fence against them,
   some bulwark to break the incursion of evils, and so to bring his mind
   to some ease, ridding it of the fear of them. Thus, men seek safety in
   the greatness, or multitude, or supposed faithfulness, of friends; they
   seek by any means to be strongly underset this way, to have many, and
   powerful, and trust-worthy friends. But wiser men, perceiving the
   unsafety and vanity of these and all external things, have cast about
   for some higher course. They see a necessity of withdrawing a man from
   externals, which do nothing but mock and deceive those most who trust
   most to them; but they cannot tell whither to direct him. The best of
   them bring him into himself, and think to quiet him so, but the truth
   is, he finds as little to support him there; there is nothing truly
   strong enough within him, to hold out against the many sorrows and
   fears which still from without do assault him. So then, though it is
   well done, to call off a man from outward things, as moving sands, that
   he build not on them, yet, this is not enough; for his own spirit is as
   unsettled a piece as is in all the world, and must have some higher
   strength than its own, to fortify and fix it. This is the way that is
   here taught, Fear not their fear, but sanctify the Lord your God in
   your hearts; and if you can attain this latter, the former will follow
   of itself.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XL.

   Worldly Troubles Idols.

   Leighton.

   The too ardent love or self-willed desire of power, or wealth, or
   credit in the world, is (an Apostle has assured us) idolatry. Now among
   the words or synonymes for idols, in the Hebrew language, there is one
   that in its primary sense signifies troubles (tegirim), other two that
   signify terrors (miphletzeth and emim). And so it is certainly. All our
   idols prove so to us. They fill us with nothing but anguish and
   troubles, with cares and fears, that are good for nothing but to be fit
   punishments of the folly, out of which they arise.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLI.

   On the right treatment of infidels.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   A regardless contempt of infidel writings is usually the fittest
   answer; Spreta vilescerent. But where the holy profession of Christians
   is likely to receive either the main or the indirect blow, and a word
   of defence may do any thing to ward it off, there we ought not to spare
   to do it.

   Christian prudence goes a great way in the regulating of this. Some are
   not capable of receiving rational answers, especially in divine things;
   they were not only lost upon them, but religion dishonoured by the
   contest.

   Of this sort are the vulgar railers at religion, the foulmouthed
   beliers of the Christian faith and history. Impudently false and
   slanderous assertions can be met only by assertions of their impudent
   and slanderous falsehood: and Christians will not, must not, condescend
   to this. How can mere railing be answered by them who are forbidden to
   return a railing answer? Whether, or on what provocations, such
   offenders may be punished or coerced on the score of incivility, and
   ill-neighbourhood, and for abatement of a nuisance, as in the case of
   other scolds and endangerers of the public peace, must be trusted to
   the discretion of the civil magistrate. Even then, there is danger of
   giving them importance, and flattering their vanity, by attracting
   attention to their works, if the punishment be slight; and if severe,
   of spreading far and wide their reputation as martyrs, as the smell of
   a dead dog at a distance is said to change into that of musk.
   Experience hitherto seems to favour the plan of treating these betes
   puantes and enfans de Diable, as their four-footed brethren, the skink
   and squash, are treated** by the American woodmen, who turn their backs
   upon the fetid intruder, and make appear not to see him, even at the
   cost of suffering him to regale on the favourite viand of these
   animals, the brains of a stray goose or crested thraso of the dunghill.
   At all events, it is degrading to the majesty, and injurious to the
   character of religion, to make its safety the plea for their
   punishment, or at all to connect the name of Christianity with the
   castigation of indecencies that properly belong to the beadle, and the
   perpetrators of which would have equally deserved his lash, though the
   religion of their fellow-citizens, thus assailed by them, had been that
   of Fo or of Juggernaut.

   On the other hand, we are to answer every one that inquires a reason,
   or an account; which supposes something receptive of it. We ought to
   judge ourselves engaged to give it, be it an enemy, if he will hear; if
   it gain him not, it may in part convince and cool him; much more,
   should it be one who ingenuously inquires for satisfaction, and
   possibly inclines to receive the truth, but has been prejudiced by
   misrepresentations of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   **About the end of the same year (says Kalm) another of these animals
   (Mephitis Americana) crept into our cellar; but did not exhale the
   smallest scent, because it was not disturbed. A foolish old woman,
   however, who perceived it at night, by the shining, and thought, I
   suppose, that it would set the world on fire, killed it; and at that
   moment its stench began to spread.

   We recommend this anecdote to the consideration of sundry old women, on
   this side of the Atlantic, who, though they do not wear the appropriate
   garment, are worthy to sit in their committee-room, like Bickerstaff in
   the Tatler, under the canopy of their grandam's hoop-petticoat.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLII.

   Passion no friend to truth.

   Leighton.

   Truth needs not the service of passion; yea, nothing so disserves it,
   as passion when set to serve it. The Spirit of truth is withal the
   Spirit of meekness. The Dove that rested on that great champion of
   truth, who is The Truth itself, is from Him derived to the lovers of
   truth, and they ought to seek the participation of it. Imprudence makes
   some kind of Christians lose much of their labour, in speaking for
   religion, and drive those further off, whom they would draw into it.

   The confidence that attends a Christian's belief makes the believer not
   fear men, to whom he answers, but still he fears his God, for whom he
   answers, and whose interest is chief in those things he speaks of. The
   soul that hath the deepest sense of spiritual things, and the truest
   knowledge of God, is most afraid to miscarry in speaking of Him, most
   tender and wary how to acquit itself when engaged to speak of and for
   God.**
     __________________________________________________________________

   **To the same purpose are the two following sentences from Hilary:

   Etiam quae pro religione dicimus, cum grandi metu et disciplina dicere
   debemus.--Hilarius de Trinit. Lib. 7.

   *Non rdictus est hominum eloquiis de Dei rebus aliius quam Dei
   sermo.--Idem.

   The latter, however, must be taken with certain qualifications and
   exceptions: as when any two or more texts are in apparent
   contradiction, and it is required to state a truth that comprehends and
   reconciles both, and which, of course, cannot be expressed in the words
   of either:--for example, the Filial subordination (My father is greater
   than I), in the equal Deity (My Father and I are one).
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLIII.

   On the conscience.

   Leighton.

   It is a fruitless verbal debate, whether conscience be a faculty or a
   habit. When all is examined, conscience will be found to be no other
   than the mind of a man, under the notion of a particular reference to
   himself and his own actions.

   Comment.

   What conscience is, and that it is the ground and antecedent of human
   (or self-) consciousness, and not any modification of the latter, I
   have shown at large in a work announced for the press, and described in
   the chapter following. I have selected the preceding extract as an
   exercise for reflection; and because I think that in too closely
   following Thomas a Kempis, the Archbishop has strayed from his own
   judgment. The definition, for instance, seems to say all, and in fact
   says nothing; for if I asked. How do you define the human mind? the
   answer must at least contain, if not consist of, the words, "a mind
   capable of conscience." For conscience is no synonyme of consciousness,
   nor any mere expression of the same as modified by the particular
   object. On the contrary, a consciousness properly human, (that is,
   self-consciousness,) with the sense of moral responsibility,
   pre-supposes the conscience as its antecedent condition and ground.
   Lastly, the sentence, "It is a fruitless verbal debate," is an
   assertion of the same complexion with the contemptuous sneers at verbal
   criticism by the contemporaries of Bentley. In questions of philosophy
   or divinity that have occupied the learned and been the subjects of
   many successive controversies, for one instance of mere logomachy I
   could bring ten instances of logodaedaly, or verbal legerdemain, which
   have perilously confirmed prejudices, and withstood the advancement of
   truth, in consequence of the neglect of verbal debate, that is, strict
   discussion of terms. In whatever sense, however, the term conscience
   may be used, the following aphorism is equally true and important. It
   is worth noticing, likewise, that Leighton himself in a following page,
   (vol. ii, p. 97), tells us, that a good conscience is the root of a
   good conversation: and then quotes from St. Paul a text, Titus 1, 15,
   in which the mind and the conscience are expressly distinguished.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLIV.

   The light of knowledge a necessary accompaniment of a good conscience.

   Leighton.

   If you would have a good conscience, you must all means have so much
   light, so much knowledge of the will of God, as may regulate you, and
   show you your way, may teach you how to do, and speak, and think, as in
   His presence.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLV.

   Yet the knowledge of the rule, though accompanied by an endeavour to
   accommodate our conduct to this rule, will not of itself form a good
   conscience.

   Leighton.

   To set the outward actions right, though with an honest intention, and
   not so to regard and find out the inward disorder of the heart, whence
   that in the actions flows, is but to be still putting the index of a
   clock right with your finger, while it is foul, or out of order within,
   which is a continual business and does no good. Oh! but a purified
   conscience, a soul renewed and refined in its temper and affections,
   will make things go right without, in all the duties and acts of our
   calling.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLVI.

   The depth of the conscience.

   How deeply seated the conscience is in the human soul, is seen in the
   effect which sudden calamities produce on guilty men, even when unaided
   by any determinate notion or fears of punishment after death. The
   wretched criminal, as one rudely awakened from a long sleep, bewildered
   with the new light, and half recollecting, half striving to recollect,
   a fearful something, he knows not what, but which he will recognize as
   soon as he hears the name, already interprets the calamities into
   judgments, executions of a sentence passed by an invisible judge; as if
   the vast pyre of the last judgment were already kindled in an unknown
   distance, and some flashes of it, darting forth at intervals beyond the
   rest, were flying and lighting upon the face of his soul. The calamity
   may consist in loss of fortune, or character, or reputation; but you
   hear no regrets from him. Remorse extinguishes all regret; and remorse
   is the implicit creed of the guilty.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLVII.

   Leighton and Coleridge.

   God hath suited every creature He hath made with a convenient good to
   which it tends, and in the obtainment of which it rests and is
   satisfied. Natural bodies have all their own natural place, whither, if
   not hindered, they move incessantly till they be in it; and they
   declare, by resting there, that they are (as I may say) where they
   would be. Sensitive creatures are carried to seek a sensitive good, as
   agreeable to their rank in being, and, attaining that, aim no further.
   Now in this is the excellency of man, that he is made capable of a
   communion with his Maker, and, because capable of it, is unsatisfied
   without it: the soul, being cut out (so to speak) to that largeness,
   cannot be filled with less. Though he is fallen from his right to that
   good, and from all right desire of it, yet, not from a capacity of it,
   no, nor from a necessity of it, for the answering and filling of his
   capacity.

   Though the heart once gone from God turns continually further away from
   Him, and moves not towards Him till it be renewed, yet, even in that
   wandering, it retains that natural relation to God, as its centre, that
   it hath no true rest elsewhere, nor can by any means find it. It is
   made for Him, and is therefore still restless till it meet with Him.

   It is true, the natural man takes much pains to quiet his heart by
   other things, and digests many vexations with hopes of contentment in
   the end and accomplishment of some design he hath; but still the heart
   misgives. Many times he attains not the thing he seeks; but if he do,
   yet he never attains the satisfaction he seeks and expects in it, but
   only learns from that to desire something further, and still hunts on
   after a fancy, drives his own shadow before him, and never overtakes
   it; and if he did, yet it is but a shadow. And so, in running from God,
   besides the sad end, he carries an interwoven punishment with his sin,
   the natural disquiet and vexation of his spirit, fluttering to and fro,
   and finding no rest for the sole of his foot; the waters of inconstancy
   and vanity covering the whole face of the earth.

   These things are too gross and heavy. The soul, the immortal soul,
   descended from heaven, must either be more happy or remain miserable.
   The highest, the uncreated Spirit, is the proper good, the Father of
   spirits, that pure and full good which raises the soul above itself;
   whereas all other things draw it down below itself. So, then, it is
   never well with the soul, but when it is near unto God, yea, in its
   union with Him, married to Him: mismatching itself elsewhere it hath
   never any thing but shame and sorrow. All that forsake Thee shall be
   ashamed, says the Prophet, Jer. xvii, 13; and the Psalmist, They that
   are far off from Thee shall perish. Psal. lxxiii, 27. And this is
   indeed our natural miserable condition, and it is often expressed this
   way, by estrangedness and distance from God.

   The same sentiments are to be found in the works of Pagan philosophers
   and moralists. Well then may they be made a subject of reflection in
   our days. And well may the pious deist, if such a character now exists,
   reflect that Christianity alone both teaches the way, and provides the
   means, of fulfilling the obscure promises of this great instinct for
   all men, which the philosophy of boldest pretensions confined to the
   sacred few.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLVIII.

   A contracted sphere, or what is called retiring from the business of
   the world, no security from the spirit of the world.

   Leighton.

   The heart may be engaged in a little business as much, if thou watch it
   not, as in many and great affairs. A man may drown in a little brook or
   pool, as well as in a great river, if he be down and plunge himself
   into it, and put his head under water. Some care thou must have, that
   thou mayest not care. Those things that are thorns indeed, thou must
   make a hedge of them, to keep out those temptations that accompany
   sloth, and extreme want that waits, on it; but let them be the hedge:
   suffer them not to grow within the garden.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XLIX.

   On church-going, as a part of religious morality, when not in reference
   to a spiritual religion.

   Leighton.

   It is a strange folly in multitudes of us, to set ourselves no mark, to
   propound no end in the hearing of the Gospel. The merchant sails not
   merely that he may sail, but for traffic, and traffics that he may be
   rich. The husbandman ploughs not merely to keep himself busy, with no
   further end, but ploughs that he may sow, and sows that he may reap
   with advantage. And shall we do the most excellent and fruitful work
   fruitlessly--hear, only to hear, and look no further? This is indeed a
   great vanity and a great misery, to lose that labour, and gain nothing
   by it, which, duly used, would be of all others most advantageous and
   gainful; and yet all meetings are full of this!
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM L.

   On the hopes and self-satisfaction of a religious moralist, independent
   of a spiritual faith--on what are they grounded?

   Leighton.

   There have been great disputes one way or another, about the merit of
   good works; but I truly think they who have laboriously engaged in them
   have been very idly, though very eagerly, employed about nothing, since
   the more sober of the schoolmen themselves acknowledge there can be no
   such thing as meriting from the blessed God, in the human, or, to speak
   more accurately in any created nature whatsoever: nay, so far from any
   possibility of merit, there can be no room for reward any otherwise
   than of the sovereign pleasure and gracious kindness of God; and the
   more ancient writers, when they use the word merit, mean nothing by it
   but a certain correlate to that reward which God both promises and
   bestows of mere grace and benignity. Otherwise, in order to constitute
   what is properly called merit, many things must concur, which no man in
   his senses will presume to attribute to human works, though ever to
   excellent; particularly, that the thing done must not previously be
   matter of debt, and that it be entire, or our own act, unassisted by
   foreign aid; it must also be perfectly good, and it must bear an
   adequate proportion to the reward claimed in consequence of it. If all
   these things do not concur, the act cannot possibly amount to merit.
   Whereas I think no one will venture to assert, that any one of these
   can take place in any human action whatever. But why should I enlarge
   here, when one single circumstance overthrows all those titles: the
   most righteous of mankind would not be able to stand, if his works were
   weighed in the balance of strict justice; how touch less then could
   they deserve that immense glory which is now in question! Nor is this
   to be denied only concerning the unbeliever and the sinner, but
   concerning the righteous and pious believer, who is not only free from
   all the guilt of his former impenitence and rebellion, but endowed with
   the gift of the Spirit. For the time is come that judgment must begin
   at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be
   of them that obey not the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely
   be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? I Peter iv,
   17, 18. The Apostle's interrogation expresses the most vehement
   negation, and signifies that no mortal, in whatever degree he is
   placed, if he be called to the strict examination of divine justice,
   without daily and repeated forgiveness, could be able to keep his
   standing, and much less could he arise to that glorious height. "That
   merit," says Bernard, "on which my hope relies, consists in these three
   things; the love of adoption, the truth of the promise, and the power
   of its performance." This is the threefold cord which cannot be broken.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   Often have I heard it said by advocates for the Socinian scheme--True!
   we are all sinners; but even in the Old Testament God has promised
   forgiveness on repentance. One of the Fathers (I forget which) supplies
   the retort--True! God has promised pardon on penitence: but has he
   promised penitence on sin?--He that repenteth shall be forgiven: but
   where is it said. He that sinneth shall repent? But repentance,
   perhaps, the repentance required in Scripture, the passing into a new
   and contrary principle of action, this Metanoia**, is in the sinner's
   own power! at his own liking! He has but to open his eyes to the sin,
   and the tears are close at hand to wash it away! Verily, the exploded
   tenet of transubstantiation is scarcely at greater variance with the
   common sense and experience of mankind, or borders more closely on a
   contradiction in terms, than this volunteer transmentation, this
   self-change, as the easy means of self-salvation! But the reflections
   of our evangelical author on this subject will appropriately commence
   the aphorisms relating to spiritual religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Metanoia, the New Testament word, which we render by repentance,
   compounded of mens, the spirit, or practical reason.

   May I without offence be permitted to record the very appropriate
   title, with which a stem humorist lettered a collection of Unitarian
   tracts? "Salvation made easy; or, Every man his own Redeemer."
     __________________________________________________________________

                       ELEMENTS OF RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY,

PRELIMINARY TO THE APHORISMS ON

  SPIRITUAL RELIGION.

   Philip saith unto him: Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us.
   Jesus saith unto him. He that hath seen me hath seen the Father: and
   how sayest thou then. Show us the Father? Believest thou not that I am
   in the Father and the Father in me? And I will pray the Father and he
   shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth: whom the
   world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him.
   But ye know him, for he dwelleth with you and shall be in you. And in
   that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me and I in
   you. John xiv, 8, 9, 10, 16, 17, 20.

PRELIMINARY.

   If there be aught spiritual in man, the will must be such.

   If there be a will, there must be a spirituality in man.

   I suppose both positions granted. The reader admits the reality of the
   power, agency, or mode of being expressed in the term, spirit; and the
   actual existence of a will. He sees clearly, that the idea of the
   former is necessary to the conceivability of the latter; and that, vice
   versa, in asserting the fact of the latter he presumes and instances
   the truth of the former--just as in our common and received systems of
   natural philosophy, the being of imponderable matter is assumed to
   render the loadstone intelligible, and the fact of the loadstone
   adduced to prove the reality of imponderable matter,

   In short, I suppose the reader, whom I now invite to the third and last
   division of the work, already disposed to reject for himself and his
   human brethren the insidious title of "Nature's noblest animal," or to
   retort it as the unconscious irony of the Epicurean poet on the
   animalizing tendency of his own philosophy. I suppose him convinced,
   that there is more in man than can be rationally referred to the life
   of nature and the mechanism of organization; that he has a will not
   included in this mechanism; and that the will is in an especial and
   preeminent sense the spiritual part of our humanity.

   Unless, then, we have some distinct notion of the will, and some
   acquaintance with the prevalent errors respecting the same, an insight
   into the nature of spiritual religion is scarcely possible; and our
   reflections on the particular truths and evidences of a spiritual state
   will remain obscure, perplexed, and unsafe. To place my reader on this
   requisite vantage-ground, is the purpose of the following exposition.

   We have begun, as in geometry, with defining our terms; and we proceed,
   like the geometricians, with stating our postulates; the difference
   being, that the postulates of geometry no man can deny, those of moral
   science are such as no good man will deny. For it is not in our power
   to disclaim our nature as sentient beings; but it is in our power to
   disclaim our nature as moral beings. It is possible, (barely possible,
   I admit,) that a man may have remained ignorant or unconscious of the
   moral law within him: and a man need only persist in disobeying the law
   of conscience to make it possible for himself to deny its existence, or
   to reject and repel it as a phantom of superstition. Were it otherwise,
   the Creed would stand in the same relation to morality as the
   multiplication table.

   This then is the distinction of moral philosophy--not that I begin with
   one or more assumptions; for this is common to all science; but--that I
   assume a something, the proof of which no man can give to another, yet
   every man may find for himself. If any man assert that he cannot find
   it, I am bound to disbelieve him. I cannot do otherwise without
   unsettling the very foundations of my own moral nature. For I either
   find it as an essential of the humanity common to him and me: or I have
   not found it at all, except as an hypochondriast finds glass legs. If,
   on the other hand, he will not find it, he excommunicates himself. He
   forfeits his personal rights, and becomes a thing: that is, one who may
   rightfully be employed, or used, as* means to an end, against his will,
   and without regard to his interest.

   All the significant objections of the Materialist, and Necessitarian
   are contained in the term, morality, all the objections of the infidel
   in the term, religion. The very terms, I say, imply a something
   granted, which the objection supposes not granted. The term presumes
   what the objection denies, and in denying presumes the contrary. For it
   is most important to observe that the reasoners on both sides commence
   by taking something for granted, our assent to which they ask or
   demand: that is, both set of with an assumption in the form of a
   postulate
     __________________________________________________________________

   *On this principle alone is it possible to justify capital, or
   ignominious punishments, or indeed any punishment not having the
   reformation of the criminal as one of its objects. Such punishments,
   like those inflicted on suicides, must be regarded as posthumous: the
   wilful extinction of the moral and personal life being, for the
   purposes of punitive justice, equivalent to a wilful destruction of the
   natural life. If the speech of Judge Burnet to the horse-stealer (You
   are not hanged for stealing a horse; but, that horses may not be
   stolen) can be vindicated to all, it must be on this principle; and not
   on the all-unsettling scheme of expedience, which is the anarchy of
   morals. But the Epicurean assumes what according to himself he neither
   is nor can be under any obligation to assume, and demands what he can
   have no right to demand: for he denies the reality of all moral
   obligation, the existence of any right. If he use the words, right and
   obligation, he does it deceptively, and means only power and
   compulsion. To overthrow the faith in aught higher or other than nature
   and physical necessity, is the very purpose of his argument. He desires
   you only to take for granted, that all reality is included in nature,
   and he may then safely, defy you to ward off his conclusion--that
   nothing is excluded!

   But as he cannot morally demand, neither can he rationally expect, your
   assent to this premiss: for he cannot be ignorant, that the best and
   greatest of men have devoted their lives to the enforcement of the
   contrary; that the vast majority of the human race in all ages and in
   all nations have believed in the contrary; and that there is not a
   language on earth, in which he could argue, for ten minutes, in support
   of his scheme, without sliding into words and phrases that imply the
   contrary. It has been said, that the Arabic has a thousand names for a
   lion; but this would be a trifle compared with the number of
   superfluous words and useless synonymes that would be found in an index
   expurgatorius of any European dictionary constructed on the principles
   of a consistent and strictly consequential Materialism.

   The Christian likewise grounds his philosophy on assertions; but with
   the best of all reasons for making them--namely that he ought so to do.
   He asserts what he can neither prove, nor account for, nor himself
   comprehend; but with the strongest inducements, that of understanding
   thereby whatever else it most concerns him to understand aright. And
   yet his assertions have nothing in them of theory or hypothesis; but
   are in immediate reference to three ultimate facts; namely, the reality
   of the law of conscience; the existence of a responsible will, as the
   subject of that law; and lastly, the existence of evil--of evil
   essentially such, not by accident of outward circumstances, not derived
   from its physical consequences, nor from any cause out of itself. The
   first is a fact of consciousness; the second a fact of reason
   necessarily concluded from the first; and the third a fact of history
   interpreted by both.

   Omnia exeunt in mysterium, says a Schoolman: that is. There is nothing,
   the absolute ground of which is not a mystery. The contrary were indeed
   a contradiction in terms: for how can that, which is to explain all
   things, be susceptible of an explanation? It would be to suppose the
   same thing first and second at the same time.

   If I rested here, I should merely have placed my creed in direct
   opposition to that of the Necessitarians, who assume (for observe, both
   parties begin in an assumption and cannot do otherwise) that motives
   act on the will, as bodies act on bodies; and that whether mind and
   matter are essentially the same, or essentially different, they are
   both alike under one and the same law of compulsory causation. But this
   is far from exhausting my intention. I mean at the same time to oppose
   the disciples of Shaftesbury and those who, substituting one faith for
   another, have been well called the pious Deists of the last century, in
   order to distinguish them from the infidels of the present age, who
   persuade themselves, (for the thing itself is not possible,) that they
   reject all faith. I declare my dissent from these two, because they
   imposed upon themselves an idea for a fact: a most sublime idea indeed,
   and so necessary to human nature, that without it no virtue is
   conceivable; but still an idea.

   In contradiction to their splendid but delusory tenets, I profess a
   deep conviction that man was and is a fallen creature, not by accidents
   of bodily constitution or any other cause, which human wisdom in a
   course of ages might be supposed capable of removing; but as diseased
   in his will, in that will which is the true and only strict synonyme of
   the word, I, or the intelligent self. Thus at each of these two
   opposite roads, (the philosophy of Hobbes and that of Shaftesbury), I
   have placed a directing post, informing my fellow-travellers, that on
   neither of these roads can they see the truths to which I would direct
   their attention.

   But the place of starting was at the meeting of foot roads, and one
   only was the right road. I proceed therefore to preclude the opinion of
   those likewise, who indeed agree with me as to the moral responsibility
   of man in opposition to Hobbes and the anti-moralists, and that he is a
   fallen creature, essentially diseased, in opposition to Shaftesbury and
   the misinterpreters of Plato; but who differ from me in exaggerating
   the diseased weakness of the will into an absolute privation of all
   freedom, thereby making moral responsibility; not a mystery above
   comprehension, but a direction contradiction, of which we do distinctly
   comprehend the absurdity. Among the consequences of this doctrine, is
   that direful one of swallowing up all the attributes of the Supreme
   Being in the one attribute of infinite power, and thence deducing that
   things are good and wise because they were created, and not created
   through wisdom and goodness. Thence, too, the awful attribute of
   justice is explained away into a mere right of absolute property; the
   sacred distinction between things and persons is erased; and the
   selection of persons for virtue and vice in this life, and for eternal
   happiness or misery in the next, is represented as the result of a mere
   will, acting in the blindness and solitude of its own infinity. The
   title of a work written by the great and pious Boyle is "Of the awe,
   which the human mind owes to the Supreme Reason." This, in the language
   of these gloomy doctors, must be translated into--"The horror, which a
   being capable of eternal pleasure or pain is compelled to feel at the
   idea of an Infinite Power, about to inflict the latter on an immense
   majority of human souls, without any power on their part either to
   prevent it or the actions which are (not indeed its causes but) its
   assigned signals, and preceding links of the same iron chain!"

   Against these tenets I maintain, that a will conceived separately from
   intelligence is a nonentity, and a mere phantasm of abstraction; and
   that a will, the state of which does in no sense originate in its own
   act, is an absolute contradiction. It might be an instinct, an impulse,
   a plastic power, and, if accompanied with consciousness, a desire; but
   a will it could not be. And this every human being knows with equal
   clearness, though different minds may reflect on it with different
   degrees of distinctness; for who would not smile at the notion of a
   rose willing to put forth its buds and expand them into flowers? That
   such a phrase would be deemed a poetic license proves the difference in
   the things: for all metaphors are grounded on an apparent likeness of
   things essentially different. I utterly disclaim the notion that any
   human intelligence, with whatever power it might manifest itself, is
   alone adequate to the office of restoring health to the will: but at
   the same time I deem it impious and absurd to hold that the Creator
   would have given us the faculty of reason, or that the Redeemer would
   in so many varied forms of argument and persuasion have appealed to it,
   if it had been either totally useless or wholly impotent. Lastly, I
   find all these several truths reconciled and united in the belief, that
   the imperfect human understanding can be effectually exerted only in
   subordination to, and in a dependent alliance with, the means and
   aidances supplied by the All-perfect and Supreme Reason; but that under
   these conditions it is not only an admissible, but a necessary,
   instrument of bettering both ourselves and others.

   We may now proceed to our reflections on the spirit of religion. The
   first three or four aphorisms I have selected from the theological
   works of Dr. Henry More, a contemporary of Archbishop Leighton, and
   like him held in suspicion by the Calvinists of that time as a
   Latitudinarian and Platonizing divine, and who probably, like him,
   would have been arraigned as a Calvinist by the Latitudinarians (I
   cannot say, Platonists)of this day, had the suspicion been equally
   groundless. One or two I have ventured to add from my own reflections.
   The purpose, however, is the same in all--that of declaring, in the
   first place, what spiritual religion is not, what is not a religious
   spirit, and what are not to be deemed influences of the Spirit. If
   after these disclaimers I shall without proof be charged by any with
   renewing or favouring the errors of the Familists, Vanists, Seekers,
   Behmenists, or by whatever other names Church history records the poor
   bewildered enthusiasts, who in the swarming time of our Republic turned
   the facts of the Gospel into allegories, and superseded the written
   ordinances of Christ by a pretended teaching and sensible presence of
   the Spirit, I appeal against them to their own consciences as wilful
   slanderers. But if with proof I have in these aphorisms signed and
   sealed my own condemnation.

   "These things I could not forbear to write. For the light within me,
   that is, my reason and conscience, does assure me, that the ancient and
   Apostolic faith according to the historical meaning thereof, and in the
   literal sense of the Creed, is solid and true: and that Familism in its
   fairest form and under whatever disguise, is a smooth tale to seduce
   the simple from their allegiance to Christ."

   Henry More.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   APHORISMS

On Spiritual Religion

   And here it will not be impertinent to observe, that what the eldest
   Greek philosophy entitled the Reason (NOYL) and ideas, the philosophic
   Apostle names the Spirit and truths spiritually discerned; while to
   those who in the pride of learning or in the overweening meanness of
   modern metaphysics decry the doctrine of the Spirit in man and its
   possible communion with the Holy Spirit, as vulgar enthusiasm, I submit
   the following sentences from a Pagan philosopher, a nobleman and a
   minister of state--"Ita dico, Lucili, sacer intra nos Spiritus sedet,
   malorum bonorumque nostrorum observator et custos. Hic prout a nobis
   tractatus est, ita nos ipse tractat. Bonus vero vir seine Deo nemo
   est." Seneca. Epist. xli.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM I.

   H. More.

   Every one is to give a reason of his faith; but priests and ministers
   more punctually than any, their province being to make good every
   sentence of the Bible to a rational inquirer into the truth of these
   oracles. Enthusiasts find it an easy thing to heat the fancies of
   unlearned and unreflecting hearers; but when a sober man would be
   satisfied of the grounds from whence they speak, he shall not have one
   syllable or the least tittle of a pertinent answer. Only they will talk
   big of the Spirit, and inveigh against reason with bitter reproaches,
   calling it carnal or fleshly, though it be indeed no soft flesh, but
   enduring and penetrant steel, even the sword of the Spirit, and such as
   pierces to the heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

Aphorism II.

   H. More.

   There are two very bad things in this resolving of men's faith and
   practice into the immediate suggestion of a Spirit not acting on our
   understandings, or rather into the illumination of such a Spirit as
   they can give no account of, such as does not enlighten their reason or
   enable them to render their doctrine intelligible to others. First, it
   defaces and makes useless that part of the image of God in us, which we
   call reason: and secondly, it takes away that advantage, which raises
   Christianity above all other religions, that she dare appeal to so
   solid a faculty.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM III.

   It is the glory of the Gospel charter and the Christian constitution,
   that its author and head is the Spirit of truth, essential Reason as
   well as absolute and incomprehensible Will. Like a just monarch, he
   refers even his own causes to the judgment of his high courts.--He has
   his King's Bench in the reason, his Court of Equity in the conscience;
   that the representative of his majesty and universal justice, this the
   nearest to the king's heart, and the dispenser of his particular
   decrees. He has likewise his Court of Common Pleas in the
   understanding, his Court of Exchequer in the prudence. The laws are his
   laws. And though by signs and miracles he has mercifully condescended
   to interline here and there with his own hand the great statute-book,
   which he had dictated to his amanuensis, Nature; yet has he been
   graciously pleased to forbid our receiving as the king's mandates aught
   that is not stamped with the Great Seal of the conscience, and
   countersigned by the reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM IV.

   On an unlearned ministry, under pretence of a call of the Spirit, and
   inward graces superseding outward helps.

   H. More.

   Tell me, ye high-flown perfectionists, ye boasters of the light within
   you, could the highest perfection of your inward light ever show to you
   the history of past ages, the state of the world at present, the
   knowledge of arts and tongues, without books or teachers? How then can
   you understand the providence of God, or the age, the purpose, the
   fulfilment of prophecies, or distinguish such as have been fulfilled
   from those to the fulfilment of which we are to look forward? How can
   you judge concerning the authenticity and uncorruptedness of the
   Gospels, and the other sacred Scriptures? And how without this
   knowledge can you support the truth of Christianity? How can you either
   have, or give a reason for, the faith which you profess? This light
   within, that loves darkness, and would exclude those excellent gifts of
   God to mankind, knowledge and understanding, what is it but a sullen
   self-sufficiency within you, engendering contempt of superiors, pride
   and a spirit of division, and inducing you to reject for yourselves,
   and to undervalue in others, the helps without, which the grace of God
   has provided and appointed for his Church--nay, to make them grounds or
   pretexts of your dislike or suspicion of Christ's ministers who have
   fruitfully availed themselves of the helps afforded them?
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM V.

   H. More.

   There are wanderers, whom neither pride nor a perverse humour have led
   astray; and whose condition is such, that I think few more worthy of a
   man's best directions. For the more imperious sects having put such
   unhandsome vizards on Christianity, and the sincere milk of the word
   having been every where so sophisticated by the humours and inventions
   of men, it has driven these anxious melancholists to seek for a teacher
   that cannot deceive, the voice of the eternal Word within them; to
   which if they be faithful, they assure themselves it wilt be faithful
   to them in return. Nor would this be a groundless presumption, if they
   had sought this voice in the reason and the conscience, with the
   Scripture articulating the same, instead of giving heed to their fancy
   and mistaking bodily disturbances, and the vapors resulting therefrom,
   for inspiration and the teaching of the Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM VI.

   Hacket.

   When every man is his own end, all things will come to a bad end.
   Blessed were those days, when every man thought himself rich and
   fortunate by the good success of the public wealth and glory. We want
   public souls, we want them. I speak it with compassion: there is no sin
   and abuse in the world that affects my thought so much. Every man
   thinks, that he is a whole commonwealth in his private family. Omnes
   quae sua sunt quaerunt. All seek their own.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   Selfishness is common to all ages and countries. In all ages
   self-seeking is the rule, and self-sacrifice the exception. But if to
   seek our private advantage in harmony with, and by the furtherance of,
   the public prosperity, and to derive a portion of our happiness from
   sympathy with the prosperity of our fellowmen--if this be public
   spirit, it would be morose and querulous to pretend that there is any
   want of it in this country and at the present time. On the contrary,
   the number of "public souls" and the general readiness to contribute to
   the public good, in science and in religion, in patriotism and in
   philanthropy, stand prominent** among the characteristics of this and
   the preceding generation. The habit of referring actions and opinions
   to fixed laws; convictions rooted in principles; thought, insight,
   system;--these, had the good Bishop lived in our time, would have been
   his desiderata, and the theme of his complaints. "We want thinking
   souls, we want them."

   This and the three preceding extracts will suffice as precautionary
   aphorisms. And here, again, the reader may exemplify the great
   advantages to be obtained from the habit of tracing the proper meaning
   and history of words. We need only recollect the common and idiomatic
   phrases in which the word "spirit" occurs in a physical or material
   sense (as, fruit has lost its spirit and flavour), to be convinced that
   its property is to improve,
     __________________________________________________________________

   **The very marked, positive as well as comparative, magnitude and
   prominence of the bump, entitled benevolence (see Spurzheim's map of
   the human skull) on the head of the late Mr. John Thurtel, has woefully
   unsettled the faith of many ardent phrenologists, and strengthened the
   previous doubts of a still greater number into utter disbelief. On my
   mind, this fact (for a fact it is) produced the directly contrary
   effect; and inclined me to suspect, for the first time, that there may
   be some truth in the Spurzheimian scheme. Whether future craniologists
   may not see cause to new-name this and one or two other of these convex
   gnomons, is quite a different question. At present, and according to
   the present use of words, any such change would be premature: and we
   must be content to say, that Mr. Thurtel's benevolence was
   insufficiently modified by the unprotrusive and unindicated convolutes
   of the brain, that secrete honesty and common sense. The organ of
   destructiveness was indirectly potentiated by the absence or imperfect
   development of the glands of reason and conscience, in this
   "unfortunate gentleman!" enliven, actuate some other thing, not
   constitute a thing in its own name. The enthusiast may find one
   exception to this where the material itself is called spirit. And when
   he calls to mind, how this spirit acts when taken alone by the unhappy
   persons who in their first exultation will boast that it is meat,
   drink, fire, and clothing to them, all in one--when he reflects, that
   its properties are to inflame, intoxicate, madden, with exhaustion,
   lethargy, and atrophy for the sequels;--well for him, if in some lucid
   interval he should fairly put the question to his own mind, how far
   this is analogous to his own case, and whether the exception does not
   confirm the rule. The letter without the spirit killeth; but does it
   follow, that the spirit is to kill the letter? To kill that which it is
   its appropriate office to enliven?

   However, where the ministry is not invaded, and the plain sense of the
   Scriptures is left undisturbed, and the believer looks for the
   suggestions of the Spirit only or chiefly in applying particular
   passages to his own individual case and exigencies; though in this
   there maybe touch weakness, some delusion and imminent danger of more,
   I cannot but join with Henry More in avowing, that I feel knit to such
   a man in the bonds of a common faith far more closely, than to those
   who receive neither the letter nor the Spirit, turning the one into
   metaphor and oriental hyperbole, in order to explain away the other
   into the influence of motives suggested by their own understandings,
   and realized by their own strength.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   APHORISMS

   On that which is indeed spiritual religion.

   In the selection of the extracts that form the remainder of this volume
   and of the comments affixed, I had the following objects principally in
   view:--first, to exhibit the true and Scriptural meaning and intent of
   several articles of faith, that are rightly classed among the mysteries
   and peculiar doctrines of Christianity:--secondly, to show the perfect
   rationality of these doctrines, and their freedom from all just
   objection when examined by their proper organ, the reason and
   conscience of man:--lastly, to exhibit from the works of Leighton, who
   perhaps of all our learned Protestant theologians best deserves the
   title of a spiritual divine, an instructive and affecting picture of
   the contemplations, reflections, conflicts, consolations and monitory
   experiences of a philosophic and richly-gifted mind, amply stored with
   all the knowledge that books and long intercourse with men of the most
   discordant characters could give, under the convictions, impressions,
   and habits of a spiritual religion.

   To obviate a possible disappointment in any of my readers, who may
   chance to be engaged in theological studies, it may be well to notice,
   that in vindicating the peculiar tenets of our Faith, I have not
   entered on the doctrine of the Trinity, or the still profounder mystery
   of the origin of moral evil--and this for the reasons following. 1.
   These doctrines are not (strictly speaking) subjects of reflection, in
   the proper sense of this word: and both of them demand a power and
   persistency of abstraction, and a previous discipline in the highest
   forms of human thought, which it would be unwise, if not presumptuous,
   to expect from any, who require aids to reflection, or would be likely
   to seek them in the present work. 2. In my intercourse with men of
   various ranks and ages, I have found the far larger number of serious
   and inquiring persons little, if at all, disquieted by doubts
   respecting articles of faith simply above their comprehension. It is
   only where the belief required of them jars with their moral feelings:
   where a doctrine, in the sense in which they have been taught to
   receive it, appears to contradict their clear notions of right and
   wrong, or to be at variance with the divine attributes of goodness and
   justice, that these men are surprised, perplexed, and alas! not seldom
   offended and alienated. Such are the doctrines of arbitrary election
   and reprobation; the sentence to everlasting torment by an eternal and
   necessitating decree; vicarious atonement, and the necessity of the
   abasement, agony and ignominious death of a most holy and meritorious
   person, to appease the wrath of God. Now it is more especially for such
   persons, unwilling sceptics, who believing earnestly ask help for their
   unbelief, that this volume was compiled, and the comments written: and
   therefore, to the Scripture doctrines, intended by the above-mentioned,
   my principal attention has been directed.

   But lastly, the whole scheme of the Christian Faith, including all the
   articles of belief common to the Greek and Latin, the Roman and the
   Protestant Churches, with the threefold proof, that it is ideally,
   morally, and historically true, will be found exhibited and vindicated
   in a proportionally larger work, the principal labour of my life since
   manhood, and which might be entitled, "Assertion of religion, as
   necessarily involving revelation; and of Christianity, as the only
   revelation of permanent and universal validity."
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM I.

   Leighton.

   Where, if not in Christ, is the power that can persuade a sinner to
   return, that can bring home a heart to God?

   Common mercies of God, though they have a leading faculty to
   repentance, (Rom. ii, 4,) yet, the rebellious heart will not be led by
   them. The judgments of God, public or personal, though they ought to
   drive us to God, yet the heart, unchanged, runs the farther from God.
   Do we not see it by ourselves and other sinners about us? They look not
   at all towards Him who smites, much less do they return; or if any more
   serious thoughts of returning arise upon the surprise of an affliction,
   how soon vanish they, either the stroke abating, or the heart, by time,
   growing hard and senseless under it! Leave Christ out, I say, and all
   other means work not this way; neither the works nor the word of God
   sounding daily in his ear, Return, return. Let the noise of the rod
   speak it, too, and both join together to make the cry the louder, yet
   the wicked willl do wickedly. Dan. xi, 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   By the phrase "in Christ," I understand all the supernatural aids
   vouchsafe and conditionally promised in the Christian dispensation: and
   among them the spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, were it
   only that the knowledge of spiritual truth is of necessity immediate,
   and intuitive; and the world or natural man possesses no higher
   intuitions than those of the pure sense, which are the subjects of
   mathematical science. But aids, observe:--therefore, not by the will of
   man alone; but neither without the will. The doctrine of modern
   Calvinism, as laid down by Jonathan Edwards and the late Dr. Williams,
   which represents a will absolutely passive, clay in the bands of a
   potter, destroys all will, takes away its essence and definition, as
   effectually as in saying--This circle is square--I should deny the
   figure to be a circle at all. It was in strict consistency therefore,
   that these writers supported the Necessitarian scheme, and made the
   relation of cause and effect the law of the universe, subjecting to its
   mechanism the moral world no less than the material or physical. It
   follows, that all is nature. Thus, though few writers use the term
   spirit more frequently, they in effect deny its existence, and evacuate
   the term of all its proper meaning. With such a system not the wit of
   man nor all the theodicies ever framed by human ingenuity, before and
   since the attempt of the celebrated Leibnitz, can reconcile the sense
   of responsibility, nor the fact of the difference in kind between
   regret and remorse. The same compulsion of consequence drove the
   fathers of modern (or pseudo-) Calvinism to the origination of holiness
   in power, of justice in right of property, and whatever other outrages
   on the common sense and moral feelings of mankind they have sought to
   cover under the fair name of sovereign grace.

   I will not take on me to defend sundry harsh and inconvenient
   expressions in the works of Calvin. Phrases equally strong and
   assertions not less rash and startling are no rarities in the writings
   of Luther: for catachresis was the favourite figure of speech in that
   age. But let not the opinions of either on this most fundamental
   subject be confounded with the New-England system, now entitled
   Calvinistic. The fact is simply this. Luther considered the pretensions
   to free-will boastful, and better suited to the budge doctors of the
   Stoic Fur, than to the preachers of the Gospel, whose great theme is
   the redemption of the will from slavery; the restoration of the will to
   perfect freedom being the end and consummation of the redemptive
   process, and the same with the entrance of the soul into glory, that
   is, its union with Christ: "glory" (John xvii, 5), being one of the
   names or tokens or symbols of the spiritual Messiah. Prospectively to
   this we are to understand the words of our Lord, At that day ye shall
   know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, (John xiv, 20:) the freedom
   of a finite will being possible under this condition only, that it has
   become one with the will of God. Now as the difference of a captive and
   enslaved will, and no will at all, such is the difference between the
   Lutheranism of Calvin and the Calvinism of Jonathan Edwards.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM II.

   Leighton.

   There is nothing in religion farther out of nature's reach, and more
   remote from the natural man's liking and believing, than the doctrine
   of redemption by a Saviour, and by a crucified Saviour. It is
   comparatively easy to persuade men of the necessity of an amendment of
   conduct; it is more difficult to make them see the necessity of
   repentance in the Gospel sense, the necessity of a change in the
   principle of action; but to convince men of the necessity of the death
   of Christ is the most difficult of all. And yet the first is but
   varnish and whitewash without the second; and the second but a barren
   nation without the last. Alas! of those who admit the doctrine in
   words, how large a number evade it in fact, and empty it of all its
   substance and efficacy, making the effect the efficient cause, or
   attributing their election to salvation to supposed foresight of their
   faith, and obedience. But it is most vain to imagine a faith in such
   and such men, which, being foreseen by God, determined him to elect
   them for salvation: were it only that nothing at all is future, or can
   have this imagined futurition, but as it is decreed, and because it is
   decreed, by God so to be.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   No impartial person, competently acquainted with the history of the
   Reformation, and the works of the earlier Protestant divines at home
   and abroad, even to the close of Elizabeth's reign, will deny that the
   doctrines of Calvin on redemption and the natural state of fallen man
   are in all essential points the same as those of Luther, Zuinglius, and
   the first Reformers collectively. These doctrines have, however, since
   the re-establishment of the Episcopal Church at the return of Charles
   II, been as generally* exchanged for what is commonly entitled
     __________________________________________________________________

   *At a period, in which Doctors Marsh and Wordsworth have, by the
   zealous on one side, been charged with Popish principles on account of
   their anti-bibliolatry and the sturdy adherents of the doctrines common
   to Luther and Calvin, and the literal interpreters of the Articles and
   Homilies, are (I wish I could say, altogether without any fault of
   their own) regarded by the clergy generally as virtual schismatics,
   dividers of, though not from, the Church, it is serving the cause of
   charity to assist in circulating the following instructive passage from
   the Life of Bishop Hackett respecting the disputes between the
   Augustinians, or Luthero-Calvinistic divines and the Grotians of his
   age: in which controversy (says his biographer) he, Hackett, "was ever
   very moderate."

   "But having been bred under Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward in
   Arminianism, but which, taken as a complete and explicit scheme of
   belief, it would be both historically and theologically more accurate
   to call Grotianism, or Christianity according to Grotius. The change
   was not, we may readily believe, effected without a struggle. In the
   Romish Church this latitudinarian system, patronized by the Jesuits,
   was manfully resisted by Jansenius, Arnauld, and Pascal; in our own
   Church by the Bishops Davenant, Sanderson, Hall, and the Archbishops
   Usher and Leighton: and in this latter half of the preceding aphorism
   the reader has a specimen of the reasonings by which Leighton strove to
   invalidate or counterpoise the reasonings of the innovators.

   Passages of this sort are, however, of rare occurrence in Leighton's
   works. Happily for thousands, he was more usefully employed in making
   his readers feel that the doctrines in question, Scripturally treated
   and taken as co-organized parts of a great organic whole, need no
     __________________________________________________________________

   Cambridge, he was addicted to their sentiments. Archbishop Usher would
   say, that Davenant understood those controversies better than ever any
   man did since St. Augustine. But he (Bishop Hackett) used to say, that
   he was sure he had three excellent men of his opinion in this
   controversy; 1. Padre Paolo (Father Paul) whose Letter is extant in
   Heinsius, anno 1604. 2. Thomas Aquinas. 3. St. Augustine. But besides
   and above them all, he believed in his conscience that St. Paul was of
   the same mind likewise. Yet at the same time he would profess that he
   disliked no Arminians, but such as revile and defame every one who is
   not so: and he would often commend Arminius himself for his excellent
   wit and parts, but only tax his want of reading and knowledge in
   antiquity. And he ever held, it was the foolishest thing in the world
   to say the Arminians were Popishly inclined, when so many Dominicans
   and Jansenists were rigid followers of Augustine in these points: and
   no less foolish to say that the Anti-Arminians were Puritans and
   Presbyterians, when Ward and Davenant, and Prideaux, and Browning,
   those stout champions for Episcopacy, were decided Anti-Arminians:
   while Arminius himself was ever a Presbyterian. Therefore he greatly
   commended the moderation of our Church, which extended equal communion
   to both." such reasonings. And better still would it have been, had he
   left them altogether for those, who, severally detaching the great
   features of Revelation from the living context of Scripture, do by that
   very act destroy their life and purpose. And then, like the eyes of the
   Indian spider,** they become clouded microscopes, to exaggerate and
   distort all the other parts and proportions. No offence then will be
   occasioned, I trust, by the frank avowal that I have given to the
   preceding passage a place among the spiritual aphorisms for the sake of
   comment: the following remarks having been the first marginal note I
   had pencilled on Leighton's pages, and thus (remotely, at least), the
   occasion of the present work.

   Leighton, I observed, throughout his inestimable work, avoids all
   metaphysical views of Election, relatively to God, and confines himself
   to the doctrine in its relation to man; and in that sense, too, in
   which every Christian may judge of it who strives to be sincere with
   his own heart. The following may, I think, be taken as a safe and
   useful rule in religious inquiries. Ideas, that derive their origin and
   substance from the moral being, and to the reception of which as true
   objectively (that is, as corresponding to a reality out of the human
   mind) we are determined by a practical interest exclusively, may not,
   like theoretical positions, be pressed onward into all their logical
   consequences. The law
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** Aranea prodigiosa. See Baker's Microscopic Experiments.

   May not this rule be expressed more intelligibly (to a mathematician at
   least) thus:--Reasoning from finite to finite on a basis of truth;
   also, reasoning from infinite to infinite on a basis of truth; will
   always lead to truth as intelligibly as the basis on which such truths
   respectively rest. While reasoning from finite to infinite, or from
   infinite to finite, will lead to apparent absurdity, although the basis
   be true: and is not such apparent absurdity another expression for
   "truth unintelligible by a finite mind?" of conscience, and not the
   canons of discursive reasoning, must decide in such cases. At least,
   the latter have no validity, which the single veto of the former is not
   sufficient to nullify. The most pious conclusion is here the most
   legitimate.

   It is too seldom considered, though most worthy of consideration, how
   far even those ideas or theories of pure speculation, that bear the
   same name with the objects of religious faith, are indeed the same. Out
   of the principles necessarily presumed in all discursive thinking, and
   which being, in the first place, universal, and secondly, antecedent to
   every particular exercise of the understanding, are therefore referred
   to the reason, the human mind (wherever its powers are sufficiently
   developed, and its attention strongly directed to speculative or
   theoretical inquiries,) forms certain essences, to which for its own
   purposes it gives a sort of notional subsistence. Hence they are called
   entia rationalia: the conversion of which into entia realia, or real
   objects, by aid of the imagination, has in all times been the fruitful
   stock of empty theories and mischievous superstitions, of surreptitious
   premisses and extravagant conclusions. For as these substantiated
   notions were in many instances expressed by the same terms, as the
   objects of religious faith; as in most instances they were applied,
   though deceptively, to the explanation of real experiences; and lastly,
   from the gratifications, which the pride and ambition of man received
   from the supposed extension of his knowledge and insight; it was too
   easily forgotten or overlooked, that the stablest and most
   indispensable of these notional beings were but the necessary forms of
   thinking, taken abstractedly: and that like the breadthless lines,
   depthless surfaces, and perfect circles of geometry, they subsist
   wholly and solely in and for the mind that contemplates them. Where the
   evidence of the senses fails us, and beyond the precincts of sensible
   experience, there is no reality attributable to any notion, but what is
   given to it by Revelation, or the law of conscience, or the necessary
   interests of morality.

   Take an instance:

   It is the office, and as it were, the instinct of reason to bring a
   unity into all our conceptions and several knowledges. On this all
   system depends; and without this we could reflect connectedly neither
   on nature nor our own minds. Now this is possible only on the
   assumption or hypothesis of a One as the ground and cause of the
   universe, and which in all succession and through all changes is the
   subject neither of time nor change. The One must be contemplated as
   eternal and immutable.

   Well! the idea, which is the basis of religion, commanded by the
   conscience and required by morality, contains the same truths, or at
   least truths that can be expressed in no other terms; but this idea
   presents itself to our mind with additional attributes, and these too
   not formed by mere abstraction and negation--with the attributes of
   holiness, providence, love, justice, and mercy. It comprehends,
   moreover, the independent (extra-mundane) existence and personality of
   the Supreme One, as our Creator, Lord, and Judge.

   The hypothesis of a one ground and principle of the universe (necessary
   as an hypothesis, but having only a logical and conditional necessity),
   is thus raised into the idea of the Living God, the supreme object of
   our faith, love, fear, and adoration. Religion and morality do indeed
   constrain us to declare him eternal and immutable. But if from the
   eternity of the Supreme Being a reasoner should deduce the
   impossibility of a creation; or conclude with Aristotle, that the
   creation was co-eternal; or, like the later Platonists, should turn
   creation into emanation, and make the universe proceed from the Deity,
   as the sunbeams from the solar orb;--or if from the divine immutability
   he should infer that all prayer and supplication must be vain and
   superstitious: then however evident and logically necessary such
   conclusions may appear, it is scarcely worth our while to examine,
   whether they are so or not. The positions themselves must be false. For
   were they true, the idea would lose the sole ground of its reality. It
   would be no longer the idea intended by the believer in his premiss--in
   the premiss, with which alone religion and morality are concerned. The
   very subject of the discussion would be changed. It would no longer be
   the God, in whom we believe; but a stoical Fate, or the superessential
   One of Plotinus, to whom neither intelligence, nor self-consciousness,
   nor life, nor even being can be attributed; or lastly, the world
   itself, the indivisible one and only substance (substantia una et
   unica) of Spinoza, of which all phaenomena, all particular and
   individual things, lives, minds, thoughts, and actions are but
   modifications.

   Let the believer never be alarmed by objections wholly speculative,
   however plausible on speculative grounds such objections may appear, if
   he can but satisfy himself, that the result is repugnant to the
   dictates of conscience, and irreconcilable with the interests of
   morality. For to baffle the objector we have only to demand of him, by
   what right and under what authority he converts a thought into a
   substance, or asserts the existence of a real somewhat corresponding to
   a notion not derived from the experience of his senses. It will be of
   no purpose for him to answer that it is a legitimate notion. The notion
   may have its mould in the understanding; but its realization must be
   the work of the fancy.

   A reflecting reader will easily apply these remarks to the subject of
   Election, one of the stumbling stones in the ordinary conceptions of
   the Christian Faith, to which the Infidel points in scorn, and which
   far better men pass by in silent perplexity. Yet surely, from mistaken
   conceptions of the doctrine. I suppose the person, with whom I am
   arguing, already so far a believer, as to have convinced himself, both
   that a state of enduring bliss is attainable under certain conditions;
   and that these conditions consist in his compliance with the directions
   given and rules prescribed in the Christian Scriptures. These rules he
   likewise admits to be such, that, by the very law and constitution of
   the human mind, a full and faithful compliance with them cannot but
   have consequences of some sort or other. But these Consequences are
   moreover distinctly described, enumerated, and promised in the same
   Scriptures, in which the conditions are recorded; and though some of
   them may be apparent to God only, yet the greater number of them are of
   such a nature that they cannot exist unknown to the individual, in and
   for whom they exist. As little possible is it, that he should find
   these consequences in himself, and not find in them the sure marks and
   the safe pledges that he is at the time in the right road to the life
   promised under these conditions. Now I dare assert that no such man,
   however fervent his charity and however deep his humility may be, can
   peruse the records of history with a reflecting spirit, or look round
   the world with an observant eye, and not find himself compelled to
   admit, that all men are not on the right road. He cannot help judging
   that even in Christian countries many,--a fearful many,--have not their
   faces turned toward it.

   This then is a mere matter of fact. Now comes the question. Shall the
   believer, who thus hopes on the appointed grounds of hope, attribute
   this distinction exclusively to his own resolves and strivings,--or if
   not exclusively, yet primarily and principally? Shall he refer the
   first movements and preparations to his own will and understanding, and
   bottom his claim to the promises on his own comparative excellence? If
   not, if no man dare take this honour to himself, to whom shall he
   assign it, if not to that Being in whom the promise originated, and on
   whom its fulfilment depends? If he stop here, who shall blame him? By
   what argument shall his reasoning be invalidated, that might not be
   urged with equal force against any essential difference between
   obedient and disobedient, Christian and worldling;--that would not
   imply that both sorts alike are, in the sight of God, the sons of God
   by adoption? If he stop here, I say, who shall drive him from his
   position? For thus far he is practically concerned;--this the
   conscience requires; this the highest interests of morality demand. It
   is a question of facts, of the will and the deed, to argue against
   which on the abstract notions and possibilities of the speculative
   reason, is as unreasonable, as an attempt to decide a question of
   colors by pure geometry, or to unsettle the classes and specific
   characters of natural history by the doctrine of fluxions.

   But if the self-examinant will abandon this position, and exchange the
   safe circle of religion and practical reason for the shifting
   sand-wastes and mirages of speculative theology; if instead of seeking
   after the marks of Election in himself he undertakes to determine the
   ground and origin, the possibility and mode of Election itself in
   relation to God; in this case, and whether he does it for the
   satisfaction of curiosity, or from the ambition of answering those, who
   would call God himself to account, why and by what right certain souls
   were born in Africa instead of England;--or why (seeing that it is
   against all reason and goodness to choose a worse, when being
   omnipotent He could have created a better) God did not create beasts
   men, and men angels;--or why God created any men but with foreknowledge
   of their obedience, and left any occasion for Election;--in this case,
   I say, we can only regret that the inquirer had not been better
   instructed in the nature, the bounds, the true purposes and proper
   objects of his intellectual faculties, and that he had not previously
   asked himself, by what appropriate sense, or organ of knowledge, he
   hoped to secure an insight into a nature which was neither an object of
   his senses, nor a part of his self-consciousness; and so leave him to
   ward off shadowy spears with the shadow of a shield, and to retaliate
   the nonsense of blasphemy with the abracadabra of presumption. He that
   will fly without wings must fly in his dreams: and till he awakes, will
   not find out that to fly in a dream is but to dream of flying.

   Thus then the doctrine of Election is in itself a necessary inference
   from an undeniable fact--necessary at least for all who hold that the
   best of men are what they are through the grace of God. In relation to
   the believer it is a hope, which if it spring out of Christian
   principles, be examined by the tests and nourished by the means
   prescribed in Scripture, will become a lively and an assured hope, but
   which cannot in this life pass into knowledge, much less certainty of
   fore-knowledge. The contrary belief does indeed make the article of
   Election both tool and parcel of a mad and mischievous fanaticism.

   But with what force and clearness does not the Apostle confute,
   disclaim, and prohibit the pretence, treating it as a downright
   contradiction in terms! See Rom. viii, 24.

   But though I hold the doctrine handled as Leighton handles it (that is,
   practically, morally, humanly) rational, safe, and of essential
   importance, I see many** reasons resulting from the peculiar
   circumstances, under which St. Paul preached and wrote, why a discreet
   minister of the Gospel should avoid the frequent use of the term, and
   express and meaning in other words perfectly equivalent and equally
   Scriptural; lest in saying truth he may convey error.

   Had my purpose been confined to one particular tenet, an apology might
   be required for so long a comment. But the reader will, I trust, have
   already perceived, that my object has been to establish a general rule
   of interpretation and vindication applicable to all doctrinal tenets,
   and especially to the (so called) mysteries of the Christian faith: to
   provide a safety-lamp for religious inquirers. Now this I find in the
   principle, that all revealed truths
     __________________________________________________________________

   **For example: at the date of St. Paul's Epistles, the (Roman) world
   may be resembled to a mass in the furnace in the first moment of
   fusion, here a speck and there a spot of the melted metal shining pure
   and brilliant amid the scum and dross. To have received the name of
   Christian was a privilege, a high and distinguishing favour. No wonder,
   therefore, that in St. Paul's writings the words, elect and election
   often, nay, most often, mean the same as eccalumeni, ecclelsia, that
   is, these who have been called out of the world: and it is a dangerous
   perversion of the Apostle's word to interpret it in the sense, in which
   it was used by our Lord, viz., in opposition to the called. (Many are
   called but few chosen). In St. Paul's sense and at that time the
   believers collectively formed a small and select number; and every
   Christian, real or nominal, was one of the elect. Add, too, that this
   ambiguity is increased by the accidental circumstance, that the Kyriak,
   aedes Dominicae, Lord's House, kirk; and ecelesia, the sum total of the
   eccalumeni, evocati, called-out; are both rendered by the same word
   Church. are to be judged of by us, as far as they are possible subjects
   of human conception, or grounds of practice, or in some way connected
   with our moral and spiritual interests. In order to have a reason for
   forming a judgment on any given article, we must be sure that we
   possess a reason, by and according to which a judgment may be formed.
   Now in respect of all truths, to which a real independent existence is
   assigned, and which yet are not contained in, or to be imagined under,
   any form of space or time, it is strictly demonstrable, that the human
   reason, considered abstractly, as the source of positive science and
   theoretical insight, is not such a reason. At the utmost, it has only a
   negative voice. In other words, nothing can be allowed as true for the
   human mind, which directly contradicts this reason. But even here,
   before we admit the existence of any such contradiction, we must be
   careful to ascertain, that there is no equivocation in play, that two
   different subjects are not confounded under one and the same word. A
   striking instance of this has been adduced in the difference between
   the notional One of the Ontologists, and the idea of the living God.

   But if not the abstract or speculative reason, and yet a reason there
   must be in order to a rational belief--then it must be the practical
   reason of man, comprehending the will, the conscience, the moral being
   with its inseparable interests and affections--that reason, namely,
   which is the organ of wisdom, and (as far as man is concerned) the
   source of living and actual truths.

   From these premisses we may further deduce, that every doctrine is to
   be interpreted in reference to those, to whom it has been revealed, or
   who have, or have had the means of knowing or hearing the same. For
   instance: the doctrine that there is no name under heaven, by which a
   man can be saved, but the name of Jesus. If the word here rendered
   name, may be understood (as it well may, and as in other texts it most
   be) as meaning the power, or originating cause, I see no objection on
   the part of the practical reason to our belief of the declaration in
   its whole extent. It is true universally or not true at all. If there
   be any redemptive power not contained in the power of Jesus, then Jesus
   is not the Redeemer: not the Redeemer of the world, not the Jesus (that
   is, Saviour) of mankind. But if with Tertullian and Augustine we make
   the text assert the condemnation and misery of all who are not
   Christians by Baptism and explicit belief in the revelation of the New
   Covenant--then I say, the doctrine is true to all intents and purposes.
   It is true, in every respect, in which any practical, moral, or
   spiritual interest or end can be connected with its truth. It is true
   in respect to every man who has had, or who might have had, the Gospel
   preached to him. It is true and obligatory for every Christian
   community and for every individual believer, wherever the opportunity
   is afforded of spreading the light of the Gospel, and making known the
   name of the only Saviour and Redeemer. For even though the uninformed
   Heathens should not perish, the guilt of their perishing will attach to
   those who not only had no certainty of their safety, but who are
   commanded to act on the supposition of the contrary. But if, on the
   other hand, a Geological dogmatist should attempt to persuade me that
   this text was intended to give us an historical knowledge of God's
   future actions and dealings--and for the gratification of our curiosity
   to inform us, that Socrates and Phocion, together with all the savages
   in the woods and wilds of Africa and America, will be sent to keep
   company with the Devil and his angels in everlasting torments--I should
   remind him, that the purpose of Scripture was to teach us our duty, not
   to enable us to sit in judgment on the souls of our fellow creatures.

   One other instance will, I trust, prevent all misconception of my
   meaning. I am clearly convinced, that the Scriptural and only true**
   idea of God will, in its development, be found to involve the idea of
   the Triunity. But I am likewise convinced, that previously to the
   promulgation of the Gospel the doctrine had no claim on the faith of
   mankind: though it might have been a legitimate contemplation for a
   speculative philosopher, a theorem in metaphysics valid in the Schools.

   I form a certain notion in my mind, and say: This is what I understand
   by the term, God. From books and conversation I find that the learned
   generally connect the same notion with the same word. I then apply the
   rules laid down by the masters of logic, for the involution and
   evolution of terms, and prove (to as many as agree with me in my
   premises) that the notion, God, involves the notion, Trinity. I now
   pass out of the Schools, and enter into discourse with some friend or
   neighbour, unversed in the formal sciences, unused to the process of
   abstraction, neither logician nor metaphysician) but sensible and
   single-minded, an Israelite indeed, trusting in the Lord God of his
   fathers, even the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob. If I speak of
   God to him, what will he understand me to be speaking of? What does he
   mean, and suppose me to mean, by the word? An accident or
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Or (I may add) any idea which does not either identify the Creator
   with the creation; or else represent the Supreme Being as a mere
   impersonal law or ordo ordinans, differing from the law of gravitation
   only by its universality. product of the reasoning faculty, or an
   abstraction which the human mind forms by reflecting on its own
   thoughts and forms of thinking? No. By God he understands me to mean an
   existing and self-subsisting reality,** a
     __________________________________________________________________

   **I have elsewhere remarked on the assistance which those that labor
   after distinct conceptions would receive from the re-introduction of
   the terms objective and subjective, objective and subjective reality
   and the like, as substitutes for real and national, and to the
   exclusion of the false antithesis between real and ideal. For the
   student in that noblest of the sciences, the scire teipsum, the
   advantage would be especially great. The few sentences that follow, in
   illustration of the terms here advocated, will not, I trust, be a waste
   of the reader's time.

   The celebrated Euler having demonstrated certain properties of arches,
   adds: "All experierce is in contradiction to this; but this is no
   reason for doubting its truth." The words sound paradoxical; but mean
   no more than this--that the mathematical properties of figure and space
   are not less certainly the properties of figure and space because they
   can never be perfectly realized in wood, stone, or iron. Now this
   assertion of Euler's might be expressed at once, briefly and simply, by
   saying, that the properties in question were subjectively true, though
   not objectively--or that the mathematical arch possessed a subjective
   reality though incapable of being realized objectively.

   In like manner if I had to express my conviction that space was not
   itself a thing, but a mode or form of perceiving, or the inward ground
   and condition in the percipient, in consequence of which things are
   seen as outward and co-existing, I convey this at once by the words,
   Space is subjective, or space is real in and for the subject alone.

   If I am asked, Why not say, in and for the mind, which every one would
   understand? I reply: we know indeed, that all minds are subjects; but
   are by no means certain that all subjects are minds. For a mind is a
   subject that knows itself, or a subject that is its own object. The
   inward principle of growth and individual form in every seed and plant
   is a subject, and without any exertion of poetic privilege poets may
   speak of the soul of the flower. But the man would be a dreamer, who
   otherwise than poetically should speak of roses and lilies as
   self-conscious subjects. Lastly, by the assistance of the terms, object
   and subject, thus used as correspondent opposites, or as negative and
   positive in physics (for example, negative and positive electricity) we
   may arrive at the distinct import and proper use of the strangely
   misused word, Idea. And as the forms of logic are all borrowed from
   geometry, (ratiocinatio discursiva formas suas sive canonas recipit ab
   intuitu) I real and personal Being--even the person, the I am, who sent
   Moses to his forefathers in Egypt. Of the actual existence of this
   divine Being he has the same historical assurance as of theirs;
   confirmed indeed by the book
     __________________________________________________________________

   may be permitted to elucidate my present meaning. Every line may be,
   and by the ancient Geometricians was, considered as a point produced,
   the two extremes being its poles, while the point itself remains in, or
   is at least represented by, the midpoint, the indifference of the two
   poles or correlative opposites. Logically applied, the two extremes or
   poles are named thesis and antithesis: thus in the line,

     I

   T------------------------------------A

   We have T = thesis, A = antithesis, and I = punctum indifferens sive
   amphotericum, which latter is to be conceived as both in as far as it
   may be either of the two former. Observe: not both at the same time in
   the same relation: for this would be the identity of T and A, not the
   indifference;--but so, that relatively to A, I is equal to T, and
   relatively to T, it becomes = A. For the purposes of the universal
   Noetic, in which we terms of most comprehension and least specific
   import, might not the Noetic Pentad be,--
    1. Prothesis.
    2. Thesis.
    3. Antithesis.
    4. Mesothesis.
    5. Synthesis.

   Prothesis. Sum. Thesis. Mesothesis. Antithesis. Res. Agere. Ago,
   Patior. Synthesis. Agens.
    1. Verb substantive = Prothesis, as expressing the identity or
       co-inherence of act and being.
    2. Substantive + Thesis, expressing being. 3. Verb = Antithesis,
       expressing act. 4. Infinitive Mesothesis, as being either
       substantive or verb, or both at once, only in different relations;
       5. Participle = Synthesis. Thus, in chemistry, sulphuretted
       hydrogen is an acid relatively to the more powerful alkalis, and an
       alkali relatively to a powerful acid. Yet one other remark, and I
       pass to the question. In order to render the constructions of pure
       mathematics applicable to philosophy, the Pythagoreans, I imagine,
       represented the line as generated, or, as it were, radiated, by a
       point not contained in the line but independent, and (in the
       language of that School) transcendant to all production, which it

   [continue]of Nature, as soon and as far as that stronger and better
   light has taught him to read and construe it--confirmed by it, I say,
   but not derived from it. Now by what right can I require this man (and
   of such men the great majority of serious believers consisted
   previously to the light of the Gospel) to receive a notion of mine,
   wholly alien from his habits of thinking, because it may be
     __________________________________________________________________

   caused but did not partake in. Facit, non patitur. This was the punctum
   invisible et presuppositum and in this way the Pythagoreans guarded
   against the error of Pantheism, into which the later Schools fell. The
   assumption of this point I call the logical prothesis. We have now
   therefore four relations of thought expressed: 1. Prothesis, or the
   identity of T and A, which is neither, because in it, as the
   transcendant of both, both are contained and exist as one. Taken
   absolutely, this finds its application in the Supreme Being alone, the
   Pythagorean Tetractys; the ineffable name, to which no image can be
   attached; the point, which has no (real) opposite or counter-point. But
   relatively taken and inadequately, the germinal power of every seed
   might be generalized under the relation of Identity. 2. Thesist or
   position. 3. Antithesis, or opposition. 4. Indifference. To which when
   we add the Synthesis or composition, in its several forms of
   equilibrium, as in quiescent electricity; of neutralization, as of
   oxygen and hydrogen in water; and of predominance, as of hydrogen and
   carbon with hydrogen, predominant, in pure alcohol; or of carbon and
   hydrogen, with the comparative predominance of the carbon, in oil; we
   complete the five most general forms or preconceptions of constructive
   logic.

   And now for the answer to the question, what is an idea, if it mean
   neither an impression on the senses, nor a definite conception, nor an
   abstract notion? (And if it does mean either of these, the word is
   superfluous: and while it remains undetermined which of these is meant
   by the word, or whether it is not which you please, it is worse than
   superfluous). But supposing the word to have a meaning of its own, what
   does it mean? What is an idea? In answer to this, I commence with the
   absolutely Real as the prothesis; the subjectively Real as the thesis;
   the objectively Real as the antithesis; and I affirm, that Idea is the
   indifference of the two--so namely, that if it be conceived as in the
   subject, the idea is an object, and possesses objective truth; but if
   in an object, it is then a subject, and is necessarily thought of as
   exercising the powers of a subject. Thus an idea conceived as
   subsisting in an object becomes a law; and a law contemplated
   subjectively (in a mind) is an idea. logically deduced from another
   notion, with which he was almost as little acquainted, and not at all
   concerned? Grant for a moment, that the latter (that is, the notion,
   with which I first set out) as soon as it is combined with the
   assurance of a corresponding reality becomes identical with the true
   and effective Idea of God! Grant, that in thus realizing the notion I
   am warranted by revelation, the law of conscience, and the interests
   and necessities of my moral being! Yet by what authority, by what
   inducement, am I entitled to attach the same reality to a second
   notion, a notion drawn from a notion. It is evident, that if I have the
   same right, it must be on the same grounds. Revelation must have
   assured it, my conscience required it--or in some way or other I must
   have an interest in this belief. It must concern me, as a moral and
   responsible being. Now these grounds were first given in the redemption
   of mankind by Christ the Saviour and Mediator: and by the utter
   incompatibility of these offices with a mere creature. On the doctrine
   of redemption depends the faith, the duty, of believing in the divinity
   of our Lord. And this again is the strongest ground for the reality of
   that Idea, in which alone this divinity can be received without breach
   of the faith in the unity of the Godhead. But such is the Idea of the
   Trinity. Strong as the motives are that induce me to defer the full
   discussion of this great article of the Christian Creed, I cannot
   withstand the request of several divines, whose situation and extensive
   services entitle them to the utmost deference, that I should so far
   deviate from my first intention as at least to indicate the point on
   which I stand, and to prevent the misconception of my purpose: as if I
   held the doctrine of the Trinity for a truth which men could be called
   on to believe by mere force of reasoning, independently of any positive
   Revelation. In short, it had been reported in certain circles, that I
   considered this doctrine as a religion of nature. Now though it might
   be sufficient to say, that I regard the very phrase "Revealed Religion"
   as a pleonasm, inasmuch as a religion not revealed is, in my judgment,
   no religion at all; I have no objection to announce more particularly
   and distinctly what I do and what I do not maintain on this point:
   provided that in the following paragraph) with this view inserted, the
   reader will look for nothing more than a plain statement of my
   opinions. The grounds on which they rest, and the arguments by which
   they are to be vindicated, are for another place.

   I hold then, it is true, that all the (so called) demonstrations of a
   God either prove too little, as that from the order and apparent
   purpose in nature; or too much, namely, that the World is itself God:
   or they clandestinely involve the conclusion in the premises, passing
   off the mere analysis or explication of an assertion for the proof of
   it,--a species of logical legerdemain not unlike that of the jugglers
   at a fair, who putting into their mouths what seems to be a walnut,
   draw out a score yards of ribbon--as in the postulate of a First Cause.
   And lastly, in all these demonstrations the demonstrators presuppose
   the idea or conception of a God without being able to authenticate it,
   that is, to give an account whence they obtained it. For it is clear,
   that the proof first mentioned and the most natural and convincing of
   all (the cosmological I mean, or that from the order in nature)
   presupposes the ontological--that is, the proof of a God from the
   necessity and necessary objectivity of the Idea. If the latter can
   assure us of a God as an existing reality, the former will go far to
   prove his power, wisdom, and benevolence. All this I hold. But

   I also hold, that this truth, the hardest to demonstrate, is the one
   which of all others least needs to be demonstrated; that though there
   may be no conclusive demonstrations of a good, wise, living, and
   personal God, there are so many convincing reasons for it, within and
   without--a grain of sand sufficing, and a whole universe at hand to
   echo the decision!--that for every mind not devoid of all reason, and
   desperately conscience-proof, the truth which it is the least possible
   to prove, it is little less than impossible not to believe! only indeed
   just so much short of impossible, as to leave some room for the will
   and the moral election, and thereby to keep it a truth of religion, and
   the possible subject of a commandment.**

   On this account I do not demand of a Deist, that he should adopt the
   doctrine of the Trinity. For he might very well be justified in
   replying, that he rejected the doctrine, not because it could not be
   demonstrated, not yet on the score of any incomprehensibilities and
   seeming contradictions that might be objected to it, as knowing
     __________________________________________________________________

   **In a letter to a friend on the mathematical Atheists of the French
   Revolution, La Lande and others, or rather on a young man of
   distinguished abilities, but an avowed and proselyting partisan of
   their tenets, I concluded with these words: "The man who will believe
   nothing but by force of demonstrative evidence (even though it is
   strictly demonstrable that the demonstrability required would
   countervene all the purposes of the truth in question, all that render
   the belief of the same desirable or obligatory) is not in a state of
   mind to be reasoned with on any subject. But if he further denies the
   fact of the law of conscience, and the essential difference between
   right and wrong, I confess he puzzles me. I cannot without gross
   inconsistency appeal to his conscience and moral sense, or I should
   admonish him that, as an honest man, he ought to advertise himself,
   with a Cavete omnes! Scelus sum. And as an honest man myself, I dare
   not advise him on prudential grounds to keep his opinions secret, lest
   I should make myself his accomplish, and be helping him on with a
   wrap-rascal." that these might be, and in fact had been, urged with
   equal force against a personal God under any form capable of love and
   veneration; but because he had not the same theoretical necessity, the
   same interests and instincts of reason for the one hypothesis as for
   the other. It is not enough, the Deist might justly say, that there is
   no cogent reason why I should not believe the Trinity; you must show me
   some cogent reason why I should.

   But the case is quite different with a Christian, who accepts the
   Scriptures as the word of God, yet refuses his assent to the plainest
   declarations of these Scriptures, and explains away the most express
   texts into metaphor and hyperbole, because the literal and obvious
   interpretation is (according to his notions) absurd and contrary to
   reason. He is bound to show, that it is so in any sense, not equally
   applicable to the texts asserting the being, infinity, and personality
   of God the Father, the Eternal and Omnipresent One, who created the
   heaven and the earth. And the more is he bound to do this, and the
   greater is my right to demand it of him, because the doctrine of
   Redemption from sin supplies the Christian with motives and reasons for
   the divinity of the Redeemer far more concerning and coercive
   subjectively, that is, in the economy of his own soul, than are all the
   inducements that can influence the Deist objectively, that is, in the
   interpretation of nature.

   Do I then utterly exclude the speculative reason from theology? No! It
   is its office and rightful privilege to determine on the negative truth
   of whatever we are required to believe. The doctrine must not
   contradict any universal principle: for this would be a doctrine that
   contradicted itself. Or philosophy? No. It may be and has been the
   servant and pioneer of faith by convincing the mind that a doctrine is
   cogitable, that the soul can present the idea to itself; and that if we
   determine to contemplate, or think of, the subject at all, so and in no
   other form can this be effected. So far are both logic and philosophy
   to be received and trusted. But the duty, and in some cases and for
   some persons even the right, of thinking on subjects beyond the bounds
   of sensible experience; the grounds of the real truth; the life, the
   substance, the hope, the love, in one word, the faith;--these are
   derivatives from the practical, moral, and spiritual nature and being
   of man.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM III.

   Burnet and Coleridge.

   That religion is designed to improve the nature and faculties of man,
   in order to the right governing of our actions, to the securing the
   peace and progress, external and internal, of individuals and of
   communities, and lastly, to the rendering us capable of a more perfect
   state, entitled the kingdom of God, to which the present life is
   probationary--this is a truth, which all who have truth only in view,
   will receive on its own evidence. If such then be the main end of
   religion altogether (the improvement namely of our nature and
   faculties), it is plain, that every part of religion is to be judged by
   its relation to this main end. And since the Christian scheme is
   religion in its most perfect and effective form, a revealed religion,
   and, therefore, in a special sense proceeding from that Being who made
   us and knows what we are, of course therefore adapted to the needs and
   capabilities of human nature; nothing can be a part of this holy Faith
   that is not duly proportioned to this end.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   This aphorism should be borne in mind, whenever a theological resolve
   is proposed to us as an article of faith. Take, for instance, the
   determinations passed at the Synod of Dort, concerning the absolute
   decrees of God in connection with his omniscience and foreknowledge. Or
   take the decision in the Council of Trent on the difference between the
   two kinds of Transubstantiation, the one in which both the substance
   and the accidents are changed, the same matter remaining--as in the
   conversion of water to wine at Cana: the other, in which the matter and
   the substance are changed, the accidents remaining unaltered, as in the
   Eucharist--this latter being Transubstantiation par eminence! Or rather
   take the still more tremendous dogma, that it is indispensable to a
   saving faith carefully to distinguish the one kind from the other, and
   to believe both, and to believe the necessity of believing both in
   order to salvation! For each or either of these extra-Scriptural
   articles of faith the preceding aphorism supplies a safe criterion.
   Will the belief tend to the improvement of any of my moral or
   intellectual faculties? But before I can be convinced that a faculty
   will be improved, I must be assured that it exists. On all these dark
   sayings, therefore, of Dort or Trent, it is quite sufficient to ask, by
   what faculty, organ, or inlet of knowledge, we are to assure ourselves
   that the words mean any thing, or correspond to any object out of our
   own mind or even in it: unless indeed the mere craving and striving to
   think on, after all the materials for thinking have been exhausted, can
   be called an object. When a number of trust-worthy persons assure me,
   that a portion of fluid which they saw to be water, by some change in
   the fluid itself or in their senses, suddenly acquired the colour,
   taste, smell, and exhilarating property of wine, I perfectly understand
   what they tell me, and likewise by what faculties they might have come
   to the knowledge of the fact. But if any one of the number not
   satisfied with my acquiescence in the fact, should insist on my
   believing, that the matter remained the same, the substance and the
   accidents having been removed in order to make way for a different
   substance with different accidents, I must entreat his permission to
   wait till I can discover in myself any faculty, by which there can be
   presented to me a matter distinguishable from accidents, and a
   substance that is different from both. It is true, I have a faculty of
   articulation; but I do not see that it can be improved by my using it
   for the formation of words without meaning, or at best, for the
   utterance of thoughts, that mean only the act of so thinking, or of
   trying so to think. But the end of religion is the improvement of our
   nature and faculties. Ergo, &c. I sum up the whole in one great
   practical maxim. The object of religious contemplation, and of a truly
   spiritual faith, is "the ways of God to man." Of the workings of the
   Godhead, God himself has told us, My ways are not as your ways, nor my
   thoughts as your thoughts.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM IV.

   The characteristic difference between the discipline of the ancient
   philosophers and the dispensation of the Gospel.

   By undeceiving, enlarging, and informing the intellect, philosophy
   sought to purify and to elevate the moral character. Of course, those
   alone could receive the latter and incomparably greater benefit, who by
   natural capacity and favorable contingencies of fortune were fit
   recipients of the former. How small the number, we scarcely need the
   evidence of history to assure us. Across the night of Paganism,
   philosophy flitted on, like the lantern-fly of the Tropics, a light to
   itself, and an ornament, but alas! no more than an ornament, of the
   surrounding darkness.

   Christianity reversed the order. By means accessible to all, by
   inducements operative on all, and by convictions, the grounds and
   materials of which all men might find in themselves, her first step was
   to cleanse the heart. But the benefit did not stop here. In preventing
   the rank vapours that steam up from the corrupt heart, Christianity
   restores the intellect likewise to its natural clearness. By relieving
   the mind from the distractions and importunities of the unruly
   passions, she improves the quality of the understanding: while at the
   same time she presents for its contemplations objects so great and so
   bright as cannot but enlarge the organ, by which they are contemplated.
   The fears, the hopes, the remembrances, the anticipations, the inward
   and outward experience, the belief and the faith, of a Christian, form
   of themselves a philosophy and a sum of knowledge, which a life spent
   in the Grove of Academus, or the "painted Porch," could not have
   attained or collected. The result is contained in the fact of a wide
   and still widening Christendom.

   Yet I dare not say, that the effects have been proportionate to the
   divine wisdom of the scheme. Too soon did the Doctors of the Church
   forget that the heart, the moral nature, was the beginning and the end;
   and that truth, knowledge, and insight were comprehended in its
   expansion. This was the true and first apostacy--when in council and
   synod the divine humanities of the Gospel gave way to speculative
   systems, and religion became a science of shadows under the name of
   theology, or at best a bare skeleton of truth, without life or
   interest, alike inaccessible and unintelligible to the majority of
   Christians. For these therefore there remained only rites and
   ceremonies and spectacles, shows and semblances. Thus among the learned
   the substance of things hoped for (Heb. xi, 1,) passed off into
   notions; and for the unlearned the surfaces of things became**
   substance. The Christian world was for centuries divided into the many,
   that did not think at all, and the few who did nothing but think--both
   alike unreflecting, the one from defect of the act, the other from the
   absence of an object.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM V.

   There is small chance of truth at the goal where there is not a
   child-like humility at the starting-post.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   Humility is the safest ground of docility, and docility the surest
   promise of docibility. Where there is no working of self-love in the
   heart that secures a leaning beforehand; where the great magnet of the
   planet is not overwhelmed or obscured by partial masses of iron in
   close neighbourhood to the compass of the judgment, though hidden or
   unnoticed; there will this great desideratum be found of a child-like
   humility. Do I then say, that I am to be influenced by no interest? Far
   from it! There is an interest of truth; or how could there be a love of
   truth? And that a love of truth for its own sake, and merely as truth,
   is possible, my soul bears
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** Virium et proprietatum, qua non nisi de substantibus predicari
   possunt, formis superstantibus attributio, est Superstitio. witness to
   itself in its inmost recesses. But there are other interests--those of
   goodness, of beauty, of utility. It would be a sorry proof of the
   humility I am extolling, were I to ask for angel's wings to overfly my
   own human nature. I exclude none of these. It is enough if the lene
   clinamen, the gentle bias, be given by no interest that concerns myself
   other than as I am a man, and included in the great family of mankind;
   but which does therefore especially concern me, because being a common
   interest of all men it must needs concern the very essentials of my
   being, and because these essentials, as existing in me, are especially
   entrusted to my particular charge.

   Widely different from this social and truth-attracted bias, different
   both in its nature and its effects, is the interest connected with the
   desire of distinguishing yourself from other men, in order to be
   distinguished by them. Hoc revera est inter te et veritatem. This
   interest does indeed stand between thee and truth. I might add between
   thee and thy own soul. It is scarcely more at variance with the love of
   truth than it is unfriendly to the attainment that deserves that name.
   By your own act you have appointed the many as your judges and
   appraisers: for the anxiety to be admired is a loveless passion, ever
   strongest with regard to those by whom we are least known and least
   cared for, loud on the hustings, gay in the ball-room, mute and sullen
   at the family fireside. What you have acquired by patient thought and
   cautious discrimination, demands a portion of the same effort in those
   who are to receive it from you. But applause and preference are things
   of barter; and if you trade in them, experience will soon teach you
   that there are easier and less unsuitable ways to win golden judgments
   than by at once taxing the patience and humiliating the self-opinion of
   your judges. To obtain your end, your words must be as indefinite as
   their thoughts: and how vague and genera these are even on objects of
   sense, the few who at a mature age have seriously set about the
   discipline of their faculties; and have honestly taken stock, best know
   by recollection of their own state. To be admired you must make your
   auditors believe at least that they understand what you say; which be
   assured, they never will, under such circumstances, if it be worth
   understanding, or if you understand your own soul. But while your
   prevailing motive is to be compared and appreciated, is it credible, is
   it possible, that you should in earnest seek for a knowledge which is
   and must remain a hidden light, a secret treasure? Have you children,
   or have you lived among children, and do you not know, that in all
   things, in food, in medicine, in all their doings and abstainings they
   must believe in order to acquire a reason for their belief? But so is
   it with religious truths for all men. These we must all learn as
   children. The ground of the prevailing error on this point is the
   ignorance, that in spiritual concernments to believe and to understand
   are not diverse things, but the same thing in different periods of its
   growth. Belief is the seed, received into the will, of which the
   understanding or knowledge is the flower, and the thing believed is the
   fruit. Unless ye believe ye cannot understand: and unless ye be humble
   as children, ye not only will not, but ye cannot believe. Of such
   therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven. Yea, blessed is the calamity that
   makes us humble; though so repugnant thereto is our nature, in our
   present state, that after a while, it is to be feared, a second and
   sharper calamity would be wanted to cure us of our pride in having
   become so humble.

   Lastly, there are among us, though fewer and less in fashion than among
   our ancestors, persons who, like Shaftesbury, do not belong to "the
   herd of Epicurus," yet prefer a philosophic paganism to the morality of
   the Gospel. Now it would conduce, methinks, to the child like humility
   we have been discoursing of, if the use of the term, virtue, in that
   high, comprehensive, and notional sense in which it was used by the
   ancient Stoics, were abandoned, as a relic of Paganism, to these modern
   Pagans: and if Christians restoring the word to its original import,
   namely, manhood or manliness, used it exclusively to express the
   quality of fortitude; strength of character in relation to the
   resistance opposed by nature and the irrational passions to the
   dictates of reason; energy of will in preserving the line of rectitude
   tense and firm against the warping forces and treacheries of
   temptation. Surely, it were far less unseemly, value ourselves on this
   moral strength than on strength of body, or even strength of intellect.
   But we will rather value it for ourselves: and bearing in mind the old
   adage, Quis custodiet ipsum costodem? we will value it the more, yea,
   then only will we allow it true spiritual worth, when we possess it as
   a gift of grace, a boon of mercy undeserved, a fulfilment of a free
   promise (1 Cor. X, 13). What more is meant in this last paragraph, let
   the venerable Hooker say for me in the following.
     __________________________________________________________________

Aphorism VI.

   Hooker.

   What is virtue but a medicine, and vice but a wound? Yea, we have so
   often deeply wounded ourselves with medicine, that God hath been fain
   to make wounds medicinable; to secure by vice where virtue hath
   stricken; to suffer the just man to fall, that being raised he may be
   taught what power it was which upheld him standing. I am not afraid to
   affirm it boldly with St. Augustine, that men puffed up through a proud
   opinion of their own sanctity and holiness received a benefit at the
   hands of God, and are assisted with his grace when with his grace they
   are not assisted, but permitted (and that grievously) to transgress.
   Whereby, as they were through over great liking of themselves
   supplanted (tripped up), so the dislike of that which did supplant them
   may establish them afterwards the surer. Ask the very soul of Peter,
   and it shall undoubtedly itself make you this answer: My eager
   protestations made in the glory of my spiritual strength I am ashamed
   of. But my shame and die tears, with which my presumption and my
   weakness were bewailed, recur in the songs of my thanksgiving. My
   strength had been my ruin, my fall hath proved my stay.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM VII.

   The being and providence of One Living God, holy, gracious, merciful,
   the Creator and Preserver of all things, and a Father of the righteous;
   the Moral Law in its utmost height, breadth and purity; a state of
   retribution after death; the resurrection of the dead; and a day of
   Judgment--all these were known and received by the Jewish people, as
   established articles of the national Faith, at or before the
   proclaiming of Christ by the Baptist. They are the ground-work of
   Christianity, and essentials in the Christian Faith, but not its
   characteristic and peculiar doctrines: except indeed as they are
   confirmed, enlivened, realized and brought home to the whole being of
   man, head, heart, and spirit, by the truths and influences of the
   Gospel.

   Peculiar to Christianity are:

   I. The belief that a Mean of Salvation has been effected and provided
   for the human race by the incarnation of the Son of God in the person
   of Jesus Christ; and that his life on earth, his sufferings, death, and
   resurrection, are not only proofs and manifestations, but likewise
   essential and effective parts of the great redemptive act, whereby also
   the obstacle from the corruption of our nature is rendered no longer
   insurmountable.

   II. The belief in the possible appropriation of this benefit by
   repentance and faith, including the aids that render an effective faith
   and repentance themselves possible.

   III. The belief in the reception (by as many as shall be heirs of
   salvation) of a living and spiritual principle, a seed of life capable
   of surviving this natural life, and of existing in a divine and
   immortal state.

   IV. The belief in the awakening of the spirit in them that truly
   believe, and in the communion of the spirit, thus awakened, with the
   Holy Spirit.

   V. The belief in the accompanying and consequent gifts, graces,
   comforts, and privileges of the Spirit, which acting primarily on the
   heart and will, cannot but manifest themselves in suitable works of
   love and obedience, that is, in right acts with right affections, from
   right principles.

   VI. Further, as Christians we are taught, that these Works are the
   appointed signs and evidences of our Faith; and that, under limitation
   of the power, the means, and the opportunities afforded us
   individually, they are the rule and measure, by which we are bound and
   enabled to judge, of what spirit we are.

   VII. All these, together with the doctrine of the Fathers re-proclaimed
   in the everlasting Gospel, we receive in the full assurance, that God
   beholds and will finally judge us with a merciful consideration of our
   infirmities, a gracious acceptance of our sincere though imperfect
   strivings, a forgiveness of our defects, through the mediation, and a
   completion of our deficiencies by the perfect righteousness of the Man
   Christ Jesus, even the Word that was in the beginning with God, and
   who, being God, became man for the redemption of mankind.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   I earnestly entreat the Reader to pause awhile, and to join with me in
   reflecting on the preceding Aphorism. It has been my aim throughout
   this work to enforce two points: 1. That Morality arising out of the
   reason and conscience of men, and Prudence, which in like manner flows
   out of the understanding and the natural wants and desires of the
   individual, are two distinct things. 2. That morality with prudence as
   its instrument has, considered abstractedly, not only a value but a
   worth in itself. Now the question is (and it is a question which every
   man must answer for himself) "From what you know of yourself; of your
   own heart and strength; and from what history and personal experience
   have led you to conclude of mankind generally; dare you trust to it?
   Dare you trust to it? To it, and to it alone? If so, well! It is at
   your own risk. I judge you not. Before Him, who cannot be mocked, you
   stand or fall. But if not, if you have had too good reason to know,
   that your heart is deceitful and your strength weakness: if you are
   disposed to exclaim with Paul--the Law indeed is holy, just, good,
   spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under sin: for that which I do, I
   allow not; and what I would, that I do not!--in this case, there is a
   Voice that says, Come unto me; and I will give you rest. This is the
   voice of Christ: and the conditions, under which the promise was given
   by him, are that you believe in him, and believe his words. And he has
   further assured you, that if you do so, you will obey him. You are, in
   short, to embrace the Christian Faith as your religion--those truths
   which St. Paul believed after his conversion, and not those only which
   he believed no less undoubtingly while he was persecuting Christ, and
   an enemy of the Christian Religion. With what consistency could I offer
   you this volume as aids to reflection, if I did not call on you to
   ascertain in the first instance what these truths are? But these I
   could not lay before you without first enumerating certain other points
   of belief, which though truths, indispensable truths, and truths
   comprehended or rather pre-supposed in the Christian scheme, are yet
   not these truths. (John i, 17).

   While doing this, I was aware that the positions, in the first
   paragraph of the preceding aphorism, to which the numerical marks are
   affixed, will startle some of my readers. Let the following sentences
   serve for the notes corresponding to the marks:

    Be you holy: even as God is holy.--What more does he require of thee,
   O man! than to do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with the Lord
   thy God? To these summary passages from Moses and the Prophets (the
   first exhibiting the closed, the second the expanded, hand of the Moral
   Law) I might add the authorities of Grotius and other more orthodox and
   not less learned divines, for the opinion that the Lord's Prayer was a
   selection, and the famous passage [The hour is coming, &c. John v. 28,
   29], a citation by our Lord from the Liturgy of the Jewish Church. But
   it will be sufficient to remind the reader, that the apparent
   difference between the prominent moral truths of the Old and those of
   the New Testament results from the latter having been written in Greek;
   while the conversations recorded by the Evangelists took place in
   Syro-Chaldaic or Aramaic. Hence it happened that where our Lord cited
   the original text, his biographers substituted the Septuagint Version,
   while our English Version is in both instances immediate and
   literal--in the Old Testament from the Hebrew Original, in the New
   Testament from the freer Greek translation. The text, I give you a new
   commandment, has no connection with the present subject.

    There is a current mistake on this point likewise, though this
   article of the Jewish belief is not only asserted by St. Paul, but is
   elsewhere spoken of as common to the Twelve Tribes. The mistake
   consists in supposing the Pharisees to have been a distinct sect, and
   in strangely over-rating the number of the Sadducees. The former were
   distinguished not by holding, as matters of religious belief, articles
   different from the Jewish Church at large; but by their pretences to a
   more rigid orthodoxy, a more scrupulous performance. They were, in
   short (if I may dare use a phrase which I dislike as profane and
   denounce as uncharitable), the Evangelicals and strict professors of
   the day. The latter, the Sadducees, whose opinions much more nearly
   resembled those of the Stoics than the Epicureans (a remark that will
   appear paradoxical to those only who have abstracted their notions of
   the Stoic philosophy from Epictetus, Mark Antonine, and certain
   brilliant inconsistencies of Seneca), were a handful of rich men,
   Romanized Jews, not more numerous than Infidels among us, and holden by
   the people at large in at least equal abhorrence. Their great argument
   was: that the belief of a future state of rewards and punishments
   injured or destroyed the purity of the Moral Law for the more
   enlightened classes, and weakened the influence of the laws of the land
   for the people, the vulgar multitude.
     __________________________________________________________________

   I will now suppose the reader to have thoughtfully reperused the
   paragraph containing the tenets peculiar to Christianity, and if he
   have his religious principles yet to form, I should expect to overhear
   a troubled murmur: How can I comprehend this ? How is this to be
   proved? To the first question I should answer: Christianity is not a
   theory, or a speculation; but a life;--not a philosophy of life, but a
   life and a living process. To the second: Try it. It has been eighteen
   hundred years in existence: and has one individual left a record, like
   the following? "I tried it; and it did not answer. I made the
   experiment faithfully according to the directions; and the result has
   been, a conviction of my own credulity." Have you, in your own
   experience, met with any one in whose words you could place full
   confidence, and who has seriously affirmed:--"I have given Christianity
   a fair trial. I was aware, that its promises were made only
   conditionally. But my heart bears me witness, that I have to the utmost
   of my power complied with these conditions. Both outwardly and in the
   discipline of my inward acts and affections, I have performed the
   duties which it enjoins, and I have used the means which it prescribes.
   Yet my assurance of its truth has received no increase. Its promises
   have not been fulfilled: and I repent me of my delusion!" If neither
   your own experience nor the history of almost two thousand years has
   presented a single testimony to this purport; and if you have read and
   heard of many who have lived and died bearing witness to the contrary:
   and if you have yourself met with someone, in whom on any other point
   you would place unqualified trust, who has on his own experience made
   report to you, that he is faithful who promised, and what he promised
   he has proved himself able to perform: is it bigotry, if I fear that
   the unbelief, which prejudges and prevents the experiment, has its
   source elsewhere than in the uncorrupted judgment; that not the strong
   free mind, but the enslaved will, is the true original infidel in this
   instance? It would not be the first time, that a treacherous bosomsin
   had suborned the understandings of men to bear false witness against
   its avowed enemy, the right though unreceived owner of the house, who
   had long warned it out, and waited only for its ejection to enter and
   take possession of the same. I have elsewhere in the present work
   explained the difference between the understanding and the reason, by
   reason meaning exclusively the speculative or scientific power so
   called, the

   or mens of the ancients. And wider still is the distinction between the
   understanding and the spiritual mind. But no gift of God does or can
   contradict any other gift, except by misuse or misdirection. Most
   readily therefore do I admit, that there can be no contrariety between
   revelation and the understanding; unless you call the fact, that the
   skin though sensible of the warmth of the sun, can convey no notion of
   its figure or its joyous light, or of the colors which it impresses on
   the clouds, a contrariety between the skin and the eye; or infer that
   the cutaneous and the optic nerves contradict each other.

   But we have grounds to believe, that there are yet other rays or
   effluences from the sun, which neither feeling nor sight can apprehend,
   but which are to be inferred from the effects. And were it even so with
   regard to the spiritual sun how would this contradict the understanding
   or the reason? It is a sufficient proof of the contrary, that the
   mysteries in question are not in the direction of the understanding or
   the (speculative) reason. They do not move on the same line or plane
   with them, and therefore cannot contradict them. But besides this, in
   the mystery that most immediately concerns the believer, that of the
   birth into a new and spiritual life, the common sense and experience of
   mankind come in aid of their faith. The analogous facts, which we know
   to be true, not only facilitate the apprehension of the facts promised
   to us, and expressed by the same words in conjunction with a
   distinctive epithet; but being confessedly not less incomprehensible,
   the certain knowledge of the one disposes us to the belief of the
   other. It removes at least all objections to the truth of the doctrine
   derived from the mysteriousness of its subject. The life, we seek
   after, is a mystery; but so both in itself and in its origin is the
   life we have. In order to meet this question, however, with minds duly
   prepared, there are two preliminary inquiries to be decided; the first
   respecting the purport, the second respecting the language, of the
   Gospel.

   First then of the purport, namely, what the Gospel does not, and what
   it does, profess to be. The Gospel is not a system of theology, nor a
   syntagma of theoretical propositions and conclusions for the
   enlargement of speculative knowledge, ethical or metaphysical. But it
   is a history, a series of facts and events related or announced. These
   do indeed involve, or rather I should say they at the same time are,
   most important doctrinal truths; but still facts and declaration of
   facts.

   Secondly of the language. This is a wide subject. But the point, to
   which I chiefly advert, is the necessity of thoroughly understanding
   the distinction between analogous and metaphorical language. Analogies
   are used in aid of conviction: metaphors, as means of illustration. The
   language is analogous, wherever a thing, power, or principle in a
   higher dignity is expressed by the same thing, power, or principle in a
   lower but more known form. Such, for instance, is the language of John
   iii, 6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; that which is born
   of the Spirit, is Spirit. The latter half of the verse contains the
   fact asserted; the former half the analogous fact, by which it is
   rendered intelligible. If any man choose to call this metaphorical or
   figurative, I ask him whether with Hobbes and Bolingbroke he applies
   the same rule to the moral attributes of the Deity? Whether he regards
   the divine justice, for instance, as a metaphorical term, a mere figure
   of speech? If he disclaims this, then I answer, neither do I regard the
   words, born again, or spiritual life, as figures or metaphors. I have
   only to add, that these analogies are the material, or (to speak
   chemically) the base, of symbols and symbolical expressions; the nature
   of which is always tautegorical, that is, expressing the same subject
   but with a difference, in contra-distinction from metaphors and
   similitudes, which are always allegorical, that is, expressing a
   different subject but with a resemblance.**

   Of metaphorical language, on the other hand, let the following be taken
   as instance and illustration. I am speaking, we will suppose, of an
   act, which in its own nature, and as a producing and efficient cause,
   is transcendant; but which produces sundry effects, each of which is
   the same in kind with an effect produced by a cause well known and of
   ordinary occurrence. Now when I characterize or designate this
   transcendant act,
     __________________________________________________________________

   **See the Statesman's Manual, p. 230, 2nd edit. Ed. in exclusive
   reference to these its effects, by a succession of names borrowed from
   their ordinary causes; not for the purpose of rendering the act itself,
   or the manner of the agency, conceivable, but in order to show the
   nature and magnitude of the benefits received from it, and thus to
   excite the due admiration, gratitude, and love in the receivers; in
   this case I should be rightly described as speaking metaphorically. And
   in this case to confound the similarity, in respect of the effects
   relatively to the recipients, with an identity in respects of the
   causes or mode? of causation relatively to the transcendant act or the
   Divine Agent, is a confusion of metaphor with analogy, and of
   figurative with literal; and has been and continues to be a fruitful
   source of superstition or enthusiasm in believers, and of objections
   and prejudices to infidels and sceptics. But each of these points is
   worthy of a separate consideration: and apt occasions will be found of
   reverting to them severally in the following aphorisms, or the comments
   thereto attached.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM VIII.

   Leighton.

   Faith elevates the soul not only above sense and sensible things, but
   above reason itself. As reason corrects the errors which sense might
   occasion, so supernatural faith corrects the errors of natural reason
   judging according to sense.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   My remarks on this aphorism from Leighton cannot be better introduced,
   or their purport more distinctly announced, than by the following
   sentence from Harrington, with no other change than is necessary to
   make the words express, without aid of the context, what from the
   context it is evident was the writer's meaning. "The definition and
   proper character of man--that, namely, which should contra-distinguish
   him from the animals--is to be taken from his reason rather than from
   his understanding in regard that in other creatures there may be
   something of understanding, but there is nothing of reason."

   Sir Thomas Brown, in his Religio Medici, complains that there are not
   impossibilities enough in religion for his active faith; and adopts by
   choice and in free preference such interpretations of certain texts and
   declarations of Holy Writ, as place them in irreconcilable
   contradiction to the demonstrations of science and the experience of
   mankind, because (says he) "I love to lose myself in a mystery, and
   'tis my solitary recreation to pose my apprehension with those involved
   enigmas and riddles of the Trinity and Incarnation:"--and because he
   delights (as thinking it no vulgar part of faith) to believe a thing
   not only above but contrary to reason, and against the evidence of our
   proper senses. For the worthy knight could answer all the objections of
   the Devil and reason "with the old resolution he had learnt of
   Tertullian: Certum est quia impossible est. It is certainly true
   because it is quite impossible!" Now this I call Ultra-fidianism.*
     __________________________________________________________________

   *There is this advantage in the occasional use of a newly minted term
   or title, expressing the doctrinal schemes of particular sects or
   parties, that it avoids the inconvenience that presses on either side,
   whether we adopt the name which the party itself has taken up by which
   to express its peculiar tenets, or that by which the same party is
   designated by its opponents. If we take the latter, it most often
   happens that either the persons are invidiously aimed at in the
   designation of the principles, or that the name implies some
   consequence or occasional accompaniment of the principles denied by the
   parties themselves, as applicable to them

   Again, there is a scheme constructed on the principle of retaining the
   social sympathies, that attend on the name of believer, at the least
   possible expenditure of belief; a scheme of picking and choosing
   Scripture texts.
     __________________________________________________________________

   collectively. On the other hand, convinced as I am, that current
   appellations are never wholly indifferent or inert: and that, when
   employed to express the characteristic relief or object of a religions
   confederacy, they exert on the many a great and constant, though
   insensible, influence; I cannot but fear that in adopting the former I
   may be sacrificing the interests of truth beyond what the duties of
   courtesy can demand or justify. I have elsewhere stated my objections
   to the word Unitarians, as a name which in its proper sense can belong
   only to the maintainers of the truth impugned by the persons, who have
   chosen it as their designation. "For unity or unition, and
   indistinguishable unicity or sameness, are incompatible terms. We never
   speak of the unity of attraction, or the unity of repulsion; but of the
   unity of attraction and repulsion in each corpuscle. Indeed, the
   essential diversity of the conceptions, unity and sameness, was among
   the elementary principles of the old logicians; and Leibnitz, in his
   critique on Wissowatius, has ably exposed the sophisms grounded on the
   confusion of the two terms. But in the exclusive sense, in which the
   name, Unitarian, is appropriated by the Sect, and in which they mean it
   to be understood, it is a presumptuous boast and an uncharitable
   calumny. No one of the Churches to which they on this article of the
   Christian faith stand opposed, Greek or Latin, ever adopted the term,
   Trini--or Tri-uni-tarians as their ordinary and proper name: and had it
   been otherwise, yet unity is assuredly no logical opposite to
   Tri-unity, which expressly includes it. The triple alliance is a
   fortiori an afliance. The true designation of their characteristic
   tenet, and which would simply and inoffensively express a fact admitted
   on all sides, is Psilanthropism, or the assertion of the mere humanity
   of Christ."**

   I dare not hesitate to avow my regret that any scheme of doctrines or
   tenets should be the subject of penal law: though I can easily conceive
   that any scheme, however excellent in itself, may be propagated, and
   however false or injurious, may be assailed in a manner and by means
   that would make the advocate or assailant justly punishable. But then
   it is the manner, the means, that constitute the crime. The merit or
   demerit of the opinions themselves depends on their originating and
   determining causes, which may differ in every different believer, and
   are
     __________________________________________________________________

   **"Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters." p. 367, 2nd edit. Ed.
   for the support of doctrines, that had been learned beforehand from the
   higher oracle of common senses which, as applied to the truths of
   religion, means the popular part of the philosophy in fashion. Of
   course, the
     __________________________________________________________________

   certainly known to Him alone, who commanded us, Judge not, lest ye be
   judged. At all events, in the present state of the law, I do not see
   where we can begin, or where we can stop, without inconsistency and
   consequent hardship. Judging by all that we can pretend to know or are
   entitled to infer, who among us will take on himself to deny that the
   late Dr. Priestley was a good and benevolent man, as sincere in his
   love as he was intrepid and indefatigable in his pursuit, Of truth? Now
   let us construct three parallel tables, the first containing the
   articles of belief, moral and theological, maintained by the venerable
   Hooker, as the representative of the Established Church, each article
   being distinctly lined and numbered; the second the tenets and
   persuasions of Lord Herbert, as the representative of the Platonizing
   Deists; and the third, those of Dr. Priestley. Let the points, in which
   the second and third agree with or differ from the first, be considered
   as to the comparative number modified by the comparative weight and
   importance of the several points--and let any competent and upright man
   be appointed the arbiter, to decide according to his best judgment,
   without any reference to the truth of the opinions, which of the two
   differed from the first more widely. I say this, well aware that it
   would be abundantly more prudent to leave it unsaid. But I say it in
   the conviction, that the liberality in the adoption of admitted
   misnomers in the naming of doctrinal systems, if only they have been
   negatively legalized, is but an equivocal proof of liberality towards
   the persons who dissent from us. On the contrary, I more than suspect
   that the former liberality does in too many men arise from a latent
   predisposition to transfer their reprobation and intolerance from the
   doctrines to the doctors, from the belief to the believers. Indecency,
   abuse, scoffing on subjects dear and awful to a multitude of our fellow
   citizens, appeals to the vanity, appetites, and malignant passions of
   ignorant and incompetent judges--these are flagrant overt acts,
   condemned by the law written in the heart of every honest man, Jew,
   Turk, and Christian. These are points respecting which the humblest
   honest man feels it his duty to hold himself infallible, and dares not
   hesitate in giving utterance to the verdict of his conscience in the
   jury-box as fearlessly as by his fireside. It is far otherwise with
   respect to matters of faith and inward conviction: and with respect to
   these I say--"Tolerate no belief that you judge false and of injurious
   tendency: and arraign no believer. The man is more and other than his
   belief: and God only knows scheme differs at different times and in
   different individuals in the number of articles excluded; but, it may
   always be recognized by this permanent character, that its object is to
   draw religion down to the believer's intellect,
     __________________________________________________________________

   how small or how large a part of him the belief in question may be, for
   good or for evil. Resist every false doctrine; and call no man heretic.
   The false doctrine does not necessarily make the man a heretic; but an
   evil heart can make any doctrine heretical."

   Actuated by these principles, I have objected to a false and deceptive
   designation in the case of one system. Persuaded that the doctrines,
   enumerated in p. 145-6, are not only essential to the Christian
   religion, but those which contra-distinguish the religion as Christian,
   I merely repeat this persuasion in another form, when I assert, that
   (in my sense of the word, Christian) Unitarianism is not Christianity.
   But do I say, that those who call themselves Unitarians, are not
   Christians? God forbid! I would not think, much less promulgate, a
   judgment at once so presumptuous and so uncharitable. Let a friendly
   antagonist retort on my scheme of faith in the like manner: I shall
   respect him all the more for his consistency as a reasoner, and not
   confide the less in his kindness towards me as his neighbour and fellow
   Christian. This latter and most endearing name I scarcely know how to
   withhold even from my friend, Hyman Hurwitz, as often as I read what
   every reverer of Holy Writ and of the English Bible ought to read, his
   admirable Vindiciae Hebraicae! It has trembled on the verge, as it
   were, of my lips, every time I have conversed with that pious, learned,
   strong-minded, and single-hearted Jew, an Israelite indeed, and without
   guile--

     Cujus cura sequi naturam, legibus uti,

     Et mentem vitiis, ora negare dolis; Virtutes opibus, verum
     praeponere falso,

     Nil vacuum sensu dicere, nil facere.

     Post obitum vivam** secum, secum requiestam,

     Nec fiat melior sors mea sorte sua!

     From a poem of Hildebert on his Master, the

     the persecuted Berengarius.

   Under the same feelings I conclude this aid to reflection by applying
   the principle to another misnomer not less inappropriate and far more
   influential. Of those, whom have found most reason to respect and
     __________________________________________________________________

   **I do not answer for the corrupt Latin. instead of raising his
   intellect up to religion. And this extreme I call Minimi-fidianism.

   Now if there be one preventive of both these extremes more efficacious
   than another, and preliminary to all the
     __________________________________________________________________

   value, many have been members of the Church of Rome: and certainly I
   did not honor those the least, who scrupled even in common parlance to
   call our Church a reformed Church. A similar scruple would not,
   methinks, disgrace a Protestant as to the use of the words, Catholic or
   Roman Catholic; and if (tacitly at least, and in thought) he remembered
   that the Romish anti-Catholic Church would more truly express the fact.
   Romish, to mark that the corruptions in discipline, doctrine and
   practice do, for the larger part, owe both their origin and
   perpetuation to the Romish Court, and the local tribunals of the City
   of Rome; and neither are or ever have been Catholic, that is,
   universal, throughout the Roman Empire, or even in the Whole Latin or
   Western Church--and anti-Catholic, because no other Church acts on so
   narrow and excommunicative a principle, or is characterised by such a
   jealous spirit of monopoly. Instead of a Catholic (universal) spirit,
   it may be truly described as a spirit of particularism counterfeiting
   Catholicity by a negative totality, and heretical
   self-circumscription--in the first instances cutting off, and since
   then cutting herself off from, all the other members of Christ's body.
   For the rest, I think as that man of true catholic spirit and apostolic
   zeal, Richard Baxter, thought; and my readers will thank me for
   conveying my reflections in his own words, in the following golden
   passage from his Life, "faithfully published from his own original MSS.
   by Matthew Silvester, 1696."

   "My censures of the Papists do much differ from what they were at
   first. I then thought that their errors in the doctrines of faith were
   their most dangerous mistakes. But now I am assured that their
   misexpressions and misunderstanding us, with our mistakings of them and
   inconvenient expressing of our own opinions, have made the difference
   in most points appear much greater than it is; and that in some it is
   next to none at all. But the great and unreconcilable differences lie
   in their Church tyranny; in the usurpations of their hierarchy, and
   priesthood, under the name of spiritual authority exercising a temporal
   lordship; in their corruptions and abasement of God's worship; but
   above all, in their corruptions befriending of ignorance and vice.

   "At first I thought that Mr. Perkins well proved that a Papist cannot
   go beyond a reprobate; but now I doubt not that God hath many
   sanctified ones among them, who have received the true doctrine of
   Christianity so practically that their contradictory errors prevail not
   against rest, it is the being made fully aware of the diversity of
   reason and the understanding. And this is the more expedient, because
   though there is no want of authorities ancient and modern for the
   distinction of the faculties, and the distinct appropriation of the
   terms, yet our best writers too often confound the one with the other.
   Even Lord Bacon himself, who in his Novum Organum has so incomparably
   set forth the nature of the difference, and the unfitness of the latter
   faculty for the objects of the former, does nevertheless in sundry
   places use the term reason where he means the understanding, and
   sometimes, though less frequently, understanding for reason. In
   consequence of thus confounding the two terms, or rather of wasting
   both words for the expression of one and the same faculty, he left
   himself no appropriate term for the other and higher gift of reason,
   and was thus under the necessity of adopting fantastical and mystical
   phrases, for example, the dry light (lumen siccum,) the lucific vision,
   and the like, meaning thereby nothing more than reason in
   contra-distinction from the understanding. Thus, too, in the preceding
   aphorism, by reason Leighton means the human understanding, the
   explanation annexed to it being (by a noticeable coincidence,) word for
   word, the very definition which the
     __________________________________________________________________

   them, to hinder their love of God and their salvation; but that their
   errors are like a conquerable dose of poison, which a healthful nature
   doth overcome. And I can never believe that a man may not be saved by
   that religion, which doth but bring him to the true love of God and to
   a heavenly mind and life: nor that God will ever cast a soul into hell
   that truly loveth him. Also at first it would disgrace any doctrine
   with me, if I did but hear it called Popery and anti-Christian; but I
   have long learned to be more impartial, and to know that Satan can use
   even the names of Popery and Antichrist, to bring a truth into
   suspicion and discredit."--Baxter's Life, Part I. p. 131. founder of
   the Critical Philosophy gives of the understanding--namely, "the
   faculty judging according to sense."
     __________________________________________________________________

ON THE DIFFERENCE IN KIND OF REASON AND THE
     __________________________________________________________________

UNDERSTANDING.
     __________________________________________________________________

SCHEME OF THE ARGUMENT.

   On the contrary, reason is the power of universal and necessary
   convictions, the source and substance of truths above sense, and having
   their evidence in themselves. Its presence is always marked by the
   necessity of the position affirmed: this necessity being conditional,
   when a truth of reason is applied to facts of experience, or to the
   rules and maxims of the understanding; but absolute, when the subject
   matter is itself the growth or offspring of reason. Hence arises a
   distinction in reason itself, derived from the different mode of
   applying it, and from the objects to which it is directed: accordingly
   as we consider one and the same gift, now as the ground of formal
   principles, and now as the origin of ideas. Contemplated distinctively
   in reference to formal (or abstract) truth, it is the speculative
   reason; but in reference to actual (or moral) truth, as the fountain of
   ideas and the light of the conscience, we name it the practical reason.
   Whenever by self-subjection to this universal light, the will of the
   individual,, the particular will, has become a will of reason, the man
   is regenerate: and reason is then the spirit of the regenerated man,
   whereby the person is capable of a quickening intercommunion with the
   Divine Spirit. And herein consists the mystery of Redemption, that this
   has been rendered possible for us. And so it is written; the first man
   Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam a quickening Spirit: (1 Cor.
   XV, 45). We need only compare the passages in the writings of the
   Apostles Paul and John, concerning the Spirit and spiritual gifts, with
   those in the Proverbs and in the Wisdom of Solomon respecting reason,
   to be convinced that the terms are synonymous.** In this at once most
   comprehensive and most appropriate acceptation of the word, reason is
   pre-eminently spiritual, and a spirit, even our spirit, through an
   effluence of the same grace by which we are privileged to say Our
   Father?

   On the other hand, the judgments of the understanding are binding only
   in relation to the objects of our senses, which we reflect under the
   forms of the understanding. It is, as Leighton, rightly defines it,
   "the faculty judging according to sense." Hence we add the epithet
   human without tautology: and speak of the human understanding in
   disjunction from that of beings higher or lower than man. But there is,
   in this sense, no human reason. There neither is nor can be but one
   reason, one and the same; even the light that lighteth every man's
   individual understanding (discursus), and thus maketh it a reasonable
   understanding, discourse of reason--one only, yet manifold; it goeth
   through all understanding, and remaining in itself regenerateth all
   other powers. The same writer calls it likewise an influence from the
   Glory of the Almighty, this being one of the names of the Messiah, as
   the Logos, or co-eternal Filial Word. And most noticeable for its
   coincidence is a fragment of Heraclitus, as I have indeed already
   noticed elsewhere;--"To discourse rationally it behoves us to derive
   strength from that which is common to all men: for all human
   understandings are nourished by the one Divine Word."

   Beasts, we have said, partake of understanding. If
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** See Wisd. of Sol. c. vii, 22-23, 27. Ed.* any man deny this, there
   is a ready way of settling the question. Let him give a careful perusal
   to Huberts two small volumes on bees and ants, (especially the latter,)
   and to Kirby and Spence's Introduction to Entomology; and one or other
   of two things must follow. He will either change his opinion as
   irreconcilable with the facts; or he must deny the facts, which yet I
   cannot suppose, inasmuch as the denial would be tantamount to the no
   less extravagant than uncharitable assertion, that Huber, and the
   several eminent naturalists, French and English, Swiss, German and
   Italian, by whom Ruber's observations and experiments have been
   repeated and confirmed, had all conspired to impose a series of
   falsehoods and fairy-tales on the world. I see no way, at least, by
   which he can get out of this dilemma, but by overleaping the admitted
   rules and fences of all legitimate discussion, and either transferring
   to the word, understanding, the definition already appropriated to
   reason, or defining understanding in genere by the specific and
   accessional perfections which the human understanding derives from its
   co-existence with reason and free-will in the same individual person;
   in plainer words, from its being exercised by a self-conscious and
   responsible creature. And, after all, the supporter of Harrington's
   position would have a right to ask him, by what other name he would
   designate the faculty in the instances referred to? If it be not
   understanding, what is it?

   In no former part of this volume has the author felt the same anxiety
   to obtain a patient attention. For he does not hesitate to avow, that
   on his success in establishing the validity and importance of the
   distinction between reason and the understanding, he rests his hopes of
   carrying the reader along with him through all that is to follow. Let
   the student but clearly see and comprehend the diversity in the things
   themselves, the expediency of a correspondent distinction and
   appropriation of the words will follow of itself. Turn bade for a
   moment to the aphorism, and having reperused the first paragraph of
   this comment thereon, regard the two following narratives as the
   illustration. I do not say proof: for I take these from a multitude of
   facts equally striking for the one only purpose of placing my meaning
   out of all doubt.

   I. Huber put a dozen humble-bees under a bell-glass along with a comb
   of about ten silken cocoons so unequal in height as not to be capable
   of standing steadily. To remedy this two or three of the humble-bees
   got upon the comb, stretched themselves over its edge, and with their
   heads downwards fixed their forefeet on the table on which the comb
   stood, and so with their hind feet kept the comb from filling. When
   these were weary, others took their places. In this constrained and
   painful posture, fresh bees relieving their comrades at intervals, and
   each working in its turn, did these affectionate little insects support
   the comb for nearly three days: at the end of which they had prepared
   sufficient wax to build pillars with. But these pillars having
   accidentally got displaced, the bees had recourse again to the same
   manoeuvre, till Huber pitying their hard case, &c.

   II. "I shall at present describe the operations of a single ant that I
   observed sufficiently long to satisfy my curiosity.

   "One rainy day, I observed a laborer digging the ground near the
   aperture which gave entrance to the ant-hill. It placed in a heap the
   several fragments it had scraped up, and formed them into small
   pellets, which it deposited here and there upon the nest. It returned
   constantly to the same place, and appeared to have a marked design, for
   it labored with ardor and perseverance. I remarked a slight furrow,
   excavated in the ground in a straight line, representing the plan of a
   path or gallery. The laborer, the whole of whose movements fell under
   my immediate observation, gave it greater depth and breadth, and
   cleared out its borders: and I saw at length, in which I could not be
   deceived, that it had the intention of establishing an avenue which was
   to lead from one of the stories to the under-ground chambers. This
   path, which was about two or three inches in length, and formed by a
   single ant, was opened above and bordered on each side by a buttress of
   earth; its concavity en forme de gouttiere was of the most perfect
   regularity, for the architect had not left an atom too much. The work
   of this ant was so well followed and understood, that I could almost to
   a certainty guess its next proceeding, and the very fragment it was
   about to remove. At the side of the opening where this path terminated,
   was a second opening to which it was necessary to arrive by some road.
   The same ant engaged in and executed alone this undertaking. It
   furrowed out and opened another path, parallel to the first, leaving
   between each a little wall of three or four lines in height. Those ants
   who lay the foundation of a wall, chamber, or gallery, from working
   separately occasion, now and then, a want of coincidence in the parts
   of the same or different objects. Such examples are of no unfrequent
   occurrence, but they by no means embarrass them. What follows proves
   that the workman, on discovering his error, knew how to rectify it. A
   wall had been erected with the view of sustaining a vaulted ceiling,
   still incomplete, that had been projected from the wall of the opposite
   chamber. The workman who began constructing it, had given it too little
   elevation to meet the opposite partition upon which it was to rest. Had
   it been continued on the original plan, it must infallibly have met the
   wall at about one half of its height, and this it was necessary to
   avoid. This state of things very forcibly claimed my attention, when
   one of the ants arriving at the place, and visiting the works, appeared
   to be struck by the difficulty which presented itself; but this it as
   soon obviated, by taking down the veiling and raising the wall upon
   which it reposed. It then, in my presence, constructed a new ceiling
   with the fragments of the former one."--Huber's Natural History of
   Ants, p. 38-41.

   Now I assert, that the faculty manifested in the acts here narrated
   does not differ in kind from understanding, and that it does so differ
   from reason. What I conceive the former to be, physiologically
   considered, will be shown hereafter. In this place I take the
   understanding as it exists in men, and in exclusive reference to its
   intelligential functions; and it is in this sense of the word that I am
   to prove the necessity of contra-distinguishing it from reason.

   Premising then, that two or more subjects having the same essential
   characters are said to fall under the same general definition, I lay it
   down, as a self-evident truth,--(it is, in fact, an identical
   proposition)--that whatever subjects fall under one and the same
   general definition are of one and the same kind: consequently, that
   which does not fall under this definition, must differ in kind from
   each and all of those that do. Difference in degree does indeed suppose
   sameness in kind; and difference in kind precludes distinction from
   difference of degree. Heterogenea non comparari, ergo nec distingui,
   possunt. The inattention to this rule gives rise to the numerous
   sophisms comprised by Aristotle under the head of that is, transition
   into a new kind, or the falsely applying to X what had been truly
   asserted of A, and might have been true of X, had it differed from A in
   its degree only. The sophistry consists in the omission to notice what
   not being noticed will be supposed not to exist; and where the silence
   respecting the difference in kind is tantamount to an assertion that
   the difference is merely in degree. But the fraud is especially gross,
   where the heterogeneous subject, thus clandestinely slipt in, is in its
   own nature insusceptible of degree: such as, for instance, certainty or
   circularity, contrasted with strength, or magnitude.

   To apply these remarks for our present purpose, we have only to
   describe Understanding and Reason, each by its characteristic
   qualities. The comparison will show the difference.
     __________________________________________________________________

  UNDERSTANDING.

    1. Understanding is discursive.
    2. The understanding in all its judgments refers to some other faculty
       as its ultimate authority.
    3. Understanding is the faculty of reflection.
     __________________________________________________________________

  REASON.

    1. Reason is fixed.
    2. The reason in all its decisions appeals to itself as the ground and
       substance of their truth.--(Heb. vi, 13).
    3. Reason of contemplation. Reason indeed is much nearer to Sense than
       to Understanding: for Reason (says our great Hooker) is a direct
       aspect of truth, an inward beholding, having a similar relation to
       the intelligible or spiritual, as sense has to the material or
       phenomenal.

   The result is: that neither falls under the definition of the other.
   They differ in kind: and had my object been confined to the
   establishment of this fact, the preceding columns would have superseded
   all further disquisition. But I have ever in view the especial interest
   of my youthful readers, whose reflective power is to be cultivated; as
   well as their particular reflections to be called forth and guided. Now
   the main chance of their reflecting on religious subjects aright, and
   of their attaining to the contemplation of spiritual truths at all
   rests on their insight into the nature of this disparity still more
   than on their conviction of its existence. I now, therefore, proceed to
   a brief analysis of the understanding, in elucidation of the
   definitions already given.

   The understanding then, (considered exclusively as an organ of human
   intelligence,) is the faculty by which we reflect and generalize. Take,
   for instance, any objects consisting of many parts, a house, or a group
   of houses: and if it be contemplated, as a whole, that is, as many
   constituting a one, it forms what, in the technical language of
   psychology, is called a total impression. Among the various component
   parts of this, we direct our attention especially to such as we
   recollect to have noticed in other total impressions. Then, by a
   voluntary act, we withhold our attention from all the rest to reflect
   exclusively on these ; and these we henceforward use as common
   characters, by virtue of which the several objects are referred to one
   and the same sort.**
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Accordingly as we attend more or less to the differences, the sort
   becomes, of course, more or less comprehensive. Hence there arises for
   the systematic naturalist the necessity of subdividing the sorts into
   orders, classes, families, &c.: all which, however, resolve themselves
   for the mere logician into the conception of genus and species, that
   is, the comprehending and the comprehended.

   Thus, the whole process may be reduced to three acts, all depending on
   and supposing a previous impression on the senses; first, the
   appropriation of our attention; 2. (and in order to the continuance of
   the first) abstraction, or the voluntary withholding of the attention;
   and 3. generalization. And these are ihe proper functions of the
   understanding: and the power of so doing, is what we mean, when we say
   we possess understanding, or are created with the faculty of
   understanding.

   [It is obvious, that the third function includes the act of comparing
   one object with another. In a note (for, not to interrupt the argument,
   I avail myself of this most useful contrivance), I have shown, that the
   act of comparing supposes in the comparing faculty, certain inherent
   forms, that is, modes of reflecting not referable to the objects
   reflected on, but pre-determined by the constitution and (as it were)
   mechanism of the understanding itself. And under some one or other of
   these forms,**
     __________________________________________________________________

     * Were it not so, how could the first comparison have been possible ^
       It would, involve the absurdity of measuring a thing by itself. But
       if we think on some one thing, the length of our own foot, or of
       our hand and arm from the elbow joint, it is evident that in order
       to do this, we must have the conception of measure. Now these
       antecedent and most general conceptions are what is meant by the
       constituent forms of the under^ standing : we call them constituent
       because they are not acquired by the understanding, but are implied
       in its constitution. As rationally might a circle be said to
       acquire a centre and circumference, as the understandmg to acquire
       these, its inherent forms, or ways of conceiving. This is what
       Leibnitz meant, when to the old adage of the Peripatetics, Nihil in
       inteUectu quod nonprius in sensUf (There is nothing in the
       understanding not derived from the senses, or-- There is nothing
       conceived that was not previously perceived ;) he replied-- jw/er
       intdUctum ipsum (except the understanding itself.)

   And here let me remark for once and all : whoever would reflect to any
   purpose -- ^whoever is in earnest in his pursuit of selfknowledge, and

   the resemblances and differences must be subsumed in order to be
   conceivable and a fortiori therefore in order to be comparable. The
   senses do not compare, but merely furnish the materials for comparison.
   But this
     __________________________________________________________________

   of one of the principal means to this, an insight into the meaning of
   the words he uses, and the different meanings properly or improperly
   conveyed by one and the same word, accordingly as it is used in the
   schools or the market, accordingly as the kind or a high degree is
   intended (for example, heat, weight, and the like, as employed
   scientifically, compared with the same word used popularly)--whoever, I
   say, seriously, proposes this as his object, must so far overcome his
   dislike of pedantry, and his dread of being sneered at as a pedant, as
   not to quarrel with an uncouth word or phrase, till he is quite sure
   that some other and more familiar one would not only have expressed the
   precise meaning with equal clearness, but have been as likely to draw
   attention to this meaning exclusively. The ordinary language of a
   philosopher in conversation or popular writings, compared with the
   language he uses in strict reasoning, is as his watch compared with the
   chronometer in his observatory. He sets the former by the town-clock,
   or even perhaps by the Dutch clock in his kitchen, not because he
   believes it right, but because his neighbours and his cook go by it. To
   afford the reader an opportunity for exercising the forbearance here
   recommended, I turn back to the phrase, "most general conceptions," and
   observe, that in strict and severe propriety of language I should have
   said generalific or generific rather than general, and concipiences or
   conceptive acts rather than conceptions.

   It is an old complaint, that a man of genius no sooner appears, but the
   host of dunces are up in arms to repel the invading alien. This
   observation would have made more converts to its truth, I suspect, had
   it been worded more dispassionately and with a less contemptuous
   antithesis. For "dunces," let us substitute "the many," or the

   "this world) of the Apostle, and we shall perhaps find no great
   difficulty in accounting for the fact. To arrive at the root, indeed,
   and last ground of the problem, it would be necessary to investigate
   the nature and effects of the sense of difference on the human mind
   where it is not holden in check by reason and reflection. We need not
   go to the savage tribes of North America, or the yet ruder natives of
   the Indian Isles, to learn how slight a degree of difference will, in
   uncultivated minds, call tip a sense of diversity, and inward
   perplexity and contradiction, as if the strangers were, and yet were
   not, of the same kind with themselves. Who has not had occasion to
   observe the effect which the gesticulations and nasal tones of a
   Frenchman produce on our own vulgar? Here we the reader will find
   explained in the note, and will now cast his eye back to the sentence
   immediately preceding this parenthesis.]

   Now when a person speaking to us of any particular
     __________________________________________________________________

   may see the origin and primary import of our unkindness. It is a sense
   of unkind, and not the mere negation but the positive opposite of the
   sense of kind. Alienation, aggravated now by fear, now by contempt, and
   not seldom by a mixture of both, aversion, hatred, enmity, are so many
   successive shapes of its growth and metamorphosis. In application to
   the present case, it is sufficient to say, that Pindar's remark on
   sweet music holds equally true of genius: as many as are not delighted
   by it are disturbed, perplexed, irritated. The beholder either
   recognizes it as a projected form of his own being, that moves before
   him with a glory round its head, or recoils from it as from a spectre.
   But this speculation would lead me too far; I must be content with
   having referred to it as the ultimate ground of the fact, and pass to
   the more obvious and proximate causes. And as the first, I would rank
   the person's not understanding what yet he expects to understand, and
   if he had a right to do so. An original mathematical work, or any other
   that require! peculiar and (so to say) technical marks and symbols,
   will excite no uneasy feelings--not in the mind of a competent reader,
   for he understands it; and not with others, because they neither expect
   nor are expected to understand it. The second place we may assign to
   the misunderstanding, which is almost sure to follow in cases where the
   incompetent person, finding no outward marks (diagrams, arbitrary
   signs, and the like) to inform him at first sight, that the subject is
   one which he does not pretend to understand, and to be ignorant of
   which does not detract from his estimation as a man of abilities
   generally, will attach some meaning to what he hears or reads; and as
   he is out of humour with the author, it will most often be such a
   meaning as he can quarrel with and exhibit in a ridiculous or offensive
   point of view.

   But above all, the whole world almost of minds, as far as we regard
   intellectual efforts, may be divided into two classes of the
   busy-indolent and lazy-indolent. To both alike all thinking is painful,
   and all attempts to rouse them to think, whether in the re-examination
   of their existing convictions, or for the reception of new light, are
   irritating. "It may all be very deep and clever; but really one ought
   to be quite sure of it before one wrenches one's brain to find out what
   it is. I take up a book as a companion, with whom I can have an easy
   cheerful chit-chat on what we both know beforehand, or else matters of
   fact. In our leisure hours we have a right to relaxation and
   amusement." object or appearance refers it by means of some common
   character to a known class (which he does in giving it a name,) we say,
   that we understand him; that is, we understand his words. The name of a
   thing, in the
     __________________________________________________________________

   Well! but in their studious hours, when their bow is to be bent, when
   they are apud Musas, or amidst the Muses? Alas! it is just the same!
   The same craving for amusement, that is, to be away from the Muses! for
   relaxation, that is, the unbending of a bow which in fact had never
   been strung! There are two ways of obtaining their applause. The first
   is: Enable them to reconcile in one and the same occupation the love of
   sloth and the hatred of vacancy! Gratify indolence, and yet save them
   from ennui--in plain English, from themselves! For, spite of their
   antipathy to dry reading, the keeping company with themselves is, after
   all, the insufferable annoyance: and the true secret of their dislike
   to a work of thought and inquiry lies in its tendency to make them
   acquainted with their own permanent being. The other road to their
   favour is, to introduce to them their own thoughts and predilections,
   tricked out in the fine language, in which it would gratify their
   vanity to express them in their own conversation, and with which they
   can imagine themselves showing off: and this (as has been elsewhere
   remarked) is the characteristic difference between the second-rate
   writers of the last two or three generations, and the same class under
   Elizabeth and the Stuarts. In the latter we find the most far-fetched
   and singular thoughts in the simplest and most native language; in the
   former, the most obvious and common-place thoughts in the most
   far-fetched and motley language. But lastly, and as the sine qua non of
   their patronage, a sufficient arc must be left for the reader's mind to
   oscillate in--freedom of choice.

   To make the shifting cloud be what you please,

   save only where the attraction of curiosity determines the line of
   motion. The attention must not be fastened down: and this every work of
   genius, not simply narrative, must do before it can be justly
   appreciated.

   In former times a popular work meant one that adapted the results of
   studious meditation or scientific research to the capacity of the
   people, presenting in the concrete, by instances and examples, what had
   been ascertained in the abstract and by discovery of the law. Now, on
   the other hand, that is a popular work which gives back to the people
   their own errors and prejudices, and flatters the many by creating them
   under the title of the public, into a supreme and inappellable tribunal
   of intellectual excellence.

   P. S. In a continuous work the frequent insertion and length of notes
   original sense of the word name, (nomen, intelligible, id quod
   intelligitur) expresses that which is understood in an appearance, that
   which we place (or make to stand) under it, as the condition of its
   real existence, and in proof that it is not an accident of the senses,
   or affection of the individual, not a phantom or apparition, that is,
   an appearance which is only an appearance. (See Gen. ii, 19, 20, and in
   Psalm xx, 1, and in many other places of the Bible, the identity of
   nomen with numen, that is, invisible power and presence, the nomen
   substantivum of all real objects, and the ground of their reality,
   independently of the affections of sense in the percipient). In like
   manner, in a connected succession of names, as the speaker passes from
   one to the other, we say that we understand his discourse (discursio
   intellectus, discursus, his passing rapidly from one thing to another).
   Thus, in all instances, it is words, names, or, if images, yet images
   used as words or names, that are the only and exclusive subjects of
   understanding. In no instance do we understand a thing in itself; but
   only the name to which it is referred. Sometimes indeed, when several
   classes are recalled conjointly, we identify the words with the
   object---though by courtesy of idiom rather than in strict propriety of
   language. Thus we may say that we understand a rainbow, when recalling
   successively the several names for the several sorts of colours, we
   know that they are to be applied to one and the same phaenomenon, at
   once distinctly and simultaneously; but even in common speech we should
   not say this of a single colour. No one would say he
     __________________________________________________________________

   would need an apology: in a book like this, of aphorisms and detached
   comments none is necessary, it being understood beforehand that the
   sauce and the garnish are to occupy the greater part of the dish.
   understands red or blue. He sees the colour, and had seen it before in
   a vast number and variety of objects; and he understands the word red,
   as referring his fancy or memory to this his collective experience.

   If this be so, and so it most assuredly is--if the proper functions of
   the understanding be that of generalizing the notices received from the
   senses in order to the construction of names: of referring particular
   notices (that is, impressions or sensations) to their proper names; and
   vice versa, names to their correspondent class or kind of notices--then
   it follows of necessity, that the understanding is truly and accurately
   defined in the words of Leighton and Kant, a faculty judging according
   to sense.

   Now whether in defining the speculative reason (that is, the reason
   considered abstractedly as a intellective power) we call it "the source
   of necessary and universal principles, according to which the notices
   of the senses are either affirmed or denied;" or describe it as "the
   power by which we are enabled to draw from particular and contingent
   appearances universal and necessary conclusions:"** it is equally
   evident that the two
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Take a familiar illustration. My sight and touch convey to me a
   certain impression, to which my understanding applies its
   pre-conceptions (conceptus antecedentes et generalissimi) of quantity
   and relation, and thus refers it to the class and name of
   three-cornered bodies--we will suppose it the iron of a turf-spade. It
   compares the sides, and finds that any two measured as one are greater
   than the third; and according to a law of the imagination, there arises
   a presumption that in all other bodies of the same figure (that is,
   three-cornered and equilateral) the same proportion exists. After this,
   the senses have been directed successively to a number of
   three-cornered bodies of unequal sides--and in these too the same
   proportion has been found without exception, till at length it becomes
   a fact of experience, that in all triangles hitherto seen, the two
   tides together are greater than the third: and there will exist
   definitions differ in their essential characters, and consequently the
   subjects differ in kind.

   The dependence of the understanding on the representations of the
   senses, and its consequent posteriority
     __________________________________________________________________

   no ground or analogy for anticipating an exception to a rule,
   generalized from so vast a number of particular instances. So far and
   no farther could the understanding carry us: and as far as this "the
   faculty, judging according to sense," conducts many of the inferior
   animals, if not in the same, yet in instances analogous and fully
   equivalent.

   The reason supersedes the whole process, and on the first conception
   presented by the understanding in consequence of the first sight of a
   inangular figure, of whatever sort it might chance to be, it affirms
   with an assurance incapable of future increase, with a perfect
   certainty, that in all possible triangles any two of the inclosing
   lines will and must be greater than the third. In short, understanding
   in its highest form of experience remains commensurate with the
   experimental notices of the senses from which it is generalised.
   Reason, on the other hand, either predetermines experience, or avails
   itself of a past experience to supersede its necessity in all future
   time; and affirms truths which no sense could perceive, nor experiment
   verify, nor experience confirm.

   Yea, this is the test and character of a truth so affirmed, that in its
   own proper form it is inconceivable. For to conceive is a function of
   the understanding, which can be exercised only on subjects subordinate
   thereto. And yet to the forms of the understanding all truth must be
   reduced, that is to be fixed as an object of reflection, and to be
   rendered expressible. And here we have a second test and sign of a
   truth so affirmed that it can come forth out of the moulds of the
   understanding only in the disguise of two contradictory conceptions,
   each of which is partially true, and the conjunction of both
   conceptions becomes the representative or expression (the exponent) of
   a truth beyond conception and inexpressible. Examples: Before Abraham
   was, I am.--God is a circle, the centre of which is every where, and
   circumference no where. The soul is all in every part.

   If this appear extravagant, it is an extravagance which no man can
   indeed learn from another, but which, (were this possible,) I might
   have learnt from Plato, Kepler, and Bacon; from Luther, Hooker, Pascal,
   Leibnitz, and Fenelon. But in this last paragraph I have, I see,
   unwittingly overstepped my purpose, according to which we were to take
   reason as a simply intellectual power. Yet even as such, and with all
   the disadvantage of a technical and arbitrary abstraction, it has been
   made evident:--1. that there is an intuition or immediate beholding,
   thereto, as contrasted with the independence and antecedency of reason,
   are strikingly exemplified in the Ptolemic System (that truly wonderful
   product and highest boast of the faculty, judging according to the
     __________________________________________________________________

   accompanied by a conviction of the necessity and universality of the
   truth so beholden not derived from the senses, which intuition, when it
   is construed by pure sense, gives birth to the science of mathematics,
   and when applied to objects supersensuous or spiritual is the organ of
   theology and philosophy:--and 2. that there is likewise a reflective
   and discursive faculty, or mediate apprehension which, taken by itself
   and uninfluenced by the former, depends on the senses for the materials
   on which it is exercised, and is contained within the sphere of the
   senses. And this faculty it is, which in generalizing the notices of
   the senses constitutes sensible experience, and gives rise to maxims or
   rules which may become more and more general, but can never be raised
   into universal verities, or beget a consciousness of absolute
   certainty; though they may be sufficient to extinguish all doubt.
   (Putting revelation out of view, take our first progenitor in the 60th
   or 100th year of his existence. His experience would probably have
   freed him from all doubt, as the sun sank in the horizon, that it would
   re-appear the next morning. But compare this state of assurance with
   that which the same man would have had of the 37th proposition of
   Euclid, supposing him like Pythagoras to have discovered the
   demonstration). Now is it expedient, I ask, or conformable to the laws
   and purposes of language, to call two so altogether desperate subjects
   by one and the same name? Or, having two names in our language, should
   we call each of the two diverse subjects by both--that is, by either
   name, as caprice might dictate? If not, then as we have two words,
   reason and understanding (as indeed what language of cultivated man has
   not?)--what should prevent us from appropriating the former to the
   power distinctive of humanity? We need only place the derivatives from
   the two terms in opposition (for example, "A and B are both rational
   beings; but there is no comparison between them in point of
   intelligence," or "She always concludes rationally, though not a woman
   of much understanding") to see that we cannot reverse the order--i. e.,
   call the higher gift understanding, and the lower reason. What should
   prevent us? I asked. Alas! that which has prevented us--the cause of
   this confusion in the terms-- is only too obvious; namely, inattention
   to the momentous distinction in the things, and (generally) to the duty
   and habit recommended in the fifth introductory aphorism of this
   volume, (see p. 2). But the cause of this, and of all its lamentable
   effects and subcauses, false doctrine, blindness of heart, and senses!)
   compared with the Newtonian, as the offspring of a yet higher power,
   arranging, correcting, and annulling the representations of the senses
   according to its own inherent laws and constitutive ideas.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM IV.

   In wonder all philosophy began; in wonder it ends; and admiration fills
   up the interspace. But the first wonder is the offspring of ignorance:
   the last is the parent of adoration. The first is the birth-throe of
   our knowledge; the last is its euthanasy and apotheosis.
     __________________________________________________________________

  SEQUELAE: OR THOUGHTS SUGGESTED BY THE PRECEDING APHORISM.

   As in respect of the first wonder we are all on the same level, how
   comes it that the philosophic mind should, in all ages, be the
   privilege of a few? The most obvious reason is this. The wonder takes
   place before the period of reflection, and (with the great mass of
   mankind) long before the individual is capable of directing his
   attention freely and consciously to the feeling, or even to its
   exciting causes. Surprise (the form and dress which the wonder of
   ignorance usually puts on) is worn away, if not precluded, by custom
   and familiarity. So is it with the objects of the senses, and the ways
   and fashions of the world around us; even as with the
     __________________________________________________________________

   contempt of the word, is best declared by the philosophic Apostle: they
   did not like to retain God in their knowledge, (Rom. i, 28), and though
   they could not extinguish the light that lighteth every man, and which
   shone in the darkness; yet because the darkness could not comprehend
   the light, they refused to bear witness of it and worshipped, instead,
   the shaping mist, which the light had drawn upward from the ground
   (that is, from the mere animal nature and instinct,) and which that
   light alone had made visible, that is, by superinducing on the animal
   instinct the principle of self-consciousness. beat of our own hearts,
   which we notice only in moments of fear and perturbation. But with
   regard to the concerns of our inward being, there is yet another cause
   that acts in concert with the power in custom to prevent a fair and
   equal exertion of reflective thought. The great fundamental truths and
   doctrines of religion, the existence and attributes of God and the life
   after death, are in Christian countries taught so early, under such
   circumstances, and in such close and vital association with whatever
   makes or marks reality for our infant minds, that the words ever after
   represent sensations, feelings, vital assurances, sense of
   reality--rather than thoughts, or any distinct conception. Associated,
   I had almost said identified, with the parental voice, look, touch,
   with the living warmth and pressure of the mother, on whose lap the
   child is first made to kneel, within whose palms its little hands are
   folded, and the motion of whose eyes its eyes follow and imitate--(yea,
   what the blue sky is to the mother, the mother's upraised eyes and brow
   are to the child, the type and symbol of an invisible heaven!)--from
   within and without these great first truths, these good and gracious
   tidings, these holy and humanizing spells, in the preconformity to
   which our very humanity may be said to consist, are so infused that it
   were but a tame and inadequate expression to say, we all take them for
   granted. At a later period, in youth or early manhood, most of us,
   indeed, (in the higher and middle classes at least) read or hear
   certain proofs of these truths--which we commonly listen to, when we
   listen at all, with much the same feelings as a popular prince on his
   coronation day, in the centre of a fond and rejoicing nation, may be
   supposed to hear the champion's challenge to all the non-existents,
   that deny or dispute his rights and royalty. In fact, the order of
   proof is most often reversed or transposed. As far at least as I dare
   judge from the goings on in my own mind, when with keen delight I first
   read the works of Derham, Nieuwentiet, and Lyonet, I should say that
   the full and life-like conviction of a gracious Creator is the proof
   (at all events, performs the office and answers all the purpose of a
   proof) of the wisdom and benevolence in the construction of the
   creature.

   Do I blame this? Do I wish it to be otherwise? God forbid! It is only
   one of its accidental, but too frequent, consequences, of which I
   complain, and against which I protest. I regret nothing that tends to
   make the light become the life of men, even as the life in the eternal
   Word is their only and single true light. But I do regret, that in
   after years--when by occasion of some new dispute on some old heresy,
   or any other accident, the attention has for the first time been
   distinctly attracted to the superstructure raised on these fundamental
   truths, or to truths of later revelation supplemental of these and not
   less important--all the doubts and difficulties, that cannot but arise
   where the understanding, the mind of the flesh, is made the measure of
   spiritual things; all the sense of strangeness and seeming
   contradiction in terms; all the marvel and the mystery, that belong
   equally to both, are first thought of and applied in objection
   exclusively to the latter. I would disturb no man's faith in the great
   articles of the (falsely so called) religion of nature. But before the
   man rejects, and calls on other men to reject, the revelations of the
   Gospel and the religion of all Christendom, I would have him place
   himself in the state and under all the privations of a Simonides, when
   in the fortieth day of his meditation the sage and philosophic poet
   abandoned the problem in despair. Ever and anon he seemed to have hold
   of the truth; but when he asked himself what he meant by it, it escaped
   from him, or resolved itself into meanings, that destroyed each other.
   I would have the sceptic, while yet a sceptic only, seriously consider
   whether a doctrine, of the truth of which a Socrates could obtain no
   other assurance than what he derived from his strong wish that it
   should be true; and which Plato found a mystery hard to discover, and
   when discovered, communicable only to the fewest of men; can,
   consonantly with history or common sense, be classed among the
   articles, the belief of which is insured to all men by their mere
   common sense? Whether, without gross outrage to fact, they can be said
   to constitute a religion of nature, or a natural theology antecedent to
   revelation, or superseding its necessity? Yes! in prevention (for there
   is little chance, I fear, of a cure) of the pugnacious dogmatism of
   partial reflection, I would prescribe to every man who feels a
   commencing alienation from the Catholic faith, and whose studios and
   attainments authorize him to argue on the subject at all, a patient and
   thoughtful perusal of the arguments and representations which Bayle
   supposes to have passed through the mind of Simonides. Or I should be
   fully satisfied if I could induce these eschewers of mystery to give a
   patient, manly, and impartial perusal to the single treatise of
   Pomponatius, De Fato.**

   When they have fairly and satisfactorily overthrown the objection and
   cleared away the difficulties urged
     __________________________________________________________________

   **The philosopher, whom the Inquisition would have burnt alive as an
   atheist, had not Leo X, and Cardinal Bembo decided that the work might
   be formidable to those semi-pagan Christians who regarded revelation as
   a mere make-weight to their boasted religion of nature; but contained
   nothing dangerous to the Catholic Church or offensive to a true
   believer. (He was born in 1462, and died in 1525. Ed.). by this
   sharp-witted Italian against the doctrines which they profess to
   retain, then let them commence their attack on those which they reject.
   As far as the supposed irrationality of the latter is the ground of
   argument, I am much deceived if, on reviewing their forces, they would
   not find the ranks woefully thinned by the success of their own fire in
   the preceding engagement--unless, indeed, by pure heat of controversy,
   and to storm the lines of their antagonists, they can bring to life
   again the arguments which they had themselves killed off in the defence
   of their own positions. In vain shall we seek for any other mode of
   meeting the broad facts of the scientific Epicurean, or the
   requisitions and queries of the all analysing Pyrrhonist, than by
   challenging the tribunal to which they appeal, as incompetent to try
   the question. In order to non-suit the infidel plaintiff, we must
   remove the cause from the faculty, that judges according to sense, and
   whose judgments, therefore, are valid only on objects of sense, to the
   superior courts of conscience and intuitive reason! The words I speak
   unto you, are Spirit, such only are life, that is, have an inward and
   actual power abiding in them.

   But the same truth is at once shield and bow. The shaft of Atheism
   glances aside from it to strike and pierce the breast-plate of the
   heretic. Well for the latter, if, plucking the weapon from the wound,
   he recognizes an arrow from his own quiver, and abandons a cause that
   connects him with such confederates! Without further rhetoric, the sum
   and substance of the argument is this;-- an insight into the proper
   functions and subaltern rank of the understanding may not, indeed,
   disarm the Psilanthropist of his metaphorical glosses, or of his
   versions fresh from the forge, with no other stamp than the private
   mark of the individual manufacturer; but it will deprive him of the
   only rational pretext for having recourse to tools so liable to abuse,
   and of such perilous example.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   Since the preceding pages were composed, and during an interim of
   depression and disqualification, I heard with a delight and an
   interest, that I might without hyperbole call medicinal, that the
   contradistinction of understanding from reason,--for which during
   twenty years I have been contending, casting my bread upon the waters
   with a perseverance which, in the existing slate of the public taste,
   nothing but the deepest conviction of its importance could have
   inspired--has been lately adopted and sanctioned by the present
   distinguished Professor of Anatomy, in the course of lectures given by
   him at the Royal College of Surgeons, on the zoological part of natural
   history; and, if I am rightly informed, in one of the eloquent and
   impressive introductory discourses. In explaining the nature of
   instinct, as deduced from the actions and tendencies of animals
   successively presented to the observation of the comparative
   physiologist in the ascending scale of organic life--or rather, I
   should have said, in an attempt to determine that precise import of the
   term, which is required by the facts*--the Professor explained the
   nature
     __________________________________________________________________

   *The word, instinct, brings together a number of facts into one class
   by the assertion of a common ground, the nature of which ground it
   determines negatively only--that is, the word does not explain what
   this common ground is; but simply indicates that there is such a
   ground, and that it is different in kind from that in which the
   responsible and consciously voluntary actions of men originate. Thus,
   in its true and primary import, instinct stands in antithesis to
   reason; and the perplexity and contradictory statements into which so
   many meritorious naturalists, and popular writers on natural history
   (Priscilla Wakefield, Kirby, Spence, Huber, and even Reimarus) have
   fallen on this subject, arise wholly of what I have elsewhere called
   the adaptive power, that is, the faculty of adapting means to proximate
   ends. [N. B. I mean here a relative end--that which relatively to one
   thing is an end, though relatively to some other it is in itself a
   mean. It is to be regretted that we have no single word to express
   those ends, that are not the end: for the distinction between those and
   an end in the proper sense of the term is an important one.] The
   Professor, I say, not only explained, first, the nature of the adaptive
   power in genere, and, secondly, the distinct character of the same
   power as it exists specifically and exclusively in the human being, and
   acquires the name of understanding; but he did it in a way which gave
   the whole sum and substance of my convictions, of all I had so long
   wished, and so often, but with such imperfect success, attempted to
   convey, free from all semblance of paradoxy, and from all occasion of
   offence--omnem offendiculi * ansam praecidens. It is,
     __________________________________________________________________

   from their taking the word in opposition to understanding. I notice
   this, because I would not lose any opportunity of impressing on the
   mind of my youthful readers the important truth that language (as the
   embodied and articulated spirit of the race, as the growth and
   emanation of a people, and not the work of any individual wit or will)
   is often inadequate, sometimes deficient, but never false or delusive.
   We have only to master the true origin and original import of any
   native and abiding word, to find in it, if not the solution of the
   facts expressed by it, yet a fingermark pointing to the road on which
   this solution is to be sought.* (Erasmi Epist. ad Dorpium). At all
   events, the paragraph passing through the medium of my own
   prepossessions, if any fault be found with it, the fault probably, and
   the blame certainly, belongs to the reporter. indeed for the
   fragmentary reader only that I have any scruple. In those who have had
   the patience to accompany me so far on the up-hill road to manly
   principles, I can have no reason to guard against that disposition to
   hasty offence from anticipation of consequences--that faithless and
   loveless spirit of fear which plunged Galileo into a prison**--a spirit
   most unworthy of an educated man, who ought to have learnt that the
   mistakes of scientific men have never injured Christianity, while every
   new truth discovered by them has either added to its evidence, or
   prepared the mind for its reception.
     __________________________________________________________________

ON INSTINCT IN CONNEXION WITH THE UNDERSTANDING.

   It is evident, that the definition of a genus or class is an adequate
   definition only of the lowest species of that genus: for each higher
   species is distinguished from the lower by some additional character,
   while the general
     __________________________________________________________________

   **And which (I may add) in a more enlightened age, and in a Protestant
   country, impelled more than one German University to anathematize Fr.
   Hodman's discovery of carbonic acid gas, and of its effects on animal
   life, as hostile to religion and tending to atheism! Three of four
   students at the University of Jena, in the attempt to raise a spirit
   for the discovery of a supposed hidden treasure, were strangled or
   poisoned by the fumes of the charcoal they had been burning in a close
   garden-house of a vineyard near Jena, while employed in their magic
   fumigations and charms. One only was restored to life: and from his
   account of the noises and spectres (in his ears and eyes) as he was
   losing his senses, it was taken for granted that the bad spirit had
   destroyed them. Frederic Hoffman admitted that it was a very bad spirit
   that had tempted them, the spirit of avarice and folly; and that a very
   noxious spirit (gas, or Geist) was the immediate cause of their death.
   But he contended that this latter spirit was the spirit of charcoal,
   which would have produced the same effect, had the young men been
   chaunting psalms instead of incantations: and acquitted the Devil of
   all direct concern in the business. The theological faculty took the
   alarm: even physicians pretended to be horror-stricken at Hoffman's
   audacity. The controversy and appendages embittered several years of
   this great and good man's life. definition includes only the characters
   common to all the species. Consequently it describes the lowest only.
   Now I distinguish a genus or kind of powers under the name of adaptive
   power, and give as its generic definition--the power of selecting and
   adapting means to proximate ends; and as an instance of the lowest
   species of this genus, I take the stomach of a caterpillar. I ask
   myself, under what words I can generalize the action of this organ; and
   I see, that it selects and adapts the appropriate means (that is, the
   assimilable part of the vegetable congesta) to the proximate end, that
   is, the growth or reproduction of the insect's body. This we call Vital
   Power, or vita propria of the stomach; and this being the lowest
   species, its definition is the same with the definition of the kind.

   Well! from the power of the stomach, I pass to the power exerted by the
   whole animal. I trace it wandering from spot to spot, and plant to
   plant, till it finds the appropriate vegetable; and again on this
   chosen vegetable, I mark it seeking out and fixing on the part of the
   plant, bark, leaf, or petals suited to its nourishment: or (should the
   animal have assumed the butterfly form), to the deposition of its eggs,
   and the sustentation of the future larva. Here I see a power of
   selecting and adapting means to proximate ends according to
   circumstances: and this higher species of adaptive power we call
   Instinct.

   Lastly, I reflect on the facts narrated and described in the preceding
   extracts from Huber, and see a power of selecting and adapting the
   proper means to the proximate ends, according to varying circumstances.
   And what shall we call this yet higher species? We name the former,
   instinct: we must call this Instinctive Intelligence.

   Here then we have three powers of the same kind; life, instinct, and
   instinctive intelligence: the essential characters that define the
   genus existing equally in all three. But in addition to these, I find
   one other character common to the highest and lowest: namely, that the
   purposes are all manifestly predetermined by the peculiar organization
   of the animals; and though it may not be possible to discover any such
   immediate dependency in all the actions, yet the actions being
   determined by the purposes, the result is equivalent: and both the
   actions and the purposes are all in a necessitated reference to the
   preservation and continuance of the particular animal or the progeny.
   There is selection, but not choice; volition rather than will. The
   possible knowledge of a thing, or the desire to have that thing
   representable by a distinct correspondent thought, does not, in the
   animal, suffice to render the thing an object, or the ground of a
   purpose. I select and adapt the proper means to the separation of a
   stone from a rock, which I neither can, nor desire to use for food,
   shelter, or ornament: because, perhaps, I wish to measure the angles of
   its primary crystals, or, perhaps, for no better reason than the
   apparent difficulty of loosening the stone--sit pro ratione
   voluntas--and thus make a motive out of the absence of all motive, and
   a reason out of the arbitrary will to act without any reason.

   Now what is the conclusion from these premises? Evidently this: that if
   I suppose the adaptive power in its highest species or form of
   instinctive intelligence, to co-exist with reason, free will, and
   self-consciousness, it instantly becomes Understanding: in other words,
   that understanding differs indeed from the noblest form of instinct,
   but not in itself or in its own essential proper ties, but in
   consequence of its co-existence with far higher powers of a diverse
   kind in one and the same subject. Instinct in a rational, responsible,
   and self-conscious animal, is Understanding.

   Such I apprehend to have been the Professor's view and exposition of
   instinct--and in confirmation of its truth, I would merely request my
   readers, from the numerous well-authenticated instances on record, to
   recall some one of the extraordinary actions of dogs for the
   preservation of their masters' lives, and even for the avenging of
   their deaths. In these instances we have the third species of the
   adaptive power in connexion with an apparently moral end--with an end
   in the proper sense of the word. Here the adaptive power co-exists with
   a purpose apparently voluntary, and the action seems neither
   pre-determined by the organization of the animal, nor in any direct
   reference to his own preservation, nor to the continuance of his race.
   It is united with an imposing semblance of gratitude, fidelity, and
   disinterested love. We not only value the faithful brute; we attribute
   worth to him. This, I admit, is a problem, of which I have no solution
   to offer. One of the wisest of uninspired men has not hesitated to
   declare the dog a great mystery, on account of this dawning of a moral
   nature unaccompanied by any the least evidence of reason, in whichever
   of the two senses we interpret the word---whether as the practical
   reason, that is, the power of proposing an ultimate end, the
   determinability of the will by ideas; or as the sciential reason, that
   is, the faculty of concluding universal and necessary truths from
   particular and contingent appearances. But in a question respecting the
   possession of reason, the absence of all truth is tantamount to a proof
   of the contrary. It is, however, by no means equally clear to me, that
   the dog may not possess an analogon of words, which I have elsewhere
   shown to be the proper objects of the "faculty, judging according to
   sense."

   But to return to my purpose: I entreat the reader to reflect on any one
   fact of this kind, whether occurring in his own experience, or selected
   from the numerous anecdotes of the dog preserved in the writings of
   zoologists. I will then confidently appeal to him, whether it is in his
   power not to consider the faculty displayed in these actions as the
   same in kind with the understanding however inferior in degree. Or
   should he even in these instances prefer calling it instinct, and this
   in contradistinction from understanding, I call on him to point out the
   boundary between the two, the chasm or partition-wall that divides or
   separates the one from the other. If he can, he will have done what
   none before him have been able to do, though many and eminent men have
   tried hard for it: and my recantation shall be among the first trophies
   of his success. If he cannot, I must infer that he is controlled by his
   dread of the consequences, by an apprehension of some injury resulting
   to religion or morality from this opinion; and I shall console myself
   with the hope, that in the sequel of this work he will find proofs of
   the directly contrary tendency. Not only is this view of the
   understanding, as differing in degree from instinct, and in kind from
   reason, innocent in its possible influences on the religious character,
   but it is an indispensable preliminary to the removal of the most
   formidable obstacles to an intelligent belief of the peculiar doctrines
   of the Gospel, of the characteristic articles of the Christian Faith,
   with which the advocates of the truth in Christ have to contend;--the
   evil heart of unbelief alone excepted.
     __________________________________________________________________

REFLECTIONS INTRODUCTORY TO APHORISM X.

   The most momentous question a man can ask is, Have I a Saviour? And yet
   as far as the individual querist is concerned, it is premature and to
   no purpose, unless another question has been previously put and
   answered, (alas! too generally put after the wounded conscience has
   already given the answer!) namely, Have I any need of a Saviour? For
   him who needs none, (O bitter irony of the evil Spirit, whose whispers
   the proud soul takes for its own thoughts, and knows not how the temper
   is scoffing the while!) there is none, as long as he feels no need. On
   the other hand, it is scarcely possible to hare answered this question
   in the affirmative, and not ask--first, in what the necessity consists?
   secondly, whence it proceeded? and, thirdly, how far the answer to this
   second question is or is not contained in the answer to the first? I
   entreat the intelligent reader, who has taken me as his temporary guide
   on the straight, but yet, from the number of cross roads, difficult way
   of religious inquiry, to halt a moment, and consider the main points
   that, in this last division of my work, have been already offered for
   his reflection. I have attempted, then, to fix the proper meaning of
   the words, nature and spirit, the one being the antithesis to the
   other: so that the most general and negative definition of nature is,
   whatever is not spirit; and vice versa of spirit, that which is not
   comprehended in nature; or in the language of our elder divines, that
   which transcends nature. But nature is the term in which we comprehend
   all things that are representable in the forms of time and space, and
   subjected to the relations of cause and effect: and the cause of the
   existence of which, therefore, is to be sought for perpetually in
   something antecedent. The word itself expresses this in the strongest
   manner possible: Natus, that which is about to be born, that which is
   always becoming. It follows, therefore, that whatever originates its
   own acts, or in any sense contains in itself the cause of its own
   state, must be spiritual, and consequently supernatural: yet not on
   that account necessarily miraculous. And such must the responsible will
   in us be, if it be at all.

   A prior step has been to remove all misconceptions from the subject; to
   show the reasonableness of a belief in the reality and real influence
   of a universal and divine spirit; the compatibility and possible
   communion of such a spirit with the spiritual in principle; and the
   analogy offered by the most undeniable truths of natural philosophy.**

   These views of the spirit, and of the will as spiritual, form the
   ground-work of my scheme. Among the numerous corollaries or appendents,
   the first that presented itself respects the question;--whether there
   is any faculty in man by which a knowledge of spiritual truths,
     __________________________________________________________________

   **It has in its consequences proved no trifling evil to the Christian
   world, that Aristotle's definitions of nature are all grounded on the
   petty and rather rhetorical than philosophical antithesis of nature to
   art--a conception inadequate to the demands even of his philosophy.
   Hence in the progress of his reasoning, he confounds the natura
   naturata (that is, the sum total of the facts and phenomena of the
   senses) with an hypothetical natura naturata a Goddess Nature, that has
   no better claim to a place in any sober system of natural philosophy
   than the Goddess Multitudo; yet to which Aristotle not rarely gives the
   name and attributes of the Supreme Being. The result was, that the idea
   of God thus identified with this hypothetical nature becomes itself but
   an hypothesis, or at best but a precarious inference from
   incommensurate premisses and on disputable principles: while in other
   passages, God is confounded with (and every where, in Aristotle's
   genuine works, included in) the universe: which most grievous error it
   is the great and characteristic merit of Plato to have avoided and
   denounced. or of any truths not abstracted from nature, is rendered
   possible;--and an answer is attempted in the comment on Aphorism VIII.
   And here I beg leave to remark, that in this comment the only novelty,
   and if there be merit, the only merit is--that there being two very
   different meanings, and two different words, I have here and in former
   works appropriated one meaning to one of the words, and the other to
   the other--instead of using the words indifferently and by hap-hazard:
   a confusion, the ill effects of which in this instance are so great and
   of such frequent occurrence in the works of our ablest philosophers and
   divines, that I should select it before all others in proof of Hobbes'
   maxim:--that it is a short downhill passage from errors in words to
   errors in things. The difference of the reason from the understanding,
   and the imperfection and limited sphere of the latter, have been
   asserted by many both before and since Lord Bacon;** but still the
   habit of using reason and understanding as synonymes acted as a
   disturbing force. Some it led into mysticism, others it set on
   explaining away a clear difference in kind into a mere superiority in
   degree: and it partially eclipsed the truth for all.

   In close connexion with this, and therefore forming the comment on the
   Aphorism next following, is the subject of the legitimate exercise of
   the understanding, and its limitation to objects of sense; with the
   errors
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Take one passage among many from the Posthumous Tracts (1660) of John
   Smith, not the least star in that bright constellation of Cambridge
   men, the contemporaries of Jeremy Taylor. "While we reflect on our own
   idea of reason, we know that our souls are not it, but only partake of
   it: and that we have it and not

   Neither can it be called a faculty, but far rather a light, which we
   enjoy, but the source of which is not in ourselves, nor rightly by any
   individual to be denominated mine." This pure intelligence he then
   proceeds to contrast with the discursive faculty, that is, the
   understanding. both of unbelief and of misbelief, which result from its
   extension beyond the sphere of possible experience. Wherever the forms
   of reasoning appropriate only to the natural world are applied to
   spiritual realities, it may be truly said, that the more strictly
   logical the reasoning is in all its parts, the more irrational it is as
   a whole.

   To the reader thus armed and prepared, I now venture to present the
   so-called mysteries of Faith, that is, the peculiar tenets and especial
   constituents of Christianity, or religion in spirit and in truth. In
   right order I must hare commenced with the articles of the Trinity and
   the Apostacy, including the question respecting the origin of Evil, and
   the Incarnation of the Word. And could I have followed this order, some
   difficulties that now press on me would have been obviated. But (as has
   already been explained) the limits of the present volume rendered it
   alike impracticable and inexpedient; for the necessity of my argument
   would have called forth certain hard though most true sayings,
   respecting the hollowness and tricksy sophistry of the so-called
   "natural theology," "religion of nature," "light of nature," and the
   like, which a brief exposition could not save from innocent
   misconceptions, much less protect against plausible misinterpretation.
   And yet both reason and experience have convinced me, that in the
   greater number of our Alogi, who feed on the husks of Christianity, the
   disbelief of the Trinity, the divinity of Christ included, has its
   origin and support in the assumed self-evidence of this natural
   theology, and in their ignorance of the insurmountable, difficulties
   which (on the same mode of reasoning) press upon the fundamental
   articles of their own remnant of a creed. But arguments, which would
   prove the falsehood of a known truth, must themselves be false, and can
   prove the falsehood of no other position in eodem genere.

   This hint I have thrown out as a spark that may perhaps fall where it
   will kindle. And worthily might the wisest of men make inquisition into
   the three momentous points here spoken of, for the purposes of
   speculative insight, and for the formation of enlarged and systematic
   views of the destination of man, and the dispensation of God, But the
   practical inquirer (I speak not of those who inquire for the
   gratification of curiosity, and still less of those who labour as
   students only to shine as disputants; but of one, who seeks the truth,
   because he feels the want of it), the practical inquirer, I say, hath
   already placed his foot on the rock, if he have satisfied himself that
   whoever needs not a Redeemer is more than human. Remove from him the
   difficulties and objections that oppose or perplex his belief of a
   crucified Saviour; convince him of the reality of sin, which is
   impossible without a knowledge of its true nature and inevitable
   consequences; and then satisfy him as to the fact historically, and as
   to the truth spiritually, of a redemption therefrom by Christ; do this
   for him, and there is little fear that he will permit either logical
   quirks or metaphysical puzzles to contravene the plain dictate of his
   common sense, that the sinless One that redeemed mankind from sin, must
   have been more than man; and that He who brought light and immortality
   into the world, could not in his own nature have been an inheritor of
   death and darkness. It is morally impossible that a man with these
   convictions should suffer the objection of incomprehensibility (and
   this on a subject of faith) to overbalance the manifest absurdity and
   contradiction in the notion of a Mediator between God and the human
   race, at the same infinite distance from God as the race for whom he
   mediates.

   The origin of evil, meanwhile, is a question interesting only to the
   metaphysician, and in a system of moral and religious philosophy. The
   man of sober mind, who seeks for truths that possess a moral and
   practical interest, is content to be certain, first, that evil must
   have had a beginning, since otherwise it must either be God, or a
   co-eternal and co-equal rival of God; both impious notions, and the
   latter foolish to boot:--secondly, that it could not originate in God;
   for if so, it would be at once evil and not evil, or God would be at
   once God (that is, infinite goodness) and not God--both alike
   impossible positions. Instead therefore of troubling himself with this
   barren controversy, he more profitably turns his inquiries to that evil
   which most concerns himself, and of which he may find the origin.

   The entire scheme of necessary Faith! maybe reduced to two
   heads;--first, the object and occasion, and secondly, the fact and
   effect,--of our redemption by Christ: and to this view does the order
   of the following Comments correspond. I have begun with Original Sin,
   and proceeded in the following Aphorism to the doctrine of Redemption.
   The Comments on the remaining Aphorisms are all subsidiary to these, or
   written in the hope of making the minor tenets of general belief be
   believed in a spirit worthy of these. They are, in short, intended to
   supply a febrifuge against aguish scruples and horrors, the hectic of
   the soul;--and "for servile and thrall-like fear, to substitute that
   adoptive and cheerful boldness, which our new alliance with God
   requires of us as Christians." (Milton). Not the origin of evil, not
   the chronology of sin, or the chronicles of the original sinner; but
   sin originant, underived from without, and no passive link in the
   adamantine chain of effects, each of which is in its turn an instrument
   of causation, but no one of them a cause;--not with sin inflicted,
   which would be a calamity;--not with sin (that
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM X.
     __________________________________________________________________

  ON ORIGINAL SIN.

   JEREMY TAYLOR

   Is there any such thing? That is not the question. For it is a fact
   acknowledged on all hands almost: and
     __________________________________________________________________

   or carnal mind) becomes the sophistic principle, the wily tempter to
   evil by counterfeit good; the pander and advocate of the passions and
   appetites: ever in league with, and always first applying to, the
   desire, as the inferior nature in man, the woman in our humanity; and
   through the desire prevailing on the will (the manhood, virtus) against
   the command of the universal reason, and against the light of reason in
   the will itself. This essential inherence of an intelligential
   principle

   in the will

   or rather the will itself thus considered, the Greeks expressed by an
   appropriate word,

   This but little differing from Origen's interpretation or hypothesis,
   is supported and confirmed by the very old tradition of the homo
   androgynus, that is, that the original man, the individual first
   created, was bi-sexual: a chimera, of which, and of many other
   mythological traditions, the most probable explanation is, that they
   were originally symbolical glyphs or sculptures, and afterwards
   translated into words, yet literally, that is into the common names of
   the several figures and images composing the symbol; while the symbolic
   meaning was left to be decyphered as before, and sacred to the
   initiate. As to the abstruseness and subtlety of the conceptions, this
   is so far from being an objection to this oldest gloss on this
   venerable relic of Semetic, not impossibly ante-diluvian, philosophy,
   that to those who have carried their researches farthest back into
   Greek, Egyptian, Persian, and Indian antiquity, it will seem a strong
   confirmation. Or, if I chose to address the Sceptic in the language of
   the day, I might remind him, that as alchemy went before chemistry, and
   astrology before astronomy, so in all countries of civilized man have
   metaphysics outrun common sense. Fortunately for us that they have so!
   For from all we know of the unmetaphysical tribes of New Holland and
   elsewhere, a common sense not preceded by metaphysics is no very
   enviable possession. O be not cheated, my youthful reader, by this
   shallow prate! The creed of true common sense is composed of the
   results of scientific meditation, observation, and experiment, as far
   as they are generally intelligible. It differs therefore in different
   countries, and in every different age of the same country. The common
   sense of a people is the moveable index of its average judgment and
   information. Without metaphysics even those who will not confess it in
   words, confess it in their complaints. For my part I cannot but confess
   that to be, which I feel and groan under, and by which all the world is
   miserable.
     __________________________________________________________________

   science could have had no language, and common sense materials.

   But to return to my subject. It cannot be denied, that the Mosaic
   narrative thus interpreted gives a just and faithful exposition of the
   birth and parentage and successive moments of phenomenal sin (peccatum
   phaenomenon; crimen primarium et commune), that is, of sin as it
   Reveals itself in time, and is an immediate object of consciousness.
   And in this sense most truly does the Apostle assert, that in Adam we
   all fell. The first human sinner is the adequate representative of all
   his successors. And with no less truth may it be said, that it is the
   same Adam that falls ill every man, and from the same reluctance to
   abandon the too dear and undivorceable Eve: and the same Eve tempted by
   the same serpentine and perverted understanding, which, framed
   originally to be the interpreter of the reason and the ministering
   angel of the spirit, is henceforth sentenced and bound over to the
   service of the animal nature, its needs and its cravings, dependent on
   the senses for all its materials, with the world of sense for its
   appointed sphere: Upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat
   all the days of thy life. I have shown elsewhere, that as the Instinct
   of the mere intelligence differs in degree not in kind, and
   circumstantially, not essentially, from the vis vitae, or vital power
   in this assimilative and digestive functions of the stomach and other
   organs of nutrition, even so the understanding in itself, and distinct
   from the reason and conscience, differs in degree only from the
   instinct in the animal. It is still but a beast of the field, though
   more subtle than any beast of the field, and therefore in its
   corruption and perversion cursed above any--a pregnant word! of which,
   if the reader wants an exposition or paraphrase, he may find one more
   than two thousand years old among the fragments of the poet Menander.
   (See Cumberland's Observer, No. CL, vol. iii, p. 289, 290). This is the
   understanding which in its every thought is to be brought under
   obedience to faith; which it can scarcely fail to be, if only it be
   first subjected to the reason, of which spiritual faith is even the
   blossoming and the fructifying process. For it is indifferent whether I
   say that faith is the interpenetration of the reason and the will, or
   that it is at once the assurance and the commencement of the
   approaching union between the reason and the intelligible realities,
   the living and substantial truths, that are even in life its most
   proper objects.

   Adam turned his back on the sun, and dwelt in the dark and the shadow.
   He sinned, and brought evil into his supernatural endowments, and lost
   the sacrament and instrument of immortality, the tree of life in the
     __________________________________________________________________

   I have thus put the reader in possession of my own opinions respecting
   the narrative in Gen. ii, and iii.

   Or I might ask with Augustine, Why not both! Why not at once symbol and
   history! Or rather how should it be otherwise! Must not of necessity
   the first man be a symbol of mankind in the fullest force of the word
   symbol, rightly defined;--a sign included in the idea which it
   represents;--that is, an actual part chosen to represent the whole, as
   a lip with a chin prominent is a symbol of man; or a lower form or
   species of a higher in the same kind: thus magnetism is the symbol of
   vegetation, and of the vegetative and reproductive power in animals;
   the instinct of the ant tribe or the bee is a symbol of the human
   understanding. And this definition of the word is of great practical
   importance, inasmuch as the symbolical is hereby distinguished toto
   genere from the allegoric and metaphorical. But, perhaps, parables,
   allegories, and allegorical or typical applications, are incompatible
   with inspired Scripture! The writings of St. Paul are sufficient proof
   of the contrary. Yet I readily acknowledge that allegorical
   applications are one thing, and allegorical interpretations another:
   and that where there is no ground for supposing such a sense to have
   entered into the intent and purpose of the sacked penman, they are not
   to be commended. So far indeed am I from entertaining any predilection
   for them, or any favourable opinion of the Rabbinical commentators and
   traditionists, from whom the fashion was derived, that in carrying it
   as far as our own Church has carried it, I follow her judgment, not my
   own. But in the first place, I know but one other part of the
   Scriptures not universally held to be parabolical, which, not without
   the sanction of great authorities, I am disposed to regard as an
   apologue or parable, namely, the book of Jonah; the reasons for
   believing the Jewish Nation collectively to be therein impersonated
   seeming to me unanswerable. Secondly, as to the chapters now in
   question--that such interpretation is at least tolerated by our Church,
   I have the word of one of her most zealous champions. And lastly, it is
   my deliberate and conscientious conviction, that the proofs of such
   having been the intention of the inspired writer or compiler of the
   book of Genesis lie on the face of the narrative itself. centre of the
   garden.** He then fell under the evils of a sickly body, and a
   passionate and ignorant soul. His sin made him sickly, his sickness
   made him peevish: his sin left him ignorant, his ignorance made him
   foolish and unreasonable. His sin left him to his nature: and by
   nature, whoever was to be born at all, was to be born a child, and to
   do before he could understand, and to be bred under laws to which he
   was always bound, but which could not always be exacted; and he was to
   choose when he could not reason, and had passions most strong when he
   had his understanding most weak; and the more need he had of a curb,
   the less strength he had to use it! And this being the case of all the
   world, what was every man's evil, became all men's greater evil; and
   though alone it was very bad, yet when they came together it was made
   much worse. Like ships in a storm, every one alone hath enough to do to
   outride it; but when they meet, besides the evils of the storm, they
   find the intolerable calamity of their mutual concussion; and every
   ship that is ready to be oppressed with the tempest, is a worse tempest
   to every vessel against which it is violently dashed. So it is in
   mankind. Every man hath evil enough of his own, and it is hard for a
   man to live up to the rule of his own reason and conscience. But when
   he hath parents and children, friends and enemies, buyers and sellers,
   lawyers and clients, a family and a neighbourhood--then it is that
   every man dashes against another, and one relation requires what
   another denies; and when one speaks another will contradict him; and
   that which is well
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** Rom. v, 14.--Who were they who had not sinned after the similitude
   of Adam's transgression; and over whom notwithstanding, death reigned?
   spoken is sometimes innocently mistaken; and that upon a good cause
   produces an evil effect; and by these, and ten thousand other
   concurrent causes, man is made more than most miserable.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   The first question we should put to ourselves, when we have to read a
   passage that perplexes us in a work of authority, is; What does the
   writer mean by all this? And the second question should be, What does
   he intend by all this? In the passage before us, Taylor's meaning is
   not quite clear. A sin is an evil which has its ground or origin in the
   agent, and not in the compulsion of circumstances. Circumstances are
   compulsory from the absence of a power to resist or control them: and
   if this absence likewise be the effect of circumstance (that is, if it
   have been neither directly nor indirectly caused by the agent himself),
   the evil derives from the circumstances; and therefore (in the
   Apostle's sense of the word, sin, when he speaks of the exceeding
   sinfulness of sin) such evil is not sin; and the person who suffers it,
   or who is the compelled instrument of its infliction on others, may
   feel regret, but cannot feel remorse. So likewise of the word origin,
   original, or originant. The reader cannot too early be warned that it
   is not applicable, and, without abuse of language, can never be
   applied, to a mere link in a chain of effects, where each, indeed,
   stands in the relation of a cause to those that follow, but is at the
   same time the effect of all that precede. For in these cases a cause
   amounts to little more than an antecedent. At the utmost it means only
   a conductor of the causative influence; and the old axiom, causa causae
   causa causati, applies with a never-ending regress to each several
   link, up the whole chain of nature. But this is nature: and no natural
   thing or act can be called originant, or be truly said to have an
   origin** in any other. The moment we assume an origin in nature, a true
   beginning, an actual first--that moment we rise above nature,
     __________________________________________________________________

   **This sense of the word is implied even in its metaphorical or
   figurative use. Thus we may say of a river that it originates in such
   or such a fountain; the water of a canal is derived from such or such a
   river. The power which we call nature, may be thus defined: A power
   subject to the law of continuity lex continui; nam in natura non datur
   saltus) which law the human understanding, by a necessity arising out
   of its own constitution, can conceive only under the form of cause and
   effect. That this form or law, of cause and effect is (relatively to
   the world without, or to things as they subsist independently of our
   perceptions) only a form or mode of thinking; that it is a law inherent
   in the understanding itself (just as the symmetry of the miscellaneous
   objects seen by the kaleidoscope inheres in, or results from, the
   mechanism of the kaleidoscope itself)--this becomes evident as soon as
   we attempt to apply the preconception directly to any operation of
   nature. For in this case we are forced to represent the cause as being
   at the same instant the effect, and vice versa the effect as being the
   cause--a relation which we seek to express by the terms action and
   re-action; but for which the term reciprocal action or the law of
   reciprocity (Wechselwirkung) would be both more accurate and more
   expressive.

   These are truths which can scarcely be too frequently impressed on the
   mind that is in earnest in the wish to reflect aright. Nature is a line
   in constant and continuous evolution. Its beginning is lost in the
   super natural: and for our understanding therefore it must appear as a
   continuous line without beginning or end But where there is no
   discontinuity there can be no origination, and every appearance of
   origination in nature is but a shadow of our own casting. It is a
   reflection from our own will or spirit. Herein, indeed, the will
   consists. This is the essential character by which will is opposed to
   nature, as spirit, and raised above nature, as self-determining
   spirit--this namely, that it is a power of originating an act or state.

   A young friend, or, as he was pleased to describe himself, a pupil of
   mine, who is beginning to learn to think, asked me to explain by an
   instance what is meant by "originating an act or state." My answer
   was--This morning I awoke with a dull pain, which I knew from
   experience the getting up would remove: and yet by adding to the
   drowsiness and by weakening or depressing the volition (volunias
   sensorialis seu mechanica) the very pain seemed to hold me back, to fix
   me, as it were, to and are compelled to assume a supernatural power
   (Gen. i, 1).

   It will be an equal convenience to myself and to my readers, to let it
   be agreed between us, that we will
     __________________________________________________________________

   the bed. After a peevish ineffectual quarrel with this painful
   disinclination, I said to myself: Let me count twenty, and the moment I
   come to nineteen I will leap out of bed. So said, and so done. Now
   should you ever find yourself in the same or in a similar state, and
   should attend to the goings-on within you, you will learn what I mean
   by originating an act. At the same time you will see that it belongs
   exclusively to the will (arbitrium); that there is nothing analogous to
   it in outward experiences; and that I had, therefore, no way of
   explaining it but by referring you to an act of your own, and to the
   peculiar self-consciousness preceding and accompanying it. As we know
   what life is by being, so we know what will is by acting. That in
   willing (replied my young friend) we appear to ourselves to constitute
   an actual beginning, and that this seems unique, and without any
   example in our sensible experience, or in the phaenomena of nature, is
   an undeniable fact. But may it not be an illusion arising from our
   ignorance of the antecedent causes? You may suppose this (I
   rejoined):--that the soul of every man should impose a lie on itself;
   and that this lie, and the acting on the faith of its being the most
   important of all truths, and the most real of all realities, should
   form the main contra-distinctive character of humanity, and the only
   basis of that distinction between things and persons on which our whole
   moral and criminal law is grounded;--you may suppose this;--I cannot,
   as I could in the case of an arithmetical or geometrical proposition,
   render it impossible for you to suppose it. Whether you can reconcile
   such a supposition with the belief of an all-wise Creator is another
   question. But, taken singly, it is doubtless in your power to suppose
   this. Were it not, the belief of the contrary would be no subject of a
   command, no part of a moral or religious duty. You would not, however,
   suppose it without a reason. But all the pretexts that ever have been
   or ever can be offered for this supposition, are built on certain
   notions of the understanding that have been generalized from
   conceptions; which conceptions, again, are themselves generalized or
   abstracted from objects of sense. Neither the one nor the other,
   therefore, have any force except in application to objects of sense,
   and within the sphere of sensible experience. What but absurdity can
   follow, if you decide on spirit by the laws of matter;--if you judge
   that, which if it be at all must be super-sensual, by that faculty of
   your mind, the very definition of which is "the faculty judging
   according to sense?" These then are unworthy generalize the word
   circumstance, so as to understand by it, as often as it occurs in this
   Comment, all and every thing not connected with the will, past or
   present, of a free agent. Even though it were the blood in the chambers
   of his hearty or his own inmost sensations, we will regard them as
   circumstantial, extrinsic, or from without.

   In this sense of the word, original, and in the sense before given of
   sin, it is evident that the phrase, original sin, is a pleonasm, the
   epithet not adding to the thought, but only enforcing it. For if it be
   sin, it must be original; and a state or act, that has not its origin
   in the will; may be calamity, deformity, disease, or mischief; but a
     __________________________________________________________________

   the name of reasons: they are only pretexts. But without reason to
   contradict your own consciousness in defiance of your own conscience,
   is contrary to reason. Such and such writers, you say, have made a
   great sensation. If so, I am sorry for it; but the fact I take to be
   this. From a variety of causes the more austere sciences have fallen
   into discredit, and impostors have taken advantage of the general
   ignorance to give a sort of mysterious and terrific importance to a
   parcel of trashy sophistry, the authors of which would not have
   employed themselves more irrationally in submitting the works of
   Raphael or Titian to canons of Criticism deduced from the sense of
   smell. Nay, less so. For here the objects and the organs are only
   disparate: while in the other case they are absolutely diverse. I
   conclude this note by reminding the reader, that my first object is to
   make myself understood. When he is in full possession of my meaning,
   then let him consider whether it deserves to be received as the truth.
   Had it been my immediate purpose to make him believe me as well as
   understand me, I should have thought it necessary to warn him that a
   finite will does indeed originate an act, and may originate a state of
   being; but yet only in and for the agent himself. A finite will
   constitutes a true beginning; but with regard to the series of motions
   and changes by which the free act is manifested and made effectual, the
   finite will gives a beginning only by coincidence with that Absolute
   Will, which is at the same time Infinite Power! Such is the language of
   religion, and of philosophy too in the last instance. But I express the
   same truth in ordinary language when I say, that a finite will, or the
   will of a finite free-agent, acts outwardly by confluence with the laws
   of nature. sin it cannot be. It is not enough that the act appears
   voluntary, or that it is intentional; or that it has the most hateful
   passions or debasing appetite for its proximate cause and
   accompaniment. All these may be found in a mad-house, where neither law
   nor humanity permit us to condemn the actor of sin. The reason of law
   declares the maniac not a free-agent; and the verdict follows of
   course--Not guilty. Now mania, as distinguished from idiocy, frenzy,
   delirium, hypochondria, and derangement (the last term used
   specifically to express a suspension or disordered state of the
   understanding or adaptive power), is the occultation or eclipse of
   reason, as the power of ultimate ends. The maniac, it is well known, is
   often found clever and inventive in the selection and adaptation of
   means to his ends; but his ends are madness. He has lost his reason.
   For though reason, in finite beings, is not the will--or how could the
   will be opposed to the reason?--yet it is the condition, the sine qua
   non of a free-will.

   We will now return to the extract from Jeremy Taylor on a theme of deep
   interest in itself, and trebly important from its bearings. For without
   just and distinct views respecting the Article of Original Sin, it is
   impossible to understand aright any one of the peculiar doctrines of
   Christianity. Now my first complaint is, that the eloquent Bishop,
   while he admits the fact as established beyond controversy by universal
   experience, yet leaves us wholly in the dark as to the main point,
   supplies us with no answer to the principal question--why he names it
   Original Sin. It cannot be said. We know what the Bishop means, and
   what matters the name? for the nature of the fact, and in what light it
   should be regarded by us, depends--on the nature of our answer to the
   question, whether Original Sin is or is not the right and proper
   designation. I can imagine the same quantum of sufferings, and yet if I
   had reason to regard them as symptoms of a commencing change, as pains
   of growth, the temporary deformity and misproportions of immaturity, or
   (as in the final sloughing of the caterpillar) the throes and struggles
   of the waxing or evolving Psyche, I should think it no Stoical flight
   to doubt, how far I was authorized to declare the circumstance an evil
   at all. Most assuredly I would not express or describe the fact as an
   evil having an origin in the sufferers themselves, or as sin.

   Let us, however, waive this objection. Let it be supposed that the
   Bishop uses the word in a different and more comprehensive sense, and
   that by sin he understands evil of all kind connected with or resulting
   from actions--though I do not see how we can represent the properties
   even of inanimate bodies (of poisonous substances for instance) except
   as acts resulting from the constitution of such bodies. Or if this
   sense, though not unknown to the mystic divines, should be, too
   comprehensive and remote, I will suppose the Bishop to comprise under
   the term sin, the evil accompanying or consequent on human actions and
   purposes:--though here, too, I have a right to be informed, for what
   reason and on what grounds sin is thus limited to human agency? And
   truly, I should be at no loss to assign the reason. But then this
   reason would instantly bring me back to my first definition; and any
   other reason, than that the human agent is endowed with reason, and
   with a will which can place itself either in subjection or in
   opposition to his reason--in other words, that man is alone of all
   known animals a responsible creature--I neither know nor can imagine.

   Thus, then; the sense which Taylor--and with him the antagonists
   generally of this Article as propounded by the first
   Reformers--attaches to the words, Original Sin, needs only be carried
   on into its next consequence, and it will be found to imply the sense
   which I have given--namely, that sin is evil having an origin. But
   inasmuch as it is evil, in God it cannot originate: and yet in some
   Spirit (that is, in some supernatural power) it must. For in nature
   there is no origin. Sin therefore is spiritual evil: but the spiritual
   in man is the will. Now when we do not refer to any particular sins,
   but to that state and constitution of the will, which is the ground,
   condition, and common cause of all sins; and when we would further
   express the truth, that this corrupt nature of the will must in some
   sense or other be considered as its own act, that the corruption must
   have been self-originated;--in this case and for this purpose we may,
   with no less propriety than force, entitle this dire spiritual evil and
   source of all evil, which is absolutely such, Original Sin. I have
   said, the corrupt nature of the will. I might add, that the admission
   of a nature into a spiritual essence by its own act is a corruption.

   Such, I repeat, would be the inevitable conclusion, if Taylor's sense
   of the term were carried on into its immediate consequences. But the
   whole of his most eloquent Treatise makes it certain that Taylor did
   not carry it on: and consequently Original Sin, according to his
   conception, is a calamity which being common to all men must be
   supposed to result from their common nature;--in other words, the
   universal calamity of human nature.

   Can we wonder, then, that a mind, a heart, like Taylor's should reject,
   that he should strain his faculties to explain away, the belief that
   this calamity, so dire in itself should appear to the All-merciful God
   a rightful cause and motive for inflicting on the wretched sufferers a
   calamity infinitely more tremendous;--nay, that it should be
   incompatible with Divine Justice not to punish it by everlasting
   torment? Or need we be surprised if he found nothing that could
   reconcile his mind to such a belief, in the circumstance that the acts
   now consequent on this calamity, and either directly or indirectly
   effects of the same, were, five or six thousand years ago, in the
   instance of a certain individual and his accomplice, anterior to the
   calamity, and the cause or occasion of the same;--that what in all
   other men is disease, in these two persons was guilt;--that what in us
   is hereditary, and consequently nature, in them was original, and
   consequently sin? Lastly, might it not be presumed, that so
   enlightened, and at the same time so affectionate, a divine would even
   fervently disclaim and reject the pretended justifications of God
   grounded on flimsy analogies drawn from the imperfections of human
   ordinances and human justice-courts--some of very doubtful character
   even as human institutes, and all of them just only as far as they are
   necessary, and rendered necessary chiefly by the weakness and
   wickedness, the limited powers and corrupt passions, of mankind? The
   more confidently might this be presumed of so acute and practised a
   logician, as Taylor, in addition to his other extraordinary gifts, is
   known to have been, when it is demonstrable that the most current of
   these justifications rests on a palpable equivocation: namely, the
   gross misuse of the word right.* An instance will explain my
     __________________________________________________________________

   *It may conduce to the readier comprehension of this point if I say,
   that the equivoque consists in confounding the almost technical sense
   of the noun substantive, right, (a sense must often determined by the
   genitive case following, as the right of property, the right of
   husbands to chastise their wives, and so forth) with the popular sense
   of the adjective, meaning. In as far as, from the known frequency of
   dishonest or mischievous persons, it may have been found necessary, in
   so far is the law justifiable in giving landowners the right of
   proceeding against a neighbour or fellow-citizen for even a slight
   trespass on that which the law has made their property:--nay, of
   preceeding in sundry instances criminally and even capitally. But
   surely, either there is no religion in the world, and nothing
   obligatory in the precepts of the Gospel, or there are occasions in
   which it would be very wrong in
     __________________________________________________________________

   right: though this likewise has, if not a double sense, yet a double
   application;--the first, when it is used to express the fitness of a
   mean to a relative end; for example, "the right way to obtain the right
   distance at which a "picture should be examined," and the like; and the
   other, when it expresses a perfect conformity and commensurateness with
   the immutable idea of equity, or perfect rectitude. Hence the close
   connection between the words righteousness and godliness, that is,
   godlikeness.

   I should be tempted to subjoin a few words on a predominating doctrine
   closely connected with the present argument--the Paleyan principle of
   general consequences; but the inadequacy of this principle as a
   criterion of right and wrong, and above all its utter unfitness as a
   moral guide, have been elsewhere so fully stated (Friend, vol. ii,
   essay xi), that even in again referring to the subject, I must shelter
   myself under Seneca's rule, that what we cannot too frequently think
   of, we cannot too often be made to recollect. It is, however, of
   immediate importance to the point in discussion, that the reader should
   be made to see how altogether incompatible the principle of judging by
   general consequences is with the idea of an Eternal, Omnipresent, and
   Omniscient Being;--that he should be made aware of the absurdity of
   attributing any form of generalization to the All-perfect Mind. To
   generalize is a faculty and function of the human understanding, and
   from the imperfection and limitation of the understanding are the use
   and the necessity of generalizing derived. Generalization is a
   substitute for intuition, for the power of intuitive, that is,
   immediate knowledge. As a substitute, it is a gift of inestimable value
   to a finite intelligence, such as man in his present state is endowed
   with and capable of exercising; but yet a substitute only, and an
   imperfect one to boot. To attribute it to God is the grossest
   anthropomorphism: and grosser instances of anthropomorphism than are to
   be found in the controversial writings on original sin and vicarious
   satisfaction, the records of superstition do not supply. the proprietor
   to exercise the right, which yet it may be highly expedient that he
   should possess. On this ground it is, that religion is the sustaining
   opposite of law.

   That Taylor, therefore, should have striven fervently against the
   Article so interpreted and so vindicated, is (for me at least) a
   subject neither of surprise nor of complaint. It is the doctrine which
   he substitutes; it is the weakness and inconsistency betrayed in the
   defence of this substitute; it is the unfairness with which he blackens
   the established Article--for to give it, as it had been caricatured by
   a few Ultra-Calvinists during the fever of the (so called)
   Quinquarticular controversy, was in effect to blacken it--and then
   imposes another scheme, to which the same objections apply with even
   increased force, a scheme which seems to differ from the former only by
   adding fraud and mockery to injustice;--these are the things that
   excite my wonder; it is of these that I complain. For what does the
   Bishop's scheme amount to? God, he tells us, required of Adam a perfect
   obedience, and made it possible by endowing him "with perfect
   rectitudes and supernatural heights of grace" proportionate to the
   obedience which he required. As a consequence of his disobedience, Adam
   lost this rectitude, this perfect sanity and proportionateness of his
   intellectual, moral and corporeal state, powers and impulses; and as
   the penalty of his crime, he was deprived of all supernatural aids and
   graces. The death, with whatever is comprised in the Scriptural sense
   of the word, death, began from that moment to work in him, and this
   consequence he conveyed to his offspring, and through them to all his
   posterity, that is, to all mankind. They were born diseased in mind,
   body and will. For what less than disease can we call a necessity of
   error and a predisposition to sin and sickness? Taylor, indeed,
   asserts, that though perfect obedience became incomparably more
   difficult, it was not, however, absolutely impossible. Yet he himself
   admits that the contrary was universal; that of the countless millions
   of Adam's posterity, not a single individual ever realized, or
   approached to the realization of, this possibility; and (if my memory*
   does not deceive me) Taylor himself has elsewhere exposed--and if he
   has not, yet common sense will do it for him--the sophistry in
   asserting of a whole what may be true of the whole, but is in fact true
   only of each of its component parts. Any one may snap a horse-hair:
   therefore, any one may perform the same feat with the horse's tail. On
   a level floor (on the hardened sand, for instance, of a sea-beach) I
   chalk two parallel straight lines, with a width of eight inches. It is
   possible for a man, with a bandage over his eyes, to keep within the
   path for two or three paces: therefore, it is possible for him to walk
   blindfold for two or three leagues without a single deviation! And this
   possibility would suffice to acquit me of injustice, though I had
   placed man-traps within an inch of one line, and knew that there were
   pit-falls and deep wells beside the other! This assertion, therefore,
   without adverting to its discordance with, if not direct contradiction
   to, the tenth and thirteenth Articles of our Church, I shall not, I
   trust, be thought to rate below its true value, if I treat it as an
   infinitesimal possibility that may be safely dropped in the
   calculation: and so proceed with the argument.
     __________________________________________________________________

   *I have, since this page was written, met with several passages in the
   Treatise on Repentance, the Holy Living and Dying, and the Worthy
   Communicant, in which the Bishop asserts without scruple the
   impossibility of total obedience; and on the same grounds as I have
   given.

   The consequence then of Adam's crime was, by a natural necessity,
   inherited by persons who could not (the Bishop affirms) in any sense
   have been accomplices in the crime or partakers in the guilt: and yet
   consistently with the divine holiness, it was not possible that the
   same perfect obedience should not be required of them. Now what would
   the idea of equity, what would the law inscribed by the Creator on the
   heart of man, seem to dictate in this case? Surely, that the
   supplementary aids, the supernatural graces correspondent to a law
   above nature, should be increased in proportion to the diminished
   strength of the agents, and the increased resistance to be overcome by
   them. But no! not only the consequence of Adam's act, but the penalty
   due to his crime, was perpetuated. His descendants were despoiled or
   left destitute of these aids and graces, while the obligation to
   perfect obedience was continued; an obligation, too, the non-fulfilment
   of which brought with it death and the unutterable woe that cleaves to
   an immortal soul for ever alienated from its Creator.

   Observe that all these results of Adam's fall enter into Bishop
   Taylor's scheme of Original Sin equally as into that of the first
   Reformers. In this respect the Bishop's doctrine is the same with that
   laid down in the Articles and Homilies of the English Church. The only
   difference that has hitherto appeared, consists in the aforesaid
   mathematical possibility of fulfilling the whole law, which in the
   Bishop's scheme is affirmed to remain still in human nature, or (as it
   is elsewhere expressed) in the nature of the human will.* But though it
   were possible
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Availing himself of the equivocal sense, and (I most readily admit)
   the injudicious use, of the word "free" in the--even on this
   account--faulty phrase, "free only to sin," Taylor treats the notion of
   a power in to grant this existence of a power in all men, Which in no
   man was ever exemplified, and where the non-actualization of such power
   is, a priori, so certain, that the belief or imagination of the
   contrary in any individual is expressly given us by the Holy Spirit as
   a test, whereby it may be known that the truth is not in him, as an
   infallible sign of imposture or self-delusion!--though it were possible
   to grant this, which, consistently with Scripture and the principles of
   reasoning which we apply in all other cases, it is not possible to
   grant;--and though it were possible likewise to overlook the glaring
   sophistry of concluding in relation to a series of indeterminate
   length, that whoever can do any one, can therefore do all; a
   conclusion, the futility of which must force itself on the common-sense
   of every man who understands the proposition;--still the question will
   arise--
     __________________________________________________________________

   the will of determining itself to evil without an equal power of
   determining itself to good, as a "foolery." I would this had been the
   only instance in his Deus Justificatus of that inconsiderate contempt
   so frequent in the polemic treatises of minor divines, who will have
   ideas of reason, spiritual truths that can only be spiritually
   discerned, translated for them into adequate conceptions of the
   understanding. The great articles of Corruption and Redemption are
   propounded to us as spiritual mysteries; and every interpretation that
   pretends to explain them into comprehensible notions, does by its very
   success furnish presumptive proof of its failure. The acuteness and
   logical dexterity, with which Taylor has brought out the falsehood, or
   semblance of falsehood, in the Calvinistic scheme, are truly admirable.
   Had he next concentred his thoughts in tranquil meditation, and asked
   himself: what then is the truth?--if a will be at all, what must a will
   be?--he might, I think, have seen that a nature in a will implies
   already a corruption of that will; that a nature is as inconsistent
   with freedom as free choice with an incapacity of choosing aught but
   evil. And lastly, a free power in a nature to fulfil a law above nature
   !--I, who who love and honor this good and great man with all the
   reverence that can dwell "on this side idolatry," dare not retort on
   this assertion the charge of foolery; but I find it a paradox as
   startling to my reason as any of the hard sayings of the Dort divines
   were to his understanding.

   Why, and on what principle of equity, were the unoffending sentenced to
   be born with so fearful a disproportion of their powers to their
   duties? Why were they subjected to a law, the fulfilment of which was
   all but impossible, yet the penalty on the failure tremendous? Admit
   that for those who had never enjoyed a happier lot, it was no
   punishment to be made to inhabit a ground which the Creator had cursed,
   and to have been born with a body prone to sickness, and a soul
   surrounded with temptation, and having the worst temptation within
   itself in its own temptibility! To have the duties of a spirit with the
   wants and appetites of an animal! Yet on such imperfect creatures, with
   means so scanty and impediments so numerous, to impose the same
   task-work that had been required of a creature with a pure and entire
   nature, and provided with supernatural aids--if this be not to inflict
   a penalty;--yet to be placed under a law, the difficulty of obeying
   which is infinite, and to have momently to struggle with this
   difficulty, and to live momently in hazard of these consequences--if
   this be no punishment;--words have no correspondence with thoughts, and
   thoughts are but shadows of each other, shadows that own no substance
   for their antitype!

   Of such an outrage on common sense Taylor was incapable. He himself
   calls it a penalty; he admits that in effect it is a punishment: nor
   does he seek to suppress the question that so naturally arises out of
   this admission;--on what principle of equity were the innocent
   offspring of Adam punished at all? He meets it, and puts in an answer.
   He states the problem, and gives his solution--namely, that "God on
   Adam's account was so exasperated with mankind, that being angry he
   would still continue the punishment!"--"The case" (says the Bishop) "is
   this. Jonathan and Michal were Saul's children. It came to pass, that
   seven of Saul's issue were to be hanged: all equally innocent, equally
   culpable." [Before I quote farther, I feel myself called on to remind
   the reader, that these last two words were added by Taylor, without the
   least grounds in Scripture, according to which (2 Sam. xxi) no crime
   was laid to their charge, no blame imputed to them. Without any
   pretence of culpable conduct on their part, they were arraigned as
   children of Saul, and sacrificed to a point of state-expedience. In
   recommencing the quotation, therefore, the reader ought to let the
   sentence conclude with the words--] "all equally innocent. David took
   the five sons of Michal, for she had left him unhandsomely. Jonathan
   was his friend: and therefore he spared his son, Mephibosheth. Now here
   it was indifferent as to the guilt of the persons (bear in mind,
   reader, that no guilt was attached to either of them!) whether David
   should take the sons of Michal, or Jonathan's; but it is likely that as
   upon the kindness that David had to Jonathan, he spared his son; so
   upon the just provocation of Michal, he made that evil fall upon them,
   which, it may be, they should not have suffered, if their mother had
   been kind. Adam was to God, as Michal to David."*

   This answer, this solution, proceeding too from a divine so
   pre-eminently gifted, and occurring (with other passages not less
   startling) in a vehement refutation of the received doctrine, on the
   express ground of its opposition to the clearest conceptions and best
   feelings of mankind--this it is that surprises me. It is of this that I
   complain. The Almighty Father exasperated with
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Vol. IX, p. 5-6. Heb. edit. those, whom the Bishop has himself in the
   same treatise described as "innocent and most unfortunate"--the two
   things best fitted to conciliate love and pity! Or though they did not
   remain innocent, yet those whose abandonment to a mere nature, while
   they were left amenable to a law above nature, he affirms to be the
   irresistible cause, that they one and all did sin! And this decree
   illustrated and justified by its analogy to one of the worst actions of
   an imperfect mortal! From such of my readers as will give a thoughtful
   perusal to these works of Taylor, I dare anticipate a concurrence with
   the judgment which I here transcribe from the blank space at the end of
   the Deus Justificatus in my own copy; and which, though twenty years
   have elapsed since it was written, I have never seen reason to recant
   or modify. "This most eloquent Treatise may be compared to a statue of
   Janus, with the one face, which we must suppose fronting the
   Calvinistic tenet, entire and fresh, as from the master's hand; beaming
   with life and force, witty scorn on the lip, and a brow at once bright
   and weighty with satisfying reason:--the other, looking toward the
   'something to be put in its place,' maimed, featureless, and
   weather-bitten into an almost visionary confusion and indistinctness."

   With these expositions I hasten to contrast the Scriptural article
   respecting original sin, or the corrupt and sinful nature of the human
   will, and the belief which alone is required of us, as Christians. And
   here the first thing to be considered, and which will at once remove a
   world of error, is; that this is no tenet first introduced or imposed
   by Christianity, and which, should a man see reason to disclaim the
   authority of the Gospel, would no longer have any claim on his
   attention. It is no perplexity that a man may get rid of by ceasing to
   be a Christian, and which has no existence for a philosophic Deist. It
   is a fact, affirmed, indeed, in the Christian Scriptures alone with the
   force and frequency proportioned to its consummate importance; but a
   fact acknowledged in every religion that retains the least glimmering
   of the Patriarchal faith in a God infinite, yet personal. A fact
   assumed or implied as the basis of every religion, of which any relics
   remain of earlier date than the last and total apostasy of the Pagan
   world, when the faith in the great I Am, the Creator, was extinguished
   in the sensual Polytheism, which is inevitably the final result of
   Pantheism, or the worship of nature; and the only form under which the
   Pantheistic scheme--that, according to which the world is God, and the
   material universe itself the one only absolute being can exist for a
   people, or become the popular creed. Thus in the most ancient books of
   the Brahmins, the deep sense of this fact, and the doctrines grounded
   on obscure traditions of the promised remedy, are seen struggling, and
   now gleaming, now flashing, through the mist of Pantheism, and
   producing the incongruities and gross contradictions of the Brahmin
   Mythology: while in the rival sect--in that most strange phaenomenon,
   the religious Atheism of the Buddhists, with whom God is only universal
   matter considered abstractedly from all particular forms--the fact is
   placed among the delusions natural to man, which, together with other
   superstitions grounded on a supposed essential difference between right
   and wrong, the sage is to decompose and precipitate from the menstruum
   of his more refined apprehensions! Thus in denying the fact, they
   virtually acknowledge it.

   From the remote East, turn to the mythology of the Lesser Asia, to the
   descendants of Javan, who dwelt in the tents of Shem, and possessed the
   isles. Here, again, and in the usual form of an historic solution, we
   find the same fact, and as characteristic of the human race, stated in
   that earliest and most venerable mythus (or symbolic parable) of
   Prometheus--that truly wonderful fable, in which the characters of the
   rebellious Spirit and of the Divine Friend of mankind

   are united in the same person; and thus in the most striking manner
   noting the forced amalgamation of the Patriarchal tradition with the
   incongruous scheme of Pantheism This and the connected tale of lo,
   which is but the sequel of the Prometheus, stand alone in the Greek
   Mythology, in which elsewhere both gods and men are mere powers and
   products of nature. And most noticeable it is, that soon after the
   promulgation and spread of the Gospel had awakened the moral sense, and
   had opened the eyes even of its wiser enemies to the necessity of
   providing some solution of this great problem of the moral world, the
   beautiful parable of Cupid and Psyche was brought forward as a rival
   Fall of Man: and the fact of a moral corruption connatural with the
   human race was again recognised. In the assertion of original sin the
   Greek Mythology rose and set.

   But not only was the fact acknowledged of a law in the nature of man
   resisting the law of God; (and whatever is placed in active and direct
   oppugnancy to the good is, ipso facto, positive evil;) it was likewise
   an acknowledged mystery, and one which by the nature of the subject
   must ever remain such--a problem, of which any other solution than the
   statement of the fact itself, was demonstrably impossible. That it "is
   so, the least reflection will suffice to convince every man, who has
   previously satisfied himself that he is a responsible being. It follows
   necessarily from the postulate of a responsible will. Refuse to grant
   this, and I have not a word to say. Concede this, and you concede all.
   For this is the essential attribute of a will, and contained in the
   very idea, that whatever determines the will acquires this, power from
   a previous determination of the will itself. The will is ultimately
   self-determined, or it is no longer a will under the law of perfect
   freedom, but a nature under the mechanism of cause and effect. And if
   by an act, to which it had determined itself, it has subjected itself
   to the determination of nature (in the language of St. Paul, to the law
   of the flesh), it receives a nature into itself, and so far it becomes
   a nature: and this is a corruption of the will and a corrupt nature. It
   is also a fall of man, inasmuch as his will is the condition of his
   personality; the ground and condition of the attribute which
   constitutes him man. And the groundwork of personal being is a capacity
   of acknowledging the moral law (the law of the spirit, the law of
   freedom, the divine will) as that which should, of itself, suffice to
   determine the will to a free obedience of the law, the law working
   therein by its own exceeding lawfulness.* This, and this alone, is
   positive good; good in itself, and independent of all relations.
   Whatever resists, and, as a positive force, opposes this in the will,
   is therefore evil. But an evil in the will is an evil will; and as all
   moral evil (that is all evil that is evil without reference to its
   contingent physical consequences) is of the will, this evil will must
   have its source in the will. And thus we might go, back from act to
   act, from evil to evil, ad infinitum, without advancing a step.
     __________________________________________________________________

   *If the law worked on the will, it would be the working of an extrinsic
   and alien force, and, as St. Paul profoundly argues, would prove the
   will sinful.

   We call an individual a bad man, not because an action is contrary to
   the law, but because it has led us to conclude from it some principle
   opposed to the law, some private maxim or by-law in the will contrary
   to the universal law of right reason in the conscience, as the ground
   of the action. But this evil principle again must be grounded in some
   other principle which has been made determinant of the will by the
   will's own self-determinalion. For if not, it must have its ground in
   some necessity of nature, in some instinct or propensity imposed, not
   acquired, another's work not our own. Consequently neither act nor
   principle could be imputed; but relatively to the agent, not original,
   not sin.

   Now let the grounds on which the fact of an evil inherent in the will
   is affirmable in the instance of any one man, be supposed equally
   applicable in every instance, and concerning all men: so that the fact
   is asserted of the individual, not because he has committed this or
   that crime, or because he has shown himself to be this or that man, but
   simply because he is a man. Let the evil be supposed such as to imply
   the impossibility of an individual's referring to any particular time
   at which it might be conceived to have commenced, or to any period of
   his existence at which it was not existing. Let it be supposed, in
   short, that the subject stands in no relation whatever to time, can
   neither be called in time nor out of time; but that all relations of
   time are as alien and heterogeneous in this question, as the relations
   and attributes of space (north or south, round or square, thick or
   thin) are to our affections and moral feelings. Let the reader suppose
   this, and he will have before him the precise import of the Scriptural
   doctrine of original sin; or rather of the fact acknowledged in all
   ages, and recognised, but not originating, in the Christian Scriptures.

   In addition to this it will be well to remind the inquirer, that the
   stedfast conviction of the existence, personality, and moral attributes
   of God, is presupposed in the acceptance of the Gospel, or required as
   its indispensable preliminary. It is taken for granted as a point which
   the hearer had already decided for himself, a point finally settled and
   put at rest: not by the removal of all difficulties, or by any such,
   increase of insight as enabled him to meet every objection of the
   Epicurean or the Sceptic with a full and precise answer; but because he
   had convinced himself that it was folly as well as presumption in so
   imperfect a creature to expect it; and because these difficulties and
   doubts disappeared at the beam, when tried against the weight and
   convictive power of the reasons in the other scale. It is, therefore,
   most unfair to attack Christianity, or any article which the Church has
   declared a Christian doctrine, by arguments, which, if valid, are valid
   against all religion. Is there a disputant who scorns a mere postulate,
   as the basis of any argument in support of the faith; who is too
   high-minded to beg his ground, and will take it by a strong hand? Let
   him fight it out with the Atheists, or the Manichean; but not stoop to
   pick up their arrows, and then run away to discharge them at
   Christianity or the Church!

   The only true way is to state the doctrine, believed as well by Saul of
   Tarsus, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Church
   of Christ, as by Paul the Apostle, fully preaching the Gospel of
   Christ. A moral evil is an evil that has its origin in a will. An evil
   common to all must have a ground common to all. But the actual
   existence of moral evil we are bound in conscience to admit; and that
   there is an evil common to all is a fact; and this evil must therefore
   have a common ground. Now this evil ground cannot originate in the
   Divine Will: it must therefore be referred to the will of man. And this
   evil ground we call original sin. It is a mystery, that is, a fact,
   which we see, but cannot explain; and the doctrine a truth which we
   apprehend, but can neither comprehend nor communicate. And such by the
   quality of the subject (namely, a responsible will) it must be, if it
   be truth at all.

   A sick man, whose complaint was as obscure as his sufferings were
   severe and notorious, was thus addressed by a humane stranger: "My poor
   Friend! I find you dangerously ill, and on this account only, and
   having certain information of your being so, and that you have not
   wherewithal to pay for a physician, I hate come to you. Respecting your
   disease, indeed, I can tell you nothing that you are capable of
   understanding, more than you know already, or can only be taught by
   reflection on your own experience. But I have rendered the disease no
   longer irremediable. I have brought the remedy with me: and I now offer
   you the means of immediate relief, with the assurance of gradual
   convalescence, and a final perfect cure; nothing more being required on
   your part, but your best endeavours to follow the prescriptions I shall
   leave with you. It is, indeed, too probable, from the nature of your
   disease, that you will occasionally neglect or transgress them. But
   even this has been calculated on in the plan of your cure, and the
   remedies provided, if only you are sincere and in right earnest with
   yourself, and have your heart in the work. Ask me not how such a
   disease can be conceived possible. Enough for the present that you know
   it to be real: and I come to cure the disease, not to explain it."

   Now, what if the patient or some of his neighbors should charge this
   good Samaritan with having given rise to the mischievous notion of an
   inexplicable disease, involving the honor of the king of the
   country;--should inveigh against him as the author and first introducer
   of the notion, though of the numerous medical works composed ages
   before his arrival, and by physicians of the most venerable authority,
   it was scarcely possible to open a single volume without finding some
   description of the disease, or some lamentation of its malignant and
   epidemic character;--and, lastly, what if certain pretended friends of
   this good Samaritan, in their zeal to vindicate him against this absurd
   charge, should assert that he was a perfect stranger to this disease,
   and boldly deny that he had ever said or done any thing connected with
   it, or that implied its existence?

   In this apologue or imaginary case, reader! you have the true bearings
   of Christianity on the fact and doctrine of original sin. The doctrine
   (that is, the confession of a known fact) Christianity has only in
   common with every religion, and with every philosophy, in which the
   reality of a responsible will, and the essential difference between
   good and evil, have been recognised. Peculiar to the Christian religion
   are the remedy and (for all purposes but those of a merely speculative
   curiosity) the solution. By the annuciation of the remedy it affords
   all the solution which our moral interests require; and even in that
   which remains, and must remain, unfathomable, the Christian finds a new
   motive to walk humbly with the Lord his God.

   Should a professed believer ask you, whether that which is the ground
   of responsible action in your will could in any way be responsibly
   present in the will of Adam,--answer him in these words: "You, Sir! can
   no more demonstrate the negative, than I can conceive the affirmative.
   The corruption of my will may very warrantably be spoken of as a
   consequence of Adam's fall, even as my birth of Adam's existence; as a
   consequence, a link in the historic chain of instances, whereof Adam is
   the first. But that it is on account of Adam; or that this evil
   principle was, a priori, inserted of infused into my will by the will
   of another--which is indeed a contradiction in terms, my will in such
   case being no will;-- this is nowhere asserted in Scripture explicitly
   or by implication." It belongs to the very essence of the doctrine,
   that in respect of original sin every man is the adequate
   representative of all men. What wonder, then, that where no inward
   ground of preference existed, the choice should be determined by
   outward relations, and that the first in time should be taken as the
   diagram? Even in the book of Genesis the word Adam, is distinguished
   from a proper name by an article before if. It is the Adam, so as to
   express the genus, not the individual--or rather, perhaps, I should
   say, as well as the individual. But that the word with its equivalent,
   the old man, is used symbolically and universally by St. Paul, (1 Cor.
   xv, 22, 45, Eph. iv, 22, Col. iii, 9, Rom. vi, 6), is too evident to
   need any proof.

   I conclude with this remark. The doctrine of original sin concerns all
   men. But it concerns Christians in particular no otherwise than by its
   connexion with the doctrine of Redemption; and with the divinity and
   divine humanity of the Redeemer, as a corollary or necessary inference
   from both mysteries. Beware of arguments against Christianity, which
   cannot stop there, and consequently ought not to have commenced there.
   Something I might have added to the clearness of the preceding views,
   if the limits of the work had permitted me to clear away the several
   delusive and fanciful assertions respecting the state* of our first
   parents, their wisdom, science and angelic faculties, assertions
   without the slightest ground in Scripture:--or, if consistently with
   the warns and preparatory studies of those, for whose use this volume
   was especially intended, I could have entered into the momentous
   subject of a spiritual fall or apostasy antecedent to the formation of
   man--a belief the Scriptural grounds of which are few and of diverse
   interpretation, but which has been almost universal in the Christian
   Church. Enough however has been given, I trust, for the reader to see
   and (as far as the subject is capable of being understood) to
   understand this long controverted article, in the sense in which alone
   it is binding on his faith. Supposing him therefore to know the meaning
   of original sin, and to have decided for himself on the fact of its
   actual existence, as the antecedent ground and occasion of
   Christianity, we may now proceed to Christianity itself, as the edifice
   raised on this ground, that is, to the great constituent article of the
   faith in Christ, as the remedy of the disease--the doctrine of
   Redemption.

   But before I proceed to this great doctrine, let me briefly remind the
   young and friendly pupil, to whom I would still be supposed to address
   myself, that in the following Aphorisms the word science is used in its
   strict and narrowest sense. By a science I here mean any chain of
   truths which are either absolutely certain, or necessarily true for the
   human mind, from the laws
     __________________________________________________________________

   *For a specimen of these Rabbinical dotages, I refer not to the
   writings of mystics and enthusiasts, but to the shrewd and witty Dr.
   South, one of whose most elaborate sermons stands prominent among the
   many splendid extravaganzas on this subject. and constitution of the
   mind itself. In neither case is our conviction derived, or capable of
   receiving any addition, from outward experience, or empirical
   date--that is, matters of fact given to us through the medium of the
   senses--though these data may have been the occasion, or may even be an
   indispensable condition, of our reflecting on the former, and thereby
   becoming conscious of the same. On the other hand, a connected series
   of conclusions grounded on empirical data, in contra-distinction from
   science, I beg leave (no better term occurring) in this place and for
   this purpose to denominate a scheme.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XI.

   In whatever age and country it is the prevailing mind and character of
   the nation to regard the present life as subordinate to a life to come,
   and to mark the present state, the world of their senses, by signs,
   instruments, and mementos of its connexion with a future state and a
   spiritual world;--where the mysteries of faith are brought within the
   hold of the people at large, not by being explained away in the vain
   hope of accommodating them to the average of their understanding, but
   by being made the objects of love by their combination with events and
   epochs of history, with national traditions, with the monuments and
   dedications of ancestral faith and zeal, with memorial and symbolical
   observances, with the realizing influences of social devotion, and,
   above all, by early and habitual association with acts of the
   will,--there religion is. There, however obscured by the hay and straw
   of human will-work, the foundation is safe. In that country and under
   the predominance of such maxims, the National Church is no mere
   State-institute. It is the State itself in its intensest federal union;
   yet at the same moment the guardian and representative of all personal
   individuality. For the Church is the shrine of morality: and in
   morality alone the citizen asserts and reclaims his personal
   independence, his integrity. Our outward acts are efficient, and most
   often possible, only by coalition. As an efficient power, the agent is
   but a fraction of unity; he becomes an integer only in the recognition
   and performance of the moral law. Nevertheless it is most true (and a
   truth which cannot with safety be overlooked) that morality, as
   morality, has no existence for a people. It is either absorbed and lost
   in the quicksands of prudential calculus, or it is taken up and
   transfigured into the duties and mysteries of religion. And no wonder:
   since morality (including the personal being, the I am, as its subject)
   is itself a mystery, and the ground and suppositum of all other
   mysteries, relatively to man.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XII.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PALEY NOT A MORALIST.

   Schemes of conduct, grounded on calculations of sell interest, or on
   the average consequences of actions, supposed to be general, form a
   branch of political economy, to which let all due honor be given. Their
   utility is not here questioned. But however estimable within their own
   sphere such schemes, or any one of them in particular, may be, they do
   not belong to moral science, to which, both in kind and purpose, they
   are in all cases foreign, and, when substituted for it, hostile.
   Ethics, or the science of morality, does indeed in no wise exclude the
   consideration of action; but it contemplates the same in its
   originating spiritual source, without reference to space, or time, or
   sensible existence. Whatever springs out of the perfect law of freedom,
   which exists only by its unity with the will of God, its inherence in
   the Word of God, and its communion with the Spirit of God-- that
   (according to the principles of moral science) is good--it is light and
   righteousness and very truth. Whatever seeks to separate itself from
   the divine principle, and proceeds from a false centre in the agent's
   particular will, is evil--a work of darkness and contradiction. It is
   sin and essential falsehood. Not the outward deed, constructive,
   destructive, or neutral,--not the deed as a possible object of the
   senses,--is the object of ethical science. For this is no compost,
   collectorium or inventory of single duties; nor does it seek in the
   multitudinous sea, in the predetermined wave, and tides and currents of
   nature, that freedom which is exclusively an attribute of spirit. Like
   all other pure sciences, whatever it enunciates, and whatever it
   concludes, it enunciates and concludes absolutely. Strictness is its
   essential character: and its first proposition is, Whosoever shall keep
   the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For as
   the will or spirit, the source and substance of moral good, is one and
   all in every part; so must it be the totality, the whole articulated
   series of single acts, taken as unity, that can alone, in the severity
   of science, be recognised as the proper counterpart and adequate
   representative of a good will. Is it in this or that limb, or not
   rather in the whole body, the entire organismus, that the law of life
   reflects itself? Much less, then, can the law of the Spirit work in
   fragments.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XIII.

   Wherever there exists a permanent** learned class, having authority,
   and possessing the respect and confidence of the country; and wherever
   the science of ethics is acknowledged and taught in this class, as a
   regular part of a learned education, to its future members generally,
   but as the special study and indispensable ground work of such as are
   intended for holy orders; there the article of original sin will be an
   axiom of faith in all classes. Among the learned an undisputed truth,
   and with the people a fact, which no man imagines it possible to deny:
   and the doctrine, thus inwoven in the faith of all, and coeval with the
   consciousness of each, will, for each and all, possess a reality,
   subjective indeed, yet virtually equivalent to that which we
   intuitively give to the objects of our senses.

   With the learned this will be the case, because the article is the
   first--I had almost said spontaneous--product of the application of
   moral science to history, of which it is the interpreter. A mystery in
   its own right, and by the necessity and essential character of its
   subject--(for the win, like the life, in every act and product
     __________________________________________________________________

   **A learned order must be supposed to consist of three classes. First,
   those who are employed in adding to the existing sum of power and
   knowledge. Second, and most numerous class, those whose office it is to
   diffuse through the community at large the practical results of
   science, and that kind and degree of knowledge and cultivation, which
   for all is requisite or clearly useful. Third, the formers and
   instructors of the second--in schools, halls, and universities, or
   through the medium of the press. The second class includes not only the
   Parochial Clergy, and all others duly ordained to the ministerial
   office; but likewise all the members of the legal and medical
   professions, who have received a learned education under accredited and
   responsible teachers. (See the Church and State, p. 45, &c., 3d edit.
   Ed.) pre-supposes to itself a past always present, a present that
   evermore resolves itself into a past)--the doctrine of original sin
   gives to all the other mysteries of religion a common basis, a
   connection of dependency, an intelligibility of relation, and a total
   harmony, which supersede extrinsic proof. There is here that same proof
   from unity of purpose, that same evidence of symmetry, which in the
   contemplation of a human skeleton, flashed conviction on the mind of
   Galen, and kindled meditation into a hymn of praise.

   Meanwhile the people, not goaded into doubt by the lessons and examples
   of their teachers and superiors; not drawn away from the fixed stars of
   heaven--the form and magnitude of which are the same for the naked eye
   of the shepherd as for the telescope of the sage--from the immediate
   truths, I mean, of reason and conscience, to an exercise to which they
   have not been trained,--of a faculty which has been imperfectly
   developed,--on a subject not within the sphere of the faculty, nor in
   any way amenable to its judgment;--the people will need no arguments to
   receive a doctrine confirmed by their own experience from within and
   from without, and intimately blended with the most venerable traditions
   common to all races, and the traces of which linger in the latest
   twilight of civilization.

   Among the revulsions consequent on the brute bewilderments of a Godless
   revolution, a great and active zeal for the interests of religion may
   be one. I dare not trust it, till I have seen what it is that gives
   religion this interest, till I am satisfied that it is not the
   interests of this world; necessary and laudable interests, perhaps, but
   which may, I dare believe, be secured as effectually and more suitably
   by the prudence of this world, and by this world's powers and motives.
   At all events, I find nothing in the fashion of the day to deter me
   from adding, that the reverse of the preceding--that where religion is
   valued and patronised as a supplement of law, or an aid extraordinary
   of police; where moral science is exploded as the mystic jargon of dark
   ages; where a lax system of consequences, by which every iniquity on
   earth may be (and how many have been!) denounced and defended with
   equal plausibility, is publicly and authoritatively taught as moral
   philosophy; where the mysteries of religion, and truths supersensual,
   are either cut and squared for the comprehension of the understanding,
   the faculty of judging according to sense, or desperately torn asunder
   from the reason, nay, fanatically opposed to it; lastly, where private*
   interpretation
     __________________________________________________________________

   *The Author of the Statesman's Manual must be the most inconsistent of
   men, if he can be justly suspected of a leaning to the Romish Church;
   or if it be necessary for him to repeat his fervent Amen to the wish
   and prayer of our late good old king, that "every adult in the British
   Empire should be able to read his Bible, and have a Bible to read!"
   Nevertheless, it may not be superfluous to declare, that in thus
   protesting against the license of private interpretation, I do not mean
   to condemn the exercise or deny the right of individual judgment, I
   condemn only the pretended right of every individual, competent and
   incompetent, to interpret Scripture in a sense of his own, in
   opposition to the judgment of the Church, without knowledge of the
   originals or of the languages, the history, customs, opinions, and
   controversies of the age and country in which they were written; and
   where the interpreter judges in ignorance or in contempt of
   uninterrupted tradition, the unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils,
   and the universal faith of the Church in all ages. It is not the
   attempt to form a judgment, which is here called in question; but the
   grounds, or rather the no-grounds on which the judgment is formed and
   relied on.

   My fixed principle is: that a Christianity without a Church exercising
   spiritual authority is vanity and dissolution. And my belief is, that
   when Popery is rushing in on us like an inundation, the nation will
   find it to be so. I say Popery; for this too I hold for a delusion,
   that Romanism or Roman Catholicism is separable from Popery. Almost as
   readily could I suppose a circle without a centre. is every thing, and
   the Church nothing--there the mystery of original sin will be either
   rejected, or evaded, or perverted into the monstrous fiction of
   hereditary sin,--guilt inherited; in the mystery of Redemption
   metaphors will be obtruded for the reality; and in the mysterious
   appurtenants and symbols of Redemption (regeneration, grace, the
   Eucharist, and spiritual communion) the realities will be evaporated
   into metaphors.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XIV.

   LEIGHTON

   As in great maps or pictures you will see the border decorated with
   meadows, fountains, flowers, and the like, represented in it, but in
   middle you have the main design I so amongst the works of God is it
   with the foreordained redemption of man. All his other works in the
   world, all the beauty of the creatures, the succession of ages, and the
   things that come to pass in them, are but as the border to this as the
   mainpiece. But as a foolish unskilful beholder, not discerning the
   excellency of the principal piece in such maps or pictures, gazes only
   on the fair border, and goes no farther--thus do the greatest part of
   us as to this great work of God, the redemption of our personal being,
   and the re-union of the human with the divine, by and through the
   divine humanity of the Incarnate Word.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XV.

   LUTHER

   It is a hard matter, yea, an impossible thing for thy human strength,
   whosoever thou art (without God's assistance), at such a time when
   Moses setteth on thee with the Law (see Aphorism XII),--when the holy
   Law written in thy heart accuseth and condemneth thee, forcing thee to
   a comparison of thy heart therewith, and convicting thee of the
   incompatibleness of thy will and nature with Heaven and holiness and an
   immediate God--that then thou shouldst be able to be of such a mind as
   if no law nor sin had ever been! I say it is in a manner impossible
   that a human creature, when he feeleth himself assaulted with trials
   and temptations, and the conscience hath to do with God, and the
   tempted man knoweth that the root of temptation is within him, should
   obtain such mastery over his thoughts as then to think no otherwise
   than that from everlasting nothing hath been but only and alone Christ,
   altogether grace and deliverance!
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   In irrational agents, namely, the brute animals, the will is hidden or
   absorbed in the law. The law is their nature. In the original purity of
   a rational agent the uncorrupted will is identical with the law. Nay,
   inasmuch as a will perfectly identical with the law is one with the
   divine will, we may say, that in the unfallen rational agent the will
   constitutes the law.* But it is evident that the holy and spiritual
   power and light, which by a prolepsis or anticipation we have named
   law, is a grace, an inward perfection, and without the commanding,
     __________________________________________________________________

   *In fewer words thus: For the brute animals, their nature is their
   law;--for what other third law can be imagined, in addition to the law
   of nature, and the law of reason? Therefore: in irrational agents the
   law constitutes the will. In moral and rational agents the will
   constitutes, or ought to constitute, the law: I speak of moral agents,
   unfallen. For the personal will comprehends the idea, as a reason, and
   it gives causative force to the idea, as a practical reason. But idea
   with the power of realizing the same is a law; or say:--the spirit
   comprehends the moral idea, by virtue of its rationality, and it gives
   to the idea causative power, as a will. In every sense, therefore, it
   constitutes the law, supplying both the elements of which it consists,
   namely, the idea, and the realizing power. binding and menacing
   character which belongs to a law, acting as a master or sovereign,
   distinct from, and existing, as it were, externally for, the agent who
   is bound to obey it. Now this is St. Paul's sense of the word, and on
   this he grounds his whole reasoning. And hence too arises the obscurity
   and apparent paradoxy of several texts. That the law is a law for you;
   that it acts on the will not in it; that it exercises an agency from
   without, by fear and coercion; proves the corruption of your will, and
   presupposes it. Sin in this sense came by the law: for it has its
   essence, as sin, in that counter-position of the holy principle to the
   will, which occasions this principle to be a law. Exactly (as in all
   other points) consonant with the Pauline doctrine is the assertion of
   John, when speaking of the re-adoption of the redeemed to be sons of
   God, and the consequent resumption (I had almost said re-absorption) of
   the law into the will

   James i, 25. He says, For the law was given by Moses, but grace and
   truth came by Jesus Christ. That by the law St. Paul meant only the
   ceremonial law, is a notion that could originate only in utter
   inattention to the whole strain and bent of the Apostle's argument.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XVI.

   LEIGHTON AND COLERIDGE

   Christ's death was both voluntary and violent. There was external
   violence: and that was the accompaniment, or at most the occasion, of
   his death. But there was internal willingness, the spiritual will, the
   will of the Spirit, and this was the proper cause. By this Spirit he
   was restored from death: neither indeed was it possible for him to be
   holden of it. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
   Spirit, says St. Peter.

   But he is likewise declared elsewhere to have died by that same Spirit,
   which here, in opposition to the violence, is said to quicken him. Thus
   Heb. ix, 14. Through the Eternal Spirit he offered himself. And even
   from Peter's words, and without the epithet eternal, to aid the
   interpretation, it is evident that the Spirit, here opposed to the
   flesh by body or animal life, is of a higher nature and power than the
   individual soul, which cannot of itself return to reinhabit or quicken
   the body.

   If these points were niceties, and an over-refining in doctrine, is it
   to be believed that the Apostles, John, Peter, and Paul, with the
   author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, would have laid so great stress
   on them? But the true life of Christians is to eye Christ in every step
   of his life--not only as their rule but as their strength: looking to
   him as their pattern both in doing and in suffering, and drawing power
   from him for going through both: being without him able for nothing.
   Take comfort, then, thou that believest! It is he that lifts up the
   soul from the gates of death: and he hath said, I will raise thee up at
   the last day. Thou that believest in him, believe him and take comfort.
   Yea, when thou art most sunk in thy sad apprehensions, and he far off
   to thy thinking, then is he nearest to raise and comfort thee: as
   sometimes it grows darkest immediately before day.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XVII.

   LEIGHTON AND COLERIDGE

   Would any of you be cured of that common disease, the fear of death?
   Yet this is not the right name of the disease, as a mere reference to
   our armies and navies is sufficient to prove: nor can the fear of
   death, either as loss of life or pain of dying, be justly held a common
   disease. But would you be cured of the fear and fearful questionings
   connected with the approach of death? Look this way, and you shall find
   more than you seek. Christ, the Word that was from the beginning, and
   was made flesh and dwelt among men, died. And he, who dying conquered
   death in his own person, conquered sin, and death, which is the wages
   of sin, for thee. And of this thou mayest be assured, if only thou
   believe in him, and love him. I need not add, keep his commandments:
   since where faith and love are, obedience in its threefold character,
   as effect, reward, and criterion, follows by that moral necessity which
   is the highest form of freedom. The grave is thy bed of rest, and no
   longer the cold bed: for thy Saviour has warmed it, and made it
   fragrant.

   If then it be health and comfort to the faithful that Christ descended
   into the grave, with especial confidence may we meditate on his return
   from thence, quickened by the Spirit: this being to those who are in
   him the certain pledge, yea, the effectual cause of that blessed
   resurrection, for which they themselves hope. There is that union
   betwixt them and their Redeemer, that they shall rise by the
   communication and virtue of his rising: not simply by his power--for so
   the wicked likewise to their grief shall be raised: but they by his
   life as their life."
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT
     __________________________________________________________________

  ON THE THREE PRECEDING APHORISMS

   To the reader, who has consented to submit his mind to my temporary
   guidance, and who permits me to regard him as my pupil or junior
   fellow-student, I continue to address myself. Should he exist only in
   my imagination, let the bread float on the waters! If it be the Bread
   of Life, it will not have been utterly cast away.

   Let us pause a moment and review the road we have passed over since the
   transit from religious morality to spiritual religion. My first attempt
   was to satisfy you, that there is a spiritual principle in man, and to
   expose the sophistry of the arguments in support of the contrary. Our
   next step was to clear the road of all counterfeits, by showing what is
   not the Spirit, what is not spiritual religion. And this was followed
   by an attempt to establish a difference in kind between religious
   truths and the deductions of speculative science; yet so as to prove,
   that the former are not only equally rational with the latter, but that
   they alone appeal to reason in the fulness and living reality of their
   power. This and the state of mind requisite for the formation of right
   convictions respecting spiritual truths, afterwards employed our
   attention. Having then enumerated the Articles of the Christian Faith,
   peculiar to Christianity, I entered on the great object of the present
   work: namely, the removal of all valid objections to these articles on
   grounds of right reason or conscience. But to render this practicable,
   it was necessary, first, to present each article in its true Scriptural
   purity, by exposure of the caricatures of misinterpreters; and this,
   again, could not be satisfactorily done till we were agreed respecting
   the faculty entitled to sit in judgment on such questions. I early
   foresaw that my best chance (I will not say, of giving an insight into
   the surpassing worth and transcendant reasonableness of the Christian
   scheme; but) of rendering the very question intelligible, depended on
   my success in determining the true nature and limits of the human
   understanding, and in evincing its diversity from reason. In pursuing
   this momentous subject, I was tempted in two or three instances into
   disquisitions, which if not beyond the comprehension, were yet unsuited
   to the taste, of the persons for whom the work was principally
   intended. These, however, I have separated from the running text, and
   compressed into notes. The reader will at worst, I hope, pass them by
   as a leaf or two of waste paper, willingly given by him to those for
   whom it may not be paper wasted. Nevertheless, I cannot conceal that
   the subject itself supposes, on the part of the reader, a steadiness in
   self-questioning, a pleasure in referring to his own inward experience
   for the facts asserted by the author, which can only be expected from a
   person who has fairly set his heart on arriving at clear and fixed
   conclusions in matters of faith. But where this interest is felt,
   nothing more than a common capacity; with the ordinary advantages of
   education, is required for the complete comprehension both of the
   argument and the result. Let but one thoughtful hour be devoted to the
   pages 161-182. In all that follows, the reader will find no difficulty
   in understanding the author's meaning, whatever he may have in adopting
   it. The two great moments of the Christian Religion are, Original Sin
   and Redemption; that the ground, this the superstructure of our faith.
   The former I have exhibited, first, according to the scheme of the
   Westminster Divines and the Synod of Dort; then, according to the*
     __________________________________________________________________

   *To escape the consequences of this scheme, some Arminian divines have
   asserted that the penalty inflicted on Adam, and continued in his
   posterity, was simply the loss of immortality--death as the utter
   extinction of personal being: immortality being regarded by them (and
   not, I think, without good reason) as a supernatural attribute, and its
   loss therefore involved in the forfeiture of supernatural graces. This
   theory has its golden side: and, as a private opinion, is said to have
   the countenance of more than one dignitary of our Church, whose general
   orthodoxy is beyond impeachment. For here the penalty resolves itself
   into the consequence, and this the natural and naturally inevitable
   consequence of Adam's crime. For Adam, indeed, it was a positive
   punishmentment: scheme of a contemporary Arminian divine; and lastly,
   in contrast with both schemes, I have placed what I firmly believe to
   be the Scriptural sense of this article, and vindicated its entire
   conformity with reason and
     __________________________________________________________________

   a punishment of his guilt, the justice of which who could have dared
   arraign! While for the offspring of Adam it was simply a not
   super-adding to their nature the privilege by which the original man
   was contradistinguished from the brute creation--a mere negation, of
   which they had no more right to complain than any other species of
   animals. God in this view appears only in his attribute of mercy, as
   averting by supernatural interposition a consequence naturally
   inevitable. This is the golden side of the theory. But if we approach
   to it from the opposite direction, it first excites a just scruple,
   from the countenance it seems to give to the doctrine of Materialism.
   The supporters of this scheme do not, I presume, contend that Adam's
   offspring would not have been born men, but have farmed a new species
   of beasts! And if not, the notion of a rational and self-conscious
   soul, perishing utterly with the dissolution of the organized body,
   seems to require, nay, almost involves, the opinion that the soul is a
   quality or accident of the body--a mere harmony resulting from
   organization.

   But let this pass unquestioned. Whatever else the descendants of Adam
   might have been without the intercession of Christ, yet (this
   intercession having been effectually made) they are now endowed with
   souls that are not extinguished together with the material body. Now
   unless these divines teach likewise the Romish figment of Purgatory,
   and to an extent in which the Church of Rome herself would denounce the
   doctrine as an impious heresy: unless they hold, that a punishment
   temporary and remedial is the worst evil that the impenitent have to
   apprehend in a future state; and that the spiritual death declared and
   foretold by Christ, the death eternal where the worm never dies, is
   neither death nor eternal, but a certain quantum of suffering in a
   state of faith, hope, and progressive amendment--unless they go these
   lengths (and the divines here intended are orthodox Churchmen, men who
   would not knowingly advance even a step on the road towards them)--then
   I feel that any advantage their theory might possess over the
   Calvinistic scheme in the article of Original Sin, would be dearly
   purchased by increased difficulties, and an ultra-Calvinistic
   narrowness in the article of Redemption. I at least find it impossible,
   with my present human feelings, not to imagine otherwise than that even
   in heaven it would be a fearful thing to know, that in order to my
   elevation to a lot infinitely more desirable than by nature it would
   have been, the lot of so vast a multitude had experience. I now proceed
   to the other momentous article--from the necessitating occasion of the
   Christian dispensation to Christianity itself. For Christianity and
   Redemption are equivalent terms. And here my comment will be comprised
   in a few sentences: for I confine my views to the one object of
   clearing this awful mystery from those too current misrepresentations
   of its nature and import, that have laid it open to scruples and
   objections, not to such as shoot forth from an unbelieving
   heart--(against these a sick bed will be a more effectual antidote than
   all the argument in the world)--but to such scruples as have their
   birth-place in the reason and moral sense. Not that it is a
   mystery--not that it passeth all understanding;--if the doctrine be
   more than a hyperbolical phrase, it must do so;--but that it is at
   variance with the law revealed in the conscience, that it contradicts
   our moral instincts and intuitions--this is the difficulty, which alone
   is worthy of an answer. And what better way is there of
     __________________________________________________________________

   been rendered infinitely more calamitons; and that my felicity had been
   purchased by the everlasting misery of the majority of my fellow-men,
   who, if no redemption had been provided, after inheriting the pains and
   pleasures of earthly existence during the numbered hours, and the few
   and evil--evil yet few--days of the years of their mortal life, would
   have fallen asleep to wake no more,--would have sunk into the dreamless
   sleep of the grave, and have been as the murmur and the plaint, and the
   exulting swell and the sharp scream, which the unequal gust of
   yesterday snatched from the strings of a wind-harp.

   In another place I have ventured to question the spirit and tendency of
   Taylor's Work on Repentance.* But I ought to have added, that to
   discover and keep the true medium in expounding and applying the
   efficacy of Christ's Cross and Passion is beyond comparison the most
   difficult and delicate point of practical divinity--and that which
   especially needs a guidance from above.
     __________________________________________________________________

   *See also Literary Remains, vol. 888, pp. 295-325. correcting the
   misconceptions than by laying open the source and occasion of them?
   What surer way of removing the scruples and prejudices, to which these
   misconceptions have given rise, than by propounding the mystery
   itself--namely the redemptive act, as the transcendant cause of
   salvation--in the express and definite words in which it was enunciated
   by the Redeemer himself?

   But here, in addition to the three Aphorisms preceding, I interpose a
   view of redemption as appropriated by faith, coincident with
   Leighton's, though for the greater part expressed in my own words. This
   I propose as the right view. Then follow a few sentences transcribed
   from Field (an excellent divine of the reign of James I, of whose work
   on the Church,** it would be difficult to speak too highly), containing
   the questions to be solved, and which is numbered as an Aphorism,
   rather to preserve the uniformity of appearance, than as being strictly
   such. Then follows the comment: as part and commencement of which the
   reader will consider the two paragraphs of pp. 152-153, written for
   this purpose, and in the foresight of the present inquiry: and I
   entreat him therefore to begin the comment by re-perusing these
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XVIII.

   Stedfast by faith. This is absolutely necessary for resistance to the
   evil principle. There is no standing out without some firm ground to
   stand on: and this faith alone supplies. By faith in the love of Christ
   the power of God becomes ours. When the soul is beleaguered
     __________________________________________________________________

   **See Literary Remains, vol. iii, pp. 57-92. Ed. by enemies, weakness
   on the walls, treachery at the gates, and corruption in the citadel,
   then by faith she says--Lamb of God slain from the foundation of the
   world! Thou art my strength! I look to thee for deliverance! And thus
   she overcomes. The pollution (miasma) of sin is precipitated by his
   blood, the power of sin is conquered by his Spirit. The Apostle says
   not--stedfast by your own resolutions and purposes; but--stedfast by
   faith. Nor yet stedfast in your will, but stedfast in the faith. We are
   not to be looking to, or brooding over ourselves, either for accusation
   or for confidence, or (by a deep yet too frequent self-delusion) to
   obtain the latter by making a merit to ourselves of the former. But we
   are to look to Christ and him crucified. The law that is very nigh to
   thee, even in thy heart: the law that condemneth and hath no promise;
   that stoppeth the guilty past in its swift flight, and maketh it disown
   its name; the law will accuse thee enough. Linger not in the
   justice-court listening to thy indictment. Loiter not in waiting to
   hear the sentence. No, anticipate the verdict. Appeal to Caesar. Haste
   to the king for a pardon. Struggle thitherward, though in fetters; and
   cry aloud, and collect the whole remaining strength of thy will in the
   outcry--I believe; Lord help my unbelief! Disclaim all right of
   property in thy fetters. Say that they belong to the old man, and that
   thou dost but carry them to the grave, to be buried with their owner!
   Fix thy thought on what Christ did, what Christ suffered, what Christ
   is--as if thou wouldst fill the hollowness of thy soul with Christ. If
   he emptied himself of glory to become sin for thy salvation, must not
   thou be emptied of thy sinful self to become righteousness in and
   through his agony and the effective merits of his cross?** By what
   other means, in what other form, is it possible for thee to stand in
   the presence of the Holy One? With what mind wouldst thou come before
   God, if not with the mind of Him, in whom
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** God manifested in the flesh is eternity in the form of time. But
   eternity in relation to time is as the absolute to the conditional, or
   the real to the apparent, and redemption must partake of both;--always
   perfected, for it is a Fiat of the Eternal;--continuous, for it is a
   process in relation to man; the former the alone objectively, and
   therefore universally, true. That redemption is an opus perfutum, a
   finished work, the claim to which is conferred in Baptism: that a
   Christian cannot speak or think as if his redemption by the blood, and
   his justification by the righteousness of Christ alone, were future or
   contingent events, but must both say and think I have been redeemed, I
   am justified; lastly, that for as many as are received into his Church
   by Baptism, Christ has condemned sin in the flesh, has made it dead in
   law, that is, no longer imputable as guilt, has destroyed the objective
   reality of sin:--these are truths which all the Reformed Churches,
   Swedish, Danish, Evangelical, (or Lutheran,) the Reformed, (the
   Calvinistic in mid-Germany, France, and Geneva, so called,) lastly, the
   Church of England, and the Church of Scotland--nay, the best and; most
   learned of divines of the Roman Catholic Church have united in
   upholding as most certain and necessary articles of faith, and the
   effectual preaching of which Luther declares to be the appropriate
   criterion, stantis vel cadentus Ecclesia. The Church is standing or
   falling, according as this doctrine is supported, or overlooked, or
   countervened. Nor has the contrary doctrine, according to which the
   baptized are each individually, to be called, converted, and chosen,
   with all the corollaries from this assumption, the watching for signs
   and sensible assurances, the frames, and the states, and the feelings,
   and the sudden conversions, the contagious fever-boils of the (most
   unfitly, so called) Evangelicals, and Arminian Methodists of the day,
   been in any age taught or countenanced by any known and accredited
   Christian Church, or by any body and succession of learned divines. On
   the other hand, it has rarely happened that the Church has not been
   troubled by Pharisaic and fanatical individuals, who have sought, by
   working on the fears and feelings of the weak and unsteady, that
   celebrity which they could not obtain by learning and orthodoxy; and
   alas! so subtle is the poison, and so malignant in its operation, that
   it is almost hopeless to attempt the cure of any person, once infected,
   more particularly when, as most often happens, the patient is a woman.
   Nor does Luther, in his numerous and admirable discourses on this
   point, conceal alone God loveth the world? With good advice, perhaps,
   and a little assistance, thou wouldst rather cleanse and patch up a
   mind of thy own, and offer it as thy admission-right, thy
   qualification, to Him who charged his angels with folly! Oh! take
   counsel of thy reason. It will show thee how impossible it is that even
   a world should merit the love of eternal wisdom and all-sufficing
   beatitude, otherwise than as it is contained in that all-perfect Idea,
   in which the supreme Spirit contemplateth itself and the plenitude of
   its infinity:--the Only-Begotten before all ages, the beloved Son, in
   whom the Father is indeed well pleased!
     __________________________________________________________________

   or palliate the difficulties which the carnal mind, that works under
   many and different disguises, throws in the way to prevent the laying
   firm hold of the truth. One most mischievous and very popular misbelief
   must be cleared away in the first instance--the presumption, I mean,
   that whatever is not quite simple, and what any plain body can
   understand at the first hearing, cannot be of necessary belief, or
   among the fundamental articles or essentials of Christian faith. A
   docile, childlike mind, a deference to the authority of the Churches, a
   presumption of the truth of doctrines that have been received and
   taught as true by the whole Church in all times; reliance on the
   positive declarations of the Apostles--in short, all the convictions of
   the truth, of a doctrine that are previous to a perfect insight into
   its truth, because these convictions, with the affections and
   dispositions accompanying them, are the very means and conditions of
   attaining to that insight--and study of, and quiet meditation on, them
   with a gradual growth of spiritual knowledge and earnest prayer for its
   increase; all these, to each and all of which the young Christian is so
   repeatedly and fervently exhorted by St. Paul, are to be superseded,
   because, forsooth, truths needful for all men, must be quite simple and
   easy, and adapted to the capacity of all, even of the plainest and
   dullest understanding! What cannot be poured all at once on a man, can
   only be supererogatory drops from the emptied shower-bath of religious
   instruction! But surely, the more rational inference would be, that the
   faith, which is to save the whole man, must have its roots and
   justifying grounds in the very depths of our being. And he who can read
   the writings of the Apostles, John and Paul, without finding in almost
   every page a confirmation of this, must have looked at them, as at the
   sun in an eclipse, through blackened glasses.

   And as the mind, so the body with which it is to be clothed; as the
   indweller, so the house in which it is to be the abiding-place.** There
   is but one wedding-garment, in which we can sit down at the
   marriage-feast
     __________________________________________________________________

   **St. Paul blends both forms of expression, and asserts the same
   doctrine, when speaking of the celestial body provided for the new man
   in the spiritual flesh and blood, (that is, the informing power and
   vivific life of the incarnate Word: for the blood is the life, and the
   flesh the power)--when speaking, I say, of this celestial body, as a
   house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, yet brought down to
   us, made appropriable by faith, and ours--he adds, for in this earthly
   house (that is, this mortal life, as the inward principle or energy of
   our tabernacle, or outward and sensible body) we groan, earnestly
   desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven: not
   that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
   swallowed up of life. 2 Cor. v, 1-4.

   The four last words of the first verse (eternal in the heavens)
   compared with the conclusion of v, 2, (which is from heaven) present a
   coincidence with John iii, 13, "And no man hath ascended up to heaven,
   but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man, which is in
   heaven." [Would not the coincidence be more apparent, if the words of
   John had been rendered word for word, even to a disregard of the
   English idiom, and with what would be servile and superstitious
   fidelity in the translation of a common classic! I can see no reason
   why the

   so frequent in St. John, should not be rendered literally, no one; and
   there may be a reason why it should. I have some doubt, likewise
   respecting the omission of the definite articles

   and a greater as to the

   both in this place and in John i, 18, being adequately rendered by our
   which is. What sense some of the Greek Fathers attached to, or inferred
   from, St. Paul's in the heavens, the theological student (and to
   theologians is this note principally addressed) may find in Waterland's
   Letters to a Country Clergyman-- a divine, whose judgment and strong
   sound sense are as unquestionable as his learning and orthodoxy. A
   clergyman, in full orders, who has never read the works of Bull and
   Waterland, has a duty yet to perform].

   Let it not be objected, that, forgetful of my own professed aversion to
   allegorical interpretations, I have, in this note, fallen into the fond
   humour of the mystic divines, and allegorizers of Holy Writ. There is,
   believe me! a wide difference between symbolical and allegorical. If I
   say that the flesh and blood (corpus noumenon) of the Incarnate Word
   are power and life, I say likewise that this mysterious power and life
   are of Heaven: and that is the bridegroom's own gift, when he gave
   himself for us, that we might live in him and he in us. There is but
   one robe of righteousness, even the spiritual body, formed by the
   assimilative power of faith, for whoever eateth the flesh of the Son of
   Man, and drinketh his blood. Did Christ come from Heaven, did the Son
   of God leave the glory which he had with his Father before the world
   began, only to shew us a way to life, to teach truths, to tell us of a
   resurrection! Or saith he not, I am the way--I am the truth--I am the
   resurrection and the life?
     __________________________________________________________________

   verily and actually the flesh and blood, of Christ. They are the
   allegorizers who turn the sixth chapter of the Gospel according to St.
   John, the hard saying,--who can hear it?--after which time many of
   Christ's disciples, who had been eye-witnesses of his mighty miracles,
   who had beard the sublime morality of his Sermon on the Mount, had
   glorified God for the wisdom which they had heard, and had been
   prepared to acknowledge, This is indeed the Christ,--went back and
   walked no more with him!--the hard sayings, which even the Twelve were
   not yet competent to understand farther than that they were to be
   spiritually understood; and which the chief of the Apostles was content
   to receive with an implicit and anticipative faith!--they, I repeat,
   are the allegorizers who moralize these hard sayings, these high words
   of mystery, into a hyperbolical metaphor per catachresin, which only
   means a belief of the doctrine which Paul believed, an obedience to the
   law, respecting which Paul was blameless, before the voice called him
   on the road to Damascus! What every parent, every humane preceptor,
   would do when a child had misunderstood a metaphor or apologue in a
   literal sense, we all know. But the meek and merciful Jesus suffered
   many of his disciples to fall off from eternal life, when, to retain
   them, he had only to say,--ye simple ones! why are ye offended! My
   words, indeed, sound strange; but I mean no more than what you have
   often and often heard from me before, with delight and entire
   acquiescence!--Credat Judaeus! Non ego. It is sufficient for me to know
   that I have used the language of Paul and John, as it was understood
   and interpreted by Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Irenaesus, and (if he
   does not err) by the whole Christian Church then existing.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XIX.

   FIELD

   The Romanists teach that sins committed after Baptism (that is, for the
   immense majority of Christians having Christian parents, all their sins
   from the cradle to the grave) are not so remitted for Christ's sake,
   but that we must suffer that extremity of punishment which they
   deserve: and therefore either we must afflict ourselves in such sort
   and degree of extremity as may answer the demerit of our sins, or be
   punished by God, here or in the world to come, in such degree and sort
   that his justice may be satisfied. [As the encysted venom, or
   poison-bag, beneath the adder's fang, so does this doctrine lie beneath
   the tremendous power of the Romish Hierarchy. The demoralizing
   influence of this dogma, find that it curdled the very life-blood in
   the veins of Christendom, it was given to Luther, beyond all men since
   Paul, to see, feel, and promulgate. And yet in his large Treatise on
   Repentance, how near to the spirit of this doctrine--even to the very
   walls and gates of Babylon--was Jeremy Taylor driven, in recoiling from
   the fanatical extremes of the opposite error!] But they that are
   orthodox, teach that it is injustice to require the paying of one debt
   twice. * * * It is no less absurd to say, as the Papists do, that our
   satisfaction is required as a condition, without which Christ's
   satisfaction is not applicable unto us, than to say, Peter hath paid
   the debt of John, and he to whom it was due accepteth of the payment on
   the condition that John pay it himself also. * * * The satisfaction of
   Christ is communicated and applied unto us without suffering the
   punishment that sin deserveth, [and essentially involveth], upon the
   condition of our faith and repentance. [To which I would add; Without
   faith there is no power of repentance: without a commencing repentance
   no power to faith: and that it is in the power of the will either to
   repent or to have faith in the Gospel sense of the words, is itself a
   consequence of the redemption of mankind, a free gift of the Redeemer:
   the guilt of its rejection, the refusing to avail ourselves of the
   power, being all that we can consider as exclusively attributable to
   our own act].
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   (CONTAINING AN APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES LAID DOWN IN PAGES 152,
   153).

   Forgiveness of sin, the abolition of guilt, through the redemptive
   power of Christ's love, and of his perfect obedience during his
   voluntary assumption of humanity, is expressed, on account of the
   resemblance of the consequences in both cases, by the payment of a debt
   for another, which debt the payer had not himself incurred. Now the
   impropriation of this metaphor--(that is, the taking it literally)--by
   transferring the sameness from the consequents to the antecedents, or
   inferring the identity of the causes from a resemblance in the
   effects--this is the point on which I am at issue: and the view or
   scheme of redemption grounded on this confusion I believe to be
   altogether un-Scriptural.

   Indeed, I know not in what other instance I could better exemplify the
   species of sophistry noticed in p. 166, as the Aristotelean

   or clandestine passing over into a diverse kind. The purpose of a
   metaphor is to illustrate a something less known by a partial
   identification of it by some other thing better understood, or at least
   more familiar. Now the article of Redemption may be considered in a
   twofold relation-- in relation to the antecedent, that is, the
   Redeemer's act, as the efficient cause and condition of redemption; and
   in relation to the consequent, that is, the effects in and for the
   redeemed. Now it is the latter relation, in which the subject is
   treated of, set forth, expanded, and enforced by St. Paul. The
   mysterious act, the operative cause, is transcendant. Factum est: and
   beyond the information contained in the enunciation of the fact, it can
   be characterised only by the consequences. It is the consequences of
   the act of Redemption, which the zealous Apostle would bring home to
   the minds and affections both of Jews and Gentiles. Now the Apostle's
   opponents and gainsayers were principally of the former class. They
   were Jews: not only Jews unconverted, but such as had partially
   received the Gospel, and who, sheltering their national prejudices
   under the pretended authority of Christ's original Apostles and the
   Church in Jerusalem, set themselves up against Paul as followers of
   Cephas. Add too, that Paul himself was a Hebrew of the Hebrews;
   intimately versed in the Jews' religion above many his equals in his
   own nation, and above measure zealous of the traditions of his fathers.
   It might, therefore, have been anticipated, that his reasoning would
   receive its outward forms and language, that it would take its
   predominant colors, from his own past, and his opponents' present,
   habits of thinking; and that his figures, images, analogies, and
   references would be taken preferably from objects, opinions, events,
   and ritual observances ever uppermost in the imaginations of his own
   countrymen. And such we find them;--yet so judiciously selected, that
   the prominent forms, the figures of most frequent recurrence, are drawn
   from points of belief and practice, forms, laws, rites and customs,
   which then prevailed through the whole Roman world, and were common to
   Jew and Gentile.

   Now it would be difficult if not impossible to select points better
   suited to this purpose, as being equally familiar to all, and yet
   having a special interest for the Jewish converts, than those are from
   which the learned Apostle has drawn the four principal metaphors, by
   which he illustrates the blessed consequences of Christ's redemption of
   mankind. These are: 1. Sin offerings, sacrificial expiation. 2.
   Reconciliation, atonement, 3. Ransom from slavery, redemption, the
     __________________________________________________________________

   * This word occurs but once in the New Testament, Rom. v, 11, the
   marginal rendering being reconciliation. The personal noun,

   is still in use with the modern Greeks for a money-changer, or one who
   takes the debased currency, so general in countries under a despotic or
   other dishonest government, in exchange for sterling coin or bullion;
   the purchaser paying the catallage, that is, the difference. In the
   elder Greek writers, the verb means to exchange for an opposite,

   He exchanged within himself enmity for friendship, (that is, he
   reconciled himself with his party;-- or, as we say, made it up with
   them, an idiom which (with whatever loss of dignity) gives the exact
   force of the word. He made up the difference. The Hebrew word, of very
   frequent occurrence in the Pentateuch, which we render by the
   substantive atonement, has its radical or visual image in copher,
   pitch. Gen. vi, 14. Thou shalt pitch it within and without with
   pitch;--hence to unite, to fill up a breach or leak, the word
   expressing both the act, namely, the bringing together what had been
   previously separated, and the means, or material, by which the re-union
   is effected, as in our English verbs, to caulk, to solder, to poy or
   pay (from poix, pitch,) and the French, suiver. Thence, metaphorically,
   expiation, the piacula having the same root, and being grounded on
   another property or use of gums and resins, the supposed cleansing
   powers of their fumigation. Numb. viii, 21: made atonment for the
   Levites to cleanse them. Lastly (or if we are to believe the Hebrew
   Lexicons, properly and most frequently) it means ransom. But if by
   proper, the interpreter means primary and radical, the assertion does
   not need a confutation: all radicals belonging to one or other of three
   classes. 1. Interjections, or sounds expressing sensations or passions.
   2. Imitations of sounds, as splash, roar, whiz, &c. 3. And principally,
   visual buying back again, or being bought back. 4. Satisfaction of a
   creditor's claims by a payment of the debt. To one or other of these
   four heads all the numerous forms and exponents of Christ's mediation
   in St. Paul's writings may be referred. And the very number and variety
   of the words or periphrases used by him to express one and the same
   thing, furnish the strongest presumptive proof that all alike were used
   metaphorically. [In the following notation, let the small letters
   represent the effects or consequences, and the capitals the efficient
   causes or antecedents. Whether by causes we mean acts or agents, is
   indifferent. Now let X signify a transcendant, that is, a cause beyond
   our comprehension, and not within the sphere of sensible experience;
   and on the other hand, let A, B, C, and D represent each some one known
   and familiar cause, in reference to some single and characteristic
   effect: namely, A in reference to k, B to l, C to m, and D to n. Then I
   say X + k l m n is in different places expressed by A+k; B+l; C+m; D+n.
   And these I should call metaphorical exponents of X].

   Now John, the beloved disciple, who leaned on the Lord's bosom, the
   Evangelist

   that is, according to the spirit, the inner and substantial truth of
   the Christian Creed--John, recording the Redeemer's own words,
   enunciates the fact itself, to the full extent in which it is
   enunciable for the human mind, simply and without any metaphor, by
   identifying it in kind with
     __________________________________________________________________

   images, objects of sight. But as to frequency, all the numerous (fifty,
   I believe,) instances of the word in the Old Testament, I have not
   found one in which it can, or at least need, be rendered by ransom
   though beyond all doubt ransom is used in the Epistle to Timothy, as an
   equivalent term. a fact of hourly occurrence--expressing it, I say, by
   a familiar fact the same in kind with that intended, though of a far
   lower dignity;--by a fact of every man's experience, known to all, yet
   not better understood than the fact described by it. In the redeemed it
   is a regeneration, a birth, a spiritual seed impregnated and evolved,
   the germinal principle of a higher and enduring life, of a spiritual
   life--that is, a life the actuality of which is not dependent on the
   material body, or limited by the circumstances and processes
   indispensable to its organization and subsistence. Briefly, it is the
   differential of immortality, of which the assimilative power of faith
   and love is the integrant, and the life in Christ the integration.

   But even this would be an imperfect statement, if we omitted the awful
   truth, that besides that dissolution of our earthly tabernacle which we
   call death, there is another death, not the mere negation of life, but
   its positive opposite. And as there is a mystery of life, and an
   assimilation to the principle of life, even to him who is the Life; so
   is there a mystery of death, and an assimilation to the principle of
   evil; a fructifying of the corrupt seed, of which death is the
   germination. Thus the regeneration to spiritual life is at the same
   time a redemption from the spiritual death.

   Respecting the redemptive act itself, and the divine agent, we know
   from revelation that he was made a quickening

   life-making) Spirit: and that in order to this it was necessary that
   God should be manifested in the flesh; that the Eternal Word, through
   whom and by whom the world

   the order, beauty, and sustaining law of visible natures) was and is,
   should be made flesh, assume our humanity personally, fulfil all
   righteousness, and so suffer and so die for us, as in dying to conquer
   death for as many as should receive him. More than this, the mode, the
   possibility, we are not competent to know. It is, as hath been already
   observed concerning the primal act of apostasy, a mystery by the
   necessity of the subject--a mystery, which at all events it will be
   time enough for us to seek and expect to understand, when we understand
   the mystery of our natural life, and its conjunction with mind and will
   and personal identity. Even the truths that are given to us to know, we
   can know only through faith in the spirit. They are spiritual things
   which must be spiritually discerned. Such, however, being the means and
   the effects of our redemption, well might the fervent Apostle associate
   it with whatever was eminently dear and precious to erring and
   afflicted mortals, and (where no expression could be commensurate, no
   single title be other than imperfect) seek from similitude of effect to
   describe the superlative boon, by successively transferring to it, as
   by a superior claim, the name of each several act and ordinance,
   habitually connected in the minds of all his hearers with feelings of
   joy, confidence, and gratitude.

   Do you rejoice when the atonement made by the priest has removed the
   civil stain from your name, restored you to your privileges as a son of
   Abraham, and replaced you in the respect of your brethren?--Here is an
   atonement which takes away a deeper and worse stain, an eating
   canker-spot in the very heart of your personal being. This, to as many
   as receive it, gives the privilege to become sons of God (John i, 12);
   this will admit you to the society of angels, and insure to you the
   rights of brotherhood with spirits made perfect. (Heb. xii, 22). Here
   is a sacrifice, a sin-offering for the whole world: and a High Priest,
   who is indeed a Mediator; who, not in type or shadow, but in very
   truth, and in his own right, stands in the place of Man to God, and of
   God to Man; and who receives as a Judge what he offered as an Advocate.

   Would you be grateful to one who had ransomed you from slavery under a
   bitter foe, or who brought you out of captivity? Here is redemption
   from a far direr slavery, the slavery of sin unto death; and he who
   gave himself for the ransom, has taken captivity captive.

   Had you by your own fault alienated yourself from your best, your only
   sure friend;--had you, like a prodigal, cast yourself out of your
   Father's house;--would you not love the good Samaritan, who should
   reconcile you to your friend? Would you not prize above all price the
   intercession, which had brought you back from husks, and the tending of
   swine, and restored you to your father's arms, and seated you at your
   father's table?

   Had you involved yourself in a heavy debt for certain gewgaws, for
   high-seasoned meats, and intoxicating drinks, and glistening apparel,
   and in default of payment had made yourself over as a bondsman to a
   hard creditor, who, it was foreknown, would enforce the bond of
   judgment to the last tittle;--with what emotions would you not receive
   the glad tidings that a stranger, or a friend whom in the days of your
   wantonness you had neglected and reviled, had paid the debt for you,
   had made satisfaction to your creditor? But you have incurred a debt of
   death to the evil nature; you have sold yourself over to sin; and,
   relatively to you, and to all your means and resources, the seal on the
   bond is the seal of necessity. Its stamp is the nature of evil. But the
   stranger has appeared, the forgiving friend has come, even the Son of
   God from heaven: and to as many as have faith in his name, I say--the
   debt is paid for you;--the satisfaction has been made.

   Now, to simplify the argument, and at the same time to bring the
   question to the test, we will confine our attention to the figure last
   mentioned, namely, the satisfaction of a debt. Passing by our modern
   Alogi, who find nothing but metaphors in either Apostle, let us suppose
   for a moment, with certain divines, that our Lord's words, recorded by
   John, and which in all places repeat and assert the same analogy, are
   to be regarded as metaphorical; and that it is the varied expressions
   of St. Paul that are to be literally interpreted: for example, that sin
   is, or involves, an infinite debt, (in the proper and law-court sense
   of the word, debt)--a debt owing by us to the vindictive justice of God
   the Father, which can only be liquidated by the everlasting misery of
   Adam and all his posterity, or by a sum of suffering equal to this.
   Likewise, that God the Father, by his absolute decree, or (as some,
   divines teach) through the necessity of his unchangeable justice, had
   determined to exact the full sum; which must, therefore, be paid either
   by ourselves or by some other in our name and behalf. But besides the
   debt which all mankind contracted in and through Adam, as a homo
   publicus, even as a nation is bound by the acts of its head or its
   plenipotentiary, every man (say these divines) is an insolvent debtor
   on his own score. In this fearful predicament the Son of God took
   compassion on mankind, and resolved to pay the debt for us, and to
   satisfy the divine justice by a perfect equivalent. Accordingly, by a
   strange yet strict consequence, it has been holden by more than one of
   these divines, that the agonies suffered by Christ were equal in amount
   to the sum total of the torments of all mankind here and hereafter, or
   to the infinite debt, which in an endless succession of instalments we
   should have been paying to the divine justice, had it not been paid in
   full by the Son of God incarnate!

   It is easy to say--"O but I do not hold this, or we do not make this an
   article of our belief!" The true question is: "Do you take any part of
   it; and can you reject the rest without being inconsequent?" Are debt,
   satisfaction, payment in full, creditor's rights, and the like, nomina
   propria, by which the very nature of Redemption and its occasion is
   expressed;--or are they, with several others, figures of speech for the
   purpose of illustrating the nature and extent of the consequences and
   effects of the redemptive act, and to excite in the receivers a due
   sense of the magnitude and manifold operation of the boon, and of the
   love and gratitude due to the Redeemer? If still you reply, the former:
   then, as your whole theory is grounded on a notion of justice, I ask
   you--Is this justice a moral attribute? But morality commences with,
   and begins in, the sacred distinction between thing and person. On this
   distinction all law, human and divine, is grounded; consequently, the
   law of justice. If you attach any meaning to the term justice, as
   applied, to God, it must be the. same to which you refer when you
   affirm or deny it of any other personal agent--save only, that in its
   attribution to God, you speak of it as unmixed and perfect. For if not,
   what do you mean? And why do you call it by the same name? I may,
   therefore, with all right and reason, put the case as between man and
   man. For should it be found irreconcilable with the justice which the
   light of reason, made law in the conscience, dictates to man, how much
   more must it be incongruous with the all-perfect justice of God!
   Whatever case I should imagine would be felt by the reader as below the
   dignity of the subject, and in some measure jarring with his feelings;
   and in other respects the more familiar the case, the better suited to
   the present purpose.

   A sum of 1000 is owing from James to Peter, for which James has given
   a bond. He is insolvent, and the bond is on the point of being put in
   suit against him, to James' utter ruin. At this moment Matthew steps
   in, pays Peter the thousand pounds, and discharges the bond. In this
   case, no man would hesitate to admit, that a complete satisfaction had
   been made to Peter. Matthew's 1000 is a perfect equivalent for the sum
   which James was bound to have paid, and which Peter had lent. It is the
   same thing: and this is altogether a question of things. Now instead
   James' being indebted to Peter for a sum of money, which (he having
   become insolvent) Matthew pays for him, let me put the case, that James
   had been guilty of the basest and most hardhearted ingratitude to a
   most worthy and affectionate mother, who had not only performed all the
   duties and tender offices of a mother, but whose whole heart was bound
   up in this her only child--who had foregone all the pleasures and
   amusements of life in watching over his sickly childhood, had
   sacrificed her health and the far greater part of her resources to
   rescue him from the consequences of his follies and excesses during his
   youth and early manhood; and to procure for him the means of his
   present rank and affluence--all which he had repaid by neglect,
   desertion, and open profligacy. Here the mother, stands in the relation
   of the creditor: and here too, I will suppose the same generous friend
   to interfere, and to perform with the greatest tenderness and constancy
   all those duties of a grateful and affectionate son, which James ought
   to have performed. Will this satisfy the mother's claims on James, or
   entitle him to her esteem, approbation, and blessing? Or what if
   Matthew, the vicarious son, should at length address her in words to
   this purpose: "Now, I trust, you are appeased, and will be henceforward
   reconciled to James, I have satisfied all your claims on him. I have
   paid his debt in full: and you are too just to require the same debt to
   be paid twice over. You will therefore regard him with the same
   complacency, and receive him into your presence, with the same love, as
   if there had been no difference between him and you. For I have made it
   up." What other reply could the swelling heart of the mother dictate
   than this: "O misery! and is it possible that you are in league with my
   unnatural child to insult me? Must not the very necessity of your
   abandonment of your proper sphere, form an additional evidence of his
   guilt? Must not the sense of your goodness teach me more fully to
   comprehend, more vividly to feel, the evil in him? Must not the
   contrast of your merits magnify his demerit in his mother's eye, and at
   once recall and embitter the conviction of the canker worm in his
   soul?"

   If indeed by the force of Matthew's example, by persuasion, or by
   additional and more mysterious influences, or by an inward co-agency,
   compatible with the existence of a personal will, James should be led
   to repent; if through admiration and love of this great goodness
   gradually assimilating his mind to the mind of his benefactor, he
   should in his own person become a grateful and dutiful child--then
   doubtless the mother would be wholly satisfied! But then the case is no
   longer a question of things, or a matter of debt payable by another.
   Nevertheless, the effect,--and the reader will remember, that it is the
   effects and consequences of Christ's mediation, on which St. Paul is
   dilating--the effect to James is similar in both cases, that is, in the
   case of James, the debtor, and of James, the undutiful son. In both
   cases, James is liberated from a grievous burthen: and in both cases,
   he has to attribute his liberation to the act and free grace of
   another. The only difference is, that in the former case (namely, the
   payment of the debt) the beneficial act is, singly and without
   requiring any re-action or co-agency on the part of James, the
   efficient cause of his liberation; while in the latter case (namely,
   that of Redemption) the beneficial act is the first, the indispensable
   condition, and then, the co-efficient.

   The professional student of theology will, perhaps, understand the
   different positions asserted in the preceding argument more readily if
   they are presented synoptically, that is, brought at once within his
   view, in the form of answers to four questions, comprising the
   constituent parts of the Scriptural doctrine of Redemption. And I trust
   that my lay readers of both sexes will not allow themselves to be
   scared from the perusal of the following short catechism, by half a
   dozen Latin words, or rather words with Latin endings, that translate
   themselves into English, when I dare assure them, that they will
   encounter no other obstacle to their full and easy comprehension of the
   contents.

   Synopsis of the constituent points in the doctrine of Redemption, in
   four questions, with correspondent answers.

   Questions.

   Who (or What) is the
    1. Agens causator?
    2. Actus causativus?
    3. Effectum causatum?
    4. Consequentia ab effecto?
     __________________________________________________________________

  *Answers.*

   I. The agent and personal cause of the Redemption of mankind is--the
   co-eternal Word and only begotten Son of the Living God, incarnate,
   tempted, agonizing

   crucified, submitting to death, resurgent, communicant of his Spirit,
   ascendent, and obtaining for his Church the descent and communion of
   the Holy Spirit, the Comforter.

   II. The causative act is--a spiritual and transcendant mystery, that
   passeth all understanding.

   III. The effect caused is--the being born anew: as before in the flesh
   to the world, so now born in the spirit to Christ.

   IV. The consequences from the effect are--sanctification from sin, and
   liberation from the inherent and penal consequences of sin in the world
   to come, with all the means and processes of sanctification by the Word
   and the Spirit: these consequents being the same for the sinner
   relatively to God and his own soul, as the satisfaction of a debt for a
   debtor relatively to his creditor; as the sacrificial atonement made by
   the priest for the transgressor of the Mosaic Law; as the
   reconciliation to an alienated parent for a son who had estranged
   himself from his father's house and presence; and as a redemptive
   ransom for a slave or captive.

   Now I complain, that this metaphorical naming of the transcendant
   causative act through the medium of its proper effects from actions and
   causes of familiar occurrence connected with the former by similarity
   of result, has been mistaken for an intended designation of the
   essential character of the causative act itself; and that thus divines
   have interpreted de omni what was spoken de singulo, and magnified a
   partial equation into a total identity.

   I will merely hint to my more learned readers, and to the professional
   students of theology, that the origin of this error is to be sought for
   in the discussions of the Greek Fathers, and (at a later period) of the
   Schoolmen on the obscure and abysmal subject of the divine A-seity and
   the distinction between the

   and the

   that is, the Absolute Will, as the universal ground of all being, and
   the election and purpose of God in the Personal Idea, as the Father.
   And this view would have allowed me to express what I believe to be the
   true import and Scriptural idea of Redemption in terms much more nearly
   resembling those used ordinarily by the Calvinistic divines, and with a
   conciliative show of coincidence. But this motive was outweighed by the
   reflection, that I could not rationally have expected to be understood
   by those, to whom I most wish to be intelligible: et si non vis
   intelligi, cur vis legi?

   Not to countervene the purpose of a Synopsis, I have detached the
   confirmative or explanatory remarks from the answers to questions II.
   and III., and place them below as scholia. A single glance of the eye
   will enable the reader to re-connect each sentence it is supposed to
   follow.
     __________________________________________________________________

  SCHOLIUM TO ANSWER II.

   Nevertheless, the factor actual truth having been assured to us by
   revelation, it is not impossible, by stedfast meditation on the idea
   and supernatural character of a personal will, for a mind spiritually
   disciplined to satisfy itself, that the redemptive act supposes (and
   that our redemption is even negatively conceivable only on the
   supposition of) an agent who can at once act on the will as an exciting
   cause, quasi ab extra; and in the will, as the condition of its
   potential, and the ground of its actual, being.
     __________________________________________________________________

  SCHOLIUM TO ANSWER III.

   Where two subjects, that stand to each other in the relation of
   antithesis or contradistinction, are connected by a middle term common
   to both, the sense of this middle term is indifferently determinable by
   either; the preferability of the one or the other in any given case
   being decided by the circumstance of our more frequent experience of,
   or greater familiarity with, the term in this connexion. Thus, if I put
   hydrogen and oxygen gas, as opposite poles, the term gas is common to
   both; and it is a matter of indifference by which of the two bodies I
   ascertain the sense of the term. But if, for the conjoint purposes of
   connexion and contrast, I oppose transparent crystallized alumen to
   opaque derb or uncrystallized alumen;--it may easily happen to be far
   more convenient for me to shew the sense of the middle term, that is,
   alumen, by a piece of pipe-clay than by a saphire or ruby; especially
   if I should be describing the beauty and preciousness of the latter to
   a peasant woman, or in a district where a ruby was a rarity which the
   fewest only had an opportunity of seeing. This is a plain rule of
   common logic directed in its application by common sense.

   Now let us apply this to the case in hand. The two opposites here are
   flesh and spirit: this in relation to Christ, that in relation to the
   world; and these two opposites are connected by the middle term, birth,
   which is of course common to both. But for the same reason, as in the
   instance last mentioned, the interpretation of the common term is to be
   ascertained from its known sense, in the more familiar
   connexion--birth, namely, in relation to our natural life and to the
   organized body, by which we belong to the present world. Whatever the
   word signifies in this connexion, the same essentially (in kind though
   not in dignity and value) must be its signification in the other. How
   else could it be (what yet in this text it undeniably is,) the punctum
   indifferens, or nota communis, of the thesis, flesh or the world and
   the antithesis Spirit or Christ? We might therefore, upon the
   supposition of a writer having been speaking of river-water in
   distinction from rain-water, as rationally pretend that in the latter
   phrase the term, water, was to be understood metaphorically, as that
   the word, birth, is a metaphor, and means only so and so in the Gospel
   according to St. John.

   There is, I am aware, a numerous and powerful party in our Church, so
   numerous and powerful as not seldom to be entitled the Church, who hold
   and publicly teach, that " Regeneration is only Baptism." Nay, the
   writer of the article on the lives of Scott and Newton, in our ablest
   and most respectable review, is but one among many who do not hesitate
   to brand the contrary opinion as heterodoxy, and schismatical
   superstition. I trust, that I think as seriously as most men of the
   evil of schism; but with every disposition to pay the utmost deference
   to an acknowledged majority, including, it is said, a very large
   proportion of the present dignitaries of our Church, I cannot but think
   it a sufficient reply, that if Regeneration means Baptism, Baptism must
   mean Regeneration; and this too, as Christ himself has declared, a
   regeneration in the spirit. Now I would ask these divines this simple
   question: Do they believingly suppose a spiritual regenerative power
   and agency inhering in or accompanying the sprinkling a few drops of
   water on an infant's face? They cannot evade the question by saying
   that Baptism is a type or sign. For this would be to supplant their own
   assertion, that Regeneration means Baptism, by the contradictory
   admission, that Regeneration is the significatum, of which Baptism is
   the significant. Unless, indeed, they would incur the absurdity of
   saying, that Regeneration is a type of Regeneration, and Baptism a type
   of itself--or that Baptism only means Baptism! And this indeed is the
   plain consequence to which they might be driven, should they answer the
   above question in the negative.

   But if their answer be, "Yes! we do suppose and believe this efficiency
   in the Baptismal act"--I have not another word to say. Only, perhaps, I
   might be permitted to express a hope that, for consistency's sake they
   would speak less slightingly of the insufflation, and extreme unction,
   used in the Romish Church; notwithstanding the not easily to be
   answered arguments of our Christian Mercury, the all-eloquent Jeremy
   Taylor, respecting the latter,--"which, since it is used when the man
   is above half dead, when he can exercise no act of understanding, it
   must needs be nothing. For no rational man can think, that any ceremony
   can make a spiritual change without a spiritual act of him that is to
   be changed; nor that it can work by way of nature, or by charm, but
   morally and after the manner of reasonable creatures."**

   It is too obvious to require suggestion, that these words here quoted
   apply with yet greater force and propriety to the point in question; as
   the babe is an unconscious subject, which the dying man need not be
   supposed to be. My avowed convictions respecting
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Dedicat. to Holy Dying. Ed. Regeneration with the spiritual Baptism,
   as its condition and initiative, (Luke iii, 16; Matt, i, 7; Matt, iii,
   11,) and of which the sacramental rite, the Baptism of John, was
   appointed by Christ to remain as the sign and figure; and still more,
   perhaps, my belief respecting the mystery of the Eucharist, (concerning
   which I hold the same opinions as Bucer,** Peter Martyr, and presumably
   Cranmer himself--these convictions and this belief will, I doubt not,
   be deemed by the orthodox de more Grotii, who improve the letter of
   Arminius with the spirit of Socinus, sufficient data to bring me in
   guilty of irrational and superstitious mysticism. But I abide by a
   maxim which I learned at an early period of my theological studies,
   from Benedict Spinoza. Where the alternative lies between the absurd
   and the incomprehensible, no wise man can be at a loss which of the two
   to prefer. To be called irrational, is a trifle: to be so, and in
   matters of religion, is far otherwise: and whether the irrationality
   consists in men's believing (that is, in having persuaded themselves
   that they believe) against reason, or without reason, I have been early
   instructed to consider it as a sad and serious evil, pregnant with
   mischiefs, political and moral. And by none of my numerous instructors
   so impressively as by that great and shining light of our Church in the
   aera of her intellectual splendor. Bishop Jeremy Taylor: from one of
   whose works, and that of especial authority for the safety as well as
   for the importance of the principle, inasmuch as it was written
   expressly ad populum, I will now, both for its own intrinsic worth, and
   to relieve the attention, wearied, perhaps, by the length and
   argumentative character of the preceding discussion, interpose the
   following Aphorism.
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Strype--Cranmer, Append. Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XX.

   TAYLOR

   Whatever is against right reason, that no faith can oblige us to
   believe. For though reason is not the positive and affirmative measure
   of our faith, and our faith ought to be larger than (speculative)**
   reason, and take something into her heart, that reason can never take
   into her eye; yet in all our creed there can be nothing against reason.
   If reason justly contradicts an article, it is not of the household of
   faith. In this there is no difficulty, but that in practice we take
   care that we do not call that reason, which is not so. For although
   reason is a right judge?, yet it ought not to pass sentence in an
   inquiry of faith, until all the information be brought in; all that is
   within, and all that is without, all that is above, and all that is
   below; all that concerns it in experience, and all that concerns it in
   act; whatsoever is of pertinent observation, and whatsoever is
   revealed. For else reason may argue very well, and yet conclude
   falsely. It may conclude well in logic, and yet infer a false
   proposition in theology. But when our judge is fully and truly informed
   in all that whence she is to make her judgment, we may safely follow
   her whithersoever she invites us.
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Which it could not be in respect of spiritual truths and objects
   super-sensuous, if it were the same with, and merely another name for
   the faculty judging according to sense--that is, the understanding, or
   (as Taylor most often calls it in distinction from reason) discourse
   (discursus scu discursiva vel discursoria). The reason, so instructed
   and so actuated as Taylor requires in the sentences immediately
   following, is what I have called the spirit.

   See ante p. 136. Ed.

   ?See ante pp. 126-7, 174-5. Ed

   See ante p. 127. Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXI.

   TAYLOR

   He that speaks against his own reason, speaks against his own
   conscience: and therefore it is certain, no man serves God with a good
   conscience, who serves him against his reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXII.

   TAYLOR

   By the eye of reason through the telescope of faith, that is,
   revelation, we may see what without this telescope we could never have
   known to exist. But as one that shuts the eye hard, and with violence
   curls the eyelid, forces a fantastic fire from the crystalline humor,
   and espies a light that never shines, and sees thousands of little
   fires that never burn; so is he that blinds the eye of reason, and
   pretends to see by an eye of faith. He makes little images of notions,
   and some atoms dance before him; but he is not guided by the light, nor
   instructed by the proposition, but sees like a man in his sleep. In no
   case can true reason and a right faith oppose each other.
     __________________________________________________________________

  NOTE PREFACTORY TO
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXIII.

   Less on my own account, than in the hope of forearming my youthful
   friends, I add one other transcript from Bishop Taylor, as from a
   writer to whose name no taint or suspicion of Calvinistic or
   schismatical tenets can attach, and for the purpose of softening the
   offence which, I cannot but foresee, will be taken at the positions
   asserted in the first paragraph of Aphorism VII, p. 145, and the
   documental proofs of the same in pp. 148-149: and this by a formidable
   party composed of men ostensibly of the most dissimilar creeds, regular
   Church-divines, voted orthodox by a great majority of suffrages, and
   the so-called free-thinking Christians, and Unitarian divines. It is
   the former class alone that I wish to conciliate: so far at least as it
   may be done by removing the aggravation of novelty from the offensive
   article. And surely the simple re-assertion of one of "the two great
   things," which Bishop Taylor could assert as a fact,--which, he took
   for granted, that no Christian would think of controverting,--should at
   least be controverted without bitterness to his successors in the
   Church. That which was perfectly safe and orthodox in 1667, in the
   judgment of a devoted Royalist and Episcopalian, ought to be at most
   but a venial heterodoxy in 1825. For the rest, I am prepared to hear in
   answer--what has already been so often and with such theatrical effect
   dropped as an extinguisher on my arguments--the famous concluding
   period of one of the chapters in Paley's Moral and Political
   Philosophy, declared by Dr. Parr to be the finest prose passage in
   English literature. Be it so. I bow to so great an authority. But if
   the learned doctor would impose it on me as the truest as well as the
   finest, or expect me to admire the logic equally with the rhetoric--

   --I start off. As I have been un-English enough to find in Pope's
   tomb-epigrant on Sir Isaac Newton nothing better than a gross and
   wrongful falsehood, conveyed in an enormous and irreverent hyperbole;
   so with regard to this passage in question, free as it is from all
   faults of taste, I have yet the hardihood to confess, that in the sense
   in which the words "discover" and "prove," are here used and intended,
   I am not convinced of the truth of the principle, (that he alone
   discovers who proves) and I question the correctness of the particular
   case, brought as instance and confirmation. I doubt the validity of the
   assertion as a general rule; and I deny it, as applied to matters of
   faith, to the verities of religion, in the belief of which there must
   always be somewhat of moral election, "an act of the will in it as well
   as of the understanding, as much love in it as discursive power. True
   Christian faith must have in it something of in-evidence, something
   that must be made up by duty and by obedience."--** But most readily do
   I admit, and most fervently do I contend, that the miracles worked by
   Christ, both as miracles and as fulfilments of prophecy, both as signs
   and as wonders, made plain discovery, and gave unquestionable proof, of
   his divine character and authority; that they were to the whole Jewish
   nation true and appropriate evidences, that He was indeed come who had
   promised and declared to their forefathers, Behold your God will come
   with vengeance, even God with a recompense. He will come and save you.
   I receive them as proofs, therefore, of the truth of every word which
   he taught who was himself The Word; and as sure evidences of the final
   victory over death and of the life to come, in that they were
   manifestations of Him, who said: I am the resurrection and the life!

   The obvious inference from the passage in question, if not its express
   import, is: Miracula experimenta crucis esse, quibus solis probandum
   erat, homines non, pecudum instar, omnino perituros esse. Now this
   doctrine I hold to be altogether alien from the spirit, and without
   authority in the letter, of Scripture. I can recall nothing in the
   history of human belief that should induce me, I find nothing in my own
   moral being that
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** J. Taylor's Worthy Communicant. Ed.

   Isaiah xxxiv, compared with Matt., x, 34, and Luke xii, 49. Ed. enables
   me, to understand it. I can, however, perfectly well understand, the
   readiness of those divines in hoc Paleii dictum ore pleno jurare, qui
   nihil aliud in toto Evangelio invenire posse, profitentur. The most
   unqualified admiration of this superlative passage I find perfectly in
   character for those, who while Socinianism and Ultra-Socinianism are
   spreading like the roots of an elm, on and just below the surface,
   through the whole land, and here and there at least have even dipped
   under the garden-fence of the Church, and blunted the edge of the
   labourer's spade in the gayest parterres of our Baalhamon,--who,--while
   heresies, to which the framers and compilers of our Liturgy, Homilies,
   and Articles would have refused the very name of Christianity, meet
   their eyes on the list of religious denominations for every city and
   large town throughout the kingdom--can yet congratulate themselves with
   Dr. Paley, in his book on the Evidences,** that the rent has not
   reached the foundation;--that is, that the corruption of man's will;
   that the responsibility of man in any sense in which it is not equally
   predicable of dogs and horses; that the divinity of our Lord, and even
   his pre-existence; that sin, and redemption through the merits of
   Christ; and grace; and the especial aids of the Spirit; and the
   efficacy of prayer; and the subsistency of the Holy Ghost; may all be
   extruded without breach or rent in the essentials of Christian
   Faith;--that a man may deny and renounce them all, and remain a
   fundamental Christian, notwithstanding! But there are many who cannot
   keep up with Latitudinarians of such a stride; and I trust that the
   majority of serious believers are in this predicament. Now for all
   these it would seem more in character to be
   _________________________________________________________

   ** Conclusion, Part III, ch. 8. Ed. 23 of Bishop Taylor's opinion, that
   the belief in question is presupposed in a convert to the truth in
   Christ--but at all events not to circulate in the great whispering
   gallery of the religious public suspicions and hard thoughts of those
   who, like myself, are of this opinion; who do not dare decry the
   religious instincts of humanity as a baseless dream; who hold, that to
   excavate the ground under the faith of all mankind, is a very
   questionable method of building up our faith, as Christians; who fear,
   that instead of adding to, they should detract from, the honour of the
   Incarnate Word by disparaging the light of the Word, that was in the
   beginning, and which lighteth every man; and who, under these
   convictions, can tranquilly leave it to be disputed, in some new
   Dialogues in the shades, between the fathers of the Unitarian Church on
   the one side, and Maimonides, Moses Mendelssohn, and Lessing on the
   other, whether the famous passage in Paley does or does not contain the
   three dialectic flaws, petitio princii, argumentum in circulo, and
   argumentum contra rem a premisso rem ipsam includente.

   Yes! fervently do I contend, that to satisfy the understanding that
   there is a future state, was not the specific object of the Christian
   Dispensation; and that neither the belief of a future state, nor the
   rationality of this belief, is the exclusive attribute of the Christian
   religion. An essential, a fundamental, article of all religion it is,
   and therefore of the Christian; but otherwise than as in connexion with
   the salvation of mankind from the terrors of that state, among the
   essential articles peculiar to the Gospel Creed (those, for instance,
   by which it is contra-distinguished from the creed of a religious Jew)
   I do not place it. And before sentence is passed against me, as
   heterodox, on this ground, let not my judges forget who it was that
   assured us, that if a man did not believe in a state of retribution
   after death, previously and on other grounds, neither would he believe,
   though a man should be raised from the dead.

   Again, I am questioned as to my proofs of a future state by men who are
   so far, and only so far, professed believers, that they admit a God and
   the existence of a law from God. I give them: and the questioners turn
   from me with a scoff or incredulous smile. Now should others of a less
   scanty creed infer the weakness of the reasons assigned by me from
   their failure in convincing these men; may I not remind them, who it
   was, to whom a similar question was proposed by men of the same class?
   But at all events it will be enough for my own support to remember it;
   and to know that He held such questioners, who could not find a
   sufficing proof of this great all-concerning verity in the words, The
   God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, unworthy of any
   other answer--men not to be satisfied by any proofs, at least, as are
   compatible with the ends and purposes of all religious conviction;--by
   any proofs that would not destroy the faith they were intended to
   confirm, and reverse the whole character and quality of its effects and
   influences. But if, notwithstanding all here offered in defence of my
   opinion, I must still be adjudged heterodox and in error,--what can I
   say but that malo cum Platone errare, and take refuge behind the ample
   shield of Bishop Jeremy Taylor.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM XXIII.

   TAYLOR.

   In order to his own glory, and for the manifestation of his goodness,
   and that the accidents of this world might not overmuch trouble those
   good men who suffered evil things, God was pleased to do two great
   things. The one was: that he sent his Son into the world to take upon
   him our nature, that every man might submit to a necessity, from which
   God's own Son was not exempt, when it behoved even Christ to suffer,
   and so to enter into glory. The other great thing was: that God did not
   only by revelation and the sermons of the Prophets to his Church, but
   even to all mankind competently teach, and effectively persuade, that
   the soul of man does not die; that though things were ill here, yet to
   the good who usually feel most of the evils of this life, they should
   end in honour and advantages. And therefore Cicero had reason on his
   side to conclude, that there is a time and place after this life,
   wherein the wicked shall be punished, and the virtuous rewarded; when
   he considered that Orpheus and Socrates, and many others, just men and
   benefactors of mankind, were either slain or oppressed to death by evil
   men. And all these received not the promise. But when virtue made men
   poor, and free speaking of brave truths made the wise to lose their
   liberty: when an excellent life hastened an opprobrious death, and the
   obeying reason and our conscience lost us our lives, or at least all
   the means and conditions of enjoying them: it was but time to look
   about for another state of things where justice should rule, and virtue
   find her own portion. And therefore men cast out every line, and turned
   every stone, and tried every argument: and sometimes proved it well,
   and when they did not, yet they believed strongly; and they were sure
   of the thing, when they were not sure of the argument.**
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Sermon at the Funeral of Sir George Dalston. Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT.

   A fact may be truly stated, and yet the cause or reason assigned for it
   mistaken, or inadequate, or pars pro toto,--one only or few of many
   that might or should have been adduced. The preceding Aphorism is an
   instance in point. The phaenomenon here brought forward by the Bishop,
   as the ground and occasion of men's belief of a future state--namely,
   the frequent, not to say ordinary, disproportion between moral worth
   and worldly prosperity--must, indeed, at all times and in all countries
   of the civilized world have led the observant and reflecting few, the
   men of meditative habits and strong feelings of natural equity, to a
   nicer consideration of the current belief, whether instinctive or
   traditional. By forcing the soul in upon herself, this enigma of Saint
   and Sage from Job, David and Solomon, to Claudian and Boelius,--this
   perplexing disparity of success and desert,--has, I doubt not, with
   such men been the occasion of a steadier and more distinct
   consciousness of a something in man different in kind, and which not
   merely distinguishes but contra-distinguishes him from brute
   animals--at the same time that it has brought into closer view an
   enigma of yet harder solution--the fact, I mean, of a contradiction in
   the human being, of which no traces are observable elsewhere, in
   animated or inanimate nature. A struggle of jarring impulses; a
   mysterious diversity between the injunctions of the mind and the
   elections of the will; and (last not least) the utter
   incommensurateness and the unsatisfying qualities of the things around
   us, that yet are the only objects which our senses discover, or our
   appetites require us to pursue:--whence for the finer and more
   contemplative spirits the ever-strengthening suspicion, that the two
   phaenomena must in some way or other stand in close connexion with each
   other, and that the riddle of fortune and circumstance is but a form or
   effluence of the riddle of man:--and hence again, the persuasion, that
   the volution of both problems is to be sought for--hence the
   presentiment, that this solution will be found--in the
   contra-distinctive constituent of humanity, in the something of human
   nature which is exclusively human:--and--as the objects discoverable by
   the senses, as all the bodies and substances that we can touch,
   measure, and weigh, are either mere totals, the unity of which results
   from the parts, and is of course only apparent; or substances, the
   unity of action of which is owing to the nature or arrangement of the
   partible bodies which they actuate or set in motion (steam for
   instance, in a steam-engine);--as on the one hand the conditions and
   known or conceivable properties of all the objects which perish and
   utterly cease to be, together with all the properties which we
   ourselves have in common with these perishable things, differ in kind
   from the acts and properties peculiar to our humanity, so that the
   former cannot even be conceived, cannot without a contradiction in
   terms be predicated, of the proper and immediate subject of the
   latter--(for who would not smile at an ounce of truth, or a square foot
   of honour?)--and as, on the other hand, whatever things in visible
   nature have the character of permanence, and endure amid continual flux
   unchanged like a rainbow in a fast-flying shower, (for example, beauty,
   order, harmony, finality, law,) are all akin to the peculia of
   humanity, are all congenera of mind and will, without which indeed they
   would not only exist in vain, as pictures for moles, but actually not
   exist at all:--hence, finally, the conclusion that the soul of man, as
   the subject of mind and will must likewise possess a principle of
   permanence, and be destined to endure. And were these grounds lighter
   than they are, yet as a small weight will make a scale descend, where
   there is nothing in the opposite scale, or painted weights, which have
   only an illusive relief or prominence; so in the scale of immortality
   slight reasons are in effect weighty, and sufficient to determine the
   judgment, there being no counter weight, no reasons against them, and
   no facts in proof of the contrary, that would not prove equally well
   the cessation of the eye on the removal or diffraction of the
   eye-glass, and the dissolution or incapacity of the musician on the
   fracture of his instrument or its strings.

   But though I agree with Taylor so far, as not to doubt that the
   misallotment of worldly goods and for tunes was one principal occasion,
   exciting well-disposed and spiritually-awakened natures by reflections
   and reasonings, such as I have here supposed, to mature the
   presentiment of immortality into full consciousness, into a principle
   of action and a well-spring of strength and consolation; I cannot
   concede to this circumstance any thing like the importance and extent
   of efficacy which he in this passage attributes to it. I am persuaded,
   that as the belief of all mankind, of all** tribes, and nations,
     __________________________________________________________________

   **I say, all: for the accounts of one or two travelling French
   philosophers, professed atheists and partisans of infidelity,
   respecting one or two African hordes, Caffres, and poor outlawed
   Boschmen, hunted out of their humanity, ought not to be regarded as
   exceptions. And as to Hearne's assertion respecting the non-existence
   and rejection of the belief among the Copper-Indians, it is not only
   hazarded on very weak and insufficient grounds, but he himself, in
   another part of his work, unconsciously supplies data, from whence the
   contrary may safely be concluded. Hearne, perhaps, put down his friend
   Motannabbi's Fort-philosophy for and languages, in all ages, and in all
   states of social union, it must be referred to far deeper grounds,
   common to man as man; and that its fibres are to be traced to the
   tap-root of humanity. I have long entertained, and do not hesitate to
   avow, the conviction that the argument from universality of belief
   urged by Barrow and others in proof of the first article of the Creed,
   is neither in point of fact--for two very different objects may be
   intended, and two or more diverse and even contradictory conceptions
   may be expressed, by the same name--nor in legitimacy of conclusion as
   strong and unexceptionable, as the argument from the same ground for
   the continuance of our personal being after death. The bull calf butts
   with smooth and unarmed brow. Throughout animated nature, of each
   characteristic organ and faculty there exists a pre-assurance, an
   instinctive and practical anticipation; and no pre-assurance common to
   a whole species does in any instance prove delusive.* All other
   prophecies of nature have their exact fulfilment--in every other
   ingrafted word of promise, nature is found true to her word; and is it
   in her noblest creature, that she tells her first lie?--(The reader
   will, of course, understand, that I am here speaking in the assumed
   character of a
     __________________________________________________________________

   the opinion of his tribe; and from his high appreciation of the moral
   character of this murderous gymnosophist, it might, I fear, be
   inferred, that Hearne himself was not the very person one would, of all
   others, have chosen for the purpose of instituting the inquiry.

   *See Baron Field's Letters from New South Wales. The poor natives, the
   lowest in the scale of humanity, evince no symptom of any religion, or
   the belief of any superior power as the maker of the world; but yet
   have no doubt that the spirits of their ancestors survive in the form
   of porpoises, and mindful of their descendants, with imperishable
   affection, drive the whales ashore for them to feast on. mere
   naturalist, to whom no light of revelation had been vouchsafed: one,
   who

     ---------------------with gentle heart

     Had worshipp'd nature in the hill and valley,

     Not knowing what he loved, but loved it all).

   Whether, however, the introductory part of the Bishop's argument is to
   be received with more or less qualification, the fact itself, as stated
   in the concluding sentence of the Aphorism, remains unaffected, and is
   beyond exception true.

   If other argument and yet higher authority were required, I might refer
   to St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and to the Epistle to the Hebrews,
   which whether written by Paul, or, as Luther conjectured, by Apollos,
   is out of all doubt the work of an Apostolic man filled with the Holy
   Spirit, and composed while the Temple and the glories of the Temple
   worship were yet in existence. Several of the Jewish and still
   Judaizing converts had begun to vacillate in their faith, and to
   stumble at the stumbling-stone of the contrast between the pomp and
   splendour of the old Law, and the simplicity and humility of the
   Christian Church. To break this sensual charm, to unfascinate these
   bedazzled brethren, the writer to the Hebrews institutes a comparison
   between the two religions, and demonstrates the superior spiritual
   grandeur, the greater intrinsic worth and dignity of the religion of
   Christ. On the other hand, at Rome where the Jews formed a numerous,
   powerful, and privileged class (many of them, too, by their proselyting
   zeal and frequent disputations with the priests and philosophers
   trained and exercised polemics) the recently-founded Christian Church
   was, it appears, in greater danger from the reasonings of the Jewish
   doctors and even of its own Judaizing members, respecting the use of
   the new revelation. Thus the object of the Epistle to the Hebrews was
   to prove the superiority of the Christian religion; the object of the
   Epistle to the Romans to prove its necessity. Now there was one
   argument extremely well calculated to stagger a faith newly
   transplanted and still loose at its roots, and which, if allowed,
   seemed to preclude the possibility of the Christian religion, as an
   especial and immediate revelation from God--on the high grounds, at
   least, on which the Apostle of the Gentiles placed it, and with the
   exclusive rights and superseding character, which he claimed for it.
   "You admit" (said they) "the divine origin and authority of the Law
   given to Moses, proclaimed with thunders and lightnings and the voice
   of the Most High heard by all the people from Mount Sinai, and
   introduced, enforced, and perpetuated by a series of the most
   stupendous miracles. Our religion, then, was given by God: and can God
   give a perishable imperfect religion? If not perishable, how can it
   have a successor? If perfect, how can it need to be superseded? The
   entire argument is indeed comprised in the latter attribute of our law.
   We know, from an authority which you yourselves acknowledge for divine,
   that our religion is perfect. He is the rock, and his work is perfect.
   (Deut. xxxii, 4). If then the religion revealed by God himself to our
   forefathers is perfect, what need have we of another?"--This objection,
   both from its importance and from its extreme plausibility, for the
   persons at least, to whom it was addressed, required an answer in both
   Epistles. And accordingly, the answer is included in the one (that to
   the Hebrews) and it is the especial purpose and main subject of the
   other. And how does the Apostle answer it? Suppose--and the case is not
   impossible*--a man of sense, who had studied the evidences of Priestley
   and Paley with Warburton's Divine Legation, but who should be a perfect
   stranger to the writings of St. Paul; and that I put this question to
   him:--"What do you think, will St. Paul's answer be?" "Nothing," he
   would reply,"can be more obvious. It is in vain, the Apostle will urge,
   that you bring your notions of probability and inferences from the
   arbitrary interpretation of a word in an absolute rather than a
   relative sense, to invalidate a known fact. It is a fact, that your
   religion is (in your sense of the word) not perfect: for it is
   deficient in one of the two essential constituents of all true
   religion, the belief of a future state on solid and sufficient grounds.
   Had the doctrine indeed been revealed, the stupendous miracles, which
   you most truly affirm to have accompanied and attested the first
   promulgation of your religion, would have supplied the requisite proof.
   But the doctrine was not revealed; and your belief of a future state
   rests on no solid grounds. You believe it (as far as you believe it,
   and as many of you as profess this belief) without
     __________________________________________________________________

   *The case here supposed actually occurred in my own experience in the
   person of a Spanish refugee, of English parents, but from his tenth
   year resident in Spain, and bred in a family of wealthy, but ignorant
   and bigoted, Roman Catholics. In mature manhood he returned to England,
   disgusted with the conduct of the priests and monks, which had indeed
   for some years produced on his mind its so common effect among the
   better-informed natives of the South of Europe--a tendency to Deism.
   The results, however, of the infidel system in France, with his
   opportunities of observing the effects of irreligion on the French
   officers in Spain, on the one hand; and the undeniable moral and
   intellectual superiority of Protestant Britain on the other, had not
   been lost on him: and here he began to think for himself and resolved
   to study the subject. He had gone through Bishop Warburton's Divine
   Legation, and Paley's Evidences; but had never read the New Testament
   consecutively, and the Epistles not at all. revelation, and without the
   only proper and sufficient evidence of its truth. Your religion,
   therefore, though of divine origin, is (if taken in disjunction from
   the new revelation, which I am commissioned to proclaim) but a religio
   dimidiata; and the main purpose, the proper character, and the
   paramount object of Christ's mission and miracles, is to supply the
   missing half by a clear discovery of a future state; and (since 'he
   alone discovers who proves') by proving the truth of the doctrine, now
   for the first time declared with the requisite authority, by the
   requisite, appropriate, and alone satisfactory evidences."

   But is this the Apostle's answer to the Jewish oppugners, and the
   Judaizing false brethren, of the Church of Christ? It is not the
   answer, it does not resemble the answer, returned by the Apostle. It is
   neither parallel nor corradial with the line of argument in either of
   the two Epistles, or with any one line; but it is a chord that
   traverses them all, and only touches where it cuts across. In the
   Epistle to the Hebrews, the directly contrary position is repeatedly
   asserted: and in the Epistle to the Romans, it is every where supposed.
   The death to which the Law sentenced all sinners (and which even the
   Gentiles without the revealed law had announced to them by their
   consciences, the judgment of God having been made known even to them)
   must be the same death, from which they were saved by the faith of the
   Son of God; or the Apostle's reasoning would be senseless, his
   antithesis a mere equivoque, a play on a word, quod idem sonat, aliud
   vult. Christ redeemed mankind from the curse of the law: and we all
   know, that it was not from temporal death, or the penalties and
   afflictions of the present life, that believers have been redeemed The
   Law, of which the inspired sage of Tarsus is speaking, from which no
   man can plead excuse; the Law miraculously delivered in thunders from
   Mount Sinai, which was inscribed on tables of stone for the Jews, and
   written in the hearts of all men (Rom. xi, 15)--the law holy and
   spiritual! What was the great point, of which this law, in its own
   name, offered no solution;--the mystery, which it left behind the veil,
   or in the cloudy tabernacle of types and figurative sacrifices? Whether
   there was a judgment to come, and souls to suffer the dread sentence?
   Or was it not far rather--what are the means of escape; where may grace
   be found, and redemption? St. Paul says, the latter. The law brings
   condemnation: but the conscience-sentenced transgressor's question,
   "What shall I do to be saved? Who will intercede for me?" she dismisses
   as beyond the jurisdiction of her court, and takes no cognizance
   thereof, save in prophetic murmurs or mute outshadowings of mystic
   ordinances and sacrificial types. Not, therefore, that there is a life
   to come, and a future state; but what each individual soul may hope for
   itself therein; and on what grounds: and that this state has been
   rendered an object of aspiration and fervent desire, and a source of
   thanksgiving and exceeding great joy; and by whom, and through whom,
   and for whom, and by what means, and under what conditions--these are
   the peculiar and distinguishing fundamentals of the Christian Faith!
   These are the revealed lights and obtained privileges of the Christian
   Dispensation. Not alone the knowledge of the boon, but the precious
   inestimable boon itself, is the grace and truth that came by Jesus
   Christ. I believe Moses, I believe Paul; but I believe in Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

APHORISM.
     __________________________________________________________________

  ON BAPTISM.

   LEIGHTON.

   In those days came John the Baptist, preaching.--It will suffice for
   our present purpose, if by these* words we direct the attention to the
   origin, or at least first Scriptural record, of Baptism, and to the
   combinement of preaching therewith; their aspect each to the other, and
   their concurrence to one excellent end; the word unfolding the
   sacrament, and the sacrament sealing the word; the word as a light,
   informing and clearing the sense of the seal; and this again as a seal,
   confirming and ratifying the truth of the word; as you see some
   significant seals, or engraven signets, have a word about them
   expressing their sense.

   But truly the word is a light, and the sacraments have in them of the
   same light illuminating them. This sacrament of Baptism, the ancients
   do particularly express by light. Yet are they both nothing but
   darkness to us, till the same light shine in our hearts; for till then
   we are nothing but darkness ourselves, and therefore the most luminous
   things are so to us. Noonday is as midnight to a blind man. And we see
   these ordinances, the word and the sacrament, without profit or comfort
   for the most part, because we have not that divine light within us. And
   we have it not, because we ask it not.
     __________________________________________________________________

   *By certain Biblical philologists of the Teutonic school (men
   distinguished by learning, but still more characteristically by
   hardihood in conjecture, and who suppose the Gospels to have undergone
   several successive revisions and enlargements by, or under the
   authority of, the sacred historians) these words are contended to have
   been, in the first delivery, the common commencement of all the Gospels

   (that is, according to the flesh,) in distinction from St. John's, or
   the Gospel

   (that is, according to the Spirit).
     __________________________________________________________________

COMMENT,

   Or an aid to reflection in the forming of a sound judgment respecting
   the purport and purpose of the Baptismal rite and a just appreciation
   of its value and importance.

   A born and bred Baptist, and paternally descended from the old orthodox
   non-conformists, and both in his own and in his father's right a very
   dear friend of mine, had married a member of the National Church. In
   consequence of an anxious wish expressed by his lady for the Baptism of
   their first child, he solicited me to put him in possession of my views
   respecting this controversy: though principally as to the degree of
   importance which I attached to it. For as to the point itself, his
   natural prepossession in favor of the persuasion in which he was born,
   had been confirmed by a conscientious examination of the arguments on
   both sides. As the comment on the preceding Aphorism, or rather as an
   expansion of its subject-matter, I will give the substance of the
   conversation: and amply shall I have been remunerated, should it be
   read with the interest and satisfaction with which it was heard. More
   particularly, should any of my readers find themselves under the same
   or similar circumstances.

   Our discussion is rendered shorter and more easy by our perfect
   agreement in certain preliminary points. We both disclaim alike every
   attempt to explain any thing into Scripture, and every attempt to
   explain any thing out of Scripture. Or if we regard either with a
   livelier aversion it is the latter, as being the more fashionable and
   prevalent. I mean the practice of both high and low Grotian divines to
   explain away positive assertions of Scripture on the pretext, that the
   literal sense is not agreeable to reason, that is, their particular
   reason. And inasmuch as (in the only right sense of the word) there is
   no such thing as a particular reason, they must, and in fact they do,
   mean that the literal sense is not accordant to their understanding,
   that is, to the notions which their understandings have been taught and
   accustomed to form in their school of philosophy. Thus a Platonist who
   should become a Christian would at once, even in texts susceptible of a
   different interpretation, recognise, because he would expect to find,
   several doctrines which the disciple of the Epicurean or mechanic
   school will not receive on the most positive declarations of the divine
   word. And as we agree in the opinion that the Minimi-fidian party err
   grievously in the latter point, so I must concede to you, that too many
   Paedo-baptists (assertors of Infant Baptism) have erred, though less
   grossly, in the former. I have, I confess, no eye for these smoke-like
   wreaths of inference, this ever-widening spiral ergo from the narrow
   aperture of perhaps a single text; or rather an interpretation forced
   into it by construing an idiomatic phrase in an artless narrative with
   the same absoluteness, as if it had formed part of a mathematical
   problem. I start back from these inverted pyramids, where the apex is
   the base. If I should inform any one that I had called at a friend's
   house, but had found nobody at home, the family having all gone to the
   play; and if he on the strength of this information should take
   occasion to asperse my friend's wife for unmmotherly conduct in taking
   an infant six months old to a crowded theatre; would you allow him to
   press on the words "nobody" and "all the family," in justification of
   the slander? Would you not tell him, that the words were to be
   interpreted by the nature of the subject, the purpose of the speaker,
   and their ordinary acceptation; and that he must or might have known,
   that infants of that age would not be admitted into the theatre?
   Exactly so, with regard to the words, he and all his household. Had
   Baptism of infants at that early period of the Gospel been a known
   practice, or had this been previously demonstrated,--then indeed the
   argument, that in all probability there were infants or young children
   in so large a family, would be no otherwise objectionable than as being
   superfluous, and a sort of anticlimax in logic. But if the words are
   cited as the proof, it would be a clear petitio principii, though there
   had been nothing else against it. But when we turn back to the
   Scriptures preceding the narrative, and find repentance and belief
   demanded as the terms and indispensable conditions of Baptism--then the
   case above imagined applies in its full force. Equally vain is the
   pretended analogy from Circumcision, which was no sacrament at all; but
   the means and mark of national distinction. In the first instance it
   was, doubtless, a privilege or mark of superior rank conferred on the
   descendants of Abraham. In the Patriarchal times this rite was confined
   (the first governments being theocracies) to the priesthood, who were
   set apart to that office from their birth. At a later period this token
   of the premier class was extended to kings. And thus, when it was
   re-ordained by Moses for the whole Jewish nation, it was at the time
   said--Ye are all priests and kings; ye are a consecrated people. In
   addition to this, or rather in aid of this, Circumcision was intended
   to distinguish the Jews by some indelible sign: and it was no less
   necessary that Jewish children should be recognisable as Jews than
   Jewish adults--not to mention the greater safety of the rite in
   infancy. Nor was it ever pretended that any grace was conferred with
   it, or that the rite was significant of any inward or spiritual
   operation. In short, an unprejudiced and competent reader need only
   peruse the first thirty-three paragraphs of the eighteenth section of
   Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying; and then compare with these the
   remainder of the section added by him after the Restoration: those,
   namely, in which he attempts to overthrow his own arguments. I had
   almost said, affects; for such is the feebleness, and so palpable the
   sophistry, of his answers, that I find it difficult to imagine that
   Taylor himself could have been satisfied with them. The only plausible
   arguments apply with equal force to Baptist and Paedo-baptist; and
   would prove, if they proved any thing, that both were wrong, and the
   Quakers only in the right.

   Now in the first place, it is obvious, that nothing conclusive can be
   drawn from the silence of the New Testament respecting a practice,
   which, if we suppose it already in use, must yet, from the character of
   the first converts, have been of comparatively rare occurrence; and
   which, from the predominant and more concerning objects and functions
   of the Apostolic writers (1 Cor. i, 17), was not likely to have been
   mentioned otherwise than incidentally, and very probably therefore
   might not have occurred to them to mention at all. But, secondly,
   admitting that the practice was introduced at a later period than that
   in which the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles were composed: I
   should yet be fully satisfied that the Church exercised herein a sound*
   discretion
     __________________________________________________________________

   *That every the least permissible form and ordinance, which at
   different times it might be expedient for the church to enact, are
   pre-enacted in the New Testament; and that whatever is not to be found
   there, ought to be allowed nowhere--this has been asserted. But that On
   either supposition, therefore, it is never without regret that I see a
   divine of our Church attempting to erect forts on a position so
   evidently commanded by the strong-hold of his antagonists. I dread the
   use which the Socinians may make of their example, and the Papists of
   their failure. Let me not, however, deceive you. (The reader
   understands, that I suppose myself conversing with a Baptist). I am of
   opinion, that the divines on your side are chargeable with a far more
   grievous mistake, that of giving a carnal and Judaizing interpretation
   to the various Gospel texts in which the terms, baptism and baptize,
   occur, contrary to the express and earnest admonitions of the Apostle
   Paul. And this I say without in the least retracting my former
   concession, that the texts appealed to, as commanding or authorizing
   Infant Baptism, are all without exception made to bear a sense neither
   contained nor deducible: and likewise that (historically considered)
   there exists no sufficient positive evidence, that the Baptism of
   infants was instituted by the Apostles in the practice of the Apostolic
   age.*
     __________________________________________________________________

   It has been proved, or even rendered plausible; or that the tenet is
   not to be placed among the revulsionary results of the
   Scripture-slighting will-worship of the Romish Church; it will be more
   sincere to say I disbelieve, than that I doubt. It was chiefly, if not
   exclusively, in reference to the extravagances built on this tenet,
   that the great Selden ventured to declare, that the words, Scrutamini
   Scripturas, had set the world in an uproar.

   Extremes appear to generate each other; but if we look steadily, there
   will most often be found some common error, that produces both as its
   positive and negative poles. Thus superstitions go by pairs, like the
   two Hungarian sisters, always quarrelling and inveterately averse, but
   yet joined at the trunk.

   *More than this I do not consider as necessary for the argument. And as
   to Robinson's assertions in his History of Baptism, that Infant Baptism
   did not commence till the time of Cyprian, who, condemning it

   Lastly, we both coincide in the full conviction, that it is neither the
   outward ceremony of Baptism, under any form or circumstances, nor any
   other ceremony, but such a faith in Christ as tends to produce a
   conformity to his holy doctrines and example in heart and life, and
   which faith is itself a declared mean and condition of our partaking of
   his spiritual body, and of being clothed upon with his
   righteousness,--that properly makes us Christians, and can alone be
   enjoined as an article of faith necessary to salvation, so that the
   denial thereof may be denounced as a damnable heresy. In the strictest
   sense of essential, this alone is the essential in Christianity, that
   the same spirit should be growing in us which was in the fulness of all
   perfection in Christ Jesus. Whatever else is named essential is such
   because, and only as far as, it is instrumental to this, or evidently
   implied herein. If the Baptists hold the visible rite to be
   indispensable to salvation, with what terror must they not regard every
   disease that befalls their children between youth and infancy! But if
   they are saved by the faith of the parent, then the outward rite is not
   essential to salvation, otherwise than as the omission should arise
   from a spirit of disobedience: and in this case it is the cause not the
   effect, the wilful and unbaptized heart, not
     __________________________________________________________________

   as a general practice, allowed it in particular cases by a dispensation
   of charity; and that it did not actually become the ordinary rule of
   the Church, till Augustine, in the fever of his Anti-Pelagian dispute
   had introduced the Calvinistic interpretation of Original Sin, and the
   dire state of infants dying unbaptized--I am so far from acceding to
   them, that I reject the whole statement as rash, and not only
   unwarranted by the authorities he cites, but unanswerably confuted by
   Baxter, Wall, and many other learned Paedo-baptists before and since
   the publication of his work. I confine myself to the assertion--not
   that Infant Baptism was not--but that there exist no sufficient proofs
   that it was--the practice of the Apostolic age. the unbaptizing hand,
   that perils it. And surely it looks very like an inconsistency to admit
   the vicarious faith of the parents and the therein implied promise,
   that the child shall be Christianly bred up, and as much as in them
   lies prepared for the communion of saints--to admit this, as safe and
   sufficient in their own instance, and yet to denounce the same belief
   and practice as hazardous and unavailing in the Church--the same, I
   say, essentially, and only differing from their own by the presence of
   two or three Christian friends as additional securities, and by the
   promise being expressed!

   But you, my filial friend! have studied Christ under a better
   teacher--the spirit of adoption, even the spirit that was in Paul, and
   which still speaks to us out of his writings. You remember and admire
   the saying of an old divine, that a ceremony duly instituted is a chain
   of gold around the neck of faith; but if in the wish to make it
   co-essential and consubstantial, you draw it closer and closer, it may
   strangle the faith it was meant to deck and designate. You are not so
   unretentive a scholar as to have forgotten the pateris et auro of your
   Virgil: or if you were, you are not so inconsistent a reasoner, as to
   translate the Hebraism, spirit and fire in one place by spiritual fire,
   and yet refuse to translate water and spirit by spiritual water in
   another place: or if, as I myself think, the different position marks a
   different sense, yet that the former must be ejusdem generis with the
   latter--the water of repentance, reformation in conduct; and the spirit
   that which purifies the inmost principle of action, as fire purges the
   metal substantially and not cleansing the surface only!

   But in this instance, it will be said, the ceremony, the outward and
   visible sign, is a Scripture ordinance. I will not reply that the
   Romish Priest says the same of the anointing of the sick with oil and
   the imposition of hands. No, my answer is: that this is a very
   sufficient reason for the continued observance of a ceremonial rite so
   derived and sanctioned, even though its own beauty, simplicity, and
   natural significancy had pleaded less strongly in its behalf. But it is
   no reason why the Church should forget that the perpetuation of a thing
   does not alter the nature of the thing, and that a ceremony to be
   perpetuated is to be perpetuated as a ceremony. It is no reason why,
   knowing and experiencing even in the majority of her own members the
   proneness of the human mind to** superstition, the Church might not
   rightfully and piously adopt the measures best calculated to check this
   tendency, and to correct the abuse to which it had led in any
   particular rite. But of superstitious notions respecting the Baptismal
   ceremony, and of abuse resulting, the instances were flagrant and
   notorious. Such, for instance, was the frequent deferring of the
   Baptismal rite to a late period of life, and even to the deathbed, in
   the belief that the mystic water would cleanse the baptized person from
   all sin and (if he died immediately after the performance of the
   ceremony,) send him pure and spotless into the other world.

   Nor is this all. The preventive remedy applied by the Church is
   legitimated as well as additionally recommended by the following
   consideration. Where a ceremony answered and was intended to answer
   several purposes, which purposes at its first institution were blended
   in respect of the time, but which afterwards by change of circumstances
   (as when, for instance, a large
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Let me be permitted to repeat and apply the note in a former page.
   Superstition may be defined as superstantium (cujusmodi sunt ceremoniae
   et signa externa quae, nisi in significando nihili sunt paene nihil)
   substantiatio. and ever-increasing proportion of the members of the
   Church, or those who at least bore the Christian name, were of
   Christian parents) were necessarily disunited--then either the Church
   has no power or authority delegated to her (which is shifting the
   ground of controversy) or she must be authorized to choose and
   determine, to which of the several purposes the ceremony should be
   attached. Now one of the purposes of Baptism was--the making it
   publicly manifest, first, what individuals were to be regarded by the
   World (Phil. ii, 15), as belonging to the visible communion of
   Christians: inasmuch as by their demeanour and apparent condition, the
   general estimation of the city set on a hill and not to be hid (Matt.
   v, 14,) could not but be affected--the city that even in the midst of a
   crooked and perverse nation was bound not only to give no cause, but by
   all innocent means to prevent every occasion, of rebuke. Secondly, to
   mark out, for the Church itself, those that were entitled to that
   especial dearness, that watchful and disciplinary love and
   loving-kindness, which over and above the affections and duties of
   philanthropy and universal charity, Christ himself had enjoined, and
   with an emphasis and in a form significant of its great and especial
   importance,--A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
   another. By a charity wide as sunshine, and comprehending the whole
   human race, the body of Christians was to be placed in contrast with
   the proverbial misanthropy and bigotry of the Jewish Church and people:
   while yet they were to be distinguished and known to all men, by the
   peculiar love and affection displayed by them towards the members of
   their own community; thus exhibiting the intensity of sectarian
   attachment, yet by the no less notorious and exemplary practice of the
   duties of universal benevolence, secured from the charge so commonly
   brought against it, of being narrow and exclusive. "How kind these
   Christians are to the poor and afflicted, without distinction of
   religion or country: but how they love each other!

   Now combine with this the consideration before urged--the duty, I mean,
   and necessity of checking the superstitious abuse of the Baptismal
   rite: and I then ask, with confidence, in what way could the Church
   have exercised a sound discretion more wisely, piously, or effectively,
   than by fixing, from among the several ends and purposes of Baptism,
   the outward ceremony to the purposes here mentioned? How could the
   great body of Christians be more plainly instructed as to the true
   nature of all outward ordinances? What can be conceived better
   calculated to prevent the ceremony from being regarded as other and
   more than a ceremony, if not the administration of the same on an
   object (yea, a dear and precious object) of spiritual duties, though
   the conscious subject of spiritual operations and graces only by
   anticipation! and in hope;--a subject unconscious as a flower of the
   dew falling on it, or the early rain, and thus emblematic of the
   myriads who (as in our Indian empire, and henceforward, I trust, in
   Africa) are temporally and even morally benefitted by the outward
   existence of Christianity, though as yet ignorant of its saving truth!
   And yet, on the other hand, what more reverential than the application
   of this the common initiatory rite of the East sanctioned and
   appropriated by Christ--its application, I say, to the very subjects,
   whom he himself commanded to be brought to him--the children in arms,
   respecting whom Jesus was much displeased with his disciples, who had
   rebuked those that brought them! What more expressive of the true
   character of that originant yet generic stain, from which the Son of
   God, by his mysterious incarnation and agony and death and
   resurrection, and by the Baptism of the Spirit, came to cleanse the
   children of Adam, than the exhibition of the outward element to
   infants, free from and incapable of crime, in whom the evil principle
   was present only as potential being, and whose outward semblance
   represented the kingdom of Heaven? And can it--to a man, who would hold
   himself deserving of anathema maranatha (I Cor. xvi. 22), if he did not
   love the Lord Jesus Christ--can it be nothing to such a man, that the
   introduction and commendation of a new inmate, a new spiritual ward, to
   the assembled brethren in Christ--(and this, as I have shown above, was
   one purpose of the Baptismal ceremony) does in the Baptism of an infant
   recall our Lord's own presentation in the Temple on the eighth day
   after his birth? Add to all these considerations the known fact of the
   frequent exposure and the general light regard of infants, at the time
   when Infant Baptism is by the Baptists supposed to have been first
   ruled by the Catholic Church, not overlooking the humane and charitable
   motives that influenced Cyprian's decision in its favour. And then make
   present to your imagination, and meditatively contemplate the still
   continuing tendency, the profitable, the beautiful effects, of this
   ordinance now and for so many centuries back, on the great mass of the
   population throughout Christendom--the softening, elevating exercise of
   faith and the conquest over the senses, while in the form of a helpless
   crying babe the presence, and the unutterable worth and value, of an
   immortal being made capable of everlasting bliss are solemnly
   proclaimed and carried home to the mind and heart of the hearers and
   beholders! Nor will you forget the probable influence on the future
   education of the child, the opportunity of instructing and impressing
   the friends, relatives and parents in their best and most docile mood.
   These are, indeed, the mollia tempora fandi.

   It is true, that by an unforeseen accident, and through the propensity
   of all zealots to caricature partial truth into total falsehood--it is
   too true, that a tree the very contrary in quality of that shown to
   Moses (Exod. xv, 25), was afterwards cast into the sweet waters from
   this fountain, and made them like the water of Marah, too bitter to be
   drunk. I allude to the Pelagian controversy, the perversion of the
   article of Original Sin by Augustine, and the frightful conclusions
   which this durus pater infantum drew from the article thus perverted.
   It is not, however, to the predecessors of this African, whoever they
   were that authorized Paedo-Baptism, and at whatever period it first
   became general--it is not to the Church at the time being, that these
   consequences are justly imputable. She had done her best to preclude
   every superstition, by allowing, in urgent cases, any and every adult,
   man, and woman, to administer the ceremonial part, the outward rite, of
   Baptism: but reserving to the highest functionary of the Church (even
   to the exclusion of the co-presbyters) the more proper and spiritual
   purpose, namely, the declaration of repentance and belief, the free
   choice of Christ as his Lord, and the open profession of the Christian
   title by an individual in his own name and by his own deliberate act.
   This office of religion, the essentially moral and spiritual nature of
   which could not be mistaken, this most solemn office the Bishop alone
   was to perform.

   Thus--as soon as the purposes of the ceremonial rite were by change of
   circumstances divided, that is, took place at different periods of the
   believer's life--to the outward purposes, where the effect was to be
   produced on the consciousness of others, the Church continued to affix
   the outward rite; while to the substantial and spiritual purpose, where
   the effect was to be produced on the individual's own mind, she gave it
   beseeming dignity by an ordinance not figurative, but standing in the
   direct cause and relation of means to the end.

   In fine, there are two great purposes to be answered, each having its
   own subordinate purposes, and desirable consequences. The Church
   answers both, the Baptists one only. If, nevertheless, you would still
   prefer the union of the Baptismal rite with the Confirmation, and that
   the presentation of infants to the assembled Church had formed a
   separate institution, avowedly prospective--I answer: first, that such
   for a long time and to a late period was my own judgment. But even then
   it seemed to me a point, as to which an indifference would be less
   inconsistent in a lover of truth, than a zeal to the separation in a
   professed lover of peace. And secondly, I would revert to the history
   of the Reformation, and the calamitous accident of the Peasants' War:
   when the poor ignorant multitude, driven frantic by the intolerable
   oppressions of their feudal lords, rehearsed all the outrages that were
   acted in our own times by the Parisian populace headed by Danton,
   Marat, Robespierre; and on the same outrageous principles, and in
   assertion of the same rights of brutes to the subversion of all the
   duties of men. In our times, most fortunately for the interests of
   religion and morality, or of their prudential substitutes at least, the
   name of Jacobin was everywhere associated with that of Atheist and
   Infidel. Or rather, Jacobinism and Infidelity were the two heads of the
   revolutionary Geryon--connatural mis-growths of the same monster-truck.
   In the German convulsion, on the contrary, by a mere but most
   unfortunate accident, the same code of Caliban jurisprudence, the same
   sensual and murderous excesses, were connected with the name of
   Anabaptist. The abolition of magistracy, community of goods, the right
   of plunder, polygamy, and whatever else was fanatical, were comprised
   in the word Anabaptism. It is not to be imagined that the Fathers of
   the Reformation could, without a miraculous influence, have taken up
   the question of Infant baptism with the requisite calmness and freedom
   of spirit. It is not to be wished, that they should have entered on the
   discussion. Nay, I will go farther. Unless the abolition of Infant
   Baptism can be shown to be involved in some fundamental article of
   faith, unless the practice could be proved fatal or imminently perilous
   to salvation, the Reformers would not have been justified in exposing
   the yet tender and struggling cause of Protestantism to such certain
   and violent prejudices as this innovation would have excited. Nothing
   less than the whole substance and efficacy of the Gospel Faith was the
   prize, which they had wrestled for and won; but won from enemies still
   in the field, and on the watch to retake, at all costs, the sacred
   treasure, and consign it once again to darkness and oblivion. If there
   be a time for all things, this was not the time for an innovation, that
   would and must have been followed by the triumph of the enemies of
   Scriptural Christianity, and the alienation of the governments that had
   espoused and protected it.

   Remember, I say this on the supposition of the question's not being
   what you do not pretend it to be, an essential of the Faith by which we
   are saved. But should it likewise be conceded that it is a disputable
   point--and that in point of fact it is and has been disputed by
   divines, whom no pious Christian of any denomination will deny to have
   been faithful and eminent servants of Christ; should it, I say, be
   likewise conceded that the question of Infant Baptism is a point, on
   which two Christians, who perhaps differ on this point only, may differ
   without giving just ground for impeaching the piety or competence of
   either; in this case I am obliged to infer that the person who at any
   time can regard this difference as singly warranting a separation from
   a religious community, must think of schism under another point of view
   than that in which I have been taught to contemplate it by St. Paul in
   his Epistles to the Corinthians.

   Let me add a few words on a diversity of doctrine closely connected
   with this;--the opinions of Doctors Mant and D'Oyly as opposed to those
   of the (so called) Evangelical clergy. "The Church of England (says
   Wall*) does not require assent and consent" to either
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Conference between two men that had doubts about Infant Baptism. By W.
   Wall, Author of the History of Infant Baptism, and Vicar of Shoreham in
   Kent. A very sensible little tract, and written in an excellent spirit;
   but it failed, I confess, in satisfying my mind as to the existence of
   any decisive proofs or documents of Infant Baptism haying been an
   Apostolic usage, or specially intended in any part of the New
   Testament: though deducible generally from many passages, and imperfect
   accordance with the spirit of the whole.

   A mighty wrestler in the cause of spiritual religion and Gospel
   morality, in whom more than in any other contemporary I seem to see the
   spirit of Luther revived, expressed to me his doubts whether we have a
   right to deny that an infant is capable of a spiritual influence. To
   such a man I could not feel justified in returning an answer ex
   tempore, or without having first submitted my convictions to a fresh
   revisal. I owe him, however, a deliberate answer; and take this
   opportunity of discharging the debt.

   The objection supposes and assumes the very point which is denied, or
   at least disputed--namely, that Infant Baptism is specially enjoined in
   the Scriptures. If an express passage to this purport had existed in
   the New Testament--the other passages, which evidently imply a
   spiritual opinion "in order to lay communion." But I will suppose the
   person a minister: but minister of a Church which has expressly
   disclaimed all pretence to infallibity; a Church which in the
   construction of its Liturgy and Articles is known to have worded
   certain passages for the purpose of rendering them subscribable by both
   A and Z--that is, the opposite parties as to the points in controversy.
   I suppose this person's convictions those of Z, and that out of five
   passages there are three, the more natural and obvious sense of which
   is in his favour; and two of which, though not absolutely precluding a
   different sense, yet the more probable interpretation is in favour of
   A, that is, of those who do not consider the Baptism of an infant as
   prospective, but hold
     __________________________________________________________________

   operation under the condition of a preceding spiritual act on the part
   of the person baptized, remaining as now--then indeed, as the only way
   of removing the apparent contradiction, it might be allowable to call
   on the Anti-paedobaptist to prove the negative--namely, that an infant
   a week old is not a subject capable or susceptible of spiritual agency.
   And, vice versa, should it be made known to us, that infants are not
   without reflection and self-consciousness; then, doubtless, we should
   be entitled to infer that they were capable of a spiritual operation,
   and consequently of that which is signified in the Baptismal rite
   administered to adults. But what does this prove for those, who (as D.
   D. Mant and D'Oyly) not only cannot show, but who do not themselves
   profess to believe, the self-consciousness of a new-born babe, but who
   rest the defence of Infant Baptism on the assertion, that God was
   pleased to affix the performance of this rite to his offer of
   salvation, as the indispensable, though arbitrary, condition of the
   infant's salvability? As kings in former ages, when they conferred
   lands in perpetuity, would sometimes, as the condition of the tenure,
   exact from the beneficiary a hawk, or some trifling ceremony, as the
   putting on or off of their sandals, or whatever else royal caprice or
   the whim of the moment might suggest. But you, honored Irving, are as
   little disposed, as myself, to favor such doctrine!

     Friend pure of heart and fervent! we have learnt

     A different love. We may not thus profane

     The idea and name of Him whose absolute will

     Is reason, truth supreme, essential order!

   it to be an opus operans et in praesenti. Then I say, that if such a
   person regards these two sentences or single passages as obliging or
   warranting him to abandon the flock entrusted to his charge, and either
   to join such as are the avowed enemies of the Church on the double
   ground of its particular constitution and of its being an
   establishment, or to set up a separate church for himself--I cannot
   avoid the conclusion, that either his conscience is morbidly sensitive
   in one speck to the exhaustion of the sensibility in a far larger
   portion; or that he must have discovered some mode, beyond the reach of
   my conjectural powers, of interpreting the Scriptures enumerated in the
   following excerpt from the popular tract before cited, in which the
   writer expresses an opinion, to which I assent with my whole heart:
   namely,

   "That all Christians in the world that hold the same fundamentals ought
   to make one Church, though differing in lesser opinions; and that the
   sin, the mischief, and danger to the souls of men, that divide into
   those many sects and parties among us, does (for the most of them)
   consist not so much in the opinions themselves, as in their dividing
   and separating for them. And in support of this tenet, I will refer you
   to some plain places of Scripture, which if you please now to peruse, I
   will be silent the while. See what our Saviour himself says, John x,
   16; John xvi, 11. And what the primitive Christians practised, Acts ii,
   46, and iv, 32. And what St. Paul says, I Cor. i, 10, 11, 12, and 2, 3,
   4, also the whole twelfth chapter: Eph. ii, 17, &c, to the end. Where
   the Jewish and Gentile Christians are showed to be one body, one
   household, one temple fitly framed together: and yet these were of
   different opinions in several matters. Likewise chap. iii 6, iv, 1-13.
   Phil. ii, 1, 2, where he uses the most solemn adjurations to this
   purpose. But I would more especially recommend to you the reading of
   Gal. v, 20, 21. Phil. iii, 15, 15. The fourteenth chapter to the
   Romans, and part of the fifteenth, to verse 7, and also Rom. xv, 17.

   Are not these passages plain, full, and earnest? Do you find any of the
   controverted points to be determined by Scripture in words nigh so
   plain or pathetic?"
     __________________________________________________________________

        Marginal note written (in 1816) in a copy of Wall's Work.

   This and the two following pages are excellent. If I addressed the
   ministers recently seceded, I would first prove from Scripture and
   reason the justness of their doctrines concerning Baptism and
   conversion. 2. I would show, that even in respect of the Prayer book,
   Homilies, &c, of the Church of England, taken as a whole, their
   opponents were comparatively as ill off as themselves, if not worse. 3.
   That few mistakes or inconvenient phrases of the Baptismal Service did
   not impose on the conscience the necessity of resigning the pastoral
   office. 4. That even if they did, this would by no means justify schism
   from lay-membership: or else there could be no schism except from an
   immaculate and infallible Church. Now, as our Articles have declared
   that no Church is or ever was such, it would follow that there is no
   such sin as that of schism, that is, that St. Paul wrote falsely or
   idly. 5. That the escape through the channel of dissent is from the
   frying-pan to the fire; or, to use a less worn and vulgar simile, the
   escape of a leech from a glass-jar of water into the naked and open
   air. But never, never, would I in one breath allow my Church to be
   fallible, and in the next contend for her absolute freedom from all
   error: never confine inspiration and perfect truth to the Scriptures,
   and then scold for the perfect truth of each and every word in the
   Prayer book. Enough for me, if in my heart of hearts, free from all
   fear of man and all lust of preferment, I believe (as I do) the Church
   of England to be the most Apostolic Church; that its doctrines and
   ceremonies contain nothing dangerous to righteousness or salvation; and
   that the imperfections in its Liturgy are spots indeed, but spots on
   the sun, which impede neither its light nor its heat, so as to prevent
   the good seed from growing in a good soil and producing fruits of
   redemption.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  CONCLUSION.

   I am not so ignorant of the temper and tendency of the age in which I
   live, as either to be miprepared for the sort of remarks which the
   literal interpretation of the Evangelist will call forth, or to attempt
   an answer to them. Visionary ravings, obsolete whimsies, transcendental
   trash, and the like, I leave to pass at the price current among those
   who are willing to receive abusive phrases as substitutes for argument.
   Should any suborner of anonymous criticism have engaged some literary
   bravo or buffoon beforehand to vilify this work, as in former
   instances, I would give a friendly hint to the operative critic that he
   may compile an excellent article for the occasion, and with very little
   trouble, out of Warburton's Tract on Grace and the Spirit, and the
   Preface to the same. There is, however, one objection, which will so
   often be heard from men, whose talents and reputed moderation must give
   a weight to their words, that I owe it both to my own character and to
   the interests of my readers, not to leave it unnoticed. The charge will
   probably be worded in this way:--There is nothing new in all this! (as
   if novelty were any merit in questions of revealed religion!) It is,
   mysticism, all taken out of William Law, after he had lost his senses,
   poor man! in brooding over the visions of a delirious German cobbler,
   Jacob Behmen.

   Of poor Jacob Behmen I have delivered my sentiments at large in another
   work. Those who have condescended to look into his writings must know
   that his characteristic errors are; first, the mistaking the accidents
   and pecularities of his own overwrought mind for realities and modes of
   thinking common to all minds: and secondly, the confusion of nature,
   that is, the active powers communicated to matter, with God the
   Creator. And if the same persons have done more than merely looked into
   the present volume, they must have seen, that to eradicate, and, if
   possible, to preclude both the one and the other, stands prominent
   among its avowed objects.

   Of William Law's Works I am acquainted with the Serious Call; and
   besides this I remember to have read a small Tract on Prayer, if I
   mistake not, as I easily may, it being at least six-and-twenty years
   since I saw it. He may in this or in other tracts have quoted the same
   passages from the fourth Gospel, which I have done. But surely this
   affords no presumption that my conclusions are the same with his; still
   less, that they are drawn from the same premisses; and least of all,
   that they were adopted from his writings. Whether Law has used the
   phrase, assimilation by faith, I know not; but I know that I should
   expose myself to a just charge of an idle parade of my reading, if I
   recapitulated the tenth part of the authors, ancient and modern, Romish
   and Reformed, from Law to Clemens Alexandrinus and Irenaeus, in whose
   works the same phrase occurs in the same sense. And after all, on such
   a subject, how worse than childish is the whole dispute!

   Is the fourth Gospel authentic? And is the interpretation I have given
   true or false? These are the only questions which a wise man would put,
   or a Christian be anxious to answer. I not only believe it to be the
   true sense of the texts; but I assert that it is the only true,
   rational, and even tolerable sense. And this position alone I conceive
   myself interested in defending. I have studied with an open and
   fearless spirit the attempts of sundry learned critics of the Continent
   to invalidate the authenticity of this Gospel, before and since
   Eichhorn's Vindication. The result has been a clearer assurance and (as
   far as this was possible) a yet deeper conviction of the genuineness of
   all the writings which the Church has attributed to this Apostle. That
   those, who have formed an opposite conclusion, should object to the use
   of expressions which they had ranked among the most obvious marks of
   spuriousness, follows as a matter of course. But that men, who with a
   clear and cloudless assent receive the sixth chapter of this Gospel as
   a faithful, nay, inspired record of an actual discourse, should take
   offence at the repetition of words which the Redeemer himself in the
   perfect foreknowledge that they would confirm the disbelieving,
   alienate the unsteadfast and transcend the present capacity even of his
   own elect, had chosen as the most appropriate; and which, after the
   most decisive proofs that they were misinterpreted by the greater
   number of his hearers, and not understood by any, he nevertheless
   repeated with stronger emphasis and without comment as the only
   appropriate symbols of the great truth he was declaring, and to realize
   which

   **

   --that in their own discourses these men
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Of which our, he was made flesh, is a very inadequate translation.
   The Church of England in this as in other doctrinal points has
   preserved the golden mean between the superstitious reverence of the
   Romanists, and the avowed contempt of the Sectarians, for the writings
   of the Fathers, and the authority and unimpeached traditions of the
   Church during the first three or four centuries. And how, consistently
   with this honorable characteristic of our Church, a minister of the
   same could, on the Sacramentary scheme now in fashion, return even a
   plausible answer to Arnauld's great work on Transubstantiation, (not
   without reason the boast of the Romish Church), exceeds my powers of
   conjecture. should hang back from all express reference to these words,
   as if they were afraid or ashamed of them, though the earliest recorded
   ceremonies and liturgical forms of the primitive Church are absolutely
   inexplicable, except in connexion with this discourse, and with the
   mysterious and spiritual, not allegorical and merely ethical, import of
   the same; and though this import is solemnly and in the most
   unequivocal terms asserted and taught by their own Church, even in her
   Catechism, or Compendium of doctrines necessary for all her
   members;--this I may, perhaps, understand; but this I am not able to
   vindicate or excuse.

   There is, however, one opprobrious phrase which it may be profitable
   for my younger readers that I should explain, namely, Mysticism. And
   for this purpose I will quote a sentence or two from a dialogue which,
   had my prescribed limits permitted, I should have attached to the
   present work; but which with an Essay* on the Church as instituted by
   Christ, and as an establishment of the State, and a series of Letters
   on the right and the superstitious use and estimation of the Bible,
   will appear in a small volume by themselves, should the reception given
   to the present volume encourage or permit the publication.
     __________________________________________________________________

MYSTICS AND MYSTICISM.

   Antinous.--"What do you call mysticism? And do you use the word in a
   good or in a bad sense?"

   Nous.--"In the latter only; as far, at least, as we are concerned with
   it. When a man refers to inward feelings and experiences, of which
   mankind at large are not conscious, as evidences of the truth of any
   opinion--such
     __________________________________________________________________

   *See the Church and State, 3rd edit. a man I call a Mystic: and the
   grounding of any theory or belief on accidents and anomalies of
   individual sensations or fancies, and the use of peculiar terms
   invented, or perverted from their ordinary significations, for the
   purpose of expressing these idiosyncrasies and pretended facts of
   interior consciousness, I name Mysticism. Where the error consists
   simply in the Mystic's attaching to these anomalies of his individual
   temperament the character of reality, and in receiving them as
   permanent truths, having a subsistence in the divine mind, though
   revealed to himself alone; but entertains this persuasion without
   demanding or expecting the same faith in his neighbours--I should
   regard it as a species of enthusiasm, always indeed to be deprecated,
   but yet capable of co-existing with many excellent qualities both of
   head and heart. But when the Mystic, by ambition or still meaner
   passions, or (as sometimes is the case) by an uneasy and self-doubting
   state of mind which seeks confirmation in outward sympathy, is led to
   impose his faith, as a duty, on mankind generally: and when with such
   views he asserts that the same experiences would be vouchsafed, the
   same truths revealed, to every man but for his secret wickedness and
   unholy will;--such a Mystic is a fanatic, and in certain states of the
   public mind a dangerous member of society. And most so in those ages
   and countries in which fanatics of elder standing are allowed to
   persecute the fresh competitor. For under these predicaments,
   Mysticism, though originating in the singularities of an individual
   nature, and therefore essentially anomalous, is nevertheless highly
   contagious. It is apt to collect a swarm and cluster circum fana,
   around the new fane; and therefore merits the name of fanaticism, or as
   the Germans say, Schwarmercy, that is swarm-making."

   We will return to the harmless species, the enthusiastic Mystics.;--a
   species that may again be subdivided into two ranks. And it will not be
   other than germane to the subject, if I endeavour to describe them in a
   sort of allegory or parable. Let us imagine a poor pilgrim benighted in
   a wilderness or desert, and pursuing his way in the starless dark with
   a lantern in his hand. Chance or his happy genius leads him to an oasis
   or natural garden, such as in the creations of my youthful fancy I
   supposed Enos,* the child of Cain to have found. And here, hungry and
   thirsty, the way-wearied man rests at a fountain; and the taper of his
   lantern throws its light on an over-shadowing tree, a boss of
   snow-white blossoms, through which the green and growing fruits peeped,
   and the ripe golden fruitage glowed. Deep, vivid, and faithful
     __________________________________________________________________

   *Will the reader forgive me if I attempt at once to illustrate and
   relieve the subject by annexing the first stanza of the poem composed
   in the same year in which I wrote the Ancient Mariner and the first
   book of Christabel?

     "Encinctur'd with a twine of leaves,

     That leafy twine his only dress!

     A lovely boy was plucking fruits

     In a moonlight wilderness.

     The moon was bright, the air was free,

     And fruits and flowers together grew

     On many a shrub and many a tree:

     And all put on a gentle hue,

     Hanging in the shadowy air

     Like a picture rich and rare.

     It was a climate where, they say.

     The night is more belov'd than day.

     But who that beauteous boy begui'd,

     That beauteous boy, to linger here?

     Alone, by night, a little child.

     In place so silent and so wild --

     Has he no friend, no loving mother near?"

     Wanderings of Cain. Poet, works, II. p. 100.

   [continue]are the impressions, which the lovely imagery comprised
   within the scanty circle of light, makes and leaves on his memory. But
   scarcely has he eaten of the fruits and drunk of the fountain, ere
   scared by the roar and howl from the desert he hurries forward; and as
   he passes with hasty steps through grove and glade, shadows and
   imperfect beholdings and vivid fragments of things distinctly seen
   blend with the past and present shapings of his brain. Fancy modifies
   sight. His dreams transfer their forms to real objects; and these lend
   a substance and an outness to his dreams. Apparitions greet him; and
   when at a distance from this enchanted land, and on a different track,
   the dawn of day discloses to him a caravan, a troop of his fellow-men,
   his memory, which is itself half fancy, is interpolated afresh by every
   attempt to recall, connect, and piece out his recollections. His
   narration is received as a madman's tale. He shrinks from the rude
   laugh and contemptuous sneer, and retires into himself. Yet the craving
   for sympathy, strong in proportion to the intensity of his convictions,
   impels him to unbosom himself to abstract auditors; and the poor
   quietest becomes a penman, and, all too poorly stocked for the writer's
   trade, he borrows his phrases and figures from the only writings to
   which he has had access, the sacred books of his religion. And thus I
   shadow out the enthusiast Mystic of the first sort; at the head of
   which stands the illuminated, Teutonic theosopher and shoemaker, honest
   Jacob Behmen, born near Gorlitz, in Upper Lusatia, in the 17th of our
   Elizabeth's reign, and who died in the 22nd of her successor's.

   To delineate a Mystic of the second and higher order, we need only
   endow our pilgrim with equal gifts of nature, but these developed and
   displayed by all the aids and arts of education and favourable fortune.
   He is on

   306 AIDS TO RSVLBOnON.

   his way to the Mecca of his ancestral and national faith, with a
   well-guarded and numerous procession of niei&gt; chants and
   fellow-pilgrims, on the established track. At the close of day the
   caravan has halted : the full moon rises on the desert : and he strays
   forth alone^ out of sight but to no unsafe distance ; and chance leads
   him, too, to the same oasis or islet of verdure on the sea oi sand. He
   wanders at leisure in its maze of beieiuty and sweetness, and thrids
   his way through the odorous and flowering thickets into open spots of
   greenery, and dis* covers statues and memorial characters, grottoes,
   and refreshing caves. But the moonshine, the imaginative poesy o[
   Nature, spreads its soft shadowy charm overall, conceals distances, and
   magnifies heights, and modifies relations ; and fills up vacuities with
   its own whiteness, counterfeiting substance ; and where the dense
   shadows lie, makes solidity imitate hoUovniess ; and gives to all
   objects a tender visionary hue and softening. Interpret the moonlight
   and the shadows as the peculiar genius and sensibiUty of the
   individual's own spirit : and here you have the other sort : a Mystic,
   an enthusiast of a nobler breed -- ^a Fenelon. But the residentiary, or
   the frequent visiter of the favoured spot, who has scanned its beauties
   by steady daylight^ and mastered its true proportions and lineaments,
   he wUl discover that both jnlgrims have indeed been there. He will
   know, that the delightful dream, which the latter tells, is a dream of
   truth ; and that even in the bewildered tale of the former there is
   truth mingled with the dream.

   But the source, the spring-head, of the charges which I anticipate,
   lies deep. Materialism, conscicms and avowed Materialism, is in ill
   repute : and a confessed Materialist therefore a rare character. But if
   the faith be ascertained by the fruits : if the predominant, though

   most often unsuspected, persuasion is to be learnt from the influences,
   under which the thoughts and affections of the man move and take their
   direction; I must reverse the position. Only not all are Materialists.
   Except a few individuals, and those for the most part of a single sect:
   every one, who calls himself a Christian, holds himself to have a soul
   as well as a body. He distinguishes mind from matter, the subject of
   his consciousness from the objects of the same. The former is his mind:
   and he says, it is immaterial. But though subject and substance are
   words of kindred roots, nay, little less than equivalent terms, yet
   nevertheless it is exclusively to sensible objects, to bodies, to
   modifications of matter, that he habitually attaches the attributes of
   reality, of substance. Real and tangible, substantial and material, are
   synonymes for him. He never indeed asks himself, what he means by mind?
   But if he did, and tasked himself to return an honest answer--as to
   what, at least, he had hitherto meant by it--he would find, that he had
   described it by negatives, as the opposite of bodies, for example, as a
   somewhat opposed to solidity, to visibility, and the like, as if you
   could abstract the capacity of a vessel, and conceive of it as a
   somewhat by itself, and then give to the emptiness the properties of
   containing, holding, being entered, and so forth. In short, though the
   proposition would perhaps be angrily denied in words, yet in fact he
   thinks of his mind, as a property, or accident of a something else,
   that he calls a soul or spirit: though the very same difficulties must
   recur, the moment he should attempt to establish the difference. For
   either this soul or spirit is nothing but a thinner body, a finer mass
   of matter: or the attribute of self-subsistency vanishes from the soul
   on the same grounds, on which it is refused to the mind.

   I am persuaded, however, that the dogmatism of the Corpuscular School,
   though it still exerts an influence on men's notions and phrases, has
   received a mortal blow from the increasingly dynamic spirit of the
   physical sciences now highest in public estimation. And it may safely
   be predicted that the results will extend beyond the intention of those
   who are gradually effecting this revolution. It is not chemistry alone
   that will be indebted to the genius of Davy, Oersted, and their
   compeers: and not as the founder of physiology and philosophic anatomy
   alone, will mankind love and revere the name of John Hunter. These men
   have not only taught, they have compelled us to admit, that the
   immediate objects of our senses, or rather the grounds of the
   visibility and tangibility of all objects of sense, bear the same
   relation and similar proportion to the intelligible object--that is, to
   the object which we actually mean when we say, "It is such or such a
   thing," or "I have seen this or that."--as the paper, ink, and
   differently combined straight and curved lines of an edition of Homer
   bear to what we understand by the words, Iliad and Odyssey. Nay,
   nothing would be more easy than so to construct the paper, ink, painted
   capitals, and the like, of a printed disquisition on the eye, or the
   muscles and cellular texture (that is, the flesh) of the human body, as
   to bring together every one of the sensible and ponderable stuffs or
   elements, that are sensuously perceived in the eye itself, or in the
   flesh itself. Carbon and nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen, sulphur,
   phosphorus, and one or two metals and metallic bases, constitute the
   whole. It cannot be these, therefore, that we mean by an eye, by our
   body. But perhaps it may be a particular combination of these? But here
   comes a question: In this term do you or do you not include the
   principle, the operating

   cause, of the combination? If not, then detach this eye from the body.
   Look steadily at it--as it might lie on the marble slab of a dissecting
   room. Say it were the eye of a murderer, a Bellingham: or the eye of a
   murdered patriot, a Sidney!--Behold it, handle it, with its "various
   accompaniments or constituent parts, of tendon, ligament, membrane,
   blood-vessel, gland, humors; its nerves of sense, of sensation, and of
   motion. Alas! all these names like that of the organ itself, are so
   many anachronisms, figures of speech, to express that which has been:
   as when the guide points with his finger to a heap of stones and tells
   the traveller, "That is Babylon, or Persepolis." Is this cold jelly the
   light of the body? Is this the micranthropos in the marvellous
   microcosm? Is this what you mean when you well define the eye as the
   telescope and the mirror of the soul, the seat and agent of an almost
   magical power?

   Pursue the same inquisition with every other part of the body, whether
   integral or simply ingredient; and let a Berzelius or a Hatchett be
   your interpreter, and demonstrate to you what it is that in each
   actually meets your senses. And when you have heard the scanty
   catalogue, ask yourself if these are indeed the living flesh, the blood
   of life? Or not far rather--I speak of what, as a man of common sense,
   you really do, not what, as a philosopher, you ought to believe--is it
   not, I say, far rather the distinct and individualized agency that by
   the given combinations utters and bespeaks its presence? Justly and
   with strictest propriety of language may I say, speaks. It is to the
   coarseness of our senses, or rather to the defect and limitation of our
   percipient faculty, that the visible object appears the same even for a
   moment. The characters, which I am now shaping on this paper, abide.
   Not only the forms remain the same, but the particles of the colouring
   stuff are fixed, and, for an indefinite period at least, remain the
   same. But the particles that constitute the size, the visibility of an
   organic structure, are in perpetual flux. They are to the combining and
   constitutive power as the pulses of air to the voice of a discourser;
   or of one who sings a roundelay. The same words may be repeated; but in
   each second of time the articulated air hath passed away, and each act
   of articulation appropriates and gives momentary form to a new and
   other portion. As the column of blue smoke from a cottage chimney in
   the breathless summer noon, or the stedfast-seeming cloud on the edge
   point of a hill in the driving air-current, which momently condensed
   and recomposed is the common phantom of a thousand successors; such is
   the flesh, which our bodily eyes transmit to us; which our palates
   taste; which our hands touch.

   But perhaps the material particles possess this combining power by
   inherent reciprocal attractions, repulsions, and elective affinites;
   and are themselves the joint artists of their own combinations? I will
   not reply, though well I might, that this would be to solve one problem
   by another, and merely to shift the mystery. It will be sufficient to
   remind the thoughtful querist, that even herein consists the essential
   difference, the contradistinction, of an organ from a machine; that not
   only the characteristic shape is evolved from the invisible central
   power, but the material mass itself is acquired by assimilation. The
   germinal power of the plant transmutes the fixed air and the elementary
   base of water into grass or leaves; and on these the organic principle
   in the ox or the elephant exercises an alchemy still more stupendous.
   As the unseen agency weaves its magic eddies, the foliage becomes
   indifferently the bone and its marrow, the pulpy brain, or the solid
   ivory. That what you see is blood, is flesh, is itself the work, or
   shall I say, the translucence, of the invisible energy, which soon
   surrenders or abandons them to inferior powers, (for there is no pause
   nor chasm in the activities of nature) which repeat a similar
   metamorphosis according to their kind;--these are not fancies,
   conjectures, or even hypotheses, but facts; to deny which is
   impossible, not to reflect on which is ignominious. And we need only
   reflect on them with a calm and silent spirit to learn the utter
   emptiness and unmeaningness of the vaunted Mechanicocorpuscular
   philosophy, with both its twins, Materialism on the one hand, and
   Idealism, rightlier named subjective Idolism, on the other: the one
   obtruding on us a world of spectres and apparitions; the other a mazy
   dream.

   Let the Mechanic or Corpuscular scheme, which in its absoluteness and
   strict consistency was first introduced by Des Cartes, be judged by the
   results. By its fruits shall it be known.

   In order to submit the various phaenomena of moving bodies to
   geometrical construction, we are under the necessity of abstracting
   from corporeal substance all its positive properties, and obliged to
   consider bodies as differing from equal portions of space** only by
   figure
     __________________________________________________________________

   **Such is the conception of body in Des Cartes' own system. Body is
   every where confounded with matter, and might in the Cartesian sense be
   defined space or extension, with the attribute of visibility. As Des
   Cartes at the same time zealously asserted the existence of
   intelligential beings, the reality and independent self-subsistence of
   the soul. Berkeleyanism or Spinosism was the immediate and necessary
   consequence. Assume a plurality of self-subsisting souls, and we have
   Berkeleyanism; assume one only (unam et unicam substantiam), and you
   have Spinosism, that is, the assertion of one infinite self-subsistent,
   with the two attributes of thinking and appearing. Cogitatio infinita
   sine centra, et omniformis apparitio. How far the Newtonian vis
   inertiae (interpreted any otherwise than as an arbitrary term = x y z,
   to represent the unknown but necessary and mobility. And as a fiction
   of science, it would be difficult to overvalue this invention. It
   possesses the same merits in relation to geometry that the atomic
   theory has in relation to algebraic calculus. But in contempt of common
   sense, and in direct opposition to the express declarations of the
   inspired historian (Gen. i), and to the tone and spirit of the
   Scriptures throughout, Des Cartes propounded it as truth of fact: and
   instead of a world created and filled with productive forces by the
   almighty Fiat, left a lifeless machine whirled about by the dust of its
   own grinding; as if death could come from the living fountain of life;
   nothingness and phantom from the plenitude of reality, the absoluteness
   of creative will!

   Holy! Holy! Holy! let me be deemed mad by all men, if such be thy
   ordinance; but, O! from such madness save and preserve me, my God!
     __________________________________________________________________

   supplement or integration of the Cartesian notion of body) has patched
   up the flaw, I leave for more competent judges to decide. But should
   any one of my readers feel an interest in the speculative principles of
   natural philosophy, and should be master of the German language, I
   warmly recommend for his perusal the earliest known publication of the
   great founder of the Critical Philosophy, (written in the twenty-second
   year of his age!) on the then eager controversy between the Leibnitzian
   and the French and English Mathematicians, respecting the living
   forces--Gedanken von der wahren Schatzung der lebendigen Krafte:
   1747--in which Kant demonstrates the right reasoning to be with the
   latter; but the truth of the fact, the evidence of experience, with the
   former; and gives the explanation, namely: body, or corporeal nature,
   is something else and more than geometrical extension, even with the
   addition of a vis inertiae. And Leibnitz with the Bernouillis, erred in
   the attempt to demonstrate geometrically a problem not susceptible of
   geometrical construction. This tract, with the succeeding
   Himmels-System, may with propriety be placed, after the Principia of
   Newton, among the striking instances of early genius; and as the first
   product of the dynamic philosophy in the physical sciences, from the
   time, at least, of Giordano Bruno, whom the idolaters burned for an
   Atheist, at Rome, in the year 1600. See The Friend, vol. i, p. 151-155.
   3d edit.

   When, however, after a short interval, the genius of Kepler expanded
   and organized in the soul of Newton, and there (if I may hazard so bold
   an expression) refining itself into an almost celestial clearness, had
   expelled the Cartesian vortices;** then the necessity of an active
   power, of positive forces present in the material universe, forced
   itself on the conviction. For as a law without a lawgiver is a mere
   abstraction; so a law without an agent to realize it, a constitution
   without an abiding executive, is, in fact, not a law but an idea. In
   the profound emblem of the great tragic poet, it is the powerless
   Prometheus fixed on a barren rock. And what was the result? How was
   this necessity provided for? God himself--my hand trembles as I write!
   Rather, then, let me employ the word, which the religious feeling, in
   its perplexity, suggested as the substitute--the Deity itself was
   declared to be the real agent, the actual gravitating power! The law
   and the lawgiver were identified. God says Dr. Priestley) not only
   does, but is every thing. Jupiter est quodcunque vides. And thus a
   system, which commenced by excluding all life and immanent activity
   from the visible universe, and evacuating the natural world of all
   nature, ended by substituting the Deity, and reducing the Creator to a
   mere
     __________________________________________________________________

   **For Newton's own doubtfully suggested ether, or most subtle fluid, as
   the ground and immediate agent in the phaenomena of universal
   gravitation, was either not adopted or soon abandoned by his disciples;
   not only as introducing, against his own canons of right reasoning, an
   ens imaginarium into physical science, a suffiction in the place of a
   legitimate supposition; but because the substance (assuming it to
   exist) must itself form part of the problem which it was meant to
   solve. Meantime Leibnitz's pre-established harmony, which originated in
   Spinosa, found no acceptance; and, lastly, the notion of a corpuscular
   substance, with properties put into it, like a pincushion hidden by the
   pins, could pass with the unthinking only for any thing more than a
   confession of ignorance, or technical terms expressing a hiatus of
   scientific insight anima mundi: a scheme that has no advantage over
   Spinosism but its inconsistency, which does indeed make it suit a
   certain order of intellects, who, like the pleuro nectae (or flat fish)
   in ichthyology which have both eyes on the same side, never see but
   half of a subject at one lime, and forgetting the one before they get
   to the other are sure not to detect any inconsistency between them.

   And what has been the consequence? An increasing unwillingness to
   contemplate the Supreme Being in his personal attributes: and thence a
   distaste to all the peculiar doctrines of the Christian Faith, the
   Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, and Redemption. The young
   and ardent, ever too apt to mistake the inward triumph in the detection
   of error for a positive love of truth, are among the first and most
   frequent victims to this epidemic fastidium. Alas! even the sincerest
   seekers after light are not safe from the contagion. Some have I known,
   constitutionally religious--I speak feelingly; for I speak of that
   which for a brief period was my own state--who under this unhealthful
   influence have been so estranged from the heavenly Father, the living
   God, as even to shrink from the personal pronouns as applied to the
   Deity. But many do I know, and yearly meet with, in whom a false and
   sickly taste co-operates with the prevailing fashion: many, who find
   the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, far too real, too substantial;
   who feel it more in harmony with their indefinite sensations

     To worship nature in the hill and valley,

     Not knowing what they love;--

   and (to use the language, but not the sense or purpose of the great
   poet of our age) would fain substitute for the Jehovah of their Bible A
   sense sublime

     Of something far more deeply interfused,

     Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,

     And the round ocean and the living air;

     A motion and a spirit, that impels

     All thinking things, all objects of all thought.

     And rolls through all things!

   WORDSWORTH.

   And this from having been educated to understand the divine
   omnipresence in any sense rather than the only safe and legitimate one,
   the presence of all things to God!

   Be it, however, that the number of such men is comparatively small! And
   be it (as in fact it often is) but a brief stage, a transitional state,
   in the process of intellectual growth! Yet among a numerous and
   increasing class of the higher and middle ranks, there is an inward
   withdrawing from the life and personal being of God, a turning of the
   thoughts exclusively to the so-called physical attributes, to the
   onmipresence in the counterfeit form of ubiquity, to the immensity, the
   infinity, the immutability;--the attributes of space with a notion of
   power as their substratum,--a Fate, in short not a moral creator and
   governor! Let intelligence be imagined, and wherein does the conception
   of God differ essentially from that of gravitation (conceived as the
   cause of gravity) in the understanding of those, who represent the
   Deity not only as a necessary but as a necessitated being; those, for
   whom justice is but a scheme of general laws; and holiness, and the
   divine hatred of sin, yea and sin itself, are words without meaning, or
   accommodations to a rude and barbarous race? Hence, I more than fear
   the prevailing taste for books of natural theology, physico-theology,
   demonstrations of God from nature, evidences of of Christianity, and
   the like. Evidences of Christianity!

   I am weary of the word. Make a man feel the want of it; rouse him, if
   you can, to the self-knowledge, of his need of it; and you may safely
   trust it to its own evidence,--remembering only the express declaration
   of Christ himself: No man cometh to me, unless the Father leadeth him?
   Whatever more is desirable--I speak now with reference to Christians
   generally, and not to professed students of theology--may, in my
   judgment, be far more safely and profitably taught, without controversy
   or the supposition of infidel antagonists, in the form of
   Ecclesiastical history.

   The last fruit of the Mechanico-corpuscular philosophy, say rather of
   the mode and direction of feeling and thinking produced by it on the
   educated class of society; or that result, which as more immediately
   connected with my present theme I have reserved for the last--is the
   habit of attaching all our conceptions and feelings, and of applying
   all the words and phrases expressing reality, to the objects of the
   senses: more accurately speaking, to the images and sensations by which
   their presence is made known to us. Now I do not hesitate to assert,
   that it was one of the great purposes of Christianity, and included in
   the process of our redemption, to rouse and emancipate the soul from
   this debasing slavery to the outward senses, to awaken the mind to the
   true criteria of reality, namely, permanence, power, will manifested in
   act, and truth operating as life. My words, said Christ, are spirit;
   and they (that is, the spiritual powers expressed by them) are
   truth;--that is, very being. For this end our Lord, who came from
   heaven to take captivity captive, chose the words and names, that
   designate the familiar yet most important objects of sense, the nearest
   and most concerning things and incidents of corporeal nature: water,
   flesh, blood, birth, bread! But he used them in senses, that could not
   without absurdity be supposed to respect the mere phaenomena, water,
   flesh, and the like, in senses that by no possibility could apply to
   the color, figure, specific mode of touch or taste produced on
   ourselves, and by which we are made aware of the presence of the
   things, and understand them--res, quae sub apparitionibus istis
   statuendae sunt. And this awful recalling of the drowsed soul from the
   dreams and phantom world of sensuality to actual reality,--how has it
   been evaded! These words, that were spirit--these mysteries, which even
   the Apostles must wait for the Paraclete, in order to
   comprehend,--these spiritual things which can only be spiritually
   discerned,--were mere metaphors, figures of speech, oriental
   hyperboles! "All this means only morality!" Ah! how far nearer to the
   truth would these men have been had they said that morality means all
   this!

   The effect, however, has been most injurious to the best interests of
   our Universities, to our incomparably constituted Church, and even to
   our national character. The few who have read my two Lay Sermons, are
   no strangers to my opinions on this head: and in my treatise on the
   Church and Churches, I shall, if providence vouchsafe, submit them to
   the public, with their grounds and historic evidences in a more
   systematic form.

   I have, I am aware, in this present work furnished occasion for a
   charge of having expressed myself with slight and irreverence of
   celebrated names, especially of the late Dr. Paley. O, if I were fond
   and ambitious of literary honour, of public applause, how well content
   should I be to excite but one third of the admiration, which, in my
   inmost being, I feel for the head and heart of Paley! And how gladly
   would I surrender all hope of contemporary praise, could I even
   approach to the incomparable grace, propriety, and persuasive facility
   of his writings! But on this very account I believe myself bound in
   conscience to throw the whole force of my intellect in the way of this
   triumphal car, on which the tutelary genius of modern idolatry is
   borne, even at the risk of being crushed under the wheels! I have at
   this moment before my eyes the eighteenth of his Posthumous Discourses:
   the amount of which is briefly this--that all the words and passages in
   the New Testament which express and contain the peculiar doctrines of
   Christianity, the paramount objects of the Christian Revelation, all
   those which speak so strongly of the value, benefit, and efficacy, of
   the death of Christ, assuredly mean something: but what they mean,
   nobody, it seems, can tell! But doubtless we shall discover it, and be
   convinced that there is a substantial sense belonging to these
   words--in a future state! Is there an enigma, or an absurdity, in the
   Koran or the Vedas, which might not be defended on the same pretence? A
   similar impression, I confess, was left on my mind by Dr. Magee's
   statement or exposition (ad normam Grotianam) of the doctrine of
   Redemption; and deeply did it disappoint the high expectations, sadly
   did it chill the fervid sympathy which his introductory chapter, his
   manly and masterly disquisition on the sacrificial rites of Paganism,
   had raised in my mind.

   And yet I cannot read the pages of Paley, here referred to, aloud,
   without the liveliest sense, how plausible and popular they will sound
   to the great majority of readers. Thousands of sober, and in their way
   pious. Christians will echo the words, together with Magee's kindred
   interpretation of the death of Christ, and adopt the doctrine for their
   make-faith: and why? It is feeble. And whatever is feeble is always
   plausible; for it favours mental indolence. It is feeble: and
   feebleness, in the disguise of confessing and condescending strength,
   is, always popular. It flatters the reader, by removing the apprehended
   distance between him and the superior author; and it flatters him still
   more by enabling him to transfer to himself, and to appropriate, this
   superiority: and thus to make his very weakness the mark and evidence
   of his strength. Ay, quoth the rational Christian--or with a sighing,
   self-soothing sound between an Ay and an Ah!--I am content to think,
   with the great Dr. Paley, and the learned Archbishop of Dublin--

   Man of sense! Dr. Paley was a great man, and Dr. Magee is a learned and
   exemplary prelate; but You do not think at all!

   With regard to the convictions avowed and enforced in my own Work, I
   will continue my address to the man of sense in the words of an old
   philosopher:--Tu vero crassis auribus et obstinato corde respuis quae
   forsitan vere perhibeantur. Minus hercule calles pravissimis
   opinionibus ea putari mendacia, quae vel auditu nova, vel visu rudia,
   vel certe supra captum cogitationis (extemporaneae tuae) ardua
   videantur: qua si paulo accuratius exploraris, non modo compertu
   evidentia, sed etiam factu facilia, senties.**
     __________________________________________________________________

   IN compliance with the suggestion of a judicious friend, the celebrated
   conclusion of the fourth book of Paley's Moral and Political
   Philosophy, referred to in p. 267 of this Volume, is here transprinted
   for the convenience of the reader:-- "Had Jesus Christ delivered no
   other declaration than the following--'The hour is coming, in the which
     __________________________________________________________________

   ** Apu'. Metam. I. Ed. all that are in the grave shall hear his voice,
   and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the resurrection
   of life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
   damnation;--he had pronounced a message of inestimable importance, and
   well worthy of that splendid apparatus of prophecy and miracles with
   which his mission was introduced, and attested; a message in which the
   wisest of mankind would rejoice to find an answer to their doubts, and
   rest to their inquiries. It is idle to say, that a future state had
   been discovered already:--it had been discovered as the Copernican
   system was:--it was one guess among many. He alone discovers, who
   proves; and no man can prove this point, but the teacher who testifies
   by miracles that his doctrine comes from God."

   Paedianus says of Virgil,--Usque adeo expers invidiae ut siquid erudite
   dictum inspiceret alterius, non minus gauderet ac si suum esset. My own
   heart assures me that this is less than the truth: that Virgil would
   have read a beautiful passage in the work of another with a higher and
   purer delight than in a work of his own, because free from the
   apprehension of his judgment being warped by self-love, and without
   that repressive modesty akin to shame, which in a delicate mind holds
   in check a man's own secret thoughts and feelings, when they respect
   himself. The cordial admiration with which I peruse the preceding
   passage as a masterpiece of composition, would, could I convey it,
   serve as a measure of the vital importance I attach to the convictions
   which impelled me to animadvert on the same passage as doctrine.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   APPENDIX.

   A SYNOPTICAL SUMMARY OF THE SCHEME OF THE ARGUMENT TO PROVE THE
   DIVERSITY IN KIND, OF THE REASON AND THE UNDERSTANDING. SEE P. 161.

   The position to be proved is the difference in kind of the
   understanding from the reason.

   The axiom, on which the proof rests, is: subjects, which require
   essentially different general definitions, differ in kind and not
   merely in degree. For difference in degree forms the ground of specific
   definitions, but not of generic or general.

   Now reason is considered either in relation to the will and moral
   being, when it is termed the **practical reason = A: or relatively to
   the intellective and sciential faculties, when it is termed theoretic
   or speculative reason = a. In order therefore to be compared with the
   reason, the understanding must in like manner be distinguished into the
   understanding as a principle of action,
     __________________________________________________________________

   **N. B. The practical reason alone is reason in the full and
   substantive sense. It is reason in its own sphere of perfect freedom;
   as the source of ideas, which ideas, in their conversion to the
   responsible will, become ultimate ends. On the other hand, theoretic
   reason, as the ground of the universal and absolute in all logical
   conclusion, is rather the light of reason in the understanding, and
   known to be such by its contrast with the contingency and particularity
   which characterize all the proper and indigenous growths of the
   understanding. in which relation I call it the adaptive power, or the
   faculty of selecting and adapting means and medial of proximate ends =
   B: and the understanding, as a mode and faculty of thought, when it is
   called reflection = b. Accordingly, I give the general definitions of
   these four: that is, I describe each severally by its essential
   characters: and I find, that the definition of A differs toto genere
   from that of B, and the definition of a from that of b.

   Now subjects that require essentially different definitions do
   themselves differ in kind. But understanding, and reason, require
   essentially different definitions. Therefore understanding and reason
   differ in kind.

  The End.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1]viii  [2]ix  [3]x  [4]xi  [5]xii  [6]xiii  [7]xiv  [8]xv  [9]xvi
   [10]xvii  [11]xviii  [12]xix  [13]xx  [14]xxi  [15]xxii  [16]xxiii
   [17]xxiv  [18]xxv  [19]xxvi  [20]xxvii  [21]xxviii  [22]xxix  [23]xxx
   [24]xxxi  [25]xxxii  [26]xxxiii  [27]xxxiv  [28]xxxv  [29]xxxvi
   [30]xxxvii  [31]xxxviii  [32]xxxix  [33]xl  [34]xli  [35]xlii
   [36]xliii  [37]xliv  [38]xlv  [39]xlvi  [40]xlvii  [41]1  [42]2  [43]3
   [44]4  [45]5  [46]6  [47]7  [48]8  [49]9  [50]10  [51]11  [52]12
   [53]13  [54]14  [55]15  [56]16  [57]17  [58]18  [59]19  [60]20  [61]21
   [62]22  [63]23  [64]24  [65]25  [66]26  [67]27  [68]28  [69]29  [70]30
   [71]31  [72]32  [73]33  [74]34  [75]35  [76]36  [77]37  [78]38  [79]39
   [80]40  [81]41  [82]42  [83]43  [84]44  [85]45  [86]46  [87]47  [88]48
   [89]49  [90]50  [91]51  [92]52  [93]53  [94]54  [95]55  [96]56  [97]57
   [98]58  [99]59  [100]60  [101]61  [102]62  [103]63  [104]64  [105]65
   [106]66  [107]67  [108]68  [109]69  [110]70  [111]71  [112]72  [113]73
   [114]74  [115]75  [116]76  [117]77  [118]78  [119]79  [120]80  [121]81
   [122]82  [123]83  [124]84  [125]85  [126]86  [127]87  [128]88  [129]89
   [130]90  [131]91  [132]92  [133]93  [134]94  [135]95  [136]96  [137]97
   [138]98  [139]99  [140]100  [141]101  [142]102  [143]103  [144]104
   [145]105  [146]106  [147]107  [148]108  [149]109  [150]110  [151]111
   [152]112  [153]113  [154]114  [155]115  [156]116  [157]117  [158]118
   [159]119  [160]120  [161]121  [162]122  [163]123  [164]124  [165]125
   [166]126  [167]127  [168]128  [169]129  [170]130  [171]131  [172]132
   [173]133  [174]134  [175]135  [176]136  [177]137  [178]138  [179]139
   [180]140  [181]141  [182]142  [183]143  [184]144  [185]145  [186]146
   [187]147  [188]148  [189]149  [190]150  [191]151  [192]152  [193]153
   [194]154  [195]155  [196]156  [197]157  [198]158  [199]159  [200]160
   [201]161  [202]162  [203]163  [204]164  [205]165  [206]166  [207]167
   [208]168  [209]169  [210]170  [211]171  [212]172  [213]173  [214]174
   [215]175  [216]176  [217]177  [218]178  [219]179  [220]180  [221]181
   [222]182  [223]183  [224]184  [225]185  [226]186  [227]187  [228]188
   [229]189  [230]190  [231]191  [232]192  [233]193  [234]194  [235]195
   [236]196  [237]197  [238]198  [239]199  [240]200  [241]201  [242]202
   [243]203  [244]204  [245]205  [246]206  [247]207  [248]208  [249]209
   [250]210  [251]211  [252]212  [253]213  [254]214  [255]215  [256]216
   [257]217  [258]218  [259]219  [260]220  [261]221  [262]222  [263]223
   [264]224  [265]225  [266]226  [267]227  [268]228  [269]229  [270]230
   [271]231  [272]232  [273]233  [274]234  [275]235  [276]236  [277]237
   [278]238  [279]239  [280]240  [281]241  [282]242  [283]243  [284]244
   [285]245  [286]246  [287]247  [288]248  [289]249  [290]250  [291]251
   [292]252  [293]253  [294]254  [295]255  [296]256  [297]257  [298]258
   [299]259  [300]260  [301]261  [302]262  [303]263  [304]264  [305]265
   [306]266  [307]267  [308]268  [309]269  [310]270  [311]271  [312]272
   [313]273  [314]274  [315]275  [316]276  [317]277  [318]278  [319]279
   [320]280  [321]281  [322]282  [323]283  [324]284  [325]285  [326]286
   [327]287  [328]288  [329]289  [330]290  [331]291  [332]292  [333]293
   [334]294  [335]295  [336]296  [337]297  [338]298  [339]299  [340]300
   [341]301  [342]302  [343]303  [344]304  [345]305  [346]306  [347]307
   [348]308  [349]309  [350]310  [351]311  [352]312  [353]313  [354]314
   [355]315  [356]316  [357]317  [358]318  [359]319  [360]320  [361]321
   [362]322  [363]323  [364]324
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_viii
   2. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_ix
   3. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_x
   4. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xi
   5. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xii
   6. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xiii
   7. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xiv
   8. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xv
   9. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xvi
  10. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xvii
  11. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xviii
  12. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xix
  13. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xx
  14. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxi
  15. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxii
  16. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxiii
  17. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxiv
  18. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxv
  19. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxvi
  20. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxvii
  21. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxviii
  22. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxix
  23. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxx
  24. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxi
  25. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxii
  26. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxiii
  27. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxiv
  28. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxv
  29. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxvi
  30. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxvii
  31. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxviii
  32. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xxxix
  33. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#i-Page_xl
  34. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ii-Page_xli
  35. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ii-Page_xlii
  36. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iii-Page_xliii
  37. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iii-Page_xliv
  38. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iii-Page_xlv
  39. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iii-Page_xlvi
  40. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iii-Page_xlvii
  41. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_1
  42. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_2
  43. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_3
  44. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_4
  45. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_5
  46. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_6
  47. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_7
  48. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_8
  49. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_9
  50. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_10
  51. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_11
  52. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_12
  53. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_13
  54. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_14
  55. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_15
  56. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_16
  57. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_17
  58. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_18
  59. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_19
  60. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_20
  61. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_21
  62. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_22
  63. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_23
  64. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#iv-Page_24
  65. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#v-Page_25
  66. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#v-Page_26
  67. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#v-Page_27
  68. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#v-Page_28
  69. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#v-Page_29
  70. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_30
  71. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_31
  72. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_32
  73. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_33
  74. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_34
  75. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_35
  76. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_36
  77. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_37
  78. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vi-Page_38
  79. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii-Page_39
  80. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.i-Page_40
  81. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.ii-Page_41
  82. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.ii-Page_42
  83. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_43
  84. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_44
  85. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_45
  86. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_46
  87. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_47
  88. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_48
  89. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_49
  90. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_50
  91. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_51
  92. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_52
  93. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_53
  94. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_54
  95. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_55
  96. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iii-Page_56
  97. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iv-Page_57
  98. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.iv-Page_58
  99. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.vii-Page_59
 100. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.vii-Page_60
 101. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.ix-Page_61
 102. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.x-Page_62
 103. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.x-Page_63
 104. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.x-Page_64
 105. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.x-Page_65
 106. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.x-Page_66
 107. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xii-Page_67
 108. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xiii.ii.i-Page_68
 109. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xiv.i-Page_69
 110. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xv-Page_70
 111. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xvi-Page_71
 112. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xvi-Page_72
 113. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xvii.ii-Page_73
 114. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xvii.iv.i-Page_74
 115. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xviii.i.i-Page_75
 116. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xix-Page_76
 117. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xx-Page_77
 118. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxii-Page_78
 119. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_79
 120. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_80
 121. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_81
 122. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_82
 123. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_83
 124. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_84
 125. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_85
 126. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_86
 127. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_87
 128. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_88
 129. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_89
 130. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_90
 131. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_91
 132. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_92
 133. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_93
 134. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xl-Page_94
 135. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xlii-Page_95
 136. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xlii-Page_96
 137. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#vii.xliii-Page_97
 138. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_98
 139. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_99
 140. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_100
 141. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_101
 142. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_102
 143. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_103
 144. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_104
 145. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_105
 146. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#viii-Page_106
 147. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ix.i-Page_107
 148. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ix.iii-Page_108
 149. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ix.v-Page_109
 150. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ix.vii-Page_110
 151. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ix.vii-Page_111
 152. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#ix.vii-Page_112
 153. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x-Page_113
 154. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x-Page_114
 155. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.ii-Page_115
 156. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.ii-Page_116
 157. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iii-Page_117
 158. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_118
 159. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_119
 160. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_120
 161. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_121
 162. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_122
 163. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_123
 164. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_124
 165. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_125
 166. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_126
 167. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_127
 168. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_128
 169. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_129
 170. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_130
 171. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_131
 172. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_132
 173. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_133
 174. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_134
 175. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_135
 176. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_136
 177. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.iv-Page_137
 178. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.v-Page_138
 179. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.vi-Page_139
 180. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.vii-Page_140
 181. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.vii-Page_141
 182. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.ix-Page_142
 183. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.ix-Page_143
 184. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.ix-Page_144
 185. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.x-Page_145
 186. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xi-Page_146
 187. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xi-Page_147
 188. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_148
 189. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_149
 190. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_150
 191. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_151
 192. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_152
 193. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_153
 194. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xii-Page_154
 195. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_155
 196. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_156
 197. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_157
 198. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_158
 199. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_159
 200. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_160
 201. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xiv-Page_161
 202. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii-Page_162
 203. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii-Page_163
 204. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii-Page_164
 205. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii-Page_165
 206. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii-Page_166
 207. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii-Page_167
 208. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_168
 209. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_169
 210. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_170
 211. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_171
 212. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_172
 213. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_173
 214. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_174
 215. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_175
 216. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_176
 217. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xvii.ii-Page_177
 218. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xviii.i-Page_178
 219. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xviii.i-Page_179
 220. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xviii.i-Page_180
 221. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xviii.i-Page_181
 222. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xviii.i-Page_182
 223. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xix-Page_183
 224. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xix-Page_184
 225. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xx-Page_185
 226. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xx-Page_186
 227. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xx-Page_187
 228. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xx-Page_188
 229. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xx-Page_189
 230. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_190
 231. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_191
 232. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_192
 233. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_193
 234. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_194
 235. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_195
 236. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxi-Page_196
 237. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxii.i-Page_197
 238. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxii.i-Page_198
 239. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxii.i-Page_199
 240. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxii.i-Page_200
 241. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_201
 242. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_202
 243. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_203
 244. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_204
 245. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_205
 246. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_206
 247. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_207
 248. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_208
 249. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_209
 250. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_210
 251. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_211
 252. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_212
 253. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_213
 254. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_214
 255. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_215
 256. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_216
 257. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_217
 258. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_218
 259. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_219
 260. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_220
 261. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_221
 262. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_222
 263. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_223
 264. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_224
 265. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiii-Page_225
 266. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxiv-Page_226
 267. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxv.i-Page_227
 268. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxv.i-Page_228
 269. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxvi-Page_229
 270. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxvi-Page_230
 271. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxvi-Page_231
 272. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxviii-Page_232
 273. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxix-Page_233
 274. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxx-Page_234
 275. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxi-Page_235
 276. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxii.i-Page_236
 277. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxii.i-Page_237
 278. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxii.i-Page_238
 279. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxii.i-Page_239
 280. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxii.i-Page_240
 281. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiii-Page_241
 282. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiii-Page_242
 283. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiii-Page_243
 284. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiii-Page_244
 285. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiii-Page_245
 286. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiii-Page_246
 287. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxiv-Page_247
 288. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_248
 289. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_249
 290. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_250
 291. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_251
 292. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_252
 293. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_253
 294. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_254
 295. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_255
 296. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_256
 297. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_257
 298. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_258
 299. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv-Page_259
 300. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv.i-Page_260
 301. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv.ii-Page_261
 302. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv.iii-Page_262
 303. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv.iii-Page_263
 304. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv.iii-Page_264
 305. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxv.iii-Page_265
 306. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxvi-Page_266
 307. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxix-Page_267
 308. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxix-Page_268
 309. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxix-Page_269
 310. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxix-Page_270
 311. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xxxix-Page_271
 312. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xl-Page_272
 313. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xl-Page_273
 314. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_274
 315. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_275
 316. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_276
 317. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_277
 318. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_278
 319. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_279
 320. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_280
 321. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_281
 322. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xli-Page_282
 323. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xlii.i-Page_283
 324. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_284
 325. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_285
 326. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_286
 327. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_287
 328. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_288
 329. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_289
 330. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_290
 331. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_291
 332. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_292
 333. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_293
 334. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_294
 335. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_295
 336. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_296
 337. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_297
 338. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_298
 339. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_299
 340. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii-Page_300
 341. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#x.xliii.i-Page_301
 342. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi-Page_302
 343. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi-Page_303
 344. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi-Page_304
 345. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_305
 346. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_306
 347. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_307
 348. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_308
 349. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_309
 350. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_310
 351. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_311
 352. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_312
 353. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_313
 354. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_314
 355. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_315
 356. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_316
 357. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_317
 358. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_318
 359. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_319
 360. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_320
 361. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_321
 362. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_322
 363. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xi.i-Page_323
 364. file:///ccel/c/coleridge/reflection/cache/reflection.html3#xii-Page_324
