     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Reflections on the Christian Faith
      Creator(s): Pasko, Mark
     Print Basis: CCEL, 2012
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BX2182
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Roman Catholic Church

                  Meditations. Devotional readings. Spiritual exercises, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Cross of Christ and the Love of God

   Palm Sunday begins the darkest and holiest week in the Christian
   calendar. It is the week when the power of Satan, sin and death do
   their worst to destroy Christ and His work. It shows the extent of the
   love that Jesus has for us and that He is willing to do or suffer
   ANYTHING to raise us up to Himself. Here are a few of the many lessons
   in the readings this week:

   -Jesus voluntarily chose to be shut out of God's sight to become one
   with our fallen nature in order to feel and suffer what we do. By
   sharing our sinful nature, we will share His glorious nature. By His
   wounds and love, we are healed. By our sufferings for His Name, others
   will be healed. The psalm that begins "My God, my God, why have you
   forgotten me?" ends in triumph and praise! We must understand this
   divine humility and accept what this divine love requires: our
   sanctification and holiness

   -Jesus bore the sins of the world on the Cross. We must also carry our
   own cross. Each cross is unique and made of our own trials and
   sufferings. Each is designed to help our spiritual growth. Our cross is
   meant to crucify our egos and all that hinders our progress and
   prevents the flow of the Spirit and eternal life.

   -"Father, forgive them for they know not what they do." Jesus forgave
   those who hated and crucified Him. He forgave Judas and would even
   forgive Satan if Satan would only accept it! We must do the same. We
   MUST forgive and pray for our enemies if we are to grow spiritually. It
   is mandatory.

   -Although nearly all of Christ's friends and disciples abandoned Him
   when push came to shove, these same weak and cowardly humans became
   those powerhouses that spread the word of God and willingly gave their
   lives to the Lord. They tested the extent of His forgiveness and it
   changed their lives. The same is true for us. We are slowly being
   transformed into the likeness of Christ.

   -When Jesus shouted from the Cross: "It is finished!" it was a shout of
   triumph, not resignation that His life and sufferings were over. He
   knew that He had run His race and that salvation was ours. He knew that
   Satan was a conquered enemy. Satan knew it too.

   What custom made cross am I to carry? Can I learn to experience joy in
   my cross knowing that it will lead to my sanctification if I let it? In
   what ways am I being transformed into the likeness of Christ? When my
   earthly life ends, will I be able to shout triumphantly: "It is
   finished!"? Do I take comfort in the fact that the disciples that knew
   Christ abandoned Him and were weak beings like me? Can I begin to pray
   for and forgive Osama Bin Ladin, the Taliban and Al Quaeda?

   Do Others Recognize Jesus In Me?

   In many of the Gospel accounts, Jesus is not recognized at first.
   Somehow, He looks different and not the same as He was when in the
   flesh. Soon, however, He is recognized through his personality,
   character, deeds and Spirit. He is also recognized in the breaking of
   the bread---the Eucharist.

   The Lord's Meal reverses the effects of the "apple" in the Garden of
   Eden. There the disobeying of the divine command brought a breaking of
   contact with God, thus, the onset of a spiritual nakedness. The Lord's
   Meal allows us to recognize God in those around us, in the world and to
   begin becoming spiritually clothed again as Christ fills our spirits.

   How is the presence of Jesus in a life manifested? Look at Peter in
   today's reading for an example. He changed from being a coward who
   denied Christ three times (someone like me) to become a powerful temple
   of the Holy Spirit who was able to inspire 3,000 people to be baptized
   in one day! (Talk about a good stump speech and sermon!) The effect of
   the presence of Jesus in the early Church was a unity of Spirit that
   was joyful, prayerful and generous to the point of selling ones
   possessions to help those who were in need. They were devoted to the
   Church leaders, the Community, the prayers and the breaking of bread.

   In the end, Jesus can look like anyone; including you and me!!!

   Do others recognize the Lord in me? Do others come to me for comfort,
   prayer and to help build their faith? Who in my life do I recognize as
   being with Jesus? Do I recognize Christ in the breaking of the bread?
   Is my contact with Jesus through the Church making me a more joyful, p

   How Strong Is My Faith?

   Doubt hinders faith and implies a lack of trust in Jesus, His power and
   His resurrection.. Doubts delay the good intended for us. The children
   of Israel would have entered the Promised Land much sooner if their
   fears and doubts did not continuously drive them back into the
   wilderness. If Christians had faithfully lived their faith, the world
   might already be converted and Jesus may have already returned in
   glory.

   That being said, I am grateful to the Apostle Thomas (Doubting Thomas)
   for demanding tangible proof of Jesus' resurrection before he would
   believe. Thomas is a modern, hard headed, "show me" kind of a person!
   His doubts help give me confidence in my faith.

   While looking for reasonable assurance of the truth of Christ's
   resurrection is understandable and expected of thinking beings with
   free will, we can't expect God to reveal Himself in a truly scientific
   manner to remove all doubts. While science is not the enemy of faith, I
   must not look to science to prove my faith. For example, my faith tells
   me that God created life while science gives me some hints on how He
   did it. Why would faith, something so critical to our salvation and
   growth, be needed at all if there is scientific certainty of the
   resurrection? The testimony of those who knew Jesus before and after
   his resurrection (including more than 500 people who experienced Him at
   one time) and the revealing of the power of the Holy Spirit in our
   lives are what should be expected.

   For many in our secular world no amount of proof would ever be enough
   to have faith. It is the curse of the secular world view and has been
   around for thousands of years. As recorded in the parable of the Rich
   Man and Lazarus (Lk 16: 19-31) Abraham says that those who will not
   listen to the testimony of Moses and the Prophets would not be
   convinced even if someone were to rise from the dead. My doubts must
   have limits or I will have no faith.

   What are the doubts to my faith in Christ? Do I expect to have absolute
   proof of my faith? What do I do to cultivate my faith and reduce my
   doubts? (Pray?, Read Scripture?, Meditate?, Spend time with
   Christians?, Act in faith?,

   !Dare To Be Audacious!

   God tells Abraham: Even though you are 75 years old, your life is just
   beginning! Get up and move to a country you have never seen! You and
   Sarah will have children as numerous as the stars even if you are both
   100 years old! All nations will bless themselves by you! Abraham got up
   and went..... THAT is faith! The rest is salvation history.

   Jesus tells Nicodemus: No one can see the Kingdom of God without being
   born from above through the Spirit! Those of the Spirit will be like
   the wind. They will be and move mysteriously and have the power to move
   mountains both physical and spiritual! Then Jesus says the most
   audacious thing imaginable: God so loves the world that He sent Me so
   that all will not die but have eternal life! Eternal life is now and we
   are called to act the eternal life in the present. Jesus shows us how.

   How is it done? Act through faith! Dare to believe the seemingly
   impossible good meant for your life and those around you can actually
   happen! Live life in the large sense since the actions of your life can
   be eternal even though you may only live a few more years! Take the
   types of risks that will require you (and others, through example) to
   grow spiritually! Believe in the power of prayer! Believe that you,
   like Abraham, are called to be a blessing and that the example of your
   life in Christ will bless future generations! Be filled with the Divine
   Audacity!

   What steps can I take to begin my real life? What is holding me back?
   What mountains need to be moved? Will I dare to pray that this happens?
   Act now!

   ? Are You Ready to Be Resurrected?

   Many have had partial resurrection experiences. Loosing one's eyesight,
   getting it back and realizing the amazing color of the sky and stained
   glass is one. Recovering from chemical addiction and depression and
   feeling the newness of life within, a rebirth experience, is another.
   Some have had near death experiences or have recovered miraculously
   from critical illness and have discovered the meaning of their lives
   for the first time. Resurrection experiences require that we have in
   some ways died.

   Ezekiel and his vision of the dry bones talks about the spiritual
   resurrection of the Jewish people after the Babylonian captivity.
   Jesus' raising of Lazarus from the dead restores a man to physical life
   (as did Elisha in the OT and St. Paul). Lazarus will physically die
   again. But, thank God, that is not the end of the story!

   Jesus Himself IS the gateway to life everlasting and the resurrection!
   He has the power to give eternal life: those who die will still live
   and those who are alive will never die! Jesus calls us from sin and
   death to uprightness and life. His Spirit enables us to be and do what
   we could never be or do on our own. It is all a free gift! All we need
   do is accept it. Jesus wept for Lazarus, he now weeps fro us. Jesus
   calls us from our tombs: "Unbind (insert your name) and let (him/her)
   go free!"

   In what ways have I had resurrection experiences? In what ways am I
   still dead? Am I ready to be and do what Jesus wants me to be and do in
   my resurrected life? Am I ready to emerge from the tomb.

   In What Areas of My Life and In What Circumstances Am I Blind?

   We all have our blind spots and tend not to see reality as it is. Much
   of it is self-induced to avoid pain and to fit into our culture.
   Today's readings teach several lessons regarding spiritual light and
   darkness.

   -God does not see as humans do. We see appearances while God looks
   within to see what is in our heart: motives, desires, ego delusions and
   darkness (self-blindness).

   -Jesus came to bring sight to the blind and blindness to those who
   think that they see clearly. Avoiding the light of Christ makes our
   darkness even deeper. If we are not careful, our self-delusions will
   make us creatures of darkness.

   -We become beings of the light by being willing to have the harsh but
   purifying spot light of Christ's truth penetrate us and burn away the
   corrosion of our ego darkness.

   -Once we are cleansed by the light, we will become reflected light of
   Christ and expose the darkness of what is in the world. This will not
   necessarily make us beloved by many.

   -The first step to become a creature of the light is to admit to
   ourselves, God and another human being (thus the need for Confession)
   our darkness and blindness. By admitting our blindness, we will loose
   our guilt, shame and begin to change. By denying our darkness, our
   guilt will remain and our darkness will become deeper.

   What areas of my life do I not want to be an "open book"? How do I
   judge others by appearances? In what ways do I try to hide my
   blindness? (For example, I tend to judge others for characteristics in
   myself that I don't want to see.)

   He is Risen! Live the Risen Life!

   (Adapted from God Calling by Two Listeners)

   As Jesus rose from the grave, we are to rise from all that hinders the
   risen life within and around us. The risen life is one of beauty,
   holiness, joy, peace and work inspired by love. Our thinking and
   actions are to show that we have risen from death to life.

   Death was the last enemy destroyed by Christ so, with death, the
   victory of Jesus is complete. There is nothing to fear. Sin is
   conquered and forgiven as you live and move and work with Christ. All
   that depresses you, all that you fear, are powerless to harm you. They
   are phantoms. The real forces were conquered by Jesus in the
   wilderness, in the Garden of Gethsemane, on the Cross and in the Tomb.

   Let nothing hinder your risen life. Rise from your fears and go out
   into the sunlight to meet your risen Lord! Each day will have much in
   it that you will meet in either the spirit of the resurrection or the
   spirit of the tomb. Deliberately choose the one and reject the other.

   Christ lays His hands on you in blessing. Wait in love and longing to
   feel their tender pressure, and, as you wait, courage and hope will
   flow into your being, irradiating your lives with the warm sun of His
   presence. Unclasp your hands of your earth-treasures so that you may
   receive from the Lord's hand the Easter Sacrament of eternal life..

   How can I live the risen life? How can I reject the thinking of the
   tomb? As I go out to meet my risen Lord, what do I want to say to Him?
   What do I think He will say to me?

   What do I need to let go of in order to receive what the Lord wants to
   give me? Will I spend time waiting quietly before the Lord to hear what
   He has to say?

   What Do You Thirst For? Does It Satisfy?

   In both the OT and Gospel readings today Israel in the desert and Jesus
   at the Samaritan well need water to quench a physical thirst. Today,
   however, much of the world is not thirsty for water but for something
   much deeper but just as real. People thirst for meaning in a world and
   culture that is large on consumerism and self-centeredness and short on
   a poverty of choice and self-forgetfulness. People try to find meaning
   in the usual sources that have always failed: possessions, power, lust,
   pleasure and greed to name but a few. There is also a strong thirst to
   avoid pain, suffering and responsibility.

   Jesus makes it clear where the water that truly quenches comes from:
   association with Him. By being fed by His Holy Spirit we will find our
   deepest thirsts satisfied. This does not mean that we will not suffer
   in order to grow. Jesus promises heart-rest but not leisure, comfort
   and not pleasure. But, remember what Paul says in today's readings. Let
   us exalt in our hardships understanding that hardships develop
   perseverance and perseverance develops a tested character, something
   that will give us hope and a hope that will not let us down because the
   love of God has been poured into our hearts.

   What do I thirst for? (Recognizing that you are thirsty and being
   willing to determine what will satisfy it in the long run is a
   necessary first step.) Am I willing to simplify my wants and desires
   and to accept a sufficiency that will satisfy? Am I willing to loose my
   hold on a meaningless self-sufficiency in order to obtain the real
   treasure?

   By Who's Light Do You Shine??

   Jesus says that we are the light of the world and that our light MUST
   shine so that others may see the Body of Christ in action, be saved and
   give glory to God through a changed life. But, by who's light are we to
   shine??

   Until recent centuries, mankind believed that the moon generated its
   own light. It isn't much light but it is enough to guide our feet at
   night. The truth is, however, remove the sun and, the real source of
   light, and the moon is dark and gives no guidance. It is as dead as can
   be. It is only to the extent that the moon reflects the sun's glory
   that it will shine with a beauty all its own. A beauty to guide our
   feet.

   Psalm 27 says that the Lord MUST be our light and salvation. We must
   reflect His glory if we are to have any glory at all since we are His
   creation and any glory of ours is a reflection of His handiwork and
   love.

   Reflecting His glory can change the world! We must do whatever is
   necessary to enable us to shine. Much of what reduces our radiance is
   the darkness of our ego and self-will. All my self-will will show
   others is greed, pride, self-centerdness and a whole host of other
   unlovely traits that I would like to hide from myself and others.

   By reflecting God's glory, He will make my feet as light as a does and
   set my steps on the heights. He will hide me under His roof and set my
   feet on a high rock; high enough to provide more reflected glory to
   light the path of others.

   Who's light do I reflect? What must I do to remove the mud and other
   dirt that keeps my light from shining? Am I willing to start working at
   this cleansing?

   Am I Willing to Go Beyond the Written Law??

   Developing legislation is difficult. The written law always has
   unintended consequences and loopholes are inadvertently (or not)
   created. According to the lawyers I worked with, there is no such thing
   as the "spirit" of the law, the written law is what must be dealt with
   or amended to a new written law. One cannot enforce the spirit of the
   law, only the letter.

   Religious matters experience the same tension between spirit and
   letter. Much of the law in the Old Testament is based on case law and
   developed by religious lawyers. Laws were written that, logically,
   could be enforced since they had to do with behavior.

   Jesus had a problem with this. He insisted that the spirit of the law,
   whether one's motives are in accord with the desired physical outcome,
   is at least as important as the behavior. One can act lawfully while
   being lawless and chaotic within. (One name for them is People of the
   Lie and may be considered a definition of evil. Some of those who had
   Jesus crucified scrupulously followed the letter of the law.)

   According to Paul, our "natural inclinations" are not good; they are
   prone to jealousy and rivalry. Ben Sirah in Ecclesiasticus notes that
   God gave us free will, and, if we choose, we can be loyal and obey the
   law of God. The psalmist indicates the work and commitment required to
   obey God's law.

   The law that Jesus preached cannot be expressed fully in writing since
   acting in a loving manner, doing what is best for the spiritual growth
   of oneself and others, is often case specific. It requires the work of
   the Holy Spirit to change my inner being and guide me into the proper
   response in the given situation.

   Am I willing to move beyond the written law and work toward major
   interior change? Am I willing to do the hard work of growing into a
   truly loving person? Will I choose water or fire, life or death? Choose
   life today!

   Are You Ready to Be a Citizen of the Kingdom of God?

   Micah the prophet says that you already know what the Lord wants from
   you: to do what is right, to love loyalty and to walk humbly with your
   God. Jesus describes the faithful person in the Beatitudes as one who
   is poor in spirit, meek (or humble), merciful, clean hearted, a
   peacemaker and willing to be persecuted for the sake of doing what is
   right.

   The words "poor in spirit" and "meek/humble" don't resonate well in our
   society and smack of self-deprecation and the willingness to be a door
   mat for others who are not meek. In fact, these terms really mean
   accepting yourself honestly for what you are: a unique creation of God
   with skills and talents to be developed and used for the benefit of
   others as well as yourself. God, like a good parent, wants what is best
   for you and knows that acceptance of His will for you will give you
   fulfillment and joy. The opposite of these qualities is
   pride/willfulness which is the king of sins and is what drove Satan,
   the most splendid and beautiful of God's creations, from His presence.

   The acceptance of God's will for you will enable you to inherit the
   Kingdom, be shown mercy, be contented, to see God and, in fact, be
   called His son/daughter.

   Giving up pride and self-centeredness is the key. Are you willing to
   unlock the door to all that God desires for you? Are you willing to
   assess yourself honestly? Are you willing to leave the baggage of your
   ego and walk into the Kingdom? Are you ready to begin living your true
   life as a citizen of the Kingdom?

   An Action Plan for Christian Discipleship

   Today's Gospel (Matthew 4: 12-23) and Epistle (1 Corinthians 1: 10-18)
   readings give a plan for Christian discipleship and action.

    1. Repent---Be willing to listen, willing to learn, willing to change.

    1. Listen for the Voice of the Lord--- He will tell you to: "Follow
       me" in a way that is tailored to your personality, skills, talents,
       spiritual gifts and station in life.

    1. Respond quickly to the Voice---- Pray, meditate, read the Word,
       talk with other Christians to help discern/confirm the message.
       Then act quickly! (Obeying the written Word, including modifying
       our assumptions about money, is a mandatory first step.)

   .
    1. Observe the Results--- Jesus said we would do the same works he
       did: teaching, proclaiming, healing and other works of the spirit.
       The works would insure unity within the Body of Christ and not
       factions. (Note that there are now several thousand denominations!)
       As members of the Body of Christ you are to be in agreement in what
       you profess so that you are perfectly united in your beliefs and
       judgements. Creating more Churches is not the answer.

    1. Be willing to Re-pent again and return to (1) above if your actions
       are not promoting unity within the Church--- Repenting is a
       continuous process and not a single action. Follow the love! (It
       isn't a fuzzy feeling and may not feel good at all.)

   Am I willing to listen and follow the Lord's plans for my life and
   Church?

   Am I Ready to Follow the Good Shepherd?

   Jesus is the Good Shepherd and the Gate leading us to eternal life. He
   leads His flock and they follow His voice. He leads them to safe
   pasture and abundant life. He will lay down His life for his flock.

   How does one follow the voice of the Shepherd? Deacon Stephen is a
   perfect example of how it is done. He is empowered with the power of
   Jesus. Like Jesus, he performs miracles and attacks untruth and evil.
   Like Jesus, he is accused by false witnesses. Like Jesus, he has a
   vision of the glorified Christ. Like Jesus, he is murdered for
   blasphemy. Like Jesus, he forgives his murderers. Like Jesus, he
   commends his spirit to God with his last breath.

   Jesus died in His early 30's. St. Stephen was probably about the same
   age. Jesus' idea of a safe pasture and an abundant life are obviously
   not those of the world! Evil will not appreciate having someone shine a
   bright light to expose its motives, deeds and sin. If possible, it will
   destroy the evidence (Jesus and Stephen) rather than examine its
   beliefs and actions, repent and be healed.

   While most Christians are not called to the martyrdom of Jesus and
   Stephen, we are all called to die to ourselves and confront the evil in
   our lives. The truth is, following the Shepherd may give us a shorter
   and unpopular (by the world's definition) life here in the world. But
   it will be a life of meaning and a life that will bring life to others.
   Eternal life, the real life, will also be ours.

   How do we respond?; with the words of the 23^rd Psalm. The Lord is my
   Shepherd, I lack nothing. Even were I to walk through the valley of the
   shadow of death, I shall fear no evil for You are with me. Surely Your
   goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life and I shall
   live in the house of the Lord forever.

   Do I expect that following Jesus will make my life easy? Am I willing
   to follow the Good Shepherd even if it required that I have a life like
   St. Stephen's? Am I willing to die to myself? Am I willing to confront
   the evil in my life?

   Are You Sure That What You Are Praying For Is Best?

   Jesus said: "Whatever you ask in my name, I will do (Jn: 14:15)". We
   have all prayed for outcomes and have seemingly received the exact
   opposite or it seems that nothing at all happens. How can this be
   explained? The words of Jesus must be taken in the context of the whole
   Gospel message. The following are a few of the points to consider:

   -Faith is the only requirement to accomplish mighty deeds. It banishes
   evil, overcomes adverse circumstances and accomplishes all good in our
   lives. Works are necessary to express and activate our faith in Jesus.

   -We must live in Christ. Once we live in Christ, to dwell on the
   material calls it into being. We must think only what will help, not
   hinder, our spiritual growth.

   -Seek first the Kingdom and all else will be given to you. To attain
   the material, redouble your efforts to attain the spiritual.

   -Pass on what you receive to bless others. Not passing on a blessing
   causes a stagnation that will result in a blockage to receiving further
   blessings.

   -God can give physical blessings to all but spiritual blessings can
   only be distributed based on the condition of the individual. God does
   not dare give spiritual powers until we are ready. It would cause harm.
   This is one of the reasons why the goodness of our lives is so
   important.

   -God answers prayer as quickly as possible but because our lives are so
   intertwined, seeming delay must occur to harmonize all in God's plan.

   -Agreeing to pray with others for something is not the same as agreeing
   that, without any doubts, it is the best thing to do and in accord with
   God's will.

   What must I do to increase my faith? What actions can I take to express
   my faith? If my thoughts were all to come true, would I bring only good
   into the world? Do I have blockages to blessings in my life? What must
   I do to resolve them? Am I too impatient to wait for the answer to my
   prayers? Am I too set on a specific outcome? Are my doubts hindering
   the blessings in my life?

   Do You See the Hand of the Creator in Nature?

   Nature has always been one of the great inspirations for leading people
   to God as they see the hand of the Creator in the created. Today's
   readings from the Psalms and Acts highlight this path to faith. In
   Acts, Paul talks to the philosophers of Athens in language they would
   understand. He indicates that through one principle, God created the
   human race and all that is. God gave us a sense of the passing of time
   and wonder so that we may seek for and find Him since in Him we live
   and move and have our being. Psalm 148 is a Cosmic Hymn of Praise
   showing all created reality praising God in their own ways.

   Nature has a strong pull for me to discover God and I have had some of
   my most memorable and meaningful experiences being in the mountains or
   at the seashore:

   "Blessed be the Father,

   Maker of sun, sand and sea,

   Without whom these would not be.

   He is the Bond between the Word of God and the Wind of God.

   Honor to the Holy Spirit,

   The Sustainer and Sanctifier of Life,

   Without whom neither dolphin nor dove would exist.

   The Spirit bridges the breach between God-Man and Ground of Being

   Praise to the Son,

   The Redeemer and Ransomer of Existence,

   Without whom there would be no consciousness of wonder or praise.

   He is the Joy and Laughter between the Creator of Life and the Breath
   of Life.

   Glory to Father, Son and Spirit,

   The All-in-All,

   Lover of all that is,

   Who makes all Whole and One."

   Do you see the hand of God in nature? What parts of nature speak to
   you? What do they say about the Creator? The warm sun and clean air are
   two of God's greatest healers. Try to spend more time outdoors!.

   Torn Between Two Loves

   Today's reading from the Gospel of John shows Jesus praying for His
   beloved disciples (including you and me) and, at the same time,
   yearning to go home to His Father. He is torn between two worlds and
   two loves. He loves humanity enough to die for while He is a sojourner
   here but longs to return to His real home and family. He says that
   unless He goes home, He will not be able to send the Holy Spirit to be
   with us. It is almost as if the Father can't bear to be away from both
   of His family members (Jesus and the Holy Spirit) at the same time.

   In a human sense, it is like the Patriarch Jacob being unwilling to let
   his son Benjamin go to Egypt since he believes that his son Joseph is
   dead and he could not bare to be without both of them at the same time
   (Gn 42:36-38).

   In some mysterious way, by raising us to Himself, we will fill the
   longing of His own humanity and the heart of the Father to be loved.
   They long to take us to their home forever.

   Am I torn between this world and the next? Do I long to go to my real
   home? How do I feel about the fact that both Jesus and the Father want
   to be loved for who they are and not just for what they can do for us?
   (Does this sound familiar?) Do I spend time with Jesus just to be in
   His presence and not to ask for anything?

   God Gave the Gift of the Holy Spirit on the Church's Birthday

   Pentecost is the birthday of the Church; the day the Lord Jesus kept
   His promise by sending the Holy Spirit to be with us in His stead. The
   Holy Spirit reverses the impact of the confusion of language and the
   separation of peoples resulting from the pride of the Tower of Babel
   (Gn 11:1-9). It promotes unity by, for example, allowing St. Peter's
   preaching of the Gospel to be understood by persons of many languages
   (Acts 2:1-11).

   The Spirit of unity is what holds the Church, the Body of Christ,
   together. But within that unit is a diversity of gifts given to us for
   our own joy, growth and to build up the Church. As St. Paul said: There
   are different gifts but one spirit; there are many ways of serving but
   the same Lord; there are many activities but it is the same God acting
   in all.

   God gives specific gifts to specific Church members as the Church has
   need of them. The gifts may not be obvious and require discernment to
   identify. In any event, it will require work on our part to develop and
   use them. If we don't do this, God will remove the gift from us and
   give it to another who will blossom and yield fruit for the Kingdom. If
   you haven't already done so, please begin exploring and using your
   God-given gifts! It may require a few risks but Jesus guarantees that
   you will be blessed in the process and find joy and fulfillment in your
   life.

   What are my spiritual gifts? How can I use them to build up myself and
   the Church? Am I willing to take some leaps of faith? Am I willing to
   work with others to help discern and use my gifts? Am I willing to work
   with others to help them discern and use their gifts?

   The Mystery of the Holy Trinity

   The Holy Trinity is one of the great mysteries of the Christian faith.
   That is good! A God that I could fully understand would be too small
   and not be a God at all. It would be something created in my image and
   not the other way around.

   Saints and theologians have been trying to figure out the Trinity for
   2,000 years. Saint Augustine, one of the great Fathers of the early
   Church, spent a lot of thought and time trying to put the Trinity into
   philosophical and logical human language but wasn't getting very far.
   One day, he had a dream. He was walking along an ocean shoreline and
   saw a little boy with a bucket walking up to the ocean, filling the
   bucket with water, walking back to a hole he had made and pouring in
   the water. Augustine asked the boy what he was doing. The boy said he
   was trying to empty the ocean. Augustine told him that was impossible
   and that he was wasting his time. The little boy replied: It is just as
   impossible for you to try to fully understand the Holy Trinity!

   Sometimes metaphorical language and the physical creation are as far as
   we can go in describing this mystery:

   "God is an ocean shore of sand, wind and sea,

   all very different but makes one shore of the three.

   The Father, the solid Rock of Creation, is the Ground of Being,

   He is the maker of bolder and sand.

   The Father is silent-barely a whispering sound,

   as the Ocean and Wind embrace all around.

   The Son, the Water of Life, is the liquid ocean,

   Caressing the Rock and Wind with devotion,

   The roaring waves beckon: Come!.

   The Spirit if the airy Wind,

   tinged with the salty tang of healing and holiness,

   loving both Beach and Ocean as He blows,

   Where?--Only God knows!

   Without each: breath, wave and sea,

   like Father, Son and Spirit,

   neither shore, nor God, would be."

   Is the Trinity a hindrance to my faith? What is the best way for me to
   understand the Trinity? Are you glad that there is mystery in the
   Christian faith? Would you want to have a "god" that you could fully
   comprehend and have "in your hip pocket"?

   Do I Trust God?

   (Adapted from God Calling by Two Listeners)

   Jesus teaches much about trusting in God, especially in today's Gospel
   reading. The following are a few of the spiritual realities to help
   build your faith and trust.

   -Do not be too ready to "do"; just "be"! Jesus said "Be ye perfect." He
   did not say to do perfect things.

   -Cultivate silence! and wait before God since God speaks in silence.

   -The Lord made each of us as a master instrument maker makes a musical
   instrument. He would not ask of you anything that would destroy or
   strain. The strain comes only when you are serving another master such
   as the world, fame or the good opinion of others, or, carrying two
   day's burden on one day.

   -Give thanks to God! even in seeming trials and worries. You cannot
   learn all of your lessons without them. They are necessary either for
   yourselves or those around you.

   -Crucify the self-life! Every blow to the "self" is used to shape the
   real, eternal, imperishable you.

   -Claim the Lord's power! The same power He used to cast out devils is
   yours today. Use it. Otherwise it will be withdrawn.

   -The Lord is your guide! Do not want to see the road ahead. Go one step
   at a time. The Lord rarely grants the long view to His disciples,
   especially in personal affairs. Faith is best cultivated one step, one
   day, at a time.

   -Complete surrender of every moment to God is the foundation of
   happiness! The superstructure is the joy of Communion with Him. This is
   the House He is preparing for you.

   -Be not afraid! It is to the drowning man that the rescuer comes. To
   the brave swimmer who can fare well alone, he comes not. Jesus waits
   until the storm is at its most violent before He rescues. This is meant
   to instill strength, confidence, joyful dependence and anticipation.

   -You are not at the mercy of fate or buffeted by others! You are being
   led in a very definite way, and those who do not serve your purpose are
   being moved out of your path. Often the Lord will go before you to
   soften a heart here, to over-rule an event there.

   -Don't rely too much on feelings! They change like the weather.

   -Nothing is by chance! Sacrifice and suffering are redemptive with the
   right attitude and are used to teach the individual or to raise or help
   others.

   How much do I trust God? Do I spend enough time listening to God? Do I
   thank God for trials? Fear is an evil ally and the Lord never uses it
   to get His way. Do I use fear to control others? How can I cultivate
   living one day at a time? What power of God do I need to claim? Can I
   tell the difference between my ego and the Lord's prompting?

   Is the Kingdom of God Bigger Than I Think?

   God is a God of mercy who wants all to be saved. He shows no partiality
   and will not be kept in anyone's "hip pocket". The Jewish people
   thought they had God all to themselves (in a "lock box") but salvation
   history shows otherwise. They were temporarily estranged from God
   because they were rebellious and not doing God's will. God was
   particularly harsh on them because He had shown so much of Himself to
   them and they still killed prophets and acted idolatrously. In today's
   Gospel reading, Jesus gives the same warning to Christians: It isn't
   those who call on God that will enter the Kingdom but those that do the
   will of the Father. He will tell many Christians (as he told the Jews),
   even those who perform miracles and cast out demons in His name: I
   never knew you. Depart from me!

   According to St. Paul (Romans 2: 12-16), when those who do not have the
   written Law behave, through their inner sense, as the Law dictates,
   they are a law unto themselves. They have demonstrated that the Law is
   engraved on their hearts as the New Covenant was predicted by the
   Prophets (Jerimiah 31: 31-34). Many gentiles evidently fit into this
   category during Paul's time. Today, many others (of non-Christian faith
   or those who have no faith) may be in the same category. They may be
   doing the will of the Father none-the-less. Can I be absolutely sure
   they are not? They may not have the full Christian truth but does that
   mean that their beliefs contain no truth that I can learn from?

   If not all who call on the Lord will enter the Kingdom, will there be
   those who do not call on the (Christian) Lord that will? The answer, I
   pray, is: yes. The "spiritual" Church is much larger than our buildings
   and organizational structure! God willing, all will enter the Kingdom
   of Heaven and none be excluded. None of us is perfect but, hopefully,
   we are all "good goats".

   Does being a Christian make me prideful? Do I think I have God fully
   understood? Am I rebellious? Am I sure I am doing God's will? Do I pray
   that all people will enter God's Kingdom? Do I pray for those of other
   faiths and those of no faith? Can I learn anything from these
   non-Christians?

   Am I a Person of Integrity?

   The Lord makes it abundantly clear in today's readings that while
   outward worship and actions are good, they must be preceded by interior
   (spiritual) worship and action. Beyond sacrifice and other rituals, the
   Lord wants mercy, fidelity, knowledge "of" God (not just "about" God),
   thanksgiving and integrity. The Lord wants our "insides" (our character
   and motives) to match our "outsides" (what others see).

   While we may at times change our insides by first changing our
   outsides, ultimately we want our spirit to control our actions. For
   example, Jesus wants us to be spiritual givers first and worldly givers
   second. We are to give of our prayers, thoughts and love first. We are
   then to give of the world's goods, including money, as they are given
   to us.

   Jesus was very tough on those Pharisees who were self-righteous,
   critical of others and refused to discern that they were wounded and
   needed a spiritual doctor like everyone else. To avoid doing the same
   we must give to all whom God sends to us. We are to give according to
   what is needed, not according to what is "deserved" or on their
   relationship to us.

   Jesus comes to those that are in need of a spiritual doctor and are
   willing to face up to that fact. He doesn't come to the self-satisfied.

   Am I satisfied with my own holiness and attitude toward "sinners"? Am I
   in need of spiritual help? Do I give enough of my time and prayers to
   others? Am I a person of integrity? What do I need to ask the Lord to
   heal me of? As with physical surgery, am I willing to face the pain of
   spiritual treatment?

   We Are A Kingdom of Priests!

   In both the Old and New Testaments the people of God are to be a
   kingdom of priests, a chosen race, a holy nation, a people to be the
   personal possession of the Lord's. While in the Old Testament priests
   were a group of men chosen to offer sacrifices to Yahweh, in the New
   Testament only Jesus is called a priest because of His self-sacrifice.
   While we were still estranged from God, Jesus chose to die for us to
   prove the depth of His love. Jesus expects us to follow Him and do what
   He did for those whom He leads to us. Today's Gospel reading gives a
   clear picture of what He expects of us. We are to teach/proclaim the
   Good News, shepherd the lost, cure disease, cast out devils and even
   raise the dead! He will empower us use these and other spiritual gifts
   as He gave it to his disciples when they were ready.

   How are we to become ready? Do not trust in your own power to provide
   for yourself. Learn to trust God to provide by living one day at a
   time. Pray for an increase in faith. Use your current gifts and
   resources for the glory of God. Be obedient and humble as you use the
   gifts since we are only messengers for Christ. While the laborer is
   worth his wage, we are not to use our gifts only for money (i.e. to
   provide only for those who can afford it).

   Do I accept the fact that I am to be a member of a kingdom of priests?
   Am I learning to recognize the gifts that the Lord has given me to use
   for the benefit of others? Am I learning to be ready?

   Are You Becoming A Christ-like Person?

   The prophet Jeremiah is probably the most beloved and Christ-like
   person in the Old Testament. God knew him and called him to be a
   prophet from his mother's womb.

   His fidelity to the Lord caused him suffering and hardship his whole
   life until he was finally murdered in his old age by his own countrymen
   in Egypt. He had the most amazing and intimate conversations with the
   Lord, as if talking face-to-face. After his death he became the "patron
   saint" of Israel, loving and praying for his people and Jerusalem (2Mac
   15: 14-16).

   Jesus makes it clear that His disciples will be treated in the same way
   that He was treated. If the religious leaders and people called Him a
   devil, we will experience the same. If He experienced ridicule, hatred
   and all that goes with that, we should be prepared for the same. Since
   Jesus was murdered to silence Him, His followers should expect to have
   to die to themselves in many ways whether or not we will be murdered
   for the Name of Jesus. Jesus gives a warning: We must not disown Him
   before men or He will disown us before the angels.

   But Jesus encourages us on! We are not to be afraid of those who can
   only kill the body. The Father loves us and knows us so well that even
   the hairs on our heads have been counted! The Spirit will empower us to
   speak the words of Jesus when the time is right.

   We will be given all that is necessary in this life plus life
   everlasting!

   Am I becoming Christ-like? Am I willing to suffer for my faith? Is my
   faith more important to me than anything the world has to offer? Am I
   willing to die to this life, myself and this culture to have a
   meaningful risen life here and now?

   Jesus Is A Radical!

   The old hymn about a sweet, meek and mild Jesus is not about the Jesus
   of the Gospels! He said that He did not come to bring peace, but a
   sword! Families would be torn apart because of Him--even putting each
   other to death! When told that His mother and brother wanted to see
   Him, He made it clear that He considered His real family those who
   listen and obey the word of God! He said that if you weren't willing to
   give up everything that you hold dear, you were not worthy of Him!
   Jesus called the religious leaders of his day hypocrites who loved
   money and were like white-washed tombs filled with the bones of dead
   men and all kinds of corruption and rottenness! Jesus hung out with
   prostitutes, tax collectors, Samaritans, lepers and all who were
   considered unclean and rejected by Jewish society. (Today He would hang
   out with the Taliban and Al Quaeda members!) He criticized the holiness
   code, the temple sacrifice, the priesthood, the morals and the
   pretentious, prideful attitudes of His people. He did not try to free
   His people from Roman rule but instead said the Jews should love their
   oppressors! He said that the temporal powers should be given what was
   appropriate and even beyond--going two miles with a Roman soldier if
   pressed into service instead of only the traditional one mile! One
   should turn the other cheek if treated unjustly for His name. Jesus,
   like Jeremiah, was put to death partly because He was considered a
   traitor who was disruptive of society and because it was the only way
   to shut Him up!

   The real Jesus has always been a radical and, sadly, too radical to be
   taken at His word by 2,000 years of society including our own. Real
   Christianity has rarely, if ever, been tried!

   Are you willing to follow a radical Jesus? Am I too comfortable with
   the status quo in my family, Church and society? What is this radical
   Jesus calling you to do today? What is He calling the Church to do
   today? What needs to change in our society? How am I to get involved?

   Am I Becoming More Child-Like As I Age?

   Jesus reveals the Kingdom of God to the child-like (not the childish).
   It is so important that unless we become like children we shall not
   enter the Kingdom. I've always found it interesting (and tragic) that
   we tend to loose our child-like qualities to get on in the "Real World"
   and then, as we age, we need to return to what we once were. Here are
   some thoughts from God Calling by Two Listeners that hint at the
   importance of our Great Return to the child -heart.

   -Seek in every way to become child-like. Seek until you find, until the
   years have added to your nature that of the trusting child. Not only
   for its simple trust must you copy the child-spirit, but for its joy of
   life, its readiness to laugh, its lack of criticism, its desire to
   share with all.

   -When a loving child is by you is the nearness only that you may
   provide protection and help for that little one? Rather, too, that in
   that little child you may find joy, cheer and comfort in its
   simplicity, its love, its trust. So too is it in your power to comfort
   and bring joy to the heart of Jesus and your Father.

   -Do you not know what it means to feel a little trusting hand in yours,
   to know a child's confidence? Does that not draw out your desire to
   love and protect? Think what the Lord's heart feels when, in your
   helplessness, you turn to Him, clinging and desiring His love and
   protection. Would you fail that child, faulty and weak as you are?
   Could the Lord fail you? Know that it is not possible!

   -Bow in anticipation as a child bows in anticipation of a glad surprise
   being prepared for it by one who loves it. Bow in such a way just
   waiting to hear the loving word to raise your head and see the wonder
   and joy of your surprise!

   Psalm 131 says it all: Lord, my heart is not haughty. I do not set my
   sights too high. I have taken no part in great affairs, in wonders
   beyond my scope. No, I hold myself in quiet and silence, like a little
   child in its mother's arms, like a little child, so I will keep myself.

   What do I need to do to become more child-like? How can I help the
   children in my life to keep their beautiful natures?

   How Do I Need to Cultivate Myself?

   The Lord sends His blessings equitably to all of us like the rain and
   seed that fall on a field. However, we will only grow from the
   blessings and pass them on to others to the extent that we have done
   the footwork of preparing ourselves to receive it.

   Jesus talks about the different types of soil that the seed of God's
   Word may fall on as if they refer to different types of people. While
   this is true, it also characterizes me at different points of my life.
   When I have heard the Word without doing the work of meditating and
   applying it to my life, I have lost it and the benefit it would have
   been to me and those around me. There have been times when the pursuit
   of pleasures and riches have choked the Word that was planted in my
   heart. At other times, the need to fit in and be accepted by my peers
   has caused me to harden my heart and fall away. Also, thank God, there
   are times when I am receptive and the seed in me may blossom to produce
   fruit that will last. I pray that, over time, my self-cultivation will
   make me increasingly receptive to God's grace even though I know that
   at times I may become parched or stony.

   I know that God's Word will not return to Him void but will accomplish
   that for which it was sent. If I am unfruitful, God will pass on the
   blessings to others that are prepared for them.

   What type of soil does my heart consist of right now? Is my heart
   capable of accepting the seed of the Word and producing good fruit?
   What do I need to do to make myself more receptive and fruitful?

   Do I Want to "Pull Weeds" In My Church?

   If I try to eliminate all that is evil and sinful in my Church, will
   anyone (including me) be left? Remember, Jesus was always associated
   with sinners and those needing a doctor. If I want to be where Jesus
   is, I need to be with and love the sinful, the weak, the outcast, the
   despised....in short, the human. Jesus became human to love and redeem
   our nature.

   The parable of the "Wheat and the Weeds" should be taken in the context
   of the rest of Scripture especially similar parables of decision such
   as the "Prodigal Son" (Luke 15:11-32), the "Friend at Midnight" (Luke
   11:5-8) and the "The Two Sons" (Matthew 21:28-32).

   The Parable of the Wheat and the Weeds makes the point that the Church,
   like the world itself, is a mix of good and bad. The disciple should
   not be discouraged by this but be confident that God's grace will
   triumph and evil will be vanquished in God's own good time. The refusal
   of the householder to allow the slaves to separate the wheat from the
   weeds while they are still growing is a warning to the disciple not to
   anticipate the final judgment of God by a definitive exclusion of
   "sinners" from the Kingdom. The judgment of God alone will eliminate
   evil. Until then, there must be patience and the preaching of
   repentance. We should all pray that love and mercy will triumph over
   judgment with others and ourselves!

   Do I want to create a "pure" Church by eliminating those who disagree
   with me? How would I feel if I were "weeded out" of the Church? Do I
   think that being "weeded out" would help my spiritual growth? When I
   recognize that I am becoming judgmental, what should I do?

   What Is the Kingdom of Heaven Like?

   "As your word unfolds, it gives light and even the simple understand."
   (Psalm 119:130)

   The Kingdom, like Life itself, is a mysterious and growing entity. Like
   a small seed, it contains everything necessary to flourish once it has
   been planted in good soil. It then becomes a shelter and home for lost
   souls (as like birds). Like yeast, it modifies its environment and
   causes everything around to be lifted up and risen like Jesus lifting
   creation to Himself. Like a developing pearl, it may appear worthless
   until it matures like a blessing left by someone and waiting to be
   discovered in one's heart. Like a dragnet, the Kingdom brings in all,
   but unlike the world, there is no waste in nature since God created no
   junk! God will use all of creation. The only part of nature that has
   the power to frustrate God's purpose is humanity with its free will.

   Does it take wisdom to discern the true worth of the Kingdom? Yes, the
   wisdom of the little child and not the world. This is the wisdom that
   sees the hand of a loving father in all things. The wisdom that
   realizes that even in lowly circumstances, the Kingdom that is planted
   in one's soul will blossom into absolute beauty and perfection like a
   bud, a bird and a baby. Once planted and watered with Love and the Word
   it will grow by its own life force and nothing will stop the blessing
   it will mature into. Nothing, that is, except my own pride and heard
   heartedness.

   Do I perceive the Kingdom growing in and around me? Do I recognize the
   wonder of small beginnings? How can I help cultivate the wisdom of the
   child in myself and others?

   How Well Do I Feed The Poor?

   Today's Gospel reading reminds me of a very important but uncomfortable
   point about following Jesus: I am to feed others (physically and
   spiritually) out of my abundance. Just as the disciples were expected
   to pass on the food to feed the crowd, I am to pass on the surplus
   blessings God has given me to feed others. This goes beyond the 10% I
   am to give to the Church. I am to give of my excess time, talent and
   treasure to feed the poor.

   Jesus was not a middle-class person and I suspect that He is not happy
   with the comfy middle- class lifestyles that American's and western
   Europeans live at the expense of the poor. (Remember: He was not happy
   with the very comfortable Pharasee's of His own day.) I suspect that He
   would tell many of us to sell what we own and give it to the poor since
   we are to learn love and interdependence, not self-sufficiency with a
   few charitable crumbs for the poor to ease our consciences. He will
   care less about what we give and more about what we have left! It is
   obvious that the American Dream and lifestyle is not sustainable if the
   rest of the world's population is to be treated justly. We can learn to
   slowly give it up voluntarily and receive the blessings of doing so or
   it will be forcibly taken from us someday by the 80% of the world's
   population that can scarcely get clean water and one good daily meal.

   Jesus promises, through His example, that if we trust Him with the
   little that we are and have, He will use that and transform it into
   divine superabundance like manna in the desert! We will also begin
   living the only life worth living.

   Do I trust the Lord with who I am and what I have? What can I do to
   learn interdependence and love? How can I reduce my need for
   independence and self-sufficiency? What can I do to learn to become
   uncomfortable with the American Dream and lifestyle? How can I get more
   directly involved with the poor (with whom Jesus dwells)? How can I use
   my home and goods to provide hospitality to God's children?

   Who Saves Me From the Storms of Life?

   During most of my life, if I were in trouble, I'd worry, obsess and
   take many actions to either fix or run from the problem. When my own
   efforts failed, I would bargain with God telling Him I would do
   such-and-such if He would get me out of the mess I was in. More often
   than not, He would leave me drowning in the mess until I gave up my own
   efforts to save myself and relied on Him only by cooperating with His
   grace, accepting needed correction/guidance/consequences and trusting
   the process.

   God seems to work like a life guard trying to rescue a drowning person
   who has one hand on the lifeline and the other flailing to save
   himself. The rescuer must then get the drowning person to stop the
   frantic splashing by letting the person become more helpless and
   exhausted and, therefore, easier to save. Psalm 40:1-2 tells a little
   more about God's method of rescue. Not only does He save me (He pulled
   me up from the seething chaos), He gives me security (He sets my feet
   on a rock) and guides me on my way (He establishes my goings).

   Jesus says: Courage! It is I! Don't be afraid! He bids me to go to Him
   across the unknown and dangerous paths of my life. When I fall (which I
   certainly will) He will save me and ask: Why do you doubt? Why do you
   have so little faith in Me?

   Do I try to save myself first and only ask for God's help if that
   fails? Do I bargain with God? Am I learning to let God take the lead in
   guiding me and solving my problems? How do I respond when Jesus asks
   me: Why do you doubt? Why do you have so little faith in Me?

   How Is the Holy Spirit Asking You to Grow?

   The Holy Spirit always seems to be pushing folks beyond their comfort
   zones and into new territory. The direction of the push always seems to
   be towards greater love, greater inclusivity and a greater range for
   the Kingdom of God.

   It was only over time that Israel's perception of God grew from that of
   a tribal war God to the loving father of all people. In today's Gospel
   reading the human side of Jesus was just beginning to understand where
   the Holy Spirit was leading. He was sent to the lost tribes of Israel
   to bring them back into the fold but was confronted with non-Israelites
   who had greater faith than anyone he met in Israel! What was he to do?
   Pray always and listen to the Holy Spirit! Go towards the faith and act
   with compassion and love! If the Canaanite woman had been less
   preserving, Jesus may have walked on by. But he recognized that the
   Holy Spirit was talking to him through this mother pleading for her
   child's life. He listened and it changed the face of his ministry by
   leading him to his saving death at the hands of those who would prefer
   a tribal war god whom they could keep in their pockets.

   Where is the wind of the Holy Spirit leading me? Is it in the direction
   of greater love and inclusivity? How will I respond to this call?

   Who Do People Say That YOU Are?

   When Jesus asked His Apostles, "Who do people say that I am?", the
   answers centered around a Prophet (maybe even a miracle-working
   prophet). While this is one of the roles of Jesus, in His personhood He
   is so much more: The Messiah!, The Son of God! No one could discern
   Jesus' true identity unless He or the Father revealed it.

   Most people when asked this question (Who are you?) will indicate what
   they do for a living or some of their roles (father, friend, sister,
   etc.). While this may define one's social identity to some degree, it
   doesn't say much about who one really is. Who one is is primarily who
   one is on the inside (including the subconscious) and who one is in
   relationship to God and the rest of Creation.

   If asked, I may say something like this. I am a person striving to grow
   to be a saint. I am a person striving to become the unique being God
   created me to be. I am a person developing my God-given gifts to use
   for His glory, my joy and the benefit of as many beings as possible. I
   am a person who has a long way to go to remove (with God's help) all of
   the junk in my heart and head.

   If Jesus walked by, looked intently into your eyes and heart, and asked
   "Who are you?", how would you respond? How would the people you know
   respond to the question if asked who you are? Do you think there would
   be a difference in the two responses?

   Am I Following Jesus?

   Jesus makes it very clear in today's Gospel. The only way we will
   discover the meaning of our lives and live their full God-given
   potential is by carrying our crosses and following Him. (Our crosses
   are the uniquely tailored means that God is using to lead us to Himself
   through suffering and purification.) He wants us to make holiness
   (wholeness) our number one priority and to grow continuously in His
   love until we attain union with God.

   How do I know if I am growing in holiness? Some of the following
   questions will help if answered honestly.

   -Do I desire/long to grow in holiness/wholeness?

   -Am I developing a greater sense of gratitude toward God?

   -Am I developing an increasing trust in God?

   -Am I growing in intimacy with Jesus?

   -Am I willing to humbly submit my will to God's will?

   -Am I developing a simplicity of lifestyle that will allow me time to
   work on my spiritual life and that promotes Godly values?

   -Does the thought of God predominate my life?

   -Am I developing a deeper sense of peace regardless of circumstances?

   -Am I developing a more positive attitude towards God, others, myself
   and the world?

   -Am I developing self-control and being open to change (repentance)?

   -Am I becoming more generous?

   -Am I willing to change my old ways of thinking, acting, judging and
   speaking?

   -Am I developing more of the fruits of the Holy Spirit? (love, joy,
   peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and
   self-control)

   -Do I have a God-centered (not self-centered) prayer life?

   Are You a "Binder" or a "Loosener"?

   "The only thing you should owe to anyone is love for one another for to
   love the other person if to fulfill the law." Romans 13:8

   "Lord....your judgments are generous." Psalm 119: 39

   Jesus indicates that we should lovingly correct our brothers and
   sisters in the faith if that is required. We all need correction at
   times. That is one of the purposes of the faith community: to help us
   grow by holding us accountable for our behaviors. The more lovingly it
   is done, the easier it is to accept.

   What does the binding and loosening statement of Jesus mean? It should
   be taken in the context of the rest of Scripture and not as an isolated
   statement. Earlier, in the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus talks about not
   judging others if we don't want to be judged, removing the log from our
   own eyes before correcting our brothers/sisters and loving others as we
   love ourselves. In this wider context, Jesus may mean that we should
   recognize and correct the wrong in ourselves first if we intend to
   correct our brother/sister compassionately. In this wider context,
   Jesus may mean that if I bind others, I am in effect binding myself. If
   I compassionately loosen another's bonds, I will experience compassion.

   When Jesus talks about treating an unrepentant brother/sister like a
   pagan or a tax collector, what does he mean? He spent most of his time
   in the company of these ritually impure people to try to bring them
   into the fold of the Kingdom of God. He did not cast them away but
   continued to search for them as a shepherd searches for the lost black
   sheep.

   Do I hasten to "bind" people (cast them out of the Church) or do I
   compassionately try to loosen their bonds? Do I try to interpret
   Scripture in the most lenient way possible or the most
   judgmental/critical way possible? Do I recognize that by binding
   others, I am opening myself up to being judged?

   Forgiveness is a Process of Learning How to Love!

   "Her many sins are forgiven, hence, she has shown great love. But the
   one to whom little is forgiven loves little." Luke 7:47

   "Love your enemies. Do good to those who hate you. Bless those who
   curse you. Pray for those who persecute you." Luke 6: 27-28

   "Whoever is without love does not know God for God is love." 1 John 4:8

   The parable of the unforgiving servant must be read in the context of
   the rest of Scripture; especially the words of Jesus. God/Jesus is love
   and does not torture anyone! Forgiveness is an aspect of love.
   Individuals decide whether or not to forgive someone and, in effect,
   torture themselves by their own lack of love and forgiveness!
   Forgiveness is a process and not a single act. My own experience has
   taught me that I must often work on forgiving someone who has deeply
   hurt me. The 77 times Jesus says I must forgive someone might not refer
   to a person hurting me 77 times but to the number of times the thought
   of a single hurt comes to mind and I must again forgive for the one
   offence! As long I choose to think about the offence, I will need to
   keep forgiving.

   I must learn to forgive others as often as needed for my own salvation
   and growth as a being created in God's image. It has nothing to do with
   the other person asking for forgiveness or deserving forgiveness. It
   has nothing to do with being treated like a door mat since I don't have
   to associate with the person if I think he/she is dangerous to me. The
   person doesn't even have to be alive to be forgiven or to ask
   forgiveness from them.

   I once wrote a long letter to my father who had at the time been dead
   for more than 20 years expressing my anger and forgiving him. I had to
   work on forgiving him for a couple of years before the process of
   forgiveness was complete. By doing so I learned to forgive myself since
   I realized how much I was like him. In the process I changed greatly. I
   had been an alcoholic who didn't know how to love or live and suffered
   from various problems such as huge panic attacks and major issues with
   authority figures. All of this disappeared while working the
   forgiveness process! I learned that I was my own jailer!

   Who do I need to forgive or ask forgiveness from? Do I recognize that
   forgiving is in my own selfish best interest since not forgiving keeps
   me in bondage? Do I recognize the good in my enemies and those who hate
   me? Do I recognize that my enemies are a mirror and may be telling me
   more truth about myself than my friends will?

   Am I Like Jesus..........or Jonah?

   Jesus said: If you bring forth what is inside you, what you bring forth
   will save you. If you don't bring forth what is inside you, what you
   don't bring forth will destroy you."

   The Gospel of Thomas (1^st century AD)

   Jesus was always trying to get his Jewish contemporaries to understand
   that though they were a people chosen by God to cultivate knowledge of
   Him, it was not because they were smarter or holier than others. He was
   trying to dispel a particularly ugly kind of nationalism that is very
   common today. It is a patriotism that says: "God is on our side. My
   country, right or wrong. Might is right." Jonah exemplifies this
   attitude. He does not want God to forgive a hated enemy that wiped out
   nearly all of Israel or see them repent. He wanted to see them
   punished, wiped off the planet forever. He didn't care that the people
   (or animals!) of Nineveh had no hatred of the Jewish people and were
   only trying to live out a sane life with their families. It was their
   government (that they had no part in choosing) that liked to rattle its
   saber and make the world bend to its will (sound familiar?). The Jews
   of Jesus' day did not want to see that they were blind and had a dark
   and ugly shadow in their personal and collective characters that would
   destroy them if they did not recognize it and repent of it.

   It is no different of me. If I think that I am not capable of the worst
   forms of evil if I were put in the right situation I am only fooling
   myself. How can I break this tendency? I must recognize my dark side
   and not pretend that it isn't real. I must recognize that I am no
   different from anyone else and it is only circumstances and the grace
   of God that keeps me in check. I must recognize the potential for evil
   in myself, repent, and ask God to be healed. I must recognize that in
   doing God's will is my joy and meaning in life. It is it's own reward.

   Do I recognize the evil that I am potentially capable of? Do I want to
   see my enemies (or the enemies of my country) burn in Hell for
   eternity? Do I ask the Lord to heal me of my unloving thinking and
   repent? Can I find joy in the good fortune of others, including those I
   don't particularly like?

   The Humility of Jesus

   "Though in the form of God, Jesus took on the form of a slave. Coming
   in human likeness He humbled Himself and became obedient even unto
   death." Philippians 2: 6-8

   "Take my yoke upon you and learn from me for I am meek and humble of
   heart." Matthew 11:29

   "Tax collectors and prostitutes are entering the Kingdom before you..."
   Matthew 21:31

   Compare the difference between Jesus and the Jewish elders in today's
   readings. Jesus, though God, was humble, willingly took on a human body
   and chose to live like us even to the point of dying a horrifying and
   humiliating death like many of His Jewish contemporaries to demonstrate
   the love of God! The elders, on the other hand, had such a misplaced
   pride in their lowest common denominator humanity that they actually
   refused the gift of having that humanity raised to its highest level as
   a child of God!

   Am I different? Sometimes I wonder. I recently saw a documentary that
   indicated that in the next few decades the percentage of persons in the
   United States greater than 85 years of age would increase to 20%. Many
   would be in horrible condition: having to be spoon fed, having to have
   their diapers changed and many not even knowing who they are. I was
   scandalized and told my wife that if I ever even came close to that
   point to please shoot me as I don't want to live like that. Only later
   did I wonder if Jesus would have responded in the same way? Or would He
   have recognized that teaching others to love by ministering to me in my
   horrifyingly abject and sick humanity is a blessing that requires me to
   give up my self-centered pride and meaningless control? The answer is
   obvious.

   Am I too proud to have others minister to me and insist that it be a
   one-way street? Am I afraid to show others my less-than-perfect real
   self and insist that they see only my good and strong side? Do I
   recognize myself in the fallen humanity of the elders of Israel? Can I
   learn to humbly accept the gift of God and be changed by that into the
   likeness of the lowly and humble Christ?

   Are We Good Tenants of the Lord's Vineyard?

   In today's reading from Isaiah (8^th century BC), the Prophet describes
   Israel as God's vineyard and its people/leaders as its tenants. The
   Lord was looking for a bountiful harvest of blessings given all the
   care He had shown Israel. However, "He expected fair judgment but found
   injustice, uprightness but found cries of distress." (Isaiah 5: 7) What
   is this "justice" and "uprightness"? Justice has to do with actions of
   right or wrong based on fairness and the Law while uprightness has to
   do with the attitude behind the deed. Upright persons whose duty was to
   uphold justice were being pushed aside by a greedy elite. As a result,
   they were demoralized and silent. In this way not just justice was
   being destroyed. The fabric of Israel's life as a people was
   deteriorating. Ultimately, Israel was destroyed by the Assyrians and
   Babylonians because their entrenched behavior and attitudes could not
   be corrected by God.

   Fast forward 800 years to the 1^st and 2nd centuries. Had the situation
   changed much? Not according to Jesus. The religious elders and elites
   had again demonstrated that they were beyond the correcting of their
   injustice and unrighteousness. The Vineyard was to be given over to
   others (the Christians) who would produce the fruits of justice and
   righteousness. Jerusalem and the Temple, the center of Jewish life,
   were destroyed in 70 AD by the Roman Emperor Titus. Palestine was
   devastated and the Jews ejected from the area in the 130's AD by the
   Romans.

   Fast forward 2,000 years to the 21^st century AD. Look around! Open
   your ears! Do you see and hear the cries of the oppressed in our world?
   Do you smell the rot of unrighteousness and taste the bitterness of
   lack of justice? Do you think that the Christianity of a rich, spoiled,
   powerful and increasingly secular nation is producing the produce that
   the Lord desires?

   Beware the rotten fruit! For example, remember that false obedience is
   the rotten fruit of fear. If I am afraid of loosing my cushy life, I
   may give lip service to religion but I will be doing everything
   possible to protect and increase what I have to be able to be
   self-sufficient. The produce that Jesus wants is born in the soil of
   peace, sown in prayer, watered by trust and bearing flower and fruit in
   joy.

   Am I more concerned about my own well-being or that of the Kingdom of
   God? Is my life different enough from the secular world that others
   know that I am a Christian by the way I live? True Christianity has
   always flourished in poor and persecuted cultures. If you had to live a
   poor and persecuted life to be a Christian, would you do it? In what
   ways can I, with God's help, increase and improve the quality of my
   fruit?

   Dreams of the Heavenly Wedding Feast

   The parable of the Wedding Feast is another of Jesus' great teaching
   stories than has the power to change your life. Jesus chose parables as
   His primary mode of communicating His word because they are easy to
   remember, they capture our attention and imagination, they are simple
   enough for a child to understand and can be complex enough to intrigue
   scholars. They are not, however, a form of communication to use to give
   clear, exact directions. Jesus' parables cannot be reduced to a simple
   moralism and generally have more than one meaning. They have such depth
   that we can go back to them again and again and continue to learn
   something from them.

   Dreamwork techniques can be used with the parables of Jesus to
   re-experience the story in a personal way to enliven our spiritual
   lives. The purpose here is to experience the story through its
   re-enactment rather than using just our rational minds to understand
   them. Following is one of the techniques you can use with this parable.

   .
    1. Let yourself grow quiet and become aware of God's presence, opening
       your consciousness to the spiritual energies and gifts contained
       for you in this story.
    2. Have the story read to you or read yourself.
    3. Recreate in your imagination the starting point of the story in as
       much sensory detail and movement as you can. For example, who is
       sitting next to you? What is he/she wearing? What does the King
       look like? What is the conversation about? What color is your floor
       cushion floor? Let your imagination do anything it wants with these
       and any other details since none of these are indicated in the
       text.
    4. Once started, let your imagination spontaneously carry on the
       story. Trust it to carry you wherever you need to go, even if it
       takes you away from the text. You may find yourself involved as a
       participant in the action of the story and/or having a conversation
       with one of the characters.
    5. When you come to a suitable stopping place, close the experience,
       express thanks to God, and gently bring yourself back to normal
       consciousness.
    6. Write down the details of the experience. Then give the experience
       a:

   Title: Let it come to you spontaneously.

   Theme: State the major themes or issues which surfaced.

   Affect: What were the dominant feelings? List them in order.

   Question: What question is the experience asking of you? What is the
   experience trying to help you become conscious of? What question do you
   want to ask? What is your response to the question asked? What is the
   response to the question you asked? Don't censor your response!

   What does this experience teach you about the Kingdom of God and the
   Heavenly Wedding Feast? How did you feel about the person being ejected
   from the banquet? Did you check to see if you were wearing proper
   clothing? What does proper clothing mean? Did the King look at you? Did
   he say anything?

   Do Jesus and Politics Mix?

   "Jesus, as he realized that they were about to come and take him by
   force to make him king, fled back to the hills alone." John 6:15 (New
   Jerusalem Bible)

   Jesus and politics mix like oil and water: they don't! The only time
   recorded in Scripture that Jesus literally ran for the hills was when
   the crowds tried to make him a politician!

   The sorry story of politics in Israel can be discerned by reading the
   Books of Samuel and Kings. Virtually every king became changed in a
   very negative way by the wealth, power and luxury bestowed on him. This
   is one of the reasons Jesus refused the offers of Satan in the desert
   temptations. He knew that these things corrupt souls and avoided them
   like the plague. He knew that bending His will to the will of God was
   critical in all things and thus refused all forms of pride related to
   human power, wealth and pleasure. His example shows that worldly power
   and spiritual power really don't mix which is why the Lord looked on
   the request of Israel for a king "like all other nations" to be a
   rejection of Him..

   When Jesus responded to the Jewish leaders who were testing him to
   "give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and give to God the things
   that are God's", he was making a subtle attack on the Roman Emperor
   Tiberius. The Emperor's, in their arrogance, where beginning to look on
   themselves as gods and thus demanded allegiance of every citizen as
   both God and King. Jesus was indicating that Caesar was not God but a
   worldly man whose authority was given to him by God. By his answer,
   Jesus raised the debate to a higher level. Those who hypocritically
   asked about tax in respect to its relation to the law of God should be
   concerned rather with repaying God with the good deeds that are His
   due.

   Jesus called King Herod, a master politician, a fox: a lone predator,
   one who is deceitful and greedy, one who will do anything to keep hold
   of his power. Pontius Pilate, another master Roman leader, was the one
   who showed that he believed that all truth was relative by his
   question: "What is truth?" To these politicians, keeping power was the
   most important thing in life. They became evil by this and choose to
   destroy those who would present evidence of their wrongdoing (look at
   John the Baptist) rather than examine their conduct, be convicted,
   repent, and healed.

   Today, in the United States, we expect our leaders to try to stay in
   power and lie in the name of compromise. We choose to believe lies. We
   expect our leaders to look after ME first, our community second, our
   state third, and only then to look after the good of the country. We
   will always get leaders that mirror us. If we want our leaders to be
   different, we need to change and, as Jesus did, put the will of God and
   the needs of our brother/sister citizens ahead of our own desires.

   Am I willing to change so that we can elect better leaders? Am I
   willing to learn to not accept lies and short term solutions to protect
   my interests and the status quo? Am I willing to accept the fact that
   life and doing God's will do not revolve around me and my desires?

   The Prophets and the Love of God

   Jesus, in today's Gospel reading, says that the commandments of love of
   God and neighbor sum up the whole Law and the Prophets. The Law spells
   out what righteousness is while the Prophets kept trying to bring a
   wayward Israel back to the Covenant of Love. The following are a few
   passages of the Prophets that show God as a loving parent: teaching,
   correcting through discipline, pleading and, finally, suffering the
   consequences of his child's poor behavior. All out of love! I wish that
   there were more such Prophets today!

   "You have been told what is good and what the Lord requires of you.
   Only that you do what is right, love goodness and walk humbly with your
   God." Micah 6:8

   "When Israel was a child, I loved him. It was I who taught Ephraim to
   walk, who took him in my arms. I drew him with human cords and bands of
   love. I fostered him like one who raises an infant to his cheeks. How
   can I give you up Ephraim?" Hosea 11:1-8

   "You alone of all the families of the earth have I intimately known.
   That is why I shall punish you for all of your wrongdoings. You have
   sold the upright for silver and the poor for a pair of sandals. You
   have crushed the heads of the weak into the dust and thrust the rights
   of the oppressed to one side. Father and son sleep with the same girl
   and thus profane my holy name. You lie down besides every alter on
   clothes acquired as pledges. Yet it was I who brought you up from Egypt
   and for forty years led you through the desert. It was I who raised up
   prophets from your sons. Is this not true? " Amos 3

   "Now, you say that what the Lord does is unfair. Now listen, is what I
   do unjust or is what you do unjust? When the upright abandons
   uprightness and does wrong and dies, he dies for the wrong that he has
   done. Similarly, when the wicked abandon wickedness to become
   law-abiding and upright, his past sins will not be remembered and he
   will save his own life. Repent, renounce all your crimes and make
   yourselves a new heart and new spirit. Why die! I take no pleasure in
   the death of anyone. Repent and live!" Ezekiel 18

   "I will make a new covenant with the House of Israel and Judah. It will
   not be like the covenant I made with their fathers which they broke.
   The new covenant will be different. I will place my law within their
   hearts. No longer will they have the need to teach others how to know
   me. All from the least to the greatest shall know me for I will forgive
   their wrongdoing and remember their sins no more." Jeremiah 31:31-34

   "The Servant of the Lord bore our infirmities, our sufferings he
   endured. He was pierced for our offences and crushed for our sins. Upon
   him is the chastisement that makes us whole. By his stripes we are
   healed. Through his sufferings, my servant shall justify many and their
   guilt he shall bear." Isaiah 53

   If I heard someone standing on the street corner saying these things,
   how would I react? Do I ever get the urge to say these things out loud
   to others? What stops me?

   Am I A "Do-As-I-Say, Not-As-I-Do" Christian?

   Many of us were raised, or raised our own children, with the "do as I
   say, not as I do" method of child rearing. Do you think that it worked
   well? Given the fact that children learn more from watching than
   listening the results are not likely to be very successful. Mostly
   children will learn to spot hypocrisy (especially as teenagers) or
   become well-meaning hypocrites themselves. It was no different for
   leaders of adults in countries like Israel.

   The Prophet Micah had much to say about the 8^th century BC religious
   and political leaders of his day. Every level of government, every
   leadership elite, appears to be grasping for one thing: money. It is
   this that blinds them to their moral responsibilities. This is why they
   were so insensitive to the evil all around them with the result that
   they lead their peoples astray. Their belief that since the Lord was
   with them, no harm would come to them was proven tragically wrong when
   Israel was destroyed by the Assyrians and Babylonians.

   Jesus had the same problem with the scribes and Pharisees of his day.
   "You must do what they tell you but do not be guided by what they do
   since they do not practice what they preach." (Matthew 23:3) The Romans
   destroyed Jerusalem and Israel within 100 years of Jesus' prediction
   that the Temple would become a mound of rubble.

   Jesus and Paul, by their example, show how leaders should lead. We have
   only one teacher and authority: Jesus. Those wishing to be the greatest
   must serve all. Paul indicates that he treated his followers as a
   father treats his children: urging, encouraging and appealing to all to
   live a life worthy of God. Paul worked day and night so as not to be a
   burden to his "children". Paul exhorts his followers to "Imitate me as
   I imitate Christ."

   The people and leaders of both Micah's and Jesus' day were pious to the
   core and sure of God's presence while, at the same time, acting with
   great injustice, greed and hypocrisy. When God's grace alone is
   stressed and not his righteous justice as well, they could feel safe
   while living on the brink of disaster. Are we different today? Do we
   presume God's mercy and not his justice? The Bible clearly warns us
   against having such an attitude.

   Do I stress God's grace and not his justice? In what ways do I take
   God's grace and mercy for granted? Am I certain that God is on my (our)
   side? Do my actions draw others to Christ or repel them? Do I talk the
   talk without walking the walk? What do I need to change with God's
   help?

   Meditating On the Heavenly Wedding

   The words and parables of Jesus are excellent sources of material for
   meditation. The goal is to bring these stories and words to life for me
   and to help me to experience them in a new and personal way.

   The meditation should be done in the context of a five step process:

    1. Read the Scripture slowly two or three times.
    2. Meditate on the passage using one or more of the techniques noted
       below.
    3. Pray/Dialogue with God. Using a journal may be helpful.
    4. Listen/Contemplate for and on the voice of the Holy Spirit.
    5. Derive Fruit by determining how you will apply what you learned to
       your life.

   Different saints developed different modes of meditation based on their
   personality type. For example:

   Ignatius of Loyola (founder of the Jesuits) had a past orientation and
   used the five senses and imagination to bring the scene to life. Become
   one of the rejected wedding attendants. What do you see, hear, smell,
   taste and feel? How did it feel to be rejected?

   Augustine of Hippo had a present orientation using the feelings and
   creative imagination to bring the words to your present circumstances.
   If Jesus look at you and said: "Stay awake for you do not no the day or
   the hour", how would you respond to Him? How would you apply this to
   your life?

   Thomas Aquinas had a future orientation using the rational thought
   process and intuition. His works stand the test of time and are being
   used for more than 700 years! He developed logical truths asking
   questions like: who, what, when, where, how and why. What is the
   relationship between being prepared and staying awake since all ten of
   the wedding attendants fell asleep? What does staying awake mean?

   Francis of Assisi had an action filled approach to meditation that used
   the five senses, and is flexible, free-flowing and what we would call
   "spirit filled" and often used nature as a source. Imagine that you are
   one of the attendants who needed oil and locked out of the celebration.
   It is the next day and you decide to write a letter explaining to the
   bride and groom why you were not present. The approach may be whatever
   you like: anger, apologetic, resentful, explanatory or something else.

   Which of the above meditative methods most matches my temperament?
   Which is the most difficult for me to use? Can I derive fruit for my
   life from each approach? Did I like journaling? How easy was it to sit
   and listen to the Holy Spirit?

   Are You Ready For More Responsibilities Within the Kingdom of God?

   In today's Gospel parable, the King indicates that those who invested
   his money with diligence will be given more responsibilities since they
   were faithful in small matters (dealing with earthly treasure). In
   Luke's account, the servants were given the responsibility of governing
   cities, the number based on how much they increased the master's money.

   The servants who, out of either fear or laziness, hid the master's
   money and gave it back without investing it were treated harshly. They
   were deprived of their treasure (a part of themselves) and, by their
   inactivity, were diminished and became self out-casts.

   In the time of Zephaniah the Prophet (first half of the 7^th century
   BC), Israel expected a Day of Yahweh, a day when Israel would be
   exalted above all nations while all of their neighbors would, in
   effect, become slave of Israel. With Zephaniah, the Day of Yahweh was
   redefined as a Day of Wrath for Israel due to its lack of righteousness
   and justice. The inhabitants of Jerusalem were prideful and hoarded
   their treasure to become self-sufficient and thus not dependant on God.
   They needed to have their treasure taken away and be cast out to remove
   their pride, self-sufficiency and to grow spiritually. Jerusalem was
   later destroyed by the Babylonians.

   In today's reading from Thessalonians, Paul warns us to be vigilant
   since another Day of Wrath, a Day of Judgment, was coming. We are to
   remain sober and awake; "putting on the breastplate of faith and love
   and the helmet that is hope for salvation." (1Thes 5:8)

   Imagine that you are the servant that received the two talents. What
   are the risks involved and how will you handle it? What rewards, if
   any, will be available if you deal well with this money? In
   interpreting this parable for your own life, do you receive more than
   money? If so, what else do you have for which you may be responsible?
   Why does the master punish the servant who kept his money safe? What is
   wrong with simply protecting what you have? How might this parable
   affect the way our Church ministers?

   Am I a "Good Goat" or a "Not-So-Perfect Sheep"?

   "I was hungry and you NEVER gave me food, I was thirsty and you NEVER
   gave me a drink......." Matthew 25: 42-45 (Jerusalem Bible)

   There is a story (perhaps legendary) that W. C. Fields, in his old age,
   was seen by a friend feverishly studying the Bible. His friend, knowing
   that Fields was never a religious man, asked him: "W. C., what are you
   doing?" Fields responded: "I'm looking for loopholes!"

   While I don't advocate looking for scriptural loopholes like an
   unscrupulous corporate lawyer or legislator, it is worth reading a
   passage of scripture in several translations if you want to get a
   fuller understanding of the meaning behind the ancient Hebrew, Greek or
   Aramaic words since they often had a greater depth of meanings than can
   be conveyed in English.

   In Jesus' allegory of the sheep and goats in the Last Judgment, while
   the sheep are not told that they are blessed because they ALWAYS did
   the right thing, the goats are condemned for NEVER doing so. This is
   Good News (Gospel) to me since I know that I am a sinful man and always
   will be imperfect as long as I am in the flesh. I may often do the
   right thing but by no means do I always do so. I don't believe that I
   know anyone who either ALWAYS does the right thing or NEVER does the
   right thing: helping to relieve the pain and suffering of another human
   being.

   I know that Jesus, the perfect Lamb of God, will lead me to safe
   pasture and will perfect me in His own time and manner. We, as members
   of Christ's Church, His Body, have His Word! May the Lord give us a
   spirit of wisdom and revelation resulting in knowledge of Him. May our
   hearts be enlightened that we may know to what hope we are being
   called. (Ephesians 1: 17:18)

   Do I recognize that I am not a perfect sheep? Who do I think that the
   goats are? Is it possible that I am a good goat slowly being
   transformed by the Good Shepherd into a healthy sheep? Do I pray for
   the goats?

   WATCH!

   "Would that you might meet us doing right, that we were mindful of you
   in our ways." Isaiah 64:4

   "What I say to you, I say to all: WATCH!" Mark 13:36

   In today's reading from Isaiah, the Jewish community had just recently
   returned to Judah from the Babylonian captivity after Babylon was
   conquered by the Persian Cyrus in 539 BC. They were appalled! Jerusalem
   was in ruins, its walls were torn down, its buildings were burned to
   the ground, the Temple was destroyed. They were threatened and
   tormented by their neighbors, including the Samaritans (mixed ethnic
   peoples brought in by the Assyrians 150 years earlier to replace the
   deported Israelites), who did not want to see Jerusalem rebuilt. They
   did not believe that the Messianic promises to David could be fulfilled
   without rebuilding the Temple and monarchy. They finally finish
   building the Temple in 515 BC. The Davidic monarchy was never really
   restored. Their lives were still very hard and they waited for God to
   come down and save them by making Israel the king of nations.

   Fast forward 550 years. Jesus predicts that this second Temple will be
   torn down like the first. (This happened in 70 AD.) The Messianic
   promises to David were not to be fulfilled in the way that Israel
   expected. Israel will conquer but it will be a spiritual conquering of
   love through the Messiah Jesus, the Son of David. Jesus warns all to
   flee Jerusalem and not to try to save the City through misguided
   Messianic hopes when they see it being attacked by the Romans. God's
   Kingdom will come gradually through the Church. The final establishment
   of the reign of God and the destruction of evil will come at a later
   date and time that only the Father knows. Jesus warns us to keep busy
   at our God-appointed tasks and remain watchful.

   In this first week of Advent, we are watching and waiting for the
   return of Jesus. As His birth was a complete surprise to all regarding
   who the Messiah would be and what He would do, His second coming will
   be a surprise and may be different than what we expect. We are to
   watch, wait and be prepared for His return. "He will keep you firm to
   the end, irreproachable on the day of our Lord Jesus." (1 Corinthians
   1:8)

   How am I preparing for the birth of Christ? How am I preparing for
   Christ's return? Are the preparations different? In what ways are they
   different?

   How Am I Making A Straight Path for the Lord's Return?

   The Prophets were inspired speakers proclaiming divine messages to
   correct the social injustices of their times and to encourage a
   purified worship of God. This Love of God-Love of Man connection can be
   discerned in today's Psalm: "Faithful love and loyalty join together,
   saving justice and peace embrace." (Psalm 85:10) While the messages of
   the Prophets were meant for their own time, they often had a timeless
   quality that could be used to help read the signs of the times in the
   future. These implications for the future may not have been recognized
   by the Prophets themselves.

   For example, today's reading from Isaiah regarding "preparing in the
   desert a way for the Lord and making a straight highway for God" was
   referring to the upcoming return of the Israelites from captivity in
   Babylon to Judah in 539 BC. This return was foretold by earlier
   Prophets and seen as a direct intervention by God with God leading the
   captives home. In New Testament times, John the Baptist saw this
   prophesy in its greater fulfillment in the coming of God in the human
   form of the Messiah.

   At the end of the first Christian century, the writer of today's
   epistle indicates that we should be trying to hasten the day of the
   Lord's return by straightening the highways of our lives. What we are
   waiting for is the new heaven and new earth where uprightness will be
   at home. While we are waiting, we should do our best to live blameless
   and unsullied lives so that He will find us at peace. (2 Peter 3:
   13-14)

   How am I trying to hasten the day of the Lord's return? How am I
   straightening my life? How am I preparing a way for the Lord in my
   heart?

   Am I Called to Be a Prophet?

   "Do not stifle the Spirit or despise the gift of prophecy with
   contempt." 1 Thes: 5:19-20

   "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me to bring good news (the Gospel) to
   the afflicted." Isaiah 61: 1

   The task of a prophet is not so much to foretell as to pronounce God's
   will, to mediate God's view of a situation, sometimes backing this up
   with prediction. It is a call to bring others back into the embrace of
   a loving God. In today's Gospel reading, John the Baptist, the last of
   the Old Testament prophets, is repeatedly called a "witness" which is
   what the term "martyr" means. According to the Bible and tradition,
   many of the prophets, including John the Baptist, were killed for their
   outspoken witness to the truth of God.

   According to today's reading from Isaiah, a prophet is called to bring
   good news (the Gospel) to the afflicted, sooth the broken-hearted,
   proclaim liberty to captives, release to those in prison and to comfort
   those who mourn. (Isaiah 61: 1-2) Do you ever talk to others about your
   faith? Do you ever listen to those who are hurting? Do you provide hope
   for those who are in the darkness of addictions or lost to the amoral
   systems of our society? Do you try to relieve the sufferings of those
   living in the misery of self-imposed mental prisons? If you do these,
   or a myriad of other similar things, to bring the love of God to a
   world desperate for love, you are performing some of the tasks of a
   prophet!

   Don't minimize this gift or hold back if the Spirit wants you to speak!
   You may not be asked to die for your faith like John the Baptist or
   bring the message to millions like Billy Graham, but you are called, as
   a part of the Body of Christ, to let your life speak of the Good News
   that is Jesus! There is no greater calling!

   In what ways am I a prophet based on what I have just read? How can I
   increase my witness of Christ? (For example, become or accept the
   comfort of a Stephen Minister, serve food at the City Mission, join the
   Outreach Committee, start a Bible Study in you home, become a Hospice
   volunteer, etc.)

   What If Mary Said No?

   Imagine for a moment that you are a very young woman being confronted
   by an angel with the message given by Gabriel to Mary. (see Luke 1:
   26-38) How might you react? How might your father react? What if you
   lived in a culture where you could be stoned for being pregnant out of
   wedlock? How would they react if you told them that God was the father?
   Do you think that you would say "Yes" to the proposition?

   There is no indication in Scripture that Mary was the first one
   approached with this proposition. Young women may have been rejecting
   it for centuries thus hindering the time of God's revelation of the
   birth of the Messiah. Looking at the history of Israel from Abraham to
   the time of Mary, it is absolutely astounding that the Lord's will was
   accomplished through such a torturous path of events and people
   seemingly hell-bent on preventing God's grace! Even in Jesus' own
   lineage there are very improbable women who may have received the
   angelic proposition. Ruth was a foreigner. Rahab was a harlot, a madam
   at a drinking house. Bathsheba was a married woman who was raped by
   King David who also had her husband murdered. Tamar was a victim of
   incest by her brother. Who would believe that good could come out of
   such a maelstrom of fallen humanity?

   But, thank God, it DID happen! The Messiah was born to one courageous
   young woman who was willing to believe the angel, put aside her fears,
   transcend her cultural norms and risk everything for the love of God!

   Scripture tells us that we can hasten or hinder the return of Jesus by
   living or not living holy and saintly lives (see 2 Peter 3:11). It is
   possible that if our Christian ancestors had allowed Jesus to live in
   them, to use them to express the divine, than long ago the world would
   have been drawn to Him and He would have returned to claim His own. He
   is still waiting for us to say: Yes! Will you do it?

   In what ways can I hasten the coming of Jesus? If I were Mary, would I
   have said Yes?

   What is God asking me to do? Do I have the courage and faith to do it?

   The Mystery of Evil

   The massacre of the Innocents is only one of many evil acts portrayed
   in the pages of the Bible. Many of these acts, the ruthless destruction
   of the inhabitants of the Promised Land portrayed in the Book of Joshua
   for example, were considered God's will at the time but today would be
   considered genocide and evil. So, what is evil? The dictionary gives a
   bland definition amounting to morally wrong actions and wickedness. I
   am neither going to try to give a better definition of evil nor am I
   going to single out persons as evil (something that is done all too
   often today). What I know is that we all commit morally wrong deeds and
   all require the mercy of God and the major transformation of our
   characters. I know that evil deeds affect my relationship with God,
   others and my self and that being aware of this may help me to avoid
   thoughtless wicked deeds.

    1. Evil deeds affect my relationship with God. An evil person
       presumably has no concept or belief in a loving and just God, if
       there is a belief in God at all. He cannot subordinate his will to
       anyone or anything, not even his Creator. Pride is king. To reduce
       my evil tendencies, I must cultivate a positive, loving world view
       and must be able to subordinate my will to a power that is greater
       than my self and accept being only a creature.

    1. Evil deeds affect my relationship with other beings. An evil person
       presumably does not see beings outside of himself as equal to
       himself. They are considered to have no feelings, not be human, or
       in some way not be worth the dignity of being treated like a living
       being. To reduce my evil tendencies, I must never scapegoat anyone,
       any living creatures or any group, even enemies. I must be able to
       put myself in the others shoes.

    1. Evil deeds affect my relationship with my self. An evil person
       presumably has no conscience or ability to realistically evaluate
       himself or his behavior. He has no ability to see himself as
       capable of being wrong or making a mistake. To reduce me evil
       tendencies, I must cultivate an inner life and be able to tolerate
       and sit with the pain of being an imperfect and limited creature. I
       must be willing to grow spiritually and recognize the reality of
       projection.

   While many of my evil inclinations have a component resulting from
   nature and nurture, grace and free-will also have a major role in blame
   or mitigation. A person may have strong evil tendencies but not have
   the power to express it completely. Those in authority can and do
   create the most chaos and evil (as in today's Gospel reading). Those
   with less power can generally do less evil.

   Will evil be vanquished? Jesus says "Look, I am making the whole of
   creation new. I will wipe away all tears and there will be no more
   death, mourning, sadness or pain." (Revelations 21: 4-5) In the interim
   we are asked to wait on the Lord and reduce the evil in our own
   character and lives. If you feel uncertain about what is good and
   struggle with an issue, that is good! Consider that much of the evil in
   the world is committed by those who are absolutely certain that they
   know what they are doing!

   Do I recognize my own evil deeds? Do I believe that God loves "evil"
   people? How do I avoid treating others as scapegoats? Am I willing to
   sit with my own inner darkness? Do I project my own un-lovely impulses
   into others?

   Jesus' Early Years

   "Oh, how I love your Law! All the day long it is in my mind. I have
   more understanding than all my teachers for your decrees are my study.
   I am wiser than the elders because I observe your commandments." Psalm
   119: 97-100

   "Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my
   father's house?" Luke 2:49

   Early Christians were very curious to learn about the details of Jesus'
   life. The first Gospel, Mark, makes no mention of Jesus' youth. Matthew
   and Luke, written ten to twenty years later using Mark as a source,
   contain narratives of his birth and infancy and Luke gives the one
   account of Jesus as a pre-teen. In the apocryphal infancy gospels of
   the second century, such as the Infancy Gospel of Thomas, Jesus is
   portrayed not only as a child prodigy but a child terror, performing
   mischievous and nasty miracles. These accounts are ethical
   embarrassments but were extremely popular and are preserved in numerous
   languages.

   In some ways Jesus seems to have been a precocious but typical
   pre-teen, self-absorbed and not understanding why Mary and Joseph would
   be worried about him after not finding him in their caravan and
   searching for him for three days. (If he were my child I would have
   told him that I didn't care if he was in his Fathers' house but if he
   ever did that again while living under my roof he would be grounded
   until he was 30 years old! Maybe that was actually the case since we
   don't hear anything more of Jesus until he was an adult.) After that
   event he lived under Joseph and Mary' authority but you can tell that
   he was always questioning and challenging typical authority as
   teenagers and young adults do to this day.

   What we know for sure is that Jesus increased in wisdom, in stature and
   in favor with God and people as he matured (Luke 2:50). We also know
   that he was like us in all ways except that he didn't have a sinful
   nature (although you wouldn't know that based on what the religious
   authorities thought of him!) (Hebrews 4:11). He often talked about how
   blessed it was to be child-like and that only those who were so would
   enter the Kingdom of God (Mark 10: 13-16). Perhaps, the best way of
   knowing about Jesus as a youth is to think back on ourselves when we
   were young and at our most graceful or to watch our young children or
   grandchildren grow.

   What can I determine of Jesus' child-like character by looking within
   myself or watching my children/grandchildren? Do I recognize the wisdom
   and grace of childhood and youth? Are there youthful characteristics
   that I have lost and need to re-acquire to enter the Kingdom? How can I
   help the youth in my life to grow to maturity while still retaining
   their blessed child-like natures?

   You Are the Lord's Servant and Child!

   "You are me Son, my beloved, my favor rests on you. Today I have
   fathered you." Luke 3:22 and Mark 1:12

   "Here is my Servant whom I uphold, my chosen one in whom my soul
   delights." Isaiah 42: 1

   "God anointed Him with the Holy Spirit and with power and because God
   was with Him, he went about doing good......" Acts 10:38

   "Whoever believes in me will perform the same works that I do myself
   and will perform even greater works." John 14:12

   While Jesus is our Lord and Savior, the unique Son of God, He makes it
   very clear that our destiny is to become like Him in all ways. With His
   grace and power acting through our faith, mighty deeds will be
   accomplished that are in accord with God's will. If we think less of
   ourselves, this is not humility but a form of pride and laziness. We
   must learn to accept our status as God's children and are being
   transformed into the likeness of Jesus.

   What a calling! What a destiny! Can anything be more exciting and
   joyful? Can anything provide more hope and purpose for our lives than
   Jesus, His mission and His plans for us? We are to change the world for
   the better through His name and when we go beyond the veil He will use
   us in other ways. How? Who knows, maybe we will be used to bring
   salvation to other creatures on other planets! Whatever it is, it will
   be good and beyond our wildest dreams!

   Practice the acceptance of your status by referring the top three
   quotations to yourself using your name and adjusting for gender. How
   does it feel to say: "I am God's child. Today He has fathered me. God
   has anointed me with His Holy Spirit and with power therefore I go
   about doing good. I am God's servant and His chosen one. God delights
   in me." Let this become part of your prayer and meditation this week.

   How Does the Lord Speak to Me? How Well Do I Hear?

   "Samuel, Samuel......Speak Lord for your servant is listening." 1
   Samuel 3:10

   "Follow me." John 1: 43

   "It is God who, for His own generous purpose, gives you the intention
   and the power to act." Philippians 2: 13

   "Make the most of the present time for it is a wicked age. That is why
   you must not be thoughtless but must recognize what is the will of the
   Lord." Ephesians 5: 16-17

   How does God speak to you? Do you hear words in your head like the Lord
   speaking to Samuel? Do you hear words outside of yourself like Jesus
   calling Philip? Do you get strong hunches which lead you outside of
   your comfort zone in a good way that is also good for others? Do you
   hear the voice of God when your Pastor speaks? Do you recognize the
   voice of the Lord in some other way?

   Regardless of how, it is important to discern the will of God for your
   life by being alert and open to the Holy Spirit every day. We do this
   through prayer, meditation/reflection, contemplation/silence,
   Scripture/other spiritual reading, consultation with other spiritual
   friends, common sense and experience.

   While in the flesh, we will always live with uncertainty but our trust
   in God's loving care must be sufficient to live without absolute
   certitude. One way of improving your discernment skills is to look at
   your past and make a list of your good decisions and your mistakes.
   Look for clues to determine why they were good or poor decisions. Use
   what you learn in making future decisions. Discuss these decisions with
   someone you trust.

   We will always make mistakes. We must be honest enough to admit them
   once we are aware of them. One guideline I've heard indicates that if
   your will is consistently for the good and you are willing to suffer
   with the uncertainty when the good seems ambiguous, than grace, working
   through your subconscious, will always be one step ahead of your
   conscious mind in the right direction. You will do the right thing but
   you won't know that at the time but only by looking back. Ultimately,
   if we do our best, we can trust St. Paul's words: "We know that all
   things work together for good for those who love God, who are called
   according to His purpose." (Romans 8:28)

   How does God normally speak to me? Do I spend enough time listening to
   the Holy Spirit? Do I have spiritual friends that I can discuss my
   decisions with? Do I learn from my mistakes or do I keep repeating
   them?

   What Are The Obstacles To God's Grace In My Life?

   "Come back disloyal children, I want to cure your disloyalty." Jeremiah
   3:22

   "Repent, and believe the Gospel...." Mark 1:15

   Jesus asks us to repent. Repent of what? At least part of the answer
   has to do with a change of heart in our attitudes towards possessions,
   pleasures and power (In traditional terms, the World, the Flesh and the
   Devil.) These are all limited goods that we try to use to make
   ourselves feel safe in a very insecure world. They are not bad in and
   of themselves except when we try to make them into absolute goods and
   the center of our lives. Possessions have to do with our relationship
   with our neighbors. Pleasure has to do with our self relationship,
   especially regarding our bodies. Power has to do with our relationship
   with God.

   How did Jesus respond to these three human challenges to a
   growth-filled and Godly life? Look at the wilderness temptations of
   Jesus in chapter 4 of Matthew and Luke. Satan's attempt to have Jesus
   turn stones into bread is a temptation to use his power for his own
   pleasure. Satan's attempt to have Jesus worship him in order to receive
   the kingdoms of the world is a temptation to make possessions his God.
   The temptation to throw himself down from the top of the Temple was a
   temptation to use power wrongly. In all cases, Jesus refused. He
   insisted that God must be the center of ones life with no compromises.

   What are the remedies we must use to overcome these temptations?
   According to the 6^th chapter of Matthew the answers are prayer,
   fasting and almsgiving. Prayer helps us keep the temptation to power
   under control. Fasting, or self-discipline, is used to discipline our
   bodies and keep our instincts under control. (It is more than
   controlling food and drink). Almsgiving, which is more that just giving
   money and goods to the poor, is meant to give a proper balance to our
   relationships with others.

   Each time I don't pray, give in to pride, or trust my own freedom and
   power rather than God's, I enlarge the obstacles to God's grace in my
   life. Each time I pray, submit myself to God's will or use my body or
   God-given resources for the benefit of others, I am opening myself up
   to the love of God and His grace.

   In which of the three areas are my temptations the greatest? How can I
   increase the subordination of my will to God's? Have my possessions
   become my God? Have my addictions to bodily pleasures gotten out of
   control?

   Is My Individualism in Accord With the Christian Message?

   "Knowledge inflates with pride but love builds up. Thus, through your
   knowledge, the weak person is brought to destruction, the brother for
   whom Christ died." 1 Corinthians 8: 1 & 11

   "Whatsoever you do to the least of my brothers, that you do unto me."
   Matthew 25:40

   The Corinthian Christians had a slogan: All of us have knowledge. They
   evidently thought that this "knowledge" made them superior to others.
   It was their "knowledge" that allowed them to overlook an incestuous
   relationship in one of their members and to consider some spiritual
   gifts superior to others in a way that was disrupting their Eucharistic
   celebrations.

   Paul proposes charity as a cure for the rivalry among the various kinds
   of knowledge/wisdom that inflated the ego and the sense of superiority
   and self-importance. Also, some of the Greek philosophers encouraged a
   form of individualism among the pagans that Paul had to correct with an
   emphasis on community.

   By combining community and charity (brotherly love), Paul defines what
   Christian freedom is. Many decisions that were considered relevant only
   to the personal relationship with God have social consequences. This is
   nothing new. The Old Testament is filled with stories that indicate
   that we are our brother's keeper and that sin/grace affect both the
   individual and the community.

   Our culture of "rugged individualism" is not only untrue (whether or
   not we believe it, our actions affect others and the actions of others
   affect us), it is contrary to the Gospel message of Jesus. Our
   decisions have moral components that must be based on the value and
   needs of others and on mutual responsibility within our communities and
   country.

   How do my beliefs about social responsibility conflict with the
   Christian message? If I were alive in the 19^th century, how would my
   beliefs and actions have affected Native Americans, slaves, the poor
   and women? Would Jesus be happy with my rugged individualism? Does my
   sense of entitlement allow the destruction of other cultures and the
   Earth? What do I need to do to accept and act on an interdependence
   that is both real and in accord with my stated Christian beliefs?

   Am I Prepared for Death?

   Today's Old Testament reading indicates that death can occur at any age
   and in any circumstance but that God has the power to raise the dead
   and reverse our corruption. At this point in time (8^th -9^th century
   BC), there was no fixed concept of life after death in the Hebrew
   faith. It is only in the mid-2^nd century BC that the idea of an
   afterlife is clearly expressed (see 2 Maccabees 7:9) While the Old
   Testament only hints at life after death in late pre-Christian Judaism,
   Jesus proclaims it boldly: There is life after death beyond anything we
   can comprehend. "I am the resurrection. Anyone who believes in me, even
   though that person dies, will live, and whoever lives and believes in
   me will never die." (John 11:24-25)

   What attitude am I to have toward death? Our secular culture teaches us
   to pretend that old age and death don't exist and that we should stay
   as busy and "wired" as possible so as not to let their reality cross
   our minds. As usual, when it comes to the ways of the world, we are
   called to do the exact opposite. We are to learn to welcome aging and
   the wisdom it brings. We are to prepare for death and learn from it as
   early in our lives as possible to hold lightly the things of this life
   through detachment. The truth is we are dying from the moment we are
   born. (Now in my mid-50's I can certainly say that there are many
   things that I can't do that I did when I was younger and to try some of
   them would kill me!. I suspect that it will get worse!) Saint Paul
   expresses this detachment in Phillipians 1: 20-25: "Christ will be
   exalted now as always in my body whether by my life or by my death."

   Jesus' human nature rebelled against the pain of the crucifixion.
   Nonetheless he accepted it because it was God's will: "Father, take
   this cup away from me but let it be as you, not I, would have it."
   (Mark 14:36) Jesus teaches that we must hold on loosely to the things
   of life and be willing to let go without looking back: "No one who puts
   his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the Kingdom of God."
   (Luke 9: 62) To the extent that I am filled with faith, hope and love,
   I am able to detach without fear since "love casts out all fear." (1
   John 4:16-18) Jesus chose the path of suffering and warned his
   disciples that those who wished to follow him had to take up their
   crosses and do the same. (Matthew 16:24-26) We all suffer the cross of
   physical deterioration and death.

   In order to die well we must have dress rehearsals for it throughout
   our lives. This is not morbid but empowering. It gives us the ability
   to move forward with our life in ways we would not do if we had no
   awareness of our mortality. One way is to take one day each month and
   try to live that day as I would want to live my last day on Earth.
   Another is to consciously learn to accept the age I am, to begin
   learning to grieve my losses and be willing to grow spiritually through
   the wisdom of detachment.

   Do I see death as a graduation to a higher level of life? Do I believe
   that at death, life is not ended but just changed? How do I act when I
   have to endure something contrary to what I want? When I am depressed
   or lonely, do I have a greater tendency to rush to the mall or liquor
   cabinet than to visit someone in need of companionship? What wisdom m I
   learning by accepting my mortality?

   Who Are The "Lepers" In My Life?

   "Feeling sorry for him (the leper), Jesus stretched out his hand,
   touched him and said to him: I am willing, be cleansed." Mark 1:41

   "Run to win." 1 Corinthians 9:24

   Until recently, leprosy was a horrible, untreatable disease. While the
   victim would not be in physical pain because the deformity and
   destruction of nerve endings would kill the sensation of pain, the
   emotional pain would be enormous. A person with this contagious disease
   would be an outcast from family, friends and society, living outside of
   the community and thus not receiving loving care, nurturing and the
   religious consolation of going to the Temple to worship. The Old
   Testament notes only two cases where God cures leprosy so it can be
   assumed that a diagnosis of leprosy would be a sentence to lifelong
   loneliness and despair. Even those with a simple skin disease like
   eczema (which I have) would be quarantined until it was determined not
   to be leprosy, perhaps for many weeks.

   Along comes Jesus. He not only healed lepers, he allowed them to come
   to him and even touch him! This would make Jesus unclean and an
   outcast. Jesus had no problem being identified with a suffering and
   rejected humanity. He demonstrated that pity was useless unless it was
   accompanied by action to relieve the suffering of a person. Love of God
   and man was to overcome the fear of the evil of disease.

   Today, leprosy is no longer the scourge that it once was. It has been
   replaced, however, by others with conditions that many in our society
   believe render them unclean and outcast: those with HIV/AIDS,
   homosexuals, pedophiles, women who have had an abortion, those of the
   Islamic faith and persons with various forms of severe mental
   disorders. The list can go on and on.

   In today's epistle, Saint Paul indicates that we should run the race of
   our life of faith to win. This means running, not away from the lepers
   in our society, but toward them with the compassion and loving actions
   that Jesus showed to the lepers of his day. Will you do it?

   Who are the "lepers" in my life? Do I recognize that it is only the
   grace of God that keeps me from becoming a societal leper? Why would I
   rather scapegoat others as lepers than face my own real fears and
   evils? How can I avoid the trap of scapegoating those who are different
   than me? What can I do to relieve the suffering of the outcasts? Can I
   put myself in their shoes?

   What Are You Doing Here?

   "What are you doing here, Elijah?" 1 Kings 19:9

   "This is my Son, my Beloved, listen to Him!" Mark 9:7

   How would you respond to the question that the Lord put to Elijah in
   today's Old Testament reading? Elijah knew inwardly through the still
   small voice why he was there. It was the same thing that he heard out
   loud on the mountain 800 years later: to listen to God's voice. Today
   we are invited to listen in on the conversation between Jesus (the
   fulfillment of the Law and Prophets), Moses (representing the Law),
   Elijah (representing the Prophets) along with Peter, John and James
   (representing the Church...us). What are they saying? If you were in
   Peter's shoes, what would you say (I'm sure I'd be more dumbfounded
   than Peter was.) What would you do? How would the experience change
   you?

   You can personally partake in and answer these questions using the
   meditation and dream work techniques below:

    1. Meditation Technique: Read the scripture slowly 2 or 3 times.
       Meditate on the passages with either a past orientation (as if you
       were actually present at the Transfiguration as either yourself or
       one of the characters) or in a present orientation (as if God or
       Jesus were addressing the words to you in your current
       circumstances). Pray/Dialog with God/Jesus and write the
       conversation in your journal. Contemplate/listen to what the Holy
       Spirit is telling you. Derive fruit by writing down how the
       experience will change your life.

    1. Dream Work Technique: After you have read or listened to the story
       several times, recreate in your imagination the starting point of
       the story in as much sensory detail and movement as you can. Let
       your imagination spontaneously carry on the story trusting that it
       will take you where you need to go. When you come to a suitable
       stopping place, close the experience and give thanks to God for
       what He has shown you. Write down the details of the experience in
       your journal. Give the experience a title, a theme and describe
       your feelings. What question is the experience asking of you? What
       is the experience trying to help you become conscious of? What
       question do you want to ask? What is the response?

   Am I becoming more accustomed to using meditation and dream work
   techniques? How regularly do I write in my spiritual journal? If I
   haven't tried them yet, what is holding me back? Am I ready to be
   transfigured to become more what Christ wants me to be? What am I doing
   here?????

   How Important Is the Church to Me?

   "Christ is the head of the Body, that is, the Church." Colossians 1:18

   While the word "Church" (ekklesia) is used only twice in the Gospels
   (in Matthew), there are many New Testament images that represent the
   church including, among others, God's bride, a flock, a building, a
   vine and the new Jerusalem. A favorite Old Testament image of the
   Church appears in today's reading: Noah's Ark. The Church, like the
   ark, saves us from the flood of worldly spiritual destruction. The
   Church, like the ark, gives life, provides nourishment and protects us.
   It provides love, community, encouragement and opportunities to grow
   like those on the ark experienced in a family setting. The Church, like
   the ark, will lead us to a new life in a new world.

   So, how important is the Church? Evidently, many Christians don't think
   that they need the Church. They may, for example, think that it is full
   of hypocrites or is unnecessary; that they can survive and grow just
   fine without its blessing and support. Or maybe even that they have
   arrived and don't need to grow and change anymore. This has certainly
   not been my experience nor has it been the experience of those I know
   who don't regularly attend Church. In the past five years I have
   developed musical, writing, counseling and teaching skills through the
   Church. I have become less obsessed with worldly things and thus
   learning about the freedom to learn to love and serve the Lord through
   the guidance of the Holy Spirit as revealed within the Church. I am
   slowly learning my place in the world and that without Christ and His
   wonderful mission and the life He is calling me to, much of life, what
   the culture thinks is important, is pretty meaningless. Would I have
   developed my gifts and grown without the aid of my Church family?
   Absolutely not! I would have stopped growing and would have begun to
   die spiritually.

   What about the future? I know that life is a journey and I am called to
   continuous growth in Christ. I suspect that the next five years will be
   as surprising as the past five, perhaps even more so. The Church and
   all it represents will continue to be the main light in my life for
   growth in holiness and meaning.

   So, how important to you is the Church? How has it fed and nourished
   you over the years? Have you had the opportunity to grow through
   service within the Church? Have you seen members of your Church family
   grow? (If so, tell them!) Does their growth provide you with
   encouragement and hope? Am I pulling my weight in the Church? Do I have
   hope in the future because of my faith in Christ and His Church?

   Do I Have Faith for My Journey?

   "I will bless the Lord who gives me counsel. My heart teaches me, night
   after night. For you will not abandon me to the grave nor let your holy
   one see the pit." Psalm 16: 7 & 10

   In today's Old Testament and Gospel readings we get a glimpse of how
   God, working through the Holy Spirit, leads us: step-by-step, not
   giving any more information than is needed beforehand.

   Abraham was asked to sacrifice his son Isaac even though God promised
   that blessings would come through this same son! How would this paradox
   be accomplished? Abraham didn't know. It only became clearer as he
   neared his sacrificial destination, Moriah (in some languages meaning
   wind, a reference to the Holy Spirit). God provided the sacrifice: the
   goat and the Lamb of God, His only Son.

   In the Gospel reading, Jesus makes His first prediction of His passion
   on His journey to Jerusalem, the sacred city. He knows that He is to be
   sacrificed but the Spirit has not yet revealed to Him all of the
   details. At this point He knows that He is to suffer greatly at the
   hands of the elders, chief priests and scribes and then killed. Awhile
   later, in the second prediction, He knows that He will be turned over
   to men and killed. They may not all be Jewish authorities. Only in the
   third prediction as He neared His destination did it become clear that
   He would be humiliated and rejected by His own people but killed by the
   gentile Romans. This meant that He would be crucified. How could the
   Son of God be killed? As a man, Jesus may not have fully understood the
   paradox. He only knew that He would be raised from the dead after three
   days and trusted His Father for the rest.

   The truth that was progressively revealed to Abraham and Jesus may have
   been neither pretty nor to their liking but they trusted God and His
   love for them. As Saint Paul says: "I am convinced that neither death
   nor life......nor anything else will be able to separate us from the
   love of God as revealed in Jesus Christ our Lord." (Romans 8:38)

   It is the same with us. We are all on our life's journey and headed for
   a destination prepared by God. We do not know what will transpire
   between now and our arrival. If we have faith in Christ, we can be sure
   that what we need to know will be revealed and that the love of God
   will see us through.

   Am I prepared to proceed on my journey to wherever God leads? Am I
   willing to be content with not having all of the answers beforehand? Do
   I trust God enough to know that even if pain and suffering are in store
   for me that God will use it for my growth and the good of others? Do I
   believe that God will provide' when I am confronted with the paradoxes
   of life?

   What Will the Holy Spirit Find In the Dark Rooms of My Inner Temple?

   "Stop making my Father's house into a market place." Mark 2: 16

   "I know that good does not dwell in me, that is, my flesh." Romans 7:
   18

   "Do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit?" 1
   Cor 6: 19

   In today's Gospel reading, we see Jesus expressing great anger at what
   He finds in the Temple at Jerusalem. It isn't that the sellers and
   buyers were doing something forbidden by the Jewish law that infuriated
   Jesus. They were fulfilling a legitimate function by converting foreign
   currency to temple money and allowing sacrificial animals to be
   purchased. But, as usual, Jesus is more concerned with why an action is
   being performed; what is the inner motive behind the exterior act. The
   buyers and sellers were making large profits at the expense of those
   coming to the temple to offer sacrifices; many of whom were poor. They
   were after the almighty buck more than realizing that they were
   performing a holy service in the presence of the Almighty in perhaps
   the holiest place on earth!

   Today, the Temple of Jerusalem is long gone and our bodies have become
   the temple of the Holy Spirit. But even Saint Paul says that he
   realizes that nothing good resides in him, that his actions and motives
   may be at cross purposes. So, over time, the Spirit of Jesus entered
   Paul's tabernacle and started violently throwing out what needed to be
   discarded and completely rearranging the inner furniture so that He
   could be a proper guest at Paul's house! The cleansing was so complete
   and Paul's identity so altered that he even had a change in name from
   Saul to Paul! Paul suffers the extreme makeover and cooperates with it
   as he is enabled. It must have felt like death. In the end, however, he
   is joyful, thanking God for the love that has been shown to him by
   allowing him to become the greatest saint of the Church.

   So, how does the Holy Spirit want to change you? How does He want to
   rearrange your inner furniture? What will the Holy Spirit find as He
   breaks down the doors of dark, dank and dingy inner closets and shines
   His purifying but painful light on its contents? What do you think that
   your new name will be? You can get a start by reviewing the Ten
   Commandments from today's Old Testament reading (Exodus 20). Maybe you
   can get rid of some of your inner contents before Jesus comes and
   really guts the place!

   You Are God's Work of Art!

   "Jesus took the loaves, gave thanks, and distributed them." John 6:11

   "I am the bread of life." John 6:25

   "We are God's work of art, created in Christ Jesus, for the good works
   which God has already designated to make up our way of life." Ephesians
   2:10

   "You are what you eat!" While this maxim is not in Proverbs, it should
   be! Its meaning has never been truer than in the case of today's
   readings. This miracle, the feeding of the thousands, is the only
   miracle of Jesus recorded in all four Gospels (including twice in
   Matthew and Mark). It is the story of Jesus as the new Moses, feeding
   the people like Moses did with manna in the desert twelve centuries
   earlier. Even more, it is the premonition of Jesus as the Bread of
   Life, feeding us with the spiritual food of His Body and Blood: "Take
   and eat. This is my body given for you." (Matthew 26:26)

   Why are we to eat of this spiritual food? The answer is given in the
   letter to the Ephesians: we are God's work of art, created in the image
   of Jesus. When God wanted to express a beautiful thought, He created a
   flower or other beauty in nature. When He wanted to express to man who
   He was, He created a very beautiful character. We are what we eat. The
   more we eat of this spiritual food in all its forms (including the food
   of prayer and meditation on the life of Jesus and His teachings), the
   more we will grow into the image Jesus has for us. We will each still
   be unique creations but we will contain the evidence that we have been
   with Jesus, that we are spiritually related. He will empower us,
   through the Holy Spirit, to perform the works that will spread the
   Kingdom of God and give us lives of infinite joy and meaning. Let us go
   to the feast, eat abundantly, and claim the eternal life that Jesus has
   in store for us!

   How important is Holy Communion to me? Do I recognize that this
   spiritual food is really the Body and Blood of or Lord Jesus? Do I
   commune with Jesus in prayer and meditation? How does it feel to be a
   unique piece of God's work of art? How are you being molded and shaped?
   Does it hurt? Are you slowly being transformed into a source of life to
   those around you?

   How Do I Show Jesus to Others?

   "Sir, we would like to see Jesus." John 12:21

   "Anyone who loves his life looses it, anyone who hates his life in this
   world will keep it for eternal life. Whoever serves me must follow me."
   John 12: 25-26

   "During his life on earth, he offered up prayer and entreaty with loud
   cries and tears to the one who had the power to save him from death."
   Hebrews 5: 5-6

   "I shall teach your ways to the wicked and sinners shall return to you.
   Open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall proclaim your praise." Psalm
   51: 14, 16

   As we approach the end of Lent and all of the interior work it
   entailed, we should increasingly be able to show Jesus to others by
   means of our lives and our words. Our lives should reflect the fact
   that we are following a crucified savior who loves us enough to suffer
   with us. We should be able to show our brokenness to others and show
   how God has heard our loud cries and seen our tears and saved us from
   death by giving us a life that is really worth living and not just
   survival. Our actions and our words should reflect our testimony so
   that we can proclaim the praise of God and lead the broken to return to
   the Lord.

   If someone asks us why we are Christians, how do we respond? How do we
   do this with words? We need to be able to say, in five minutes or less,
   how our lives were before our healing by Jesus, how Jesus entered our
   lives, and how our lives are now.

   For example, I could say that I am an alcoholic and that my father and
   brothers are alcoholic. I have suffered with mental illness ranging
   from depression, obsessive/compulsive thoughts, panic and extreme fear
   through much of my life. I am blind and partially deaf. I have often
   wished I were dead, even as young as eight years of age. I thank God my
   life crumbled in middle age and that I had to let down my artificial
   walls of self-sufficiency and learn to be healed through the power of
   God in the 12-Step programs. It was there that I learned acceptance,
   love and the gradual healing that God intends for many human problems.
   God healed me of my alcoholism, panic, obsessions, sarcasm and fears
   but it took time and much foot work. It was often noticed by others
   before I even recognized that I had changed.

   God continues to work miracles in my life. In the past five years I
   have developed musical, writing, teaching and counseling skills through
   the Lord working through our pastor (my spiritual director) and the
   Church. I have become less obsessed with worldly notions of success and
   am learning to trust the Holy Spirit to guide me in and to freedom. I
   am slowly learning my place in the world by means of the wonderful
   mission of Jesus and his plans for my life. What about the future? I
   believe that the Lord will continue to heal and lead me as long as I
   continue to grow in faith and willingness to change, practice obedience
   and strive with passion to the wonderful goal that the Lord is calling
   me too.

   What is my testimony? Am I prepared to write a five minute summary of
   what the Lord has done with my life? Am I willing to share this with
   others?
     __________________________________________________________________

   Testimony Outline

    1. Before Christ

    1. Blindness At Birth
    2. Alcoholism in Father and Brothers
    3. No relationship with Father, Too close to Mother
    4. Mental health problems including my own alcoholism: depression,
       anxiety, rumination.
    5. Deafness

    1. What happened.

    1. Worsening blindness, alcoholism, work related problems, divorce,
       mental health problems
    2. Recovery and Treatment: Learned to see God more clearly and ask for
       His help to survive and change.
    3. The Lord began to change me. I learned that the alcohol was causing
       many of my problems, not helping. I needed to grow up emotionally
       and spiritually. I learned that my mental health prison was self
       induced and I could walk out of it whenever I wanted since God was
       with me to help. God led me to an Episcopal church and priest who
       helped wretched men like me. A father figure.
    4. Spiritual lessons learned:

    1. I needed to learn how to forgive myself, my father and others.
       Heart of Chrisian message.
    2. I needed to do lots of foot work as shown in the 12 Steps.
    3. God did not remove my consequences of my behavior but transformed
       them into good once I learned the lessons.
    4. I needed to stop blaming others for my problems and take
       responsibility.

    1. Where I am today

    1. I have been sober for 21 years. My mental health has never been
       better. Still on anti depressants. God has given me a real life.
    2. The Lord opened doors to teach, council and many other things
       including, weirdly enough, music ministry.
    3. I am learning to trust God more and more each day. Take risks in
       the Lord's name. Such as prayer table and prison ministry.
    4. The Lord continues to open and close doors. Spiritual growth and
       life in general is a process, not an event. I must trust the
       process and know that the Lord loves me and will continue to guide
       me.
    5. I am slowly learning to have Jesus lead me to the Father: something
       only He can do as my brother.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]11:1-9   [2]42:36-38

   Exodus

   [3]20

   1 Samuel

   [4]3:10

   1 Kings

   [5]19:9

   Psalms

   [6]16   [7]27   [8]40:1-2   [9]51   [10]85:10   [11]119   [12]119
   [13]119:130   [14]131   [15]148

   Isaiah

   [16]5   [17]42   [18]53   [19]61   [20]61   [21]64:4

   Jeremiah

   [22]3:22   [23]31:31-34

   Ezekiel

   [24]18

   Hosea

   [25]11:1-8

   Amos

   [26]3

   Micah

   [27]6:8

   Matthew

   [28]4   [29]11:29   [30]16:24-26   [31]21:28-32   [32]21:31
   [33]23:3   [34]25   [35]25:40   [36]26:26

   Mark

   [37]1:12   [38]1:15   [39]1:41   [40]2   [41]9:7   [42]10   [43]13:36
   [44]14:36

   Luke

   [45]1   [46]2:49   [47]2:50   [48]3:22   [49]6   [50]7:47   [51]9
   [52]11:5-8   [53]15:11-32   [54]16

   John

   [55]1   [56]6:11   [57]6:15   [58]6:25   [59]11:24-25   [60]12
   [61]12:21   [62]14:12

   Acts

   [63]2:1-11   [64]10:38

   Romans

   [65]2   [66]7   [67]8:28   [68]8:38   [69]13:8

   1 Corinthians

   [70]1   [71]1:8   [72]6   [73]8   [74]9:24

   Ephesians

   [75]1   [76]2:10   [77]5

   Philippians

   [78]2   [79]2

   Colossians

   [80]1:18

   1 Thessalonians

   [81]5:8

   Hebrews

   [82]4:11   [83]5

   2 Peter

   [84]3   [85]3:11

   1 John

   [86]4:8   [87]4:16-18

   2 Maccabees

   [88]7:9   [89]15
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=1#i-p245.1
   2. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=42&scrV=36#i-p237.1
   3. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=0#i-p920.1
   4. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=10#i-p776.1
   5. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=9#i-p859.1
   6. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=0#i-p894.1
   7. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=0#i-p115.1
   8. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=1#i-p433.1
   9. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#i-p943.1
  10. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=10#i-p691.1
  11. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#i-p484.1
  12. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#i-p747.1
  13. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=130#i-p406.1
  14. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=0#i-p380.1
  15. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=0#i-p204.1
  16. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i-p540.1
  17. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=0#i-p763.1
  18. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#i-p601.1
  19. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=0#i-p704.1
  20. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=0#i-p708.1
  21. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=4#i-p676.1
  22. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=22#i-p797.1
  23. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#i-p599.1
  24. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=0#i-p597.1
  25. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=1#i-p593.1
  26. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=0#i-p595.1
  27. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=8#i-p591.1
  28. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#i-p152.1
  29. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#i-p527.1
  30. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#i-p835.4
  31. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=28#i-p398.3
  32. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=31#i-p529.1
  33. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#i-p612.1
  34. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#i-p661.1
  35. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#i-p815.1
  36. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=26#i-p931.1
  37. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i-p762.2
  38. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=15#i-p798.1
  39. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=41#i-p844.1
  40. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i-p912.1
  41. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=7#i-p860.1
  42. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=0#i-p755.3
  43. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=36#i-p678.1
  44. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=36#i-p835.1
  45. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i-p717.1
  46. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=49#i-p749.1
  47. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=50#i-p755.1
  48. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#i-p762.1
  49. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=0#i-p499.1
  50. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#i-p497.1
  51. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=0#i-p835.2
  52. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#i-p398.2
  53. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=11#i-p398.1
  54. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=0#i-p41.1
  55. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i-p778.1
  56. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=11#i-p925.1
  57. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=15#i-p573.1
  58. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=25#i-p927.1
  59. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=24#i-p831.2
  60. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=0#i-p941.1
  61. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=21#i-p940.1
  62. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=12#i-p765.1
  63. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#i-p245.2
  64. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#i-p764.1
  65. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i-p319.1
  66. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#i-p913.1
  67. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#i-p790.1
  68. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=38#i-p902.1
  69. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=8#i-p482.1
  70. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i-p152.2
  71. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=8#i-p684.1
  72. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=0#i-p914.1
  73. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=0#i-p813.1
  74. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=24#i-p846.1
  75. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i-p669.1
  76. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#i-p929.1
  77. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i-p782.1
  78. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i-p525.1
  79. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i-p780.1
  80. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#i-p877.1
  81. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#i-p654.1
  82. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=11#i-p755.2
  83. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i-p942.1
  84. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=0#i-p695.1
  85. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=11#i-p722.1
  86. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#i-p501.1
  87. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#i-p835.3
  88. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=7&scrV=9#i-p831.1
  89. file:///ccel/p/pasko/reflections/cache/reflections.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=15&scrV=0#i-p350.1
