     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Change of the Sabbath
      Creator(s): Shepard, Thomas (1605-1649)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology;
      LC Call no: BX7117
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Congregationalism
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 Thomas Shepard

                           The Change Of The Sabbath

   Thesis 1. The change of this day from the last to the first day of the
   week, although it be confirmed by an ancient custom, yet the true
   reason and grounds of so great a change are not so fully known, sacred
   writings not so expressly setting down (as it does in some things of
   less concernment) the causes hereof. And many of the arguments heaped
   up and multiplied by some for the change of it, which may seem of very
   great weight, while they want an adversary at the other end of the
   scale to balance them; yet upon sad examination and search into them,
   they prove too light, and consequently occasion the temptation of
   scrupling the truth and validity of others more clear. We are therefore
   with more wariness and humility of mind to search into this
   controversy, and with much thankfulness and modesty to accept that
   little light which God gives us in greater, as well as of much light
   which he is pleased to lend us in smaller matters. "Pascimur opertis,
   exercemur obscuris, was his speech long since concerning the
   Scriptures. There is no truth so clear but man's loose wit can invent
   and mint many pernicious cavils against it; and therefore in those
   things which shine forth with less evidence, it is no wonder if it
   casts such blots and stains upon them as that they can scarcely be
   discerned. Nil magis inimicum veritati, acumine nimio. We should
   therefore be wise with sobriety, and remember that in this and such
   like controversies, the Scriptures were not written to answer all the
   scruples and objections of cavillers, but to satisfy and establish the
   consciences of poor believers. And verily, when I meet with such like
   speeches and objections as these, viz., Where is it expressly said that
   the old Sabbath is abrogated? and what one scripture is there in the
   New Testament declaring expressly that the Lord's day is substituted
   and put in its room? I can not from such expressions but think and fear
   that the ignorance of this change in some does not spring so much from
   deficiency and want of light on God's part, but rather from
   perverseness on man's part, which will not see nor own the truth,
   because it is not revealed and dispensed after that manner and fashion
   of expression as man's wit and fantasy would have it. Like Naaman, who,
   because the prophet went not about the cure of his leprosy in that way
   and fashion which he would have him, did not therefore (for a time) see
   that way of cure which God had revealed to him. For the Holy Ghost is
   not bound to write all the principles of religion under commonplace
   heads, nor to say expressly, In this place of Scripture you may see the
   old Sabbath abrogated, and the new instituted; for we find no such kind
   of expressions concerning Paul's epistles, and many books of Scripture,
   that this or that epistle or book is canonical, which yet we know to be
   so by other evidences. We know, also, that the Holy Ghost, by brief
   hints of truth, gives occasion of large comments, and by writing about
   other matters tanquam aliud agens, it brings forth to light, by the by,
   revelations of great concernment, which it saw meet purposely in that
   manner to make known. And as in many other things it has thus done, so
   especially in this of the Sabbath. So that if our hearts, like locks,
   were fitted to God's key, they would be soon opened to see thoroughly
   the difficulties of this point; which I confess, of all practical
   points, has been most full of knots and difficulties to my own
   weakness.

   Thesis 2. To make apostolic unwritten inspirations, notified and made
   known in their days to the churches, to be the cause of the change of
   the day, is to plough with a Popish heifer, and to cast that anchor on
   which deceivers use to rely, and by which they hope to save themselves
   when they know not how otherwise to defend their falsehoods.

   Thesis 3. To make ecclesiastical custom, established first by the
   imperial law of Constantine, to be the foundation of the change, is to
   make a prop for prelacy, and a step to Popery, and to open a gap to all
   human inventions. For if it be in the church's power to appoint the
   greatest holy day, why may not any other rite and ceremony be imposed
   also? And if it be free to observe this day or not, in respect of
   itself, because it wants a divine institution, and yet necessary to
   observe it, in respect of the church's custom and constitution, (as
   some pretend,) why may not the church's commandment be a rule of
   obedience in a thousand things else as well as in this? and so
   introduce will worship, and to serve God after the tradition of men,
   which God abhors?

   Thesis 4. The observation of the first day of the week for the
   Christian Sabbath arises from the force of the fourth commandment, as
   strongly as the observation of the media cultus, or means of worship,
   now under the New Testament, does from the force of the second
   commandment; only let this be supposed, that the day is now changed,
   (as we shall hereafter prove,) as also that the worship itself is
   changed by divine institution; for gospel institutions, when they be
   appointed by divine sovereign authority, yet they may then be observed
   and practised by virtue of some moral law. The gospel appointed new
   sacraments, but we are to use them by virtue of the second commandment;
   so here the gospel appoints a new seventh day for the Sabbath, but it
   stands by virtue of the fourth commandment, and therefore the
   observation of it is not an act of Christian liberty, but of Christian
   duty, imposed by divine authority, and by virtue of the moral law.

   Thesis 5. For, the morality of the fourth commandment (as has been
   proved) being preserved in observing not that Sabbath only, nor yet a
   Sabbath merely when man sees meet, but in observing the Sabbath, i.e.,
   such a Sabbath as is determined and appointed of God, (which may
   therefore be either the first or last of the seven days,) hence it is,
   that the first of the seven, if it be determined and instituted of God
   under the New Testament, arises equally from the fourth commandment, as
   the last seventh day did under the Old Testament; and therefore it is
   no such piaculum, nor delusion of the common people, as Mr Brabourn
   would make it, to put the title of the Lord's Sabbath upon the Lord's
   day, and to call it the Sabbath day; for if it be born out of the same
   womb the first seventh was, if it arise (I mean) from the same
   commandment, "Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day," why may it not
   bear the name of the Sabbath now, as the first born did in former
   times?

   Thesis 6. If the Lord would have men to work six days together,
   according to his own example, and the morality of the fourth
   commandment, that so a seventh day determined by himself might be
   observed, hence it is that neither two Sabbaths in a week can stand
   with the morality of the fourth commandment, nor yet could the former
   Sabbath be justly changed into any other day than into the first day of
   the week; the first day could not belong to the week before, for then
   there should be eight days in a week, and if it did belong to the week
   following, then (if we suppose that the second had been the Sabbath)
   there must be one working day, viz., the first day to go before it, and
   five working days after it, and so there should not nor could not be
   six working days continued together, that the seventh might be the
   Lord's, according to the morality of the fourth commandment. And hence
   it is, that no human or ecclesiastical power can change the Sabbath to
   what day of the week they please, from the first, which now is.

   Thesis 7. It should not seem an uncouth phrase, or a hard saying, to
   call the first day of the week a seventh, or the seventh day; for
   though it be the first absolutely in order of existence from the
   creation, yet relatively in way of relation, and in respect of the
   number of seven in a week, it may be invested with the name and title
   of a seventh, even of such a seventh day as may lawfully be crowned and
   anointed to be the Sabbath day; for look, as Noah, though he was the
   first in order of years, and dignity of entrance into the ark, yet he
   is called the eighth, (2 Pet ii. 5,) in that he was one of them (as the
   learned observe) qui octonarium numerum perficiebant, or who made up
   the number of eight; so it is in respect of the first day, which in
   divers respects may be called the first, and yet the seventh also. Mr.
   Brabourn's argument therefore is of no solidity, who goes about to
   prove the Christian Sabbath to be no Sabbath, because "that Sabbath
   which the fourth commandment enjoins is called the seventh day;" but
   all the evangelists call the Lord's day the first day of the week, not
   the seventh day. For he should remember that the same day in divers
   respects may be called the first day, and yet the seventh day; for in
   respect of its natural existence and being, it may be and is called the
   first day, and yet in respect of divine use and application, it may be
   and is called the seventh day, even by virtue of the fourth
   commandment, which is the Lord's day, which is confessed to be the
   first day.

   Thesis 8. For although in numero numerante, (as they call it,) i.e., in
   number numbering, there can be but one seventh, which immediately
   follows the number six, yet in numero numerato, i.e., in number
   numbered, or in things which are numbered, (as are the days of the
   week,) any of the seven may be so in way of relation and proportion.
   As, suppose seven men stand together; take the last man in order from
   the other six, who stand about him, and he is the seventh; so again,
   take the first in order, and set him apart from the six who stand below
   him, and if the number of them who are taken from him make up the
   number if six, he then may and must necessarily be called the seventh.
   Just thus it is in the days of the week; the first Sabbath from the
   creation might be called the seventh day in respect of the six days
   before it; and this first day of the week may be called the seventh day
   also, in respect of the six working days together after it. That may be
   called the last seventh, this the first seventh, without any absurdity
   of account, which some would imagine; and if this first day of the week
   is called the eighth day, according to Ezekiel's prophecy of
   evangelical times, and his reckoning onward from the creation, (Ezek.
   xliii. 27,) why may it not then in other respects put on the name of a
   seventh also?

   Thesis 9. The reason why the Lord should depose the last seventh, and
   exalt and crown the first of seven to be the day of the Christian
   Sabbath, is not so well considered, and therefore to be here narrowly
   examined. For as for those eastern Christians, who, in the primitive
   times, observed two Sabbaths in a week, the Jewish and the Christian,
   doubtless their milk sod over, and their zeal went beyond the rule. The
   number of Jews who were believers, and yet, too, too zealous of their
   old customs, we know did fill those places in their dispersion, and
   before more than the western and more remote parts, and therefore they
   might more powerfully infect those in the east; and they, to gain or
   keep them, might more readily comply with them. Let us therefore see
   into the reasons of this change from one seventh unto another.

   Thesis 10. The good will of Him who is Lord of the Sabbath, is the
   first efficient and primary cause of the institution of a new Sabbath;
   but the resurrection of Christ, being upon the first day of the week,
   (Mark xvi. 9,) is the secondary, moral, or moving cause hereof: the day
   of Christ's resurrection being Christ's joyful day for his people's
   deliverance, and the world's restitution and new creation, it is no
   wonder if the Lord Christ appoint it, and the apostles preach and
   publish it, and the primitive Christians observe it as their holy and
   joyful day of rest and consolation. For some notable work of God upon a
   day being ever the moral cause of sanctifying the day, hence the work
   of redemption being finished upon the day of Christ' resurrection, and
   it being the most glorious work that ever was, and wherein Christ was
   first most gloriously manifested to have rested from it, (Rom. i. 4,)
   hence the Lord Christ might have good cause to honour this day above
   all others; and what other cause there should be of the public solemn
   assemblies in the primitive churches, upon the first day in the week,
   than this glorious work of Christ's resurrection upon the same day
   which began their great joy for the rising of the Sun of Righteousness,
   is scarce imaginable.

   Thesis 11. No action of Christ does of itself sanctify any time; for if
   it did, why should we not then keep as many holy days every year as we
   find holy actions of Christ recorded in Scripture, as the superstitious
   crew of blind Papists do at this day? But if God, who is the Lord of
   time, shall sanctify any such day or time wherein any such action is
   done, such a day then is to be kept holy; and therefore if the will of
   God has sanctified the day of Christ's resurrection, we may lawfully
   sanctify the same day; and therefore Mr Brabourn does us wrong, as if
   we made the resurrection of Christ merely to be the cause of the change
   of this day.

   Thesis 12. Why the will of God should honour the day of Christ's
   resurrection as holy, rather than any other day of his incarnation,
   birth, passion, ascension: It is this; because Christ's rising day was
   his resting or Sabbath day, wherein the first entered into his rest,
   and whereon his rest began. For the Sabbath, or rest day, of the Lord
   our God, only can be our rest day, according to the fourth commandment.
   Hence the day of God's rest from the work of creation, and the day of
   Christ's rest from the work of redemption, are only fit and capable of
   being our Sabbaths. Now, the Lord Christ, in the day of his incarnation
   and birth, did not enter into his rest, but rather made entrance into
   his labour and sorrow, who then began the work of humiliation, (Gal.
   iv. 4,5;) and in the day of his passion, he was then under the sorest
   part and feeling of his labour, in bitter agonies upon the cross and in
   the garden. And hence it is that none of those days were consecrated to
   be our Sabbath, or rest days, which were days of Christ's labour and
   sorrow; nor could the day of his ascension be fit to be made our
   Sabbath, because, although Christ then and thereby entered into his
   place of rest, (the third heavens,) yet did he not then make his first
   entrance into his estate of rest, which was in the day of his
   resurrection; the wisdom and will of God did therefore choose this day
   above any other to be the Sabbath day.

   Thesis 13. Those that go about (as some of late have done) to make
   Christ's ascension day the ground of our Sabbath day, had need be
   fearful lest they lose the truth and go beyond it, while they affect
   some new discoveries of it, which seems to be the case here. For though
   Christ at his ascension entered into his place of rest, yet the place
   is but an accidental thing to Christ's rest itself, the state of which
   was begun in the day of his resurrection; and therefore there is no
   reason to prefer that which is but accidental above that which is most
   substantial; or the day of entrance into the place of his rest in his
   ascension before the day of rest in his resurrection; beside, it is
   very uncertain whether Christ ascended upon the first day of the week;
   we are certain that he arose then; and why we should build such a vast
   change upon an uncertainty I know not. And yet suppose that, by
   deduction and strength of wit, it might be found out, yet we see not
   the Holy Ghost expressly setting it down, viz., that Christ ascended
   upon the first day of the week, which, if he had intended to have made
   the ground of our Christian Sabbath, he would surely have done; the
   first day in the week being ever accounted the Lord's day in Holy
   Scriptures; and no other first day do we find mentioned on which he
   ascended, but only on that day wherein he arose from the dead.

   Thesis 14. And look, as Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of
   the world meritoriously, but not actually, so he was also risen again
   in the like manner from the foundation of the world meritoriously, but
   not actually. Hence it is, that look, as God the Father actually
   instituted no Sabbath day, until he had actually finished His work of
   creation, so neither was it meet that this day should be changed until
   Christ Jesus had actually finished (and not meritoriously only) the
   work of redemption or restoration; and hence it is that the church,
   before Christ's coming, might have good reason to sanctify that day,
   which was instituted upon the actual finishing of the work of creation,
   and yet might have no reason to observe our Christian Sabbath; the work
   of restoration and new creation, and rest from it, not being then so
   much as actually begun.

   Thesis 15. Whether our Saviour appointed that first individual day of
   his resurrection to be the first Christian Sabbath is somewhat
   difficult to determine; and I would not tie knots, and leave them for
   others to unloose. This only I aim at: that although the first
   individual day of Christ's resurrection should not possibly be the
   first individual Sabbath, yet still the resurrection of Christ is the
   ground of the institution of the Sabbath, which one consideration
   dashes all those devices of some men's heads, who puzzle their readers
   with many intricacies and difficulties, in showing that the first day
   of Christ's resurrection could not be the first Sabbath, and thence
   would infer that the day of his resurrection was not the ground of the
   institution of the Sabbath, which inference is most false; for it was
   easy with Christ to make that great work on this day to be the ground
   of the institution of it, some time after that work was past.

   Thesis 16. The sin and fall of man having defaced and spoiled (de jure,
   though not de facto) the whole work of creation, as the learned Bishop
   Lake well observes, it was not so meet therefore that the Sabbath
   should be ever kept in respect of that work, but rather in respect of
   this new creation or restoration of all things by Christ, after the
   actual accomplishment thereof in the day of his resurrection. But look,
   as God the Father having created the world in six days, he rested
   therefore and sanctified the seventh, so this work being spoiled and
   marred by man's sin, and the new creation being finished and ended, the
   Lord therefore rested the first day of the week, and therefore
   sanctified it.

   Thesis 17. The fourth commandment gives in the reason why God
   sanctified the seventh day from the creation, viz.: because God rested
   on that day, and as it is in Ex. xxxi. 17, was refreshed in it, that
   is, took a complacency and delight in his work so done and so finished.
   But the sin of man in falling from his first creation made God repent
   that ever he made man, (Gen. vi. ,) and consequently the world for man,
   and therefore it took off that complacency or rest and refreshing in
   this his work; if, therefore, the Lord betake himself to work a new
   work, a new creation or renovation of all things in and by his Son, in
   which he will forever rest, may not the day of his rest be then justly
   changed into the first of seven, on which day his rest in his new work
   began, whereof he will never repent? If the Lord vary his rest, may not
   he vary the time and day of it? Nay, must not the time and day of our
   rest be varied, because the ground of God's rest in a new work is
   changed?

   Thesis 18. As it was no necessary duty, therefore, perpetually to
   observe that seventh day wherein God first rested, because his rest on
   that day is now changed, so also it is not necessary orderly to observe
   those six days of labour, wherein he first laboured and built the
   world, of which, for the sin of man, he is said to have repented; yet
   notwithstanding, though it be no necessary duty to observe those
   particular six days of labour, and that seventh of rest, yet it is a
   moral duty (as has been proved) to observe six days for labour, and a
   seventh for rest; and hence it follows that, although the Lord Christ's
   rest on the day of his resurrection (the first day of the week) might
   and may justly be taken as a ground of our rest on the same day, yet
   his labour in the work of redemption three and thirty years and upward,
   all the days of his life and humiliation, could not nor can not justly
   be made the ground or example of our labour, so as we must labour and
   work thirty-three years together before we keep a Sabbath the day of
   Christ's rest. Because, although God could alter and change the day of
   rest without infringement of the morality of the fourth commandment,
   yet he could not make the example of Christ's labour thirty-three years
   together the ground and example of our continuance in our work, without
   manifest breach of that moral rule, viz.: that man shall have six days
   together for labour, and the seventh for rest. For man may rest the
   first day of the week, and withal observe six days for labour, and so
   keep the fourth commandment; but he can not labour thirty-three years
   together, and then keep a Sabbath, without apparent breach of the same
   commandment; and therefore that argument of Master Brabourn against our
   Christian Sabbath melts into vanity, wherein he urges an equity of the
   change of the days of our labour, "either three days only together, (as
   Christ did lie in the grave,) or thirty-three years together, (as he
   did all the days of his humiliation,) in case we will make a change of
   the Sabbath, from the change of the day of Christ's rest." And yet I
   confess ingenuously with him, that if the Lord had not instituted the
   first day of the week to be our Christian Sabbath, all these and such
   like arguings and reasonings were invalid to prove a change; for man's
   reason has nothing to do to change days without divine appointment and
   institution: these things only I mention why the wisdom of God might
   well alter the day. The proofs that he has changed it shall follow in
   due place.

   Thesis 19. The resurrection of Christ may therefore be one ground, not
   only of the sanctification of the Christian Sabbath, but also a
   sufficient ground of the abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath. For, first,
   the greater light may darken the less and a greater work (as the
   restoration of the world above the creation of it) may overshadow the
   less. (Jer. xxiii. 7-8; Ex. xii. 2.) Secondly, man's sin spoiled the
   first rest, and therefore the day of it might be justly abrogated. For
   the horrible wrath of God had been immediately poured upon man, (as
   might be proved, and as it was upon the lapsed angels,) and
   consequently upon all creatures for man's sake, if Christ had not given
   the Father rest, for whose sake the world was made, (Rev. iv. 11,) and
   by whose means and mediation the world continues as now it does. (John
   vi. 22.)

   Thesis 20. Yet although Christ's resurrection be one ground not only of
   the institution of the new Sabbath, but also of the abrogation of the
   old, yet it is not the only ground why the old was abrogated; for (as
   has been shown) there was some type affixed to the Jewish Sabbath, by
   reason of which there was just cause to abrogate, or rather (as Calvin
   calls it) to translate the Sabbath to another day. And, therefore, this
   dashes another of Mr. Brabourn's dreams, who argues the continuance of
   the Jewish Sabbath, because there is a possibility for all nations
   still to observe it. "For," says he, "can not we in England as well as
   they at Jerusalem remember that Sabbath? Secondly, rest in it. Thirdly,
   keep it holy. Fourthly, keep the whole day holy. Fifthly, the last of
   seven. Sixthly, and all this in imitation of God. Could no nation (says
   he) besides the Jews observe these six things?" Yes, verily, that they
   could in respect of natural ability; but the question is not what men
   may or might do, but what they ought to do, and should do. For besides
   the change of God's rest through the work of the Son, there was a type
   affixed to that Jewish Sabbath, for which cause it may justly vanish at
   Christ's death, as well as other types, in respect of the affixed type,
   which was but accidental; and yet be continued and preserved in another
   day, being originally and essentially moral. A Sabbath was instituted
   in paradise, equally honoured by God in the decalogue with all other
   moral laws, foretold to continue in the days of the gospel, by Ezekiel
   and Isaiah, (Ezek. xliii. ult.; Is. lvi. 4-6,) and commended by Christ,
   who bids his people pray that their flight may not be in the winter or
   Sabbath day, as it were easy to open these places against all cavils;
   and therefore it is for substance moral. Yet the word "Sabbatism,"
   (Hebr. iv. 9,) and the apostle's gradation from yearly holy days to
   monthly new moons, and from them to weekly Sabbaths, which are called
   "shadows of things to come," (Col. ii. 16,) seems strongly to argue
   some type affixed to those individual Sabbaths, or Jewish seventh days;
   and hence it is, perhaps, that the Sabbath is set among moral laws in
   the decalogue, being originally and essentially moral, and yet is set
   among ceremonial feast days, (Lev. xxiii. 2,3,) because it is
   accidentally typical. And therefore Mr. Brabourn need not raise such a
   dust, and cry out, "O, monstrous! very strange! what a mingle-mangle!
   what an hotchpotch have we here! what a confusion and jumbling of
   things so far distant, as when morals and ceremonials are here mingled
   together!" No, verily, we do not make the fourth commandment
   essentially ceremonial; but being accidentally so, why may it,
   notwithstanding this, be mingled among the rest of the morals? Let one
   solid reason be given, but away with words.

   Thesis 21. If the question be, What type is affixed and annexed to the
   Sabbath? I think it difficult to find out, although man's wanton wit
   can easily allegorise and readily frame imaginations enough in this
   point. Some think it typified Christ's rest in the grave; but I fear
   this will not hold, no more than many other Popish conjectures, wherein
   their allegorising postilers abound. Bullinger and some others think
   that it was typical in respect of the peculiar sacrifices annexed to
   it, which sacrifices were types of Christ. (Num. xxviii. 9.) And
   although much might be said for this against that which Mr. Brabourn
   replies, yet I see nothing cogent in this; for the multiplying of
   sacrifices (which were partes cultus instituti) on this day proves
   rather a specialty of worshipping God more abundantly on this day than
   any ceremonialness in it; for if the offering of sacrifices merely
   should make a day ceremonial, why did it not make every day ceremonial
   in respect of every day's offering of the morning and evening
   sacrifice? Some think that our rest upon the Sabbath (not God the
   Father's rest, as Mr. Brabourn turns it) was made not only a
   resemblance, but also a type, of our rest in Christ, of which the
   apostle speaks, (Heb. iv. 3,) which is therefore called a Sabbatism,
   (ver.9,) or keeping of a Sabbath, as the word signifies. What others
   would infer from this place to make the Sabbath to be merely
   ceremonial, and what Mr. Brabourn would answer from hence, that it is
   not at all ceremonial, may both of them be easily answered here again,
   as already they have been in some of the former theses. Some scruples I
   see not yet through, about this text, enforce me herein to be silent,
   and therefore to leave it to such as think they may defend it, as one
   ground of some affixed type unto the Jewish Sabbath.

   Thesis 22. Learned Junius goes before us herein, and points out the
   type affixed to that Sabbath. For besides the first institution of it
   in paradise, he makes two other causes, which he calls accessory, or
   affixed and added to it. 1. One was civilis, or civil, that men and
   beasts might rest from their toilsome labour every week. 2.
   Ceremonialis, or ceremonial, for their solemn commemoration of their
   deliverance out of Egypt, which we know typified our deliverance by
   Christ. (Deut. v. 15.) Some think, indeed, that their deliverance out
   of Egypt was upon the Sabbath day; but this I do not urge, because,
   though it be very probable, yet it is not certain; only this is
   certain, that they were to sanctify this day because of this their
   deliverance; and it is certain this deliverance was typical of our
   deliverance by Christ: and hence it is certain that there was a type
   affixed to this Sabbath; and because the Scripture is so plain and
   express in it, I am inclined to think the same which Junius does, that
   this is the type rather than any other I have yet heard of; against
   which I know many things may be objected; only it may be sufficient to
   clear up the place against that which Mr. Brabourn answers to it.

   Thesis 23. "The deliverance out of Egypt," says he, "is not set down as
   the ground of the institution of the Sabbath, but only as a motive to
   the observation thereof; as it was more general in the preface to the
   decalogue, to the obedience of every other command, which,
   notwithstanding, are not ceremonial; for God says, I am the Lord, who
   brought thee out of Egypt; therefore keep thou the first, the second,
   the third, the fifth, the sixth, as well as the fourth commandment; and
   therefore, says he, we may make every commandment ceremonial as well as
   the Sabbath, if the motive of deliverance out of Egypt makes the
   Sabbath to be so." This is the substance and sinews of his discourse
   herein; and I confess it is true, their deliverance out of Egypt was
   not the first ground of the institution of it, but God's rest after his
   six days' labour; yet it was such a ground as we contend for, viz., a
   secondary, and an annexed or affixed ground. And that it was not a
   motive only to observe that day, (as it is in the preface to the
   decalogue,) but a superadded ground of it, may appear from this one
   consideration, viz., because that very ground on which the Lord urges
   the observation of the Sabbath in Ex. xx. 11 is wholly left out in the
   repetition of the law, (Deut. v. 15,) and their deliverance out of
   Egypt put into the room thereof; for the ground in Ex. xx. 11 is this:
   "Six days God made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh day and
   sanctified it;" but instead of these words, and of this ground, we find
   other words put into their room, (Deut. v.15:) "Remember thou wast a
   servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord brought thee out thence
   with a mighty hand; therefore the Lord thy God commandeth thee to keep
   the Sabbath." Which seems to argue strongly that these words are not a
   mere motive, but another ground of the observation of the Sabbath. And
   why might not the general motive in the preface to the decalogue serve
   as a sufficient motive to the obedience of this commandment, if there
   was no more but a motive in these words of Deuteronomy; and therefore I
   suppose this was also the ground and affixed type unto the Jewish
   Sabbath.

   Thesis 24. But still the difficulty remains; for Mr. Brabourn will say
   that those were but human reasons: but what ground is there from
   Scripture for the institution of another Sabbath, as well as the
   abrogation of the old? which if it be not cleared, I confess this cause
   sinks: here, therefore, let it be again observed that we are not to
   expect such evidence from Scripture concerning this change, (as fond
   and humorous wit sometimes pleads for,) in this controversy, namely,
   that Christ should come with drum and trumpet, as it were, upon Mount
   Zion, and proclaim by word or writing, in so many express words, that
   the Jewish Sabbath is abrogated, and the first day of the week
   instituted in its room, to be observed of all Christians to the end of
   the world. For it is not the Lord's manner so to speak in many other
   things which concern his kingdom, but as it were occasionally, or in
   way of history, or epistle to some particular church or people; and
   thus he does concerning the Sabbath; and yet Wisdom's mind is plain
   enough to them that understand. Nor do I doubt but that those
   scriptures which are sometimes alleged for the change of the Sabbath,
   although at the first blush they may not seem to bear up the weight of
   this cause, yet being thoroughly considered, they are not only
   sufficient to establish modest minds, but are also such as may
   epistomizein (epistomidzein), or stop the mouths even of wranglers
   themselves.

   Thesis 25. I do not think that the exercise of holy duties on a day
   argues that such a day is the Christian Sabbath; for the apostles
   preached commonly upon the Jewish Sabbath, sometimes upon the first day
   of the week also; and therefore the bare exercise of holy duties on a
   day is no sufficient argument that either the one or the other is the
   Christian Sabbath; for then there might be two Sabbaths, yea, many
   Sabbaths, in a week, because there may be many holy duties in several
   days of the week, which we know is against the morality of the fourth
   commandment.

   Thesis 26. Yet, notwithstanding, although holy duties on a day do not
   argue such a day to be our Sabbath, yet that day which is set apart for
   Sabbath services rather than any other day, and is honoured above any
   other day for that end, surely such a day is the Christian Sabbath.
   Now, if it may appear that the first day of the week was thus honoured,
   then certainly it is to be accounted the Christian Sabbath.

   Thesis 27. The primitive pattern churches thus honoured the first day
   of the week; and what they practised without reproof, that the apostles
   (who planted those churches) enjoined and preached unto them so to do;
   at least in such weighty matters as the change of the days, of
   preferring one before that other which the Lord has honoured before;
   and what the apostles preached, that the Lord Jesus commanded, (Matt.
   xxviii. 20,) "Go teach all nations that which I command you." Unless
   any shall think that the apostles sometimes went beyond their
   commission to teach that to others which Christ never commanded, which
   is blasphemous to imagine; for though they might err in practice as
   men, and as Peter did at Antioch, and Paul and Barnabas in their
   contention, yet in their public ministry they were infallibly and
   extraordinarily assisted, especially in such things which they hold
   forth as patterns for after times; if, therefore, the primitive
   churches thus honoured the first day of the week above any other day
   for Sabbath services, then certainly they were instituted and taught
   thus to do by the apostles approving of them herein; and what the
   apostles taught the churches, that the Lord Jesus commanded to the
   apostles. So that the approved practice of the churches herein shows
   what was the doctrine of the apostles; and the doctrine of the apostles
   shows what was the command of Christ; so that the sanctification of
   this first day of the week is no human tradition, but a divine
   institution from Christ himself.

   Thesis 28. That the churches honoured this day above any other shall
   appear in its place, as also that the apostles commanded them so to do.
   Yet, Mr. Primrose says, that this latter is doubtful; and Mr. Ironside
   (not questioning the matter) falls off with another evasion, viz., that
   they acted herein not as apostles, but as ordinary pastors, and
   consequently as fallible men, not only in commanding this change of the
   Sabbath, but in all other matters of church government, (among which he
   reckons this of the Sabbath to be one,) which he thinks were imposed
   according to their private wisdom, as most fit for those times, but not
   by any apostolic commission as concerning all times. But to imagine
   that matters of church government in the apostles' days were coats for
   the moon in respect of after times, and that the form of it is mutable,
   (as he would have it,) I suppose will be digested by few honest and
   sober minds in these times, unless they be biased for a season by
   politic ends, and therefore herein I will not contend; only it may be
   considered whether any private spirit could abolish that day, which
   from the beginning of the world God so highly honoured, and then honour
   and advance another day above it, and sanctify it too (as shall be
   proved) for religious services. Could any do this justly but by
   immediate dispensation from the Lord Christ Jesus? And if the apostles
   did thus receive it immediately from Christ, and so teach the
   observation of it, they could not then teach it as fallible men and as
   private pastors, as he would have it; a pernicious conceit, enough to
   undermine the faith of God's elect in many matters more weighty than
   this of the Sabbath.

   Thesis 29. To know when and where the Lord Christ instructed his
   disciples concerning this change, is needless to inquire. It is
   sufficient to believe this: that what the primitive churches exemplary
   practised, that was taught them by the apostles who planted them; and
   that whatsoever the apostles preached, the Lord Christ commanded, as
   has been shown. Yet if the change of the Sabbath be a matter
   appertaining to the kingdom of God, why should we doubt but that,
   within the space of his forty days' abode with them after his
   resurrection, he then taught it them? for it is expressly said, that he
   then taught them such things. (Acts xiii.)

   Thesis 30. When the apostles came among the Jews, they preached usually
   upon the Jewish Sabbath; but this was not because they did think or
   appoint it herein to be the Christian Sabbath, but that they might take
   the fittest opportunity and season of meeting with, and so of preaching
   the gospel to, the Jews in those times. For what power had they to call
   them together when they saw meet? Or, if they had, yet was it meet for
   them thus to do, before they were sufficiently instructed about God's
   mind for setting apart some other time? And how could they be
   sufficiently and seasonably instructed herein without watching the
   advantage of those times which the Jews thought were the only Sabbaths?
   The days of Pentecost, Passover, and hours of prayer in the temple are
   to be observed still as well as the Jewish Sabbath, if the apostles'
   preaching on their Sabbaths argues the continuance of them, as Mr.
   Brabourn argues; for we know that they preached also, and went up
   purposely to Jerusalem, at such times, to preach among them, as well as
   upon the Sabbath days; look therefore, as they laid hold upon the days
   of Pentecost and Passover as the fittest seasons to preach to the Jews,
   but not thinking that such feasts should still be continued, so it is
   in their preaching upon the Jewish Sabbaths.

   Thesis 31. Nor did the apostles sinfully Judaize by preaching to the
   Jews upon their Sabbaths, (as Mr. Brabourn would infer;) supposing that
   their Sabbaths should not be still observed, they should then Judaize
   and after ceremonies, (says he,) and so build up those things which
   they laboured to destroy. For suppose they did observe such days and
   Sabbaths as were ceremonial for a time, yet it being done not in
   conscience of the day, but in conscience of taking so fit a season to
   preach the gospel in, it could not nor can not be any sinful Judaizing,
   especially while then the Jews were not sufficiently instructed about
   the abolishing of those things. For Mr. Brabourn could not but know
   that all the Jewish ceremonies, being once the appointment of God, were
   to have an honourable burial, and that therefore they might be lawfully
   observed for a time among the Jews, until they were more fully
   instructed about them; and hence Paul circumcised Timothy because of
   the Jews, (Acts xvi. 3,) and did otherwise conform to them, that so he
   might win and gain the more upon them; and if Paul observed purposely a
   Jewish ceremony of circumcision which was not necessary, nay, which was
   not lawful to be observed among the Gentiles, (Gal. v. 2,) and yet he
   observed it to gain the Jews, why might not Paul much more preach the
   gospel, which is in itself a necessary duty, upon a Jewish Sabbath
   which fell out occasionally to him, and therefore might lawfully be
   observed for such an end among the Jews, which among the Gentiles might
   be unlawful? Suppose therefore that the apostles might have taught the
   Jews from house to house, (as Mr. Brabourn argues against the necessity
   put upon the apostles to preach upon the Jewish Sabbath,) yet what
   reason or conscience was there to lose the opportunity of public
   preaching for the more plentiful gathering in of souls, when many are
   met together, and which may lawfully be done, and be contended only to
   seek their good in such private ways? And what although Paul did
   assemble the chief of the Jews together at Rome, when he was a
   prisoner, to acquaint them with civil matters about his imprisonment,
   (Acts xxviii. 17;) yet had he power to do thus in all places where he
   came? or was it meet for him so to do? Did not he submit the
   appointment of a sacred assembly to hear the word rather unto them than
   assume it to himself? (Acts xxviii. 23.) It is therefore false and
   unsound which Mr. Brabourn affirms, viz., that Paul did preach on the
   Jewish Sabbath in conscience of the day, not merely with respect of the
   opportunity he then took from their own public meetings then to preach
   to them; for (says he) Paul had power to assemble them together on
   other days. This I say, is both false; for he that was so much spoken
   against among them might not in all places be able to put forth such a
   power; as also it is unsound; for suppose he had such a power, yet
   whether it was so meet for him to put it forth in appointing other
   times, may be easily judged of by what has been said.

   Thesis 32. Nor is there a foundation here laid of making all other
   actions of the apostles unwarrantable or inimitable, (as Mr. Brabourn
   says,) because we are not to imitate the apostles herein in preaching
   upon the Jewish Sabbaths. For no actions either of Christ or the
   apostles, which were done merely in respect of some special occasion,
   or special reason, are, ea tenus, or in that respect, binding to
   others; for the example of Christ eating the Lord's supper only with
   men, not women, in an upper chamber, and toward the dark evening, does
   not bind us to exclude women, or not to celebrate in other places and
   times, because we know that these actions were merely occasioned in
   respect of special reasons, (as the eating of the Passover with one's
   own family, Christ's family not consisting of women,) so it is here in
   respect of the Sabbath. The apostles preaching upon the Jewish Sabbath
   was merely occasional, by occasion of the public meetings (their
   fittest time to do good in) which were upon this and any other day.

   Thesis 33. Now, although the Jews observing this day, the apostles
   observed it among the Jews by preaching among them, yet we shall find
   that among the Christian Gentile churches and believers, (where no
   Judaism was to be so much as tolerated for a time,) not any such day
   was thus observed; nay, another day, the first day in the week, is
   honoured and preferred by the apostles above any other day in the week
   for religious and Sabbath services. For, although holy duties do not
   argue always a holy day, yet when we shall find the Holy Ghost single
   out and nominate one particular day to be observed and honoured rather
   than any other day, and rather than the Jewish seventh day itself, for
   Sabbath services and holy duties, this undeniably proves that day to be
   the Christian Sabbath, and this we shall make evident to be the first
   day of the week; which one thing seriously minded (if proved) does
   utterly subvert the whole frame and force of Mr. Brabourn's shady
   discourse for the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, and most
   effectually establishes the Christian Sabbath. Mr. Brabourn therefore
   herein bestirs his wits, and tells us, on the contrary, that Paul
   preached not only to the Jews, but even unto the Gentiles, upon this
   Jewish Sabbath, rather than any other day; and for this end brings
   double proof: one is Acts xiii. 42,44, where the Gentiles are said to
   desire Paul to preach to them, eis to metaxu sabbaton (eis to metaxu
   sabbaton), i.e., the week between, or any day between till the next
   Sabbath, (as some translate it,) or (if Mr. Brabourn will) the next
   Sabbath, or Jewish Sabbath, when almost all the city came out to hear
   Paul, who were most of them Gentiles, not Jews. Be it so, they were
   Gentiles indeed; but as yet no church or Christian church of Gentiles
   actually under Christ's government and ordinances, among whom (I say)
   the first day of the week was so much honoured above any other day for
   sacred assemblies. For it is no wonder if the apostles yield to their
   desires in preaching any time of the week which they thought the best
   time, even upon the Jewish Sabbath, among whom the Jews being mingled,
   they might have the fitter opportunity to preach to them also, and so
   become all things to all men to gain some. His second proof is Acts
   xvi. 12,13; and here he tells us that Paul and Timothy preached, not to
   the Jews, but to the Gentiles, upon the Sabbath day. I confess they are
   not called Jews no more than it is said that they were Gentiles; but
   why might not Lydia and her company be Jews or Jewish proselytes, who,
   we know, did observe the Jewish Sabbath strictly till they were better
   instructed, as they did all other Jewish ceremonies also? For Lydia is
   expressly said to be one who worshiped God before Paul came. Mr.
   Brabourn tells us they were no Jewish proselytes, because they had no
   Jewish synagogue, and therefore they were fain to go out of the city
   into the fields, beside a river to pray. I confess the text says that
   they went out to a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; but
   that this was the open fields, and that there was no oratory, house, or
   place of shelter to meet and pray in, this is not in the text, but is
   Mr. Brabourn's comment and gloss on it. But suppose it was in the open
   fields, and that they had no synagogue; yet will it follow that these
   were not Jews? Might not the Jews be in a Gentile city for a time,
   without any synagogue, especially if their number be but small, and
   this small number consist chiefly of women, as it seems this did, whose
   hearts God touched, leaving their husbands to their own ways? If they
   were not Jews or Jewish proselytes, why did they choose the Sabbath
   day, (which the Jews so much set by,) rather than any other, to pray
   and worship God together in? But verily such answers as these,
   wherewith the poor man abounds in his treatise, make me extremely fear
   that he rather stretched his conscience than was acted by a plain
   deluded conscience in this point of the Sabbath.

   Thesis 34. It remains, therefore, to prove that the first day of the
   week is the Christian Sabbath by divine institution; and this may
   appear from those three texts of Scripture ordinarily alleged for this
   end: 1. Acts xx. 7; 2. 1 Cor. xvi. 2; 3. Rev. i. 10; which, being taken
   jointly together, hold these three things:--

   1. That the first day of the week was honoured above any other day for
   Sabbath services in the primitive church's practice, as is evident,
   Acts xx. 7.

   2. That the apostles commanded the observation of this day rather than
   any other for Sabbath services, as is evident, 1 Cor. xvi. 1,2.

   3. That this day is holy and sanctified to be holy to the Lord above
   any other day, and therefore it has the Lord's name upon it, (a usual
   sign of things holy to him,) and therefore called the Lord's day, as is
   evident, Rev.i.10; but these things need more particular explication.

   Thesis 35. In the first of these places, (Acts xx. 7,) these
   particulars are manifest:--

   1. That the church of Troas (called disciples) publicly and generally
   now met together, so that it was no private church meeting, (as some
   say,) but general and open, according as those times would give leave.

   2. That this meeting was upon the first day of the week, called en te
   mia ton sabbaton (en tei mia ton sabbaton) which phrase, although
   Gomarus, Primrose, Heylin, and many others go about to translate thus,
   viz., upon one of the days of the week. Yet this is sufficient to dash
   that dream, (besides what else might be said,) viz., that this phrase
   is expounded in other Scriptures to be the first day of the week, (Luke
   xxiv. 1; John xx. 1,) but never to be found throughout all the
   Scriptures expounded of one day in the week. Gomarus indeed tells us of
   en mia emeron (en miai hemeron), (Luke v. 17, and viii. 22, and xx. 1,)
   which is translated quodam die, or a certain day; but this will not
   help him, for this is not en te mia ton sabbaton (en te mia ton
   sabbaton), as it is in this place.

   3. That the end of this meeting was holy duties, viz., to break bread,
   or to receive the Lord's supper, as the phrase is expounded, (Acts ii.
   43,) which was therefore accompanied with preaching the word and
   prayer, holy preparation and serious meditation about those great
   mysteries. Nor can this breaking of bread be interpreted of their love
   feasts, or common suppers, as Gomarus suspects. For their love feasts
   and common suppers were not of the whole church together, (as this
   was,) but in several houses, as Mr. Cartwright proves from Acts ii. 46.
   And although the Corinthians used their love feasts in public, yet they
   are sadly reproved for it by the apostle, (1 Cor. xi. 12,) and
   therefore he would not allow it here.

   4. It is not said that Paul called them together because he was to
   depart the next day, or that they purposely declined the Lord's supper
   till that day because then Paul was to depart, (as Mr. Primrose urges;)
   but the text speaks of it as of a time and day usually observed of them
   before, and therefore it is said, that "when they came together to
   break bread;" and Paul therefore took his opportunity of preaching to
   them, and seems to stay purposely, and wait seven days among them, that
   he might communicate with them, and preach unto them in this ordinary
   time of public meeting; and therefore, though he might privately
   instruct and preach to them the other seven days, yet his preaching now
   is mentioned in regard of some special solemnity of meeting on this
   day.

   5. The first day was honoured above any other day for these holy
   duties, or else why did they not meet upon the last day of the week,
   the Jewish Sabbath, for these ends? For if the Christian churches were
   bound to observe the Jewish Sabbath, why did they not meet then, and
   honour the seventh day above the first day? considering that it was but
   the day before, and therefore might easily have done it, more fitly,
   too, had that seventh day been the Christian Sabbath.

   6. Why is the first day of the week mentioned, which is attributed only
   in the New Testament to the day of Christ's resurrection, unless this
   day was then usually honoured and sanctified for holy duties, called
   here breaking of bread, by a synecdoche of a part for the whole, and
   therefore comprehends all other Sabbath duties? For there is no more
   reason to exclude prayer, preaching, singing of psalms, etc., because
   these are not mentioned, than to exclude drinking of wine in the
   sacrament, (as the blind Papists do,) because this neither is here made
   mention of. Mr. Primrose indeed tells us that it may be the first day
   of the week is named in respect of the miracle done in it upon
   Eutychus. But the text is plain; the time of the meeting is mentioned,
   and the end of it to break bread, and the miracle is but brought in as
   a particular event which happened on this day, which was set apart
   first for higher ends.

   7. Nor is it said in the text that the church of Troas met every day
   together to receive the sacrament, (as Mr. Primrose suggests,) and that
   therefore this action of breaking bread was done without respect to any
   particular or special day, it being performed every day. For I do not
   find that the primitive church received the Lord's supper every day;
   for though it be said (Acts ii. 42) that the church continued in the
   apostles' fellowship and breaking of bread; yet it is not said that
   they brake bread every day. They are indeed said to be daily in the
   temple, (ver.46,) but not that they brake bread every day in the
   temple, or from house to house, or if they should, yet the breaking of
   bread in this verse is meant of common, not sacred bread, as it is
   verse 42, where I think the bread was no more common than their
   continuance in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship was common; and
   therefore in this 46th verse the phrase is altered, and the original
   word properly signifies ordinary bread for common nourishment. And yet
   suppose they did receive the sacrament every day, yet here the breaking
   of bread is made mention of as the opus diei, or the special business
   of the day; and the day is mentioned as the special time for such a
   purpose; and hence no other day (if they break bread in it) is
   mentioned, and therefore it is called in effect "the day of meeting to
   break bread." Nor do I find in all the Scripture a day distinctly
   mentioned for holy duties, (as this first day of the week is,) wherein
   a whole people or church meet together for such ends; but that day was
   holy: the naming of the particular day for such ends implies the
   holiness of it, and the time is purposely mentioned, that others in
   aftertimes might purposely and specially observe that day.

   8. Nor is it said that the disciples met together the night after the
   first day; but it is expressly said to be upon the first day of the
   week: and suppose (as Mr. Brabourn says) that their meeting was not
   together in the morning, but only in the evening time to celebrate the
   Lord's supper, a little before the shutting in of the day; yet it is a
   sufficient ground for conscience to observe this day above any other
   for holy services, although every part of the day be not filled up with
   public and church duties; for suppose the Levites on the Jewish Sabbath
   should do no holy public duty on their own Sabbath until the day was
   far spent; will Mr. Brabourn argue from thence that the Jewish Sabbath
   was not wholly holy unto God? But again: suppose the latter part of the
   day was spent in breaking of bread; yet will it follow that no other
   part of the day was spent before, either in any private or public holy
   duties? Possibly they might receive the Lord's supper in the evening of
   this Sabbath, (for the time of this action is in the general
   indifferent;) yet might they not spend the rest of the morning in
   public duties, as we know some do now in some churches, who are said to
   meet together to break bread the latter part of this day, and yet
   sanctify the Sabbath the whole day before? Suppose it be not expressly
   said that they did shut up shop windows at Troas, and forsake the plow
   and the wheel, and abstain from all servile work; yet if he believes
   that no more was done this day but what is expressly set down, Mr.
   Brabourn must needs see a pitiful face of Christ in the Lord's supper,
   and people coming rushing upon it without any serious examination or
   preparation, or singing of psalms, because no such duties as these are
   mentioned to be upon this day.

   9. Lastly, Master Primrose, like a staggering man, knows not what to
   fasten on in answer to this place, and therefore tells us, that suppose
   it was a Sabbath, yet that it might be taken up from the church's
   liberty and custom, rather than from any divine institution; but
   besides that which has been said to dash his dream, (Thesis. 27,) the
   falseness of this common and bold assertion will appear more fully in
   the explication of the second text, (1 Cor. xvi. 1,2,) which now
   follows, wherein it will appear to be an apostolic (and therefore a
   divine) institution from Jesus Christ.

   Thesis 36. In the second of the places therefore alleged, (1 Cor. xvi.
   1,2,) these things are considerable to prove the first day in the week
   to be the Christian Sabbath, and that not so much by the church's
   practice, as by the apostle's precept; for, --

   1. Although it be true, that in some cases collections may be made any
   day for the poor saints, yet why does the apostle here limit them to
   this day for the performance of this duty? They that translate kata
   mian sabbaton (kata mian sabbaton), upon one day of the week, do
   miserably mistake the phrase, which in Scripture phrase only signifies
   the first day of it, and beat their foreheads against the main scope of
   the apostle, viz., to fix a certain day for such a duty as required
   such a certain time; for they might (by this translation) collect their
   benevolences one day in four or ten years, for then it should be done
   one day in a week.

   2. The apostle does not only limit them to this time, but also all the
   churches of Galatia, (ver. 1,) and consequently all other churches, if
   that be true, (2 Cor. viii. 13,14,) wherein the apostle professes he
   presses not one church, that he may ease another church, but that there
   be an equality; and although I see no ground, from this text, that the
   maintenance of the ministry should be raised every Sabbath day, (for
   Christ would not have them reckoned among the poor, being labourers
   worthy of their hire,) and although this collection was for the poor
   saints of other churches, yet the proportion strongly holds, that if
   there be ordinary cause of such collections in every particular church,
   these collections should be made the first day of the week, much more
   carefully and religiously for the poor of one's own church; and that in
   all the churches of Christ Jesus to the end of the world.

   3. The apostle does not limit them thus with wishes, and counsels only
   to do it if they thought most meet, but osper dietaxa (hosper dietaxa),
   (ver.1,) as I have ordained, or instituted; and therefore binds their
   consciences to it; and if Paul ordained it, certainly he had it from
   Christ Jesus, who first commanded him so to appoint it; who professes
   that what he had received of the Lord, that only he commanded unto them
   to do. (1 Cor. xi. 13)

   4. If this day had not been more holy and more fit for this work of
   love than any other day, he durst not have limited them to this day,
   nor durst he have honoured this day above any other in the week, yea,
   above the Jewish seventh day. For we see the very apostle tender always
   of Christian liberty, and not to bind where the Lord leaves his people
   free; for thus doing he should rather make snares than laws for
   churches, (1 Cor. vii. 27,35,) and go expressly against his own
   doctrine, (Gal. v. 1,) who bids them "stand fast in their liberty," and
   that in this very point of the observation of days. (Gal. iv. 10.) But
   what fitness was there on this day for such a service? Consider
   therefore, --

   5. That the apostle does not in this place immediately appoint and
   institute the Sabbath, but supposes it to be so already, (as Mr.
   Primrose is forced to acknowledge,) and we know duties of mercy and
   charity, as well as of necessity and piety, are Sabbath duties; for
   which end this day (which Beza finds in an ancient manuscript to be
   called the Lord's day) was more fit for those collections than any
   other day; partly because they usually met together publicly on this
   day, and so their collections might be in a greater readiness against
   Paul's coming; partly, also, that they might give more liberally, at
   least freely, it being supposed that upon this day men's hearts are
   more weaned from the world, and are warmed, by the word and ordinances,
   with more lively faith and hope of better things to come, and
   therefore, having received spiritual things from the Lord more
   plentifully on this day, every man will be more free to impart of his
   temporal good things therein for refreshing of the poor saints, and the
   very bowels of Christ Jesus. And what other reason can be given of
   limiting this collection to this day I confess I can not honestly
   (though I could wickedly) imagine. And certainly if this was the end,
   and withal the Jewish day was the Christian Sabbath, the apostle would
   never have thus limited them to this day, nor honoured and exalted this
   first day before that Jewish seventh; which if it had been the
   Christian Sabbath, had been more fit for such a work as this than the
   first day (if a working day) could be.

   6. Suppose therefore that this apostolic and divine institution is to
   give their collections, but not to institute the day, (as Master
   Primrose pleads;) suppose also that they were not every Lord's day or
   first day, but sometimes upon the first day; suppose also that they
   were extraordinary, and for the poor of other churches, and to continue
   for that time only of their need; suppose also that no man is enjoined
   to bring into the public treasury of the church, but (par eanto titheto
   (par heanto titheto)) privately to lay it by on this day by himself,
   (as Mr. Brabourn urges against this text,) yet still the question
   remains unanswered, viz.: Why should the apostle limit them to this
   day? Either for extraordinary or private collections, and such special
   acts of mercy, unless the Lord had honoured this day for acts of mercy
   (and much more of piety) above any other ordinary and common day? What
   then could this day be but the Christian Sabbath imposed by the
   apostles, and magnified and honoured by all the churches in those days?
   I know there are some other replies made to this Scripture by Mr.
   Brabourn; but they are wind eggs (as Plutarch calls that philosopher's
   notions,) and have but little in them; and therefore I pass them by as
   I do many other things in that book as not worth the time to name them.

   7. This, lastly, I add, this first day was thus honoured either by
   divine or human institution; if by divine, we have what we plead for;
   if by human custom and tradition, then the apostle assuredly would
   never have commended the observation of this day, who elsewhere
   condemns the observation of days, though the days were formerly by
   divine institution. "Ye observe," says he, "days and times;" and would
   he then have commended the observation of these days above any other
   which are only by human, but never by divine institution? It is strange
   that the churches of Galatia are forbidden the observation of days,
   (Gal. iv. 10,) and yet commanded (1 Cor. xvi. 1,2) a more sacred and
   solemn observation of the first day of the week rather than any other.
   Surely, this could not be, unless we conclude a divine institution
   hereof. For we know how zealous the holy apostle is every where to
   strike at human customs, and therefore could not lay a stumbling block
   (to occasion the grievous fall of churches) to allow and command them
   to observe a human tradition, and to honour this above the seventh day
   for such holy services as are here made mention of. But whether this
   day was solemnly sanctified as the Sabbath of the Lord our God, we come
   now to inquire.

   Thesis 37. In the third text, (Rev. i. 10,) mention is made of the
   Lord's day, which was ever accounted the first day of the week. It
   seems, therefore, to be the Lord's day, and consequently the Sabbath of
   the Lord our God. Two things are needful here to be considered and
   cleared: --

   1. That this day being called the Lord's day, it is therefore set apart
   and sanctified by the Lord Christ as holy.

   2. That this day thus sanctified is the first day of the week, and
   therefore that first day is our holy or Sabbath day.

   Thesis 38. The first difficulty here to prove and clear up is, that
   this day, which is here called the Lord's day, is a day instituted and
   sanctified for the Lord's honour and service above any other day. For,
   as the sacrament of bread and wine is called the Lord's supper, and the
   Lord's table, for no other reason but because they were instituted by
   Christ, and sanctified for him and his honour, so what other reason can
   be given by any Scripture light why this is called the Lord's day, but
   because it was in the like manner instituted and sanctified as they
   were? Mr. Brabourn here shifts away from the light of this text, by
   affirming that it might be called the Lord's day in respect of God the
   Creator, not Christ the Redeemer, and therefore may be meant of the
   Jewish Sabbath, which is called the Lord's holy day. (Is.lviii.3.) But
   why might he not as well say, that it is called the Lord's supper and
   table, in respect of God the Creator, considering that in the New
   Testament, since Christ is actually exalted to be Lord of all, this
   phrase is only applied to the Lord Christ as Redeemer? Look, therefore,
   as the Jewish Sabbath, being called the Lord's Sabbath, or the Sabbath
   of Jehovah, is by that title and note certainly known to be a day
   sanctified by Jehovah, as Creator, so this day, being called the Lord's
   day, is by this note as certainly known to be a day sanctified by our
   Lord Jesus, as Redeemer. Nor do I find any one distinct thing in all
   the Scripture which has the Lord's superscription or name upon it, (as
   the Lord's temple, the Lord's offerings, the Lord's people, the Lord's
   priests, etc.,) but it is sanctified of God and holy to him. Why is not
   this day, then, holy to the Lord, if it equally bears the Lord's name?
   Master Primrose, indeed, puts us off with another shift, viz., that
   this day being called so by the church's customs, John, therefore,
   calls it so in respect of that custom which the church then used,
   without divine institution. But why may not he as well say that he
   calls it the Lord's table in respect of the church's custom also? The
   designation of a day, and of the first time in the day for holy public
   services, is, indeed, in the power of each particular church, (suppose
   it be a lecture, and the hours of Sabbath meetings;) but the
   sanctification of a day, if it be divine worship, to observe it if God
   command and appoint it, then surely it is will worship for any human
   custom to institute it. Now, the Lord's name being stamped upon this
   day, and so set apart for the honour of Christ, it can not be that so
   it should be called in respect of the church's custom; for surely then
   they should have been condemned for will worship by some of the
   apostles; and therefore it is in respect of the Lord's institution
   hereof.

   Thesis 39. The second difficulty now lies in clearing up this
   particular, viz., that this day, thus sanctified, was the first day of
   the week, which is therefore the holy day of the Lord our God, and
   consequently the Christian Sabbath: for this purpose let these ensuing
   particulars be laid together.

   1. That this day of which John speaks is a known day, and was generally
   known in those days by this glorious name of the Lord's day, and
   therefore the apostle gives no other title to it but the Lord's day, as
   a known day in those times; for the scope of John in this vision is, as
   in all other prophetical visions when they set down the day and time of
   it, to gain the more credit to the certainty of it, when every one sees
   the truth circumstantiated, and they hear of the particular time; and
   it may seem most absurd to set down the day and time for such an end,
   and yet the day is not particularly known.

   2. If it was a known day, what day can it be either by evidence of
   Scripture, or any antiquity, but the first day of the week? For, --

   1. There is no other day on which mention is made of any other work or
   action of Christ which might occasion a holy day, but only this of the
   resurrection, which is exactly noted of all the evangelists to be upon
   the first day of the week, and by which work he is expressly said to
   have all power given him in heaven and earth, (Matt. xxviii. 18,) and
   to be actually Lord of dead and living, (Rom. xiv. 9;) and therefore
   why should any other Lord's day be dreamed of? Why should Master
   Brabourn imagine that this day might be some superstitious Easter day,
   which happens once a year? the Holy Ghost, on the contrary, not setting
   down the month or day of the year, but of the week wherein Christ
   arose, and therefore it must be meant of a weekly holy day here called
   the Lord's day.

   2. We do not read of any other day besides this first day of the week,
   which was observed for holy Sabbath duties, and honoured above any
   other day for breaking of bread, for preaching the word, (which were
   acts of piety,) nor for collections for the poor, (the most eminent act
   of mercy:) why, then, should any imagine any other day to be the Lord's
   day, but that first day?

   3. There seems to be much in that which Beza observes out of an ancient
   Greek manuscript wherein that first day of the week (1 Cor. xvi. 2) is
   expressly called the Lord's day; and the Syriac translation says that
   their meeting together to receive the sacrament (1 Cor. xi. 20) was
   upon the Lord's day; nor is there any antiquity but expounds this
   Lord's day of the first day of the week, as learned Rivet makes good
   against Gomarus, professing that Quotquot interpretes hactenus ferunt,
   hoec verba de die resurrectionis Domini intellexerunt; solus quod
   quidem sciam, Cl. D. Gomarus contradixit."

   4. Look, as Jehovah's or the Lord's holy day (Is. lviii. 13) was the
   seventh day in the week then in use in the Old Testament, so why should
   not this Lord's day be meant of some seventh day, (the first of seven
   in the week which the Lord appointed, and the church observed under the
   New Testament,) and therefore called (as that was) the Lord's day?

   5. There can be no other day imagined but this to be the Lord's day.
   Indeed, Gomarus affirms that it is called the Lord's day, because of
   the Lord Jesus' apparition in vision to John; and therefore he tells
   that, in Scripture phrase, the day of the Lord is such a day wherein
   the Lord manifests himself either in wrath or in favor, as here to
   John. But there is a great difference between those phrases; the Lord's
   day and the day of the Lord, which is not called here. For such an
   interpretation of the Lord's day, as if it was an uncertain time, is
   directly cross to the scope of John in setting down this vision, who,
   to beget more credit to it, tells us, first, of the person that saw it,
   -- I, John, -- (Rev. i. 9;) secondly, the particular place, in Patmos;
   thirdly, the particular time, the Lord's day.

   These considerations do utterly subvert Mr. Brabourn's discourse, to
   prove the Jewish Sabbath to be the Lord's day, which we are still to
   observe, and may be sufficient to answer the scruples of modest and
   humble minds; for, if we ask the time of it, it is on the first day of
   the week. Would we know whether this time was spent in holy duties and
   Sabbath services? This also has been proved. Would we know whether it
   was sanctified for that end? Yes, verily, because it is called the
   Lord's day, and consequently all servile work was and is to be laid
   aside in it. Would we know whether it is the Christian Sabbath day?
   Verily, if it be the day of the Lord our God, (the Lord's day,) why is
   it not the Sabbath of the Lord our God? If it be exalted and honoured
   by the apostles of Christ above the Jewish Sabbath duties, why should
   we not believe but that it was our Sabbath day? And although the words
   Sabbath day, or seventh day, be not expressly mentioned, yet if they be
   for substance in this day, and by just consequence deduced from
   Scripture, it is all one as if the Lord had expressly called them so.

   Thesis 40. Hence therefore it follows, that although this particular
   seventh day, which is the first of seven, be not particularly made
   mention of in the fourth commandment, yet the last of seven being
   abrogated, and this being instituted in its room, it is therefore to be
   perpetuated and observed in its room. For though it be true (as Mr.
   Brabourn urges) that new institutions can not be founded, no, not by
   analogy of proportion, merely upon old institutions, as, because
   children were circumcised, it will not follow that they are therefore
   to be baptised, and so because the Jews kept that seventh day, that we
   may therefore keep the first day; yet this is certain, that when new
   things are instituted not by human analogy, but by divine appointment,
   the application of these may stand by virtue of old precepts and
   general rules, from whence the application even of old institutions
   formerly arose. For we know that the cultus institutus in the New
   Testament, in ministry and sacraments, stands at this day by virtue of
   the second commandment, as well as the instituted worship under the
   Old. And though baptism stands not by virtue of the institution of
   circumcision, yet it being, de novo, instituted by Christ, as the seal
   of initiation into Christ's mystical body, (1 Cor.xii.12,) it now
   stands by virtue of that general rule by which circumcision itself was
   administered, viz., that the seal of initiation into Christ's body be
   applied to all the visible members of that body; and hence children are
   to be now baptized, as once they were circumcised, being members of
   Christ's body. So the first day of the week being instituted to be the
   Lord's day, or Lord's Sabbath, hence it follows, that, if the first
   seventh, which is now abrogated, was once observed because it was the
   Lord's Sabbath, or the Sabbath day which God appointed, -- by the very
   same rule, and on the very same ground, we also are bound to keep this
   first day, being also the Sabbath of the Lord our God, which he has now
   appointed anew under the New Testament.

   Thesis 41. It is true that some of the primitive churches, in the
   eastern parts, did for some hundred of years observe both Sabbaths,
   both Jewish and Christian. But they did this without warrant from God,
   (who allows but one Sabbath in a week,) and also against the rule of
   the apostles; for I think that Paul, foreseeing this observation of
   days and Jewish Sabbaths to be stirring and ready to creep into the
   church, that he did therefore condemn the same in his Epistles to the
   Galatians and Colossians; and that therefore Christian emperors and
   councils, in after times, did well and wisely both to condemn the
   observation of the one and withal honour the other.

   Thesis 42. Although the work of redemption be applied unto few in
   respect of the special benefits of it, yet Christ, by his death, is
   made Heir and Lord of all things, being now set down at the right hand
   of God, and there is some benefit which befalls all the world by
   Christ's redemption; and the government of all things is not now in the
   hand of God as Creator, but in the hand of a Mediator, (Heb. i. 1,2;
   ii. 8,9; John v. 22; Col. i. 16,17; 1 Tim. iv. 10; John iii. 35;) and
   hence it is no wonder if all men, as well as a few elected, selected,
   and called, be commanded to sanctify the Lord's day, as once they were
   the Jewish seventh day; the work of Christ being in some respect of as
   great extent, through all the work of creation, as the work of the
   Father. And therefore it is a great feebleness in Mr. Brabourn to go
   about to vilify the work of redemption, and extol that of creation
   above it; and that therefore the Sabbath ought still to be kept in
   reference to the work of creation, which concerns all men, rather than
   in respect of redemption, which he imagines concerns only some few.

   Thesis 43. The Lord Christ rested from the work of redemption by price,
   upon the day of his resurrection; but he is not yet at rest from the
   work of redemption by power, until the day of our resurrection and
   glory be perfected. But it does not hence follow (as Mr. Primrose
   imagines) that there is no Lord's day instituted in respect of Christ's
   resurrection, because he has not, nor did not then rest from redemption
   by power; for look, as the Father, having rested from the works of
   creation, might therefore appoint a day of rest, although he did not,
   nor does not yet rest from providence, (John v. 17,) so the Lord Christ
   having finished the great work of redemption, he might justly appoint a
   day of rest, although his redeeming work by power was yet behind.

   Thesis 44. The heavy and visible judgments of God revealed from heaven
   against profaneness of this our Lord's day Sabbath will one day be a
   convincing argument of holiness of this day, when the Lord himself
   shall have the immediate handling and pressing of it. Meanwhile I
   confess my weakness to convince an adversary by it; nor will I contend
   with any other arguments from antiquity for the observation of this
   day; but these may suffice, which are alleged from the holy word.

   End.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]6

   Exodus

   [2]12:2   [3]20:11   [4]20:11   [5]31:17

   Leviticus

   [6]23:2   [7]23:3

   Numbers

   [8]28:9

   Deuteronomy

   [9]5   [10]5:15   [11]5:15

   Isaiah

   [12]56:4-6   [13]58:13

   Jeremiah

   [14]23:7-8

   Ezekiel

   [15]43   [16]43:27

   Matthew

   [17]28:18   [18]28:20

   Mark

   [19]16:9

   Luke

   [20]5:17   [21]24:1

   John

   [22]3:35   [23]5:17   [24]5:22   [25]6:22   [26]20:1

   Acts

   [27]2   [28]2:42   [29]2:43   [30]2:46   [31]13   [32]13:42
   [33]13:44   [34]16:3   [35]16:12   [36]16:13   [37]20:7   [38]20:7
   [39]20:7   [40]28:17   [41]28:23

   Romans

   [42]1:4   [43]14:9

   1 Corinthians

   [44]3   [45]7:27   [46]7:35   [47]11:12   [48]11:13   [49]11:20
   [50]16:1   [51]16:1   [52]16:1   [53]16:1   [54]16:2   [55]16:2
   [56]16:2   [57]16:2   [58]16:2   [59]16:2

   2 Corinthians

   [60]8:13   [61]8:14

   Galatians

   [62]4:4   [63]4:5   [64]4:10   [65]4:10   [66]5:1   [67]5:2

   Colossians

   [68]1:16   [69]1:17   [70]2:16

   1 Timothy

   [71]4:10

   Hebrews

   [72]1:1   [73]1:2   [74]2:8-9   [75]4:3   [76]4:9

   Revelation

   [77]1:9   [78]1:10   [79]1:10   [80]4:11
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=0#i-p17.2
   2. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=2#i-p19.2
   3. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=11#i-p23.1
   4. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=11#i-p23.3
   5. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=17#i-p17.1
   6. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=2#i-p20.5
   7. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=3#i-p20.6
   8. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=9#i-p21.1
   9. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i-p23.4
  10. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=15#i-p22.1
  11. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=15#i-p23.2
  12. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=4#i-p20.2
  13. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=13#i-p66.1
  14. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=7#i-p19.1
  15. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=43&scrV=0#i-p20.1
  16. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=43&scrV=27#i-p8.1
  17. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#i-p63.1
  18. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#i-p27.1
  19. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=9#i-p10.1
  20. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=17#i-p40.3
  21. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=1#i-p40.1
  22. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#i-p71.8
  23. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#i-p72.1
  24. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#i-p71.4
  25. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=22#i-p19.4
  26. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=1#i-p40.2
  27. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i-p34.2
  28. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=42#i-p45.1
  29. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=43#i-p41.1
  30. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=46#i-p41.2
  31. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#i-p29.1
  32. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=42#i-p33.1
  33. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=44#i-p33.2
  34. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=3#i-p31.1
  35. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=12#i-p33.3
  36. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=13#i-p33.4
  37. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=7#i-p34.1
  38. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=7#i-p35.1
  39. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=7#i-p38.1
  40. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=17#i-p31.3
  41. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=23#i-p31.4
  42. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i-p10.2
  43. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=9#i-p63.2
  44. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=0#i-p34.4
  45. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=27#i-p52.1
  46. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#i-p52.2
  47. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=12#i-p41.3
  48. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=13#i-p51.1
  49. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=20#i-p65.2
  50. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#i-p36.1
  51. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#i-p47.1
  52. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#i-p48.1
  53. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#i-p55.2
  54. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i-p34.3
  55. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i-p36.2
  56. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i-p47.2
  57. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i-p48.2
  58. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i-p55.3
  59. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i-p65.1
  60. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=13#i-p50.1
  61. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=14#i-p50.2
  62. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#i-p12.1
  63. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#i-p12.2
  64. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i-p52.4
  65. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i-p55.1
  66. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=1#i-p52.3
  67. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=2#i-p31.2
  68. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i-p71.5
  69. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#i-p71.6
  70. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=16#i-p20.4
  71. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i-p71.7
  72. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i-p71.1
  73. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#i-p71.2
  74. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=8#i-p71.3
  75. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i-p21.2
  76. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=9#i-p20.3
  77. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i-p67.1
  78. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=10#i-p34.5
  79. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=10#i-p56.1
  80. file:///ccel/s/shepard/sabbath/cache/sabbath.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#i-p19.3
