     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The History of the Origins of Christianity. Book III. Saint
                  Paul.
      Creator(s): Renan, Joseph Ernest (1823-1892).
   CCEL Subjects: All; History
      LC Call no: BR165.R42 V.3
     LC Subjects:

                  Christianity

                  History

                  By period

                  Early and medieval
     __________________________________________________________________

THE HISTORY

    OF THE

                            ORIGINS OF CHRISTIANITY.

BOOK III.

SAINT PAUL.

    BY

ERNEST RÉNAN

   Member of the French Academy.

London:

MATHIESON & COMPANY
     __________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION.

  CRITICISM OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS.

   The fifteen or sixteen years of religious history comprised in this
   volume in the embryonic age of Christianity, are the years with which
   we are best acquainted. Jesus and the primitive Church at Jerusalem
   resemble the images of a far-off paradise, lost in a mysterious mist.
   On the other hand, the arrival of St Paul at Rome, in consequence of
   the step the Author of the Acts has taken in closing at that juncture
   his narrative, marks in the history of Christian origins the
   commencement of a profound darkness into which the bloody glare of the
   barbarous feasts of Nero, and the thunders of the Apocalypse, cast only
   a few gleams. In particular, the death of the Apostles is enveloped in
   an impenetrable obscurity. On the contrary, the era of the missions of
   St Paul, especially of the second mission and the third, is known to us
   through documents of the greatest value. The Acts, till then so
   legendary, become suddenly quite authentic; the last chapters, composed
   in part of the narrative of an eye-witness, are the sole complete
   historical writings which we have of the early times of Christianity.
   In fine, those years, through a privilege very rare in similar
   circumstances, provide us with documents, the dates of which are
   absolutely authentic, and a series of letters, the most important of
   which have withstood all the tests of criticism, and which have never
   been subjected to interpolations.

   In the introduction to the preceding volume, we have made an
   examination of the Book of Acts. We must now discuss seriatim the
   different epistles which bear the name of St Paul. The Apostle informs
   us himself, that even during his lifetime there were in circulation in
   his name several spurious letters, and he often took precautions to
   prevent frauds. We are, therefore, only carrying out his intentions in
   subjecting the writings which have been put forth as his to a rigorous
   censorship.

   There are in the New Testament fourteen of such epistles, which it will
   be necessary at the outset to divide into two distinct categories.
   Thirteen of these writings bear in the text of the letter the name of
   the Apostle. In other words, these letters profess to be the works of
   Paul, so that there is no choice between the following two hypotheses:
   either that Paul is really the author, or that they are the work of an
   impostor, who wished to have his compositions passed off as the work of
   Paul. On the other band, the fourteenth epistle, the one to the
   Hebrews, does not bear the name of Paul in the superscription) [1] ;
   the author plunges at once in medias res without giving his name. The
   attribution of that epistle to Paul is founded only on tradition.

   The thirteen epistles which profess to belong to Paul may, in regard to
   authenticity, be ranged into five classes:--

   1. Epistles incontestable and uncontested. These are the Epistles to
   the Galatians, the two Epistles to the Corinthians, and the Epistle to
   the Romans.

   2. Epistles that are undoubted, although some objections have been
   taken to them. These are the two Epistles to the Thessalonians, and the
   Epistle to the Philippians.

   3. Epistles of a probable authenticity, although grave objections have
   been taken to them. This is the Epistle to the Colossians, to which is
   annexed the note to Philemon

   4. Epistle doubtful. This is the epistle addressed to the Ephesians.

   5. Epistles false. These are the two Epistles to Timothy, and the
   Epistle to Titus.

   We have nothing to remark here in regard to the epistles of the first
   category; the most severe critics, such as Christian Baur, accept them
   reservedly. We shall hardly insist on discussing the epistles of the
   second class either. The difficulties which certain modern writers have
   raised against them, are merely those slight suspicions which it is the
   duty of the critic to point out frankly, but without being determined
   by them when stronger reasons should sway him. Now, these three
   epistles have a character of authenticity which outweighs every other
   consideration. The only serious difficulty which has been raised
   against the Epistles to the Thessalonians, is deduced from the theory
   of the Anti-Christ appended in the second chapter of the second Epistle
   to the Thessalonians,--a theory which seems identical with that of the
   Apocalypse, and which consequently assumed Nero to be dead when the
   books were written. But that objection permits of solution, as we shall
   see in the course of the present volume. The author of the Apocalypse
   only applied to his times an assemblage of ideas, one part of which
   went back even to the origins of Christian belief, while the other part
   had reference to the times of Caligula.

   The Epistle to the Colossians has been subjected to a much more serious
   fire of objection.. It is undoubted that the language used in that
   epistle to express the part played by Jesus in the bosom of the
   divinity, as creator and prototype of all creation, trenches strongly
   on the language of certain other epistles, and seems to approach in
   style the writings attributed to John. In rending such passages one
   believes oneself to be in the full swing of Gnosticism. The language of
   the Epistle to the Colossians is far removed from that of the undoubted
   epistles. The vocabulary is a little different; the style is more
   emphatic and more round, and less abrupt and natural. At points it is
   embarrassed, declamatory and overcharged, similar to the style of the
   false Epistles to Timothy and to Titus. The ideas are hardly those with
   which one would expect to meet in Paul. Nevertheless, justification by
   faith occupies no longer the first place in the predilections of the
   Apostle. The theory of the angels is much more developed; the æons
   begin to appear. The redemption of Christ is no longer simply a
   terrestrial fact; it is extended to the entire universe. Certain
   critics have been able to discern in many passages either imitations of
   the other epistles, or the desire of reconciling the peculiar bias of
   Paul to the different schools of his own (a desire so apparent in the
   author of the Acts), or the inclination to substitute moral and
   metaphysical formulas, such as love and science, for the formulas of
   faith and works which, during the first century, had caused so many
   contests. Other critics, in order to explain that singular mixture of
   things agreeable to Paul, and of things but little agreeable to him,
   have recourse to interpolations, or assume that Paul confided the
   editing of the epistle in question to Timothy. It is certain that when
   we sift this epistle to the bottom, as well as the one to the
   Philippians, for a continued account of the life of Paul, we are not
   quite so successful as in the great epistles of certain authenticity,
   anterior to the captivity of Paul. In the latter, the operation
   furnished, so to speak, its own proofs; the facts and the texts fit the
   one into the other without effort, and seem to recall one another. In
   the epistles pertaining to the captivity, on the contrary, more than
   one laborious combination is required, and more than one contradiction
   has to be silenced; at first sight, the goings and comings of the
   disciples do not agree, many of the circumstances of time and place are
   presented, if we may so speak, backwards.

   There is, nevertheless, nothing about all this which is decisive. If
   the Epistle to the Colossians is, as we believe it to be, the work of
   Paul, it was written during the last days of the life of the Apostle,
   at a date when his biography is very obscure. We shall show later on
   that it is quite admissible, that the theology of St Paul, which, from
   the Epistles to the Thessalonians to the Epistle to the Romans, is so
   strongly developed, was developed still further in the interval between
   the Epistle to the Romans and that of his death. We shall show
   likewise, that the most energetic expressions of the Epistle to the
   Colossians were only a short advance upon those of the anterior
   epistles. St Paul was one of those men who, through their natural bent
   of mind, have a tendency to pass from one order of ideas to another,
   even though their style and their manner of perception present
   sentiments the most fixed. The taint of Gnosticism which is to be found
   in the Epistle to the Colossians is encountered, though less
   articulated in the other writings of the New Testament, in the
   Apocalypse, and in the Epistle to the Hebrews. In place of rejecting
   some passages of the New Testament in which are to be found traces of
   Gnosticism, we must sometimes reason inversely, and seek out in these
   passages the origin of the gnostic ideas which prevailed in the Second
   Century. We may, in a sense, even say, that these ideas were anterior
   to Christianity, and that nascent Christianity borrowed more than once
   from Gnosticism. In a word, the Epistle to the Colossians, though full
   of eccentricities, does not embrace any of those impossibilities which
   are to be found in the Epistles to Titus and to Timothy. It furnishes
   even many of those details which reject the hypothesis as false.
   Assuredly of this number is its connection with the note to Philemon.
   If the epistle is apocryphal, the note is apocryphal also; yet few of
   the pages have so pronounced a tone of sincerity; Paul alone, as it
   appears to us, could write that little master-piece. The apocryphal
   epistles of the New Testament--those, for example, to Titus and to
   Timothy--are awkward and dull. The Epistle to Philemon resembles in
   nothing these fastidious imitations.

   Finally, we shell soon show that the so-called Epistle to the Ephesian
   is in part copied from the Epistle to the Colossians, which leads to
   the supposition, that the compiler of the Epistle to the Ephesians
   firmly regarded the Epistle to the Colossians as an original apostolic.
   Note, also, that Marcion, who is in general so well informed in his
   criticism on the writings of Paul,--Marcion who so justly rejected the
   Epistles to Titus and to Timothy,--admits unreservedly in his
   collection the two epistles of which we have just been speaking.

   Infinitely more strong are the objection. which can be raised against
   the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians. And first of all, note that
   this designation is nothing if not certain. The epistle has absolutely
   no seal of circumstance; it is addressed to no one in particular; those
   to whom it was addressed occupied for the moment a smaller place in the
   thoughts of Paul than his other correspondents. Is it admissible that
   Paul could have written to a Church with which he had so intimate
   relations, without saluting anybody, without conveying to the brethren
   the salutation of the brethren with whom they were acquainted, and
   particularly Timothy, without addressing to his disciples some counsel,
   without reminding them of anterior relations, and without the
   composition presenting any of those peculiar features which constitute
   the most authentic character of the other epistles?

   The composition is addressed to converted Pagans; now the Church at
   Ephesus was, in great part, Judæo-Christian. When we remember with what
   eagerness Paul in all his epistles seized on and invented pretexts for
   speaking of his ministry and of his preaching, we experience a lively
   surprise in seeing him throughout the course of a letter addressed to
   these same Ephesians--"that for the space of three years he did not
   cease, night and day, to exhort with tears"--lose every opportunity
   presented to him of reminding them of his sojourn amongst them; in
   seeing him, I say, obstinately confining himself to abstract
   philosophy, or, what is more singular, to the lifeless formulas least
   suited to the growth of the first Church. How different it is in the
   Epistles to the Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, and Thessalonians,
   even in the Epistle to those Colossians, whom, however, the Apostle
   even only knew indirectly. The Epistle to the Romans is the only one
   which in this respect resembles somewhat the epistles in question. Like
   them, the Epistle to the Romans is a complete doctrinal expos'; whilst
   in regard to the epistles addressed to those readers who had received
   from him the Gospel, Paul supposes always the basis of his teaching to
   be known, and contents himself with insisting upon some point which is
   related to it. How does it come about that the only two impersonal
   letters of St Paul are, in the one case, an epistle addressed to a
   Church which he had never seen, and in the other, an epistle addressed
   to the Church with which he had the most extended and continuous
   relations!

   The reading of the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians suffices,
   therefore, to awaken the suspicion that the letter in question had not
   been addressed to the Church at Ephesus. The evidence furnished by the
   manuscripts changes these suspicions into certainty. The words en
   Epheso, in the first verse, were introduced about the end of the fourth
   century. The Vatican manuscript, and the Codex Sinaiticus, both of the
   fourth century, and whose authority, at least, when they are in accord,
   are more important than that of all the other manuscripts together, do
   not contain these words. A Vienne manuscript, the one which is
   designated in the collection of the Epistles of Paul by the figures 67,
   of the eleventh or twelfth centuries, presents them erased. St Basil
   maintains that the ancient manuscripts which he was able to consult did
   not have these word. Finally, the testimony of the third century proves
   that at that epoch, the existence of the said words in the first verse
   was unknown. If then everybody believed that the epistle of which we
   are speaking had been addressed to the Ephesians, it was in virtue of
   the title, and not in virtue of the superscription. A man who, in spite
   of the a priori dogmatic sprit which is often carried into the
   correction of the holy books, had frequently flashes of true criticism,
   Marcion (about 150 A.D.), contended that the so-called Epistle to the
   Ephesians was the Epistle to the Laodicæans, of whom St Paul speaks in
   the Epistle to the Colossians. That which appears the most certain is,
   that the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians was not addressed to any
   special Church, and that if it belongs to St Paul, it is a simple
   circular letter intended for the churches in Asia which were composed
   of converted Pagans. The superscription of these letters, of which
   there are several copies, might present, according to the words tois
   ousin, a blank destined to receive the name of the Church to which it
   was addressed. Perhaps the Church at Ephesus possessed one of these
   copies of which the compiler of the letters of Paul availed himself.
   The fact of finding one such copy at Ephesus appeared to him a
   sufficient reason for writing at the head Pros Ephesious. As it was
   omitted at an early date to preserve a blank after ousin, the
   superscription became: tois agiois tois ousin, chai pistois, a rather
   unsatisfactory reading which may have been rectified in the fourth
   century, by inserting after ousin, in conformity with the title, the
   words en Epheso.

   This doubt in regard to the recipients of the so-called Epistle to the
   Ephesians might be very readily reconciled with its authenticity; but
   critical reflection upon this second point excites new suspicion. One
   fact which confronts us at the very threshold, is the resemblance which
   is to be remarked between the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians and
   the Epistle to the Colossians. The two epistles are copies of one
   another. Which is the epistle that has served for the original, and
   which is to be considered as an imitation? It looks indeed as if it
   were the Epistle to the Colossians which has served for the original,
   and that it is the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians which is the
   imitation. The second epistle is the most fully developed; the formulas
   in it are exaggerated; everything that distinguishes the Epistle to the
   Colossians among the epistles of St Paul is more pronounced still in
   the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians. The Epistle to the Colossians
   is full of special details; it has a dictum which corresponds well with
   the historical circumstances in which it must have been written; the
   Epistle to the Ephesians is altogether vague. We can understand how a
   general catechism might be drawn from a particular letter, but not how
   a particular letter might be drawn from a general catechism. In fine,
   the 21st verse of chapter vi. of the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians
   takes it for granted that the Epistle to the Colossians was previously
   written. As soon as it is admitted that the Epistle to the Colossians
   is a work of St Paul's, the question then may be stated as
   follows:--How could Paul waste his time in counterfeiting one of his
   own works, repeating himself, to make an ordinary letter out of a
   topical and special letter?

   This is not altogether impossible; but it is not very probable. The
   improbability of such a conception is diminished if we suppose that
   Paul delegated that task to one of his disciples. Perhaps Timothy, for
   example, may have taken the Epistle to the Colossians so as to apply
   it, and to make of it a general composition which could be addressed to
   all the Churches of Asia. It is difficult to speak with assurance on
   this point: for it is also supposable that the epistle may have been
   written after the death of Paul, at an epoch when people set about
   seeking out apostolic writings, and when, seeing the small number of
   such writings, people were not over scrupulous in producing new
   ones--imitating, assimilating, copying, and diluting writings
   previously held to be apostolic. Thus, the second general Epistle of
   Peter was manufactured out of the first epistle, and out of the Epistle
   of Jude. It is possible that the so-called epistle to the Ephesians
   owed its origin to the same process. The objections which have been
   raised against the Epistle to the Colossians, both as regards language
   and doctrines, are addressed principally to the latter. The Epistle to
   the Ephesians, in respect of style, is sensibly different from the
   undisputed epistles; it contains favourite expressions, gradations
   which only belong to it; words foreign to the ordinary language of
   Paul, some of which are to be found in the Epistles to Timothy, to
   Titus, and to the Hebrews. The sentences are diffuse, feeble, and
   loaded with useless words and repetition, entangled with frivolous
   incidents, full of pleonasms and of encumbrances. The same difference
   is apparent in the ideas. In the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians
   Gnosticism is plainly manifest; the idea of the Church conceived as a
   living organism, is developed in it in such a way as to carry the mind
   to the years 70 or 80; the exegesis is foreign to the custom of Paul;
   the manner in which he speaks of the "holy Apostles" surprises one; the
   theory of marriage is different from that which Paul expounded to the
   Corinthians.

   On the other hand, it must be said that the aim and the interest the
   counterfeiter might have had in composing this piece is not altogether
   apparent, inasmuch as it adds little to the Epistle to the Colossians.
   It seems, moreover, that a forger would have written a letter plainly
   addressed and circumstantial, as was the case with the Epistles to
   Timothy and to Titus. That Paul wrote or dictated this letter is almost
   impossible to admit; but that some one may have composed it during his
   lifetime, under his eyes, and in his name, is what cannot be declared
   as improbable. Paul, a prisoner at Rome, is able to charge Tychicus to
   go and visit the Churches of Asia and to remit several letters--the
   Epistle to the Colossians, the Note to Philemon, and the Epistle, now
   lost, to the Laodicæans; he could, besides, remit to him copies of a
   sort of circular letter in which the name of the destined Church was
   left in blank, and which could be the so-called Epistle to the
   Ephesians. On his way to Ephesus, Tychicus may have shown this open
   letter to the Ephesians; and it in permissible to suppose that the
   latter took or retained a copy of it. The resemblance of this general
   epistle to the Epistle to the Colossians was, as if that a man who had
   written several letters at intervals of a few days, and who, being
   pre-occupied, with a certain number of fixed ideas, had relapsed,
   without knowing it, into the same expressions; or, rather, as if that
   Paul had charged either Timothy or Tychicus in composing the circular
   letter to make it fit in with the Epistle to the Colossians, and to
   exclude everything of a topical character. The passage, Colossians iv.
   16, shows that Paul sometimes caused the letters to be carried from one
   Church to another. We shall see presently that a similar hypothesis
   must be made use of to explain certain peculiarities of the Epistle to
   the Romans. It appears that, in these last years, Paul adopted
   encyclical letters as a form of writing well adapted to the vast rural
   ministry that he had to fulfil. In writing to one Church, the thought
   occurred to him that the things which he indited might be suitable for
   other Churches, and he so arranged matters that the latter might not be
   deprived of them. We come in this way to regard the Epistle to the
   Colossians and the so-called Epistle to the Ephesians, taken together,
   as a pendant to the Epistle to the Romans, as a sort of theological
   exposition, which was destined to be transmitted in the form of a
   circular letter to the different Churches founded by the Apostle. The
   Epistle to the Ephesians had not the same degree of authenticity as the
   Epistle to the Colossians; but it had a more general application, and
   it was preferred. In very early times it was taken for a work of
   Paul's, and for a writing of high authority. This is proved by the use
   which is made of it in the first epistle attributed to Peter, a
   treatise whose authenticity is not impossible, and which, in any case,
   belongs to the apostolic period. Among the letters which bear the name
   of Paul, the Epistle to the Ephesians is probably the one which was the
   first cited as a composition of the Apostle of the Gentiles.

   There remain the two Epistles to Timothy and the Epistle to Titus. The
   authenticity of these three epistles presents some insurmountable
   difficulties. I regard them as apocryphal productions. To prove this, I
   would point out that the language of the three writings is not that of
   Paul. I would take note of a series of turns and expressions either
   exclusively peculiar, or particularly dear to the author, which being
   characteristic, ought to be found in similar proportions in the other
   epistles of Paul, or, at least, in the proportion desired. Other
   expressions, which bear in a kind of way the signature of Paul, are
   lacking in this. I would particularly point out that these epistles
   embrace a multitude of inconsistencies, both as regards the supposed
   author and the supposed recipients. The ordinary characteristic of the
   letters fabricated with a doctrinal intention is, that the forger sees
   the public over the head of the pretended recipient, and writes to the
   latter about things of which he is entirely conversant, and to which
   the forger desires the public to listen. The three epistles under
   discussion partake in a high degree of this character. Paul, whose
   authenticated letters are so particular, so precise; Paul, who,
   believing in the near end of the world, never supposed that he would be
   read in after ages. Paul was herein a general preacher, just enough
   interested in his correspondent to make sermons to him which had not
   relation to himself, and to address to him a small code of
   ecclesiastical discipline in view of the future. But these arguments,
   which of themselves ought to be decisive, I can afford to pass over. I
   shall only, in proving my thesis, make use of reasonings which are more
   or less material. I shall attempt to demonstrate that there is no
   possible means of putting these into the known frame, or even into a
   possible frame of the life of St Paul. A very important preliminary
   observation is the perfect similarity of these three epistles, the one
   to the other--a similarity which compels the admission that either all
   three are authentic or all three must be rejected as apocryphal. The
   particular features which separate them widely from the other epistles
   of St Paul are the same. The odd expressions in the language of St
   Paul, which are to be remarked in them, are to be discovered equally in
   the three. The defects which render the style unworthy of St Paul are
   identical. It is a curious enough fact that each time St Paul takes the
   pen to write to his disciples he forgets his habitual mannerisms, falls
   into the same looseness, the same idioms. The ground-work of the ideas
   gives rise to a similar observation. The three epistles are full of
   vague counsels, or moral exhortations, of which Timothy and Titus,
   familiarised by daily intercourse with the ideas of the Apostle, had no
   need. The errors which are combatted in them are always a sort of
   Gnosticism. The predilections of the author in the three epistles do
   not much vary; we see the jealous and anxious care of an orthodoxy
   already formed and of a hierarch already developed. The three
   narratives are sometimes a repetition of one another, and copies of the
   other epistles of St Paul. One thing is certain, namely, that if the
   three epistles had been written at the dictation of Paul, they belong
   to the same period of his life--a period separated by long years from
   the time when he composed the other epistles. Any hypotheses which
   place between the three epistles in question an interval of three or
   four years, for example, or which placed between them some one of the
   other epistles which are known to us, ought to be rejected. To explain
   the similarity, the one to the other, of the three epistles, and their
   dissimilarity to the others, admits of but one possible construction,
   and that is to suppose that they were written in a space of time
   somewhat short, and a long time after the others--at an epoch when all
   the circumstances which surrounded the Apostle had been changed, when
   he had become old, when his ideas and his style had undergone
   modification. Certainly one might succeed in proving the possibility of
   such an hypothesis, but that would not resolve the question. The style
   of a man may change; but from a style the most striking and the most
   inimitable that ever existed, one cannot fall into a style, prolix and
   destitute of vigour. In any case, such an hypothesis is formally
   excluded by what we know for certain of the life of Paul. We proceed
   now to demonstrate this.

   The first Epistle to Timothy in the one which presents the fewest
   individual traits, and nevertheless, did it stand alone, we would not
   be able to find in it an incident in the life of Paul. Paul, when he
   was reputed to have written this epistle, had, for a long time, left
   Timothy, for he had not written to him since he went away (i. 3). The
   Apostle quitted Timothy at Ephesus. Paul at that same time had departed
   for Macedonia. Not having time to combat the errors which had begun to
   spread at Ephesus, the chief advocates of which were Hymenæus and
   Alexander (i. 20), Paul had left Timothy in order to combat these
   errors. The journey which Paul made was to be of short duration; he
   calculated to return soon to Ephesus (iii. 14, 16; vi. 13).

   Two hypotheses have been proposed in order to include this epistle in
   the contexture of the life of Paul, each as those which are furnished
   by the Acts, and confirmed by the certain epistles. According to the
   one, the journey from Ephesus into Macedonia, which separated Paul and
   Timothy, is the one which is narrated in Acts xx. 1. That journey took
   place during the third mission. Paul remained three years at Ephesus.
   He left in order to see once more his churches in Macedonia, and those
   in Achaia. It was, it is said, from Macedonia or Achaia that he wrote
   to the disciple whom he had left in Ephesus, giving him full powers.
   This hypothesis is inadmissible. First, the Acts inform us (xix. 22)
   that Timothy had gone in advance of his master into Macedonia, where in
   fact Paul joined him (2 Cor. i. 1). And then is it probable that,
   almost on the morrow of his departure from Ephesus, Paul should have
   given to his disciple the instructions of which we read in the first
   Epistle to Timothy? The errors which he singled out in it he had
   himself been able to combat. The turn of the verse (1 Tim. i. 3) is not
   compatible with a man who is about to depart from Ephesus after a long
   sojourn. Besides, Paul announces the intention of returning to Ephesus
   (iii. 14; iv. 13); but Paul, in quitting Ephesus, had the fixed
   intention of going to Jerusalem without passing again through Ephesus
   (Acts xix. 21; xx. 1, 3, 16; 1 Cor. xvi. 4; ii. 1, 16). Let us add,
   that if we suppose the epistle to be written at that moment, everything
   about it becomes awkward; the defect of the apocryphal letters, which
   are anything but precise, in which the author holds up to his
   fictitious correspondent things au courant of what was about to be;
   such a defect, I say, is carried so far as to be absurd.

   In order to avoid this difficulty, and above all to explain the
   intention announced by Paul of returning to Ephesus, some have had
   recourse to another explanation. It is supposed that the journey from
   Macedonia, mentioned in the verse (1 Tim. i. 3), is a journey not
   recounted in the Acts which Paul would have made during his three
   years' sojourn at Ephesus. It is certainly permissible to believe that
   Paul was not all that time stationary. It is supposed, then, that he
   made a journey into the Archipelago, and through there, at the same
   sweep, a link was designed to be attached to the Epistle to Titus in a
   manner more or leas conformable to the life of Paul. We do not deny the
   possibility of such a journey, although the silence of the Acts
   presents, it is true, a difficulty: yet, we cannot deny that it is here
   where the embarrassments begin which are found in First Timothy. By
   accepting this hypothesis, we understand less than if we had adopted
   the former one as to the meaning of the verse i. 3. Why does he tell
   Timothy what he already knows quite well? Paul had just passed two or
   three years at Ephesus, and he will soon again return there. What
   signifies these errors he has suddenly discovered at the moment of
   departure, which he leaves Timothy at Ephesus to settle? By the latter
   hypothesis, moreover, the first Epistle to Timothy should have been
   written about the same time as the great authentic epistles of Paul.
   What! is it on the morrow of the Epistle to the Galatians, and on the
   eve of the Epistles to the Corinthians, that Paul could have written
   such a milk-and-water amplification? He must have dropped his habitual
   style in setting out from Ephesus; he must have found it again on
   returning there, in order to write the letters to the Corinthians,
   excepting on one occasion, a few years after, when he took up again the
   pretended style of the journey for the purpose of writing to the
   self-same Timothy. The second to Timothy, by the admission of
   everybody, could not have been written before the arrival of Paul at
   Rome, a prisoner. Accordingly, there must have elapsed several years
   between the first Epistle to Timothy and that to Titus, on the one
   hand, and the second to Timothy, on the other. This could not be. The
   three narratives have been copied the one from the other; but how are
   we to suppose that Paul, after an interval of five or six years, in
   writing to a friend, should make extracts from old letters? Would that
   be a proceeding worthy of a master of the epistolary art, one so ardent
   and so rich in ideas? The second hypothesis is then, like the first, a
   tissue of improbabilities. The verse (1 Tim. i. 3) is a maze from which
   the apologist cannot extricate himself. That verse raises an
   impossibility in the biography of St Paul. We must find an instance
   where Paul, in going into Macedonia, could only have touched at
   Ephesus; that instance has no existence in the life of St Paul previous
   to his imprisonment. Let us add, that when Paul is reputed to have
   written the epistle in question, the Church of Ephesus possessed a
   complete organisation of elders, deacons, and deaconesses; this Church
   even presents the usual appearances of a community already grown old
   with its schisms and errors, nothing of all of which is applicable to
   the time of the third mission. If the first to Timothy was written by
   Paul, we must throw it into an hypothetical period of his life
   posterior to his imprisonment, and beyond the scope of the Acts. This
   hypothesis, involving also the examination of the two other epistles of
   which we have just been speaking, will be reserved by us, till later
   on.

   The second Epistle to Timothy furnishes many more facts than the first.
   The Apostle is evidently in prison at Rome (i. 8, 12, 16, 17; ii.
   9-10). Timothy is at Ephesus, (i. 16-18; ii. 17; iv. 14-15, 19), where
   the false doctrines continue to increase through the fault of Hymenæus
   and Philetus (ii. 17). Paul has not been long at Rome and in prison,
   when he gives to Timothy, in the form of news, certain details about a
   journey into the Archipelago he had just made; at Miletum he has left
   Trophimus sick (i. 11, 20); at Troas he has left several things with
   Carpus (iv. 13), and Erastus remained at Corinth (iv. 20). At Rome the
   Asiatics, among others Phygellas and Hermogenes, have abandoned him (i.
   15). Another Ephesian, on the other hand, Onesiphorus, one of his old
   friends, having come to Rome, sought him out, and found him, and cared
   for him in his captivity (i. 16-18). The Apostle is filled with a
   presentiment of his near end (iv. 6-8). His disciples are far removed
   from him. Demas has forsaken him to pursue his worldly interests, and
   is departed unto Thessaloncia (iv. 10); Crescens to Galatia (ibid.),
   Titus unto Dalmatia (ibid.); and he has sent Tychicus to Ephesus (iv.
   12); only Luke is with him (iv. 11). A certain Alexander, a
   copper-smith from Ephesus, did him much harm, and opposed him actively;
   this Alexander has set out again for Ephesus (iv. 14-15). Paul has
   already appeared before the Roman authorities; on this occasion no one
   has assisted him (iv. 16), but God has aided him, and delivered him
   from out of the mouth of the lion (iv. 17). In consequence of this, he
   begs Timothy to come before the winter (iv. 9, 21), and to bring Mark
   with him (iv. 11). He gives him at the same time a commission, which
   is, to bring him his cloak, the books, and the parchment which he left
   at Troas with Carpus (iv. 13). He recommends him to salute Prisca,
   Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus. He sends to him the greetings
   of Pudens, of Linus, of Claudia, and of all the brethren (iv. 21).

   This simple analysis suffices to point out some strange incoherencies.
   The Apostle is at Rome; he has just made a journey of the Archipelago,
   he gives to Timothy the particulars of it, as though he had not written
   to him since the journey. In the same letter he speaks to him of his
   prison and of his trial. Will any one say that this journey into the
   Archipelago was the journey of Paul the captive, narrated in the Acts?
   But in this journey Paul did not traverse the Archipelago, neither
   could he go to Miletum, nor to Troas, nor, above all, to Corinth, since
   at the elevation of Cnide, the tempest drives the vessels upon Crete,
   then upon Malta. Will any one say that the voyage in question was the
   last voyage of St Paul, a free man, his return voyage to Jerusalem in
   company with the deputies charged with accusing him? But Timothy was in
   that voyage, at least from Macedonia (Acts xx. 4). More than two years
   rolled away between that voyage and the arrival of Paul at Rome (Acts
   xxiv. 27). Can we conceive that Paul would recount to Timothy as being
   news, things which took place in his presence a long time before, when,
   in the interval, they had lived together, and had hardly been separate?
   Far from being left sick at Miletum, Trophimus followed the Apostle to
   Jerusalem, and was the cause of his arrestment (Acts xx. 29). The
   passage, 2 Tim. iv. 10, 11, compared with Col. v. 10, 14, and with
   Philemon -- 24, forms a contradiction not less serious. How could Demas
   have forsaken Paul when the latter wrote the second to Timothy, seeing
   that epistle was posterior to the Epistle to the Colossians and to the
   Epistle to Philemon? When writing these last two epistles Paul has Mark
   near him; how, in writing to Timothy, could he therefore say,--"Take
   Mark and bring him with thee; for he is profitable to me for the
   ministry?" On the other hand, we have established the fact, that it is
   not allowable to separate the three letters; but in the manner it has
   been treated by some there would be three years at least between the
   first and the second to Timothy, and it is necessary to place between
   them the second to the Corinthians and the Epistle to the Romans. One
   single refuge then remains here for the first to Timothy, and that is
   to suppose that the second to Timothy was written during a prolongation
   of the life of the Apostle of which the Acts makes no mention. This
   hypothesis may be demonstrably possible, but a multitude of inherent
   difficulties to the epistle would still remain. Timothy is at Ephesus,
   and (iv. 12) Paul says dryly, "I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus," as if
   Ephesus was not the place of destination. What could be more barren
   than the passage 2 Tim. iii. 10-11? Nay, what could be more inexact?
   Paul was only associated with Timothy in the second mission, but the
   persecutions which Paul underwent at Antioch in Pisidia, at Iconium,
   and Lystra took place during the first mission. The real Paul writing
   to Timothy would have had many other mutual experiences to put him in
   mind of. Let us add, that he would not have dreamt of losing his time
   in recalling them to him. A thousand improbabilities rise up on every
   side, but it is useless to discuss them, for the hypothesis itself is
   in question, and according to which our epistle would be posterior to
   the appearance of Paul before the council of Nero. This hypothesis, I
   say, ought to be discarded, as we shall demonstrate when we come to
   discuss, in its turn, the Epistle to Titus.

   When Paul wrote the Epistle to Titus, the latter was in the island of
   Crete (i. 5). Paul, who had just visited that island, and had been very
   much dissatisfied with the inhabitants (i. 12, 13), left his disciples
   there, in order to complete the organisation of the churches, and to go
   from city to city to establish presbyteri or episcopi (i. 6). He
   promised Titus to send him soon Artemas and Tychicus; he begged his
   disciples to come, when he had received these two brethren, to rejoin
   him at Nicopolis where he calculated to pass the winter (iii. 12), The
   Apostle next recommends his disciple to bring diligently Zenas and
   Apollos, and to take great care of them (iii. 13).

   And here, again, with every phrase, difficulties present themselves.
   Not a word for the faithful Cretians--nothing but hurtful and
   unbefitting severity (i. 12, 13)--fresh declamations against errors,
   the existence of which the churches recently established had not dreamt
   of (i. 10 et suivi)--errors Paul, absent, saw and was better acquainted
   with than Titus who was on the spot--details which presumed
   Christianity to be already old and completely developed in the island
   (i. 5, 6)--trivial recommendations bearing upon points quite clear.
   Such an epistle would have been useless to Titus, as it did not contain
   a single word that he ought not to have known by heart. But it is by
   direct arguments, and not by plausible inductions, that the apocryphal
   character of the document in question can be made clear.

   If it is wished to connect this letter with the period in the life of
   Paul known through the Acts, the same difficulties are experienced as
   in those which precede. According to the Acts, Paul only touched at
   Crete once, and that was when shipwrecked. He made but a very short
   stay there, and during the stay he was a captive. It is surely not at
   this moment that Paul was able to commence the founding of churches in
   the island. Besides, if it were the voyage of Paul as a captive which
   is related (Tit. i. 5), Paul, when he wrote, ought to be a captive at
   Rome. How could he say from his prison at Rome that he intended to pass
   the winter at Nicopolis? Why did he not make, as wan his custom, some
   allusion to his being in the condition of a prisoner?

   Another hypothesis has been tried. It has been attempted to connect the
   Epistle to Titus and the Epistle to Timothy the one with the other. It
   has been premised that these two epistles were the results of the
   episodical voyage, which St Paul might have composed during his sojourn
   at Ephesus. No doubt this hypothesis may go a very little way to
   explain the difficulties in the first to Timothy, but we most
   investigate it to see whether the Epistle to Titus can lend it any
   support.

   Paul was at Ephesus for a year or two. During the summer he formed the
   project of making an apostolic tour, of which the Acts has made no
   mention. He left Timothy at Ephesus, and took with him Titus and the
   two Ephesians, Artemas and Tychicus. He went first into Macedonia, then
   from there to Crete, where he founded several churches. He left Titus
   in the island, charging him to continue his work, and to repair to
   Corinth with Artemas and Tychicus. He made there the acquaintance of
   Apollos, whom he had not seen before, and who was on the point of
   setting out for Ephesus. He begged Apollos to go a little way out of
   his straight route so as to pass through Crete, and to carry to Titus
   the epistle which has been preserved. His plan at that moment was to go
   into Epirus, and to pass the winter at Nicopolis. He sends to inform
   Titus of that plan, announces to him that he will see again Artemas and
   Tychicus in Crete, and begs him, as soon as he shall have seen them, to
   come and rejoin him at Nicopolis. Paul then made his journey into
   Epirus. He wrote from Epirus the first to Timothy, and charged Artemas
   and Timothy to take it with them; he enjoined them likewise to pass
   through Crete, so as to give at the same time the notice to Titus to
   come and join him at Nicopolis. Titus repaired to Nicopolis, and the
   Apostle and his disciple returned together to Ephesus.

   With this hypothesis we can in a fashion give an account of the
   circumstances contained in the Epistle to Titus, and the first to
   Timothy. Nay, more, we obtain two apparent advantages by it. It serves
   to explain the passages of the Epistles to the Corinthians, from which
   it appears, at first glance, to result that St Paul, in going to
   Corinth at the end of his long sojourn at Ephesus, went there for the
   third rime (1 Cor. xvi. 7; 2 Cor. ii. 1; xii. 14, 21; viii. 1); it
   serves further to explain the passage in which St Paul pretends to have
   preached the Gospel as far away as Illyrium (Rom. xv. 19). There is
   nothing substantial about these advantages, nor anything to compensate
   for the injuries done to probability in order to obtain them!

   First, this pretended episodical voyage, so short that the author of
   the Acts did not judge it proper to speak of it, must have been very
   considerable, since it embraced a journey into Macedonia, a voyage to
   Crete, a sojourn at Corinth, and wintering at Nicopolis. This must have
   taken almost a year. Why, then, does the author of the Acts say that
   the sojourn of Paul at Ephesus extended over three year. (Acts xix. 8,
   10; xx. 31)? Doubtless these expressions do not exclude short absences,
   but they exclude a series of journeys. Besides, in the hypothesis we
   are discussing, the voyage to Nicopolis should have taken place before
   the second Epistle to the Corinthians. Yet, in that epistle, Paul
   declares that Corinth is, at the date when he wrote, the extreme point
   of his missions towards the west. Finally, the itinerary which has been
   traced of the journey of Paul is not very natural. Paul went first into
   Macedonia--the text is formal (1 Tim. i. 3)--and thence he repairs to
   Crete. In going from Macedonia into Crete, Paul must have cruised about
   the coast, either at Ephesus--in which case the verse, 1 Tim. i. 3, is
   denuded of meaning--or at Corinth, in which case we cannot conceive why
   he wanted to return there immediately after. And how is it that Paul,
   in desiring to make a journey from Epirus, speaks of the winter which
   he must pass, and not of the journey itself? And this sojourn at
   Nicopolis, how is it that we do not know more about it? To suppose the
   Nicopolis in question to be the one in Thrace, on the Nestus, only adds
   to the confusion, and does not possess any of the apparent advantages
   of the hypothesis discussed above.

   Some exegites think to remove the difficulty by modifying a little the
   journey required by this hypothesis. According to them, Paul went from
   Epirus into Crete, from there to Corinth, then to Nicopolis, then to
   Macedonia. The fatal verse, 1 Tim. i. 3, is opposed to that. Let
   suppose a person starting from Paris, with the intention of making a
   trip to England, following the banks of the Rhine in Switzerland and
   Lombardy. Would that person, having arrived at Cologne, write to one of
   his friends in Paris: "I have left you at Paris, and am going to
   Lombardy?" The conduct of St Paul, in any of these suppositions, is not
   less absurd than the route of such a one. The journey of Tychicus and
   Artemas into Crete is not susceptible of proof. Why did Paul not give
   to Apollos a letter for Timothy? Why did he delay writing to him
   through Tychicus and Artemas? Why did he not fix a time with Titus when
   he should come to join him, seeing that his projects were arrested?
   These journeys from Corinth to Ephesus, all made by way of Crete, for
   the lack of an apology, are not at all natural. Paul, in this
   hypothesis of the episodical journey, in whatever manner we may regard
   the itinerary, gives and holds back perpetually; he does things without
   due consideration; he extracts only from his wanderings a portion of
   their advantages, reserving for future occasions that which he could
   very well accomplish at the moment. When these epistles are in
   question, it seems that the ordinary laws of probability and of good
   sense are reversed.

   All attempts to include the Epistles to Titus and Timothy in the work
   of the life of St Paul traced by the Acts are tainted with insoluble
   contradictions. The authentic epistles of St Paul explain, suppose, and
   permeate one another. The three epistles in question may be compared to
   a small round which has been punched out by a severe critic; and this
   is so much the more singular when two of them, the first to Timothy and
   the one to Titus, should happen just in the middle of that whirl of
   affairs, so very consecutive and so well known, which have reference to
   the Epistle to the Galatians, the two to the Corinthians, and that to
   the Romans. Several also of the exegites who defend the authenticity of
   these three gospels have had recourse to another hypothesis. They
   pretend that these epistles ought to be placed at a period in the life
   of St Paul of which the Acts makes no mention. According to the latter,
   Paul, after having appeared before Nero, as is implied in the Acts, was
   acquitted, which is very possible, nay, even probable. Set at liberty,
   he resumed his apostolic career, and went into Spain, which is likewise
   probable. According to the critics, of whom we are speaking, Paul, at
   that period of his life, made a fresh journey to the Archipelago--the
   journey which is referred to in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. He
   returned again to Rome, and was there made prisoner a second time, and
   from his prison wrote the second to Timothy.

   All this, it most be owned, resembles much the artificial defence of an
   accused person who, in order to answer objections, is driven to vent an
   assemblage of facts which have no connection with anything that is
   known. These isolated hypotheses, without either support or force, are
   in the eyes of the law a sign of culpability, in criticism the sign of
   apocryphy. Even admitting the possibility of that new voyage to the
   Archipelago, it would take no end of pains to bring into accord the
   facts related in the three epistles; these goings and comings are
   susceptible of very little proof. But such a discussion is useless. It
   is evident, in fact, that the author of the second to Timothy knew well
   how to speak of the captivity mentioned in the Acts, and to which
   allusion is made in the Epistles to the Philippians, Colossians, and
   Philemon. The similarity of 2 Tim. iv. 9-22 with the endings of the
   Epistles to the Colossians and to Philemon, proves it. The personnel
   which surrounded the Apostle is nearly identical in both cases. The
   captivity, from the midst of which Paul is reputed to have written the
   second to Timothy, finishes with his liberation (2 Tim. iv. 17-18).
   Paul in this epistle is full of hope; he meditates new schemes, and is
   pre-occupied with the thought, which, in fact, he is full of during the
   whole of his first (and only) captivity, namely, to perfect evangelical
   preaching--to preach Christ to all nations, and in particular to
   peoples of the far west. If the three epistles were of so far advanced
   a date, we cannot conceive why Timothy should always be spoken of in
   them as a young man. We are able, besides, to prove directly that the
   voyage to the Archipelago, posterior to the sojourn of Paul at Rome,
   did not take place. In such a voyage, indeed, St Paul would have
   touched at Miletum (2 Tim. iv. 20). Now in the fine discourse which the
   author of the Acts attributes to St Paul at the end of the third
   mission, while passing through Miletum, he makes Paul say, "And now,
   behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the
   kingdom of God, shall see my face no more" (Acts xx. 25). But it is not
   argued that Paul was deceived in his previsions, so that he had to
   change his opinions, and to see again a church to which he thought he
   had said a final adieu. This is not the question, however. It matters
   little to us whether Paul may or may not have uttered these words. The
   author of the Acts was well acquainted with the routine of Paul's life,
   although, unfortunately, he has not judged it proper to inform us of
   it. It is impossible that he could have put into the mouth of his
   master what he knew very well could not be verified.

   The letters to Timothy and to Titus are therefore refuted by the whole
   contexture of the biography of Paul. When they are forced into it by
   one party, they are thrust out of it by another party. Even if an
   express period in the life of the Apostle were created for them, the
   result would not be any more satisfactory. These epistles refute
   themselves; they are full of contradictions; the Acts and the authentic
   epistles would be lost if we could not succeed in creating another
   hypothesis to uphold the epistles of which we are speaking. And may it
   not be alleged that a forger could not have thrown a little more
   sprightliness into these contradictions? Demo of Corinth, in the second
   century, has a theory not less chimerical in regard to the journeys of
   St Paul, inasmuch as he makes him arrive at Corinth and to depart from
   Corinth for Rome in the company of St Peter--a thing utterly
   impossible. There is no doubt that the three epistles in question were
   fabricated at a period when the Acts had not yet gained full authority.
   Later, the canvas of the Acts was embellished, like as did the author
   of the fable of Theckla about the year 200. The author of our epistles
   knew the names of the principal disciples of St Paul; he had read
   several of his epistles; he had formed a vague idea of his journeyings;
   justly enough, he is struck by the multitude of disciples which
   surrounded Paul, and whom he sends out as messengers in every
   direction. But the details which he has invented are false and
   inconsistent: they always represent Timothy as being a young man; the
   imperfect notion he has of a journey Paul made into Crete makes him
   believe that Paul had founded churches there. The personnel which he
   introduces into the three epistles is peculiarly Ephesian; we are
   tempted at moments to think that the desire to exalt certain families
   of Ephesus and to depreciate some others belonging to it was not
   altogether singular in a fabricator.

   The three epistles in question, were they apocryphal from one end to
   the other? or were they made use of for the purpose of composing
   authentic letters addressed to Titus and to Timothy, that they should
   have been diluted, in a sense, to conform with the ideas of the times,
   and with the intention of leading the authority of the apostles to the
   developments which the ecclesiastical hierarchy took? It is this that
   is difficult to decide. Perhaps, in certain parts, at the close of the
   second to Timothy, for example, letters bearing different dates have
   been mixed up; but even then it must be admitted that the forger has
   given himself plenty of scope. Indeed, one consequence which is derived
   from what precedes, is that the three epistles are sisters, that, to
   speak accurately, they are one and the same work, and that no
   distinction can be drawn between them in anything that regards their
   authenticity.

   It is quite otherwise with the question of finding out whether some of
   the data of the second to Timothy (for example, i. 15-18; ii. 17, 18;
   iv. 19-21) have not a historical value. The forger, though not knowing
   all the life of Paul, and not possessing the Acts, might have, notably
   in the last days of the Apostle, some original details. Especially do
   we believe that the passage in the second of Timothy (iv. 19-21) has
   much importance, and throws a true light upon the imprisonment of St
   Paul at Rome. The fourth gospel is also, in one sense, apocryphal; yet
   we cannot say that on this account it is a work destitute of historical
   importance. As to that which it possesses of chimera, according to our
   ideas of such supposititious works, it must, on no account, be
   discarded from the New Testament. This ought not to occasion the least
   scruple. If the pious author of the false letters to Timothy and to
   Titus could be brought back and made to assist amongst us in the
   discussions of which he has been the cause, he would not be forbidden;
   he would respond, like the priest of Asia, author of the Romance of
   Theckla, when he found himself pressed into a corner: convictum atque
   confessum id se amore Pauli fecisse.

   The time of the composition of these three epistles may be placed about
   the year 96 to 100. Theophilus of Antioch (about the year 170) cited
   them expressly. Irenæus, Clement of Alexandria, and Tertullian admitted
   them also. Marcion, on the contrary, rejected them, or did not know
   them. The allusions which are believed to have been found in the
   epistles attributed to Clement of Rome, to Ignatius, to Polycarp, are
   doubtful. There were floating about at that epoch a certain number of
   hemitetic phrases, all facts; the presence of those phrases in a
   writing does not prove that the author has borrowed them directly from
   some other writing in which he has found them. The agreements which we
   remark between certain expressions of Hegesippe and certain passages in
   the epistles in question, are singular; one does not know what
   consequence to draw from them, for if, in those expressions, Hegesippe
   has in his eye the first Epistle to Timothy, it would seem that he
   regarded it as a writing posterior to the death of the Apostles.
   However that may be, it is clear that when he had collected the letters
   of Paul, the letters to Titus and to Timothy, he enjoyed full
   authority. Where were they composed? Probably at Ephesus; probably at
   Rome. The partisans of this second hypothesis may say that, in the
   East, people do not commit errors which are remarked on. Their style
   bristles with Latinisms. The intention which prompted the writing, to
   wit, the desire of augmenting the force of the hierarchical principle,
   and of the authority of the Church, in presenting a model of piety, of
   docility, of "ecclesiastical spirit," traced by the Apostle himself, is
   altogether in harmony with what we know of the character of the Roman
   Church from the first century.

   It only remains for us now to speak of the Epistle to the Hebrews. As
   we have already said, that epistle does not belong to Paul; but it
   ought not to be put in the same category as the two epistles to Timothy
   and the one to Titus, the author not seeking to pass off his work for a
   writing of Paul. What is the value of the opinion which is established
   in the Church, and according to which Paul is the author of this
   maudlin epistle? A study of the manuscripts, an examination of the
   ecclesiastical tradition, and a searching criticism of the work itself,
   will enlighten us on that point. The ancient manuscripts bear simply at
   the head of the epistle, Pros Ebraious. As to the order of
   transcription, the Codex Vaticanus and the Codex Sinaiticus
   representing the Alexandrine tradition, place the epistle among those
   of Paul. The Græco-Latin manuscripts, on the contrary, exhibit all the
   hesitation which still remained in the West during the first half of
   the middle ages, as to the canonicity of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
   and, by consequence, its attribution to Paul. The Codex Boernerianus
   omits it; the Codex Augiensis gives it only in Latin after the epistles
   of Paul. The Codex Claramontanus puts the epistle in question outside
   the list, as a sort of appendix, after the stichometry general of the
   writing, a proof that the epistle was not found in the manuscript from
   which the Claramontanus was copied. In the aforesaid stichometry (a
   very ancient composition) the Epistle to the Hebrews does not appear,
   or, if it appears it is under the name of Barnabas. In fine, the errors
   which abound in the Latin text of the Epistle of the Claramontanus are
   sufficient to awaken the suspicion of the critic, and prove that that
   epistle was only included gradually, and as if surreptitiously, in the
   canon of the Latin Church. But there is uncertainty even as to the
   tradition. Marcion did not have the Epistle to the Hebrews in his
   collection of the epistles of Paul: the author of the canon attributed
   to Muratori omits it in his list. Irenæus was acquainted with the
   writing in question, but he did not consider it as belonging to Paul.
   Clement of Alexandria believed it was Paul's; but he felt a difficulty
   in attributing it to him, and, to get out of the embarrassment, had
   recourse to a not very acceptible hypothesis: he assumes that Paul
   wrote the epistle in Hebrew, and that Luke translated it into Greek.
   Origen admits also, in a sense, the Epistle to the Hebrews as belonging
   to Paul, but he recognised that many people denied that it had been
   written by the latter. Nowhere in it could he discover the style of
   Paul, and supposes, almost as Clement of Alexandria did, that the
   origin of the ideas belonged only to the Apostle. "The character of the
   style of the epistle," says he, "has not the ruggedness of that of the
   Apostle." This letter is, as regards the arrangement of the words, much
   more Hellenic, as everybody must avow who is capable of judging of the
   difference of styles. . . . As for me, if I had to express an opinion,
   I should say that the thoughts are the Apostle's, but that the style
   and the arrangement of the words belong to some one who has revoked
   from memory the words of the Apostle, and who has reduced to writing
   the discourse of his master. If, then, any church maintains that this
   epistle belongs to Paul, it has only to prove it; for the ancients must
   have had some reason to go on handing it down as the work of Paul. As
   to the question--Who wrote this epistle? God alone knows the truth.
   Amongst the opinions which have been transmitted to us by history, one
   appears to have been written by Clement of Alexandria, who was Bishop
   of the Romans; another by Luke, who wrote the Gospels and the Acts.
   Tertullian does not observe the same discretion: he unhesitatingly puts
   forward the Epistle to the Hebrews as the work of Paul. Gaius, a priest
   of Rome, St Hippolytus, and St Cyprian did not place it among the
   epistles of Paul. During the novatianistic quarrel, in which, for many
   reasons, this epistle might have been employed, it is not even
   mentioned.

   Alexandria was the centre where the opinion was formed that the Epistle
   to the Hebrews should be intercalated in the series of the letters of
   Paul. Towards the middle of the third century Dionysius of Alexandria
   appeared to entertain no doubt as to Paul being its author. From that
   time this became the opinion most generally accepted in the East;
   nevertheless, protestations did not cease to make themselves heard. The
   Latins especially protested vigorously; particularly the Roman Church,
   who maintained that the epistle did not belong to Paul. Eusebius
   hesitated much, and had recourse to the hypothesis of Clement of
   Alexandria and of Origen; he was inclined to believe that the epistle
   had been composed in Hebrew by Paul, and translated by Clement of Rome.
   St Jerome and St Augustine have been at pains to conceal their doubts,
   and rarely cite that part of the canon without a reservation. Divers
   documents insist always in giving as the author of the work either
   Luke, Barnabas, or Clement. The ancient manuscripts of Latin production
   sufficed, as we have seen, to attest the repugnance which the West
   experienced when this epistle was put forward as a work of Paul's. It
   is clear that when we have made, if we may so speak, the editio
   princeps of the letters of Paul, the number of letters must be fixed at
   thirteen. People were no doubt accustomed very early to place after the
   thirteen epistles the Epistle to the Hebrews--an anonymous apostolic
   writing, whose ideas approached in some respects those contained in the
   writings of Paul. Hence, one had only a step to take to arrive at the
   conclusion that the Epistle to the Hebrew's belonged to the Apostle.
   Everything induces the belief that this induction was made at
   Alexandria, that is to say, in a Church relatively modern as compared
   with the Churches of Syria, Asia, Greece, and Rome. Such an induction
   is of no value in criticism, if the clear, intrinsic proofs are
   perverted by another party in attributing the epistle in question to
   the Apostle Paul.

   Now, this is in reality what has taken place. Clement of Alexandria and
   Origen, very good judges indeed of the Greek style, could not find in
   our epistle any semblance of the style of Paul. St Jerome is of the
   same opinion; the fathers of the Latin Church who refused to credit
   that the epistle was Paul's,--all gave the some reason for their
   doubts; propter styli sermonis que distantiam. This is an excellent
   reason. The style of the Epistle to the Hebrews is, in a word,
   different from that of Paul; it is more oratorical, more periodic; the
   diction contains a number of idiomatic expressions. The fundamental
   basis of the thoughts is not far removed from the opinions of Paul,
   especially Paul as a captive; but the exposition and the exegesis are
   quite distinct. There is no nominal superscription, which was contrary
   to the usage of the Apostle; characteristics which one always expects
   to find in an epistle of Paul's are wanting in the former. The exegesis
   is particularly allegorical, and resembles much more that of Philo than
   that of Paul. The author has imbibed the Alexandrian culture. He only
   makes use of the version called the Septuagint; from the text of this
   he adduces reasons which exhibit a complete ignorance of Hebrew; his
   method of citing and of analysing Biblical texts is not in conformity
   with the method of Paul. The author, moreover, is a Jew; he fancies
   himself to be extolling Christ when he compares him to a great Hebrew
   priest; Christianity is to him none other than perfected Judaism; he is
   far from regarding the Law as abolished. The passage ii. 3, where the
   author is placed among those who have only indirectly heard of the
   mysteries of the life of Christ from the mouth of the disciples of
   Jesus, does not accord at all with one of the most fixed pretensions of
   Paul. Let us remark, finally, that, in writing of the Christian
   Hebrews, Paul must have deviated from one of his most fixed rules,
   which was, never to perform a pastoral not upon the soil of churches
   Judæo-Christian, so that the apostles of circumcision might not, on
   their side, encroach upon the churches of uncircumcision.

   The Epistle to the Hebrews was not, therefore, written by St Paul. By
   whom and where was it written? and to whom was it addressed? We shall
   examine all these points in our fourth volume. For the present, the
   simple date of a writing so important interests us. Now, this date has
   been determined with sufficient decision. The Epistle to the Hebrews
   was, according to all probability, anterior to the year 70, inasmuch as
   the Levitical service of the Temple is represented in it as being
   regularly, and without interruption, continued. On the other hand, at
   xiii. 7, and even at v. 12, there would appear an allusion to the death
   of the apostles,--of James, the brother of the Lord, for example; at
   xiii. 13, there seems to be recorded a deliverance to Timothy posterior
   to the death of Paul; at x. 32, and suivi, and probably at xiii. 7
   there is, I think, a distinct mention of the persecutions of Nero in
   the year 64. It is probable that the passage xiii. 7, and following,
   contains an allusion to the commencements of the revolt of Judea (year
   66), and a foreboding of the misfortunes which are to follow; this
   passage implies, moreover, that the year 40, after the death of Christ,
   had not passed, and that this term was drawing near. Everything,
   therefore, combines to support the hypothesis that the compiling of the
   Epistle to the Hebrews took place between the years 65 and 70, probably
   in the year 66.

   After having discussed the authenticity, it remains now for us to
   discuss the integrity of the epistles of Paul. The authentic epistles
   have never been interpolated. The style of the Apostle was so
   individual, and so original, that every addition would drop off from
   the body of the text by reason of its own inertness. In the labour of
   publication which took place when the epistles were collected, there
   were, nevertheless, some operations, the import of which must be taken
   into account. The principle upon which the compilers proceeded appears
   to have been; 1st, to add nothing to the text; 2d, to reject nothing
   which they believed to have been dictated or written by the Apostle;
   3d, to avoid repetitions which could not fail, especially in the
   circular letters, but contain identical statements. In like manner, the
   compilers would appear to have followed a system of patching up, or of
   intercalating, the aim of which seems to have been to save some
   portions which would otherwise have been lost. Thus the passage (2 Cor.
   vi. 14; viii. 1) forms a small paragraph which breaks so singularly the
   sequence of the epistle, and which disposes one to believe that it has
   been clumsily pieced in there. The last chapters of the Epistle to the
   Romans presents facts much more striking, and which will require to be
   discussed with minuteness; for many portions of the biography of Paul
   depend upon the system which is adopted in regard to these chapters.

   In reading the Epistle to the Romans, after quitting chap. xii., we
   experience some astonishment. Paul appears to have departed from his
   habitual maxim, "Mind your own business." It is strange that he gives
   imperative counsels to a Church he has not founded, and which resembles
   so closely the impertinence of those who seek to build upon foundations
   established by others. At to the close of chap. xiv., some
   peculiarities still more capricious make their appearance. Several
   manuscripts--que suit Gresbach--according to St John Chrysostom,
   Theodoretus, Theophylactus, OEcumenius, fix on that place as the finale
   of chap. xvi. (verses 25-27). The Codex Alexandrinus, and some others,
   repeat twice this finale--once at the end of chap. xiv., and once more
   at the end of chap. xvi. Verses 1-13 of chap. xv. excite anew our
   surprise. These verses repeat and take up tacitly again what has
   preceded. It is hardly to be supposed that they would be found in the
   same letter as the one which precedes. Paul repeats himself frequently
   in the course of the same disquisition; but he never returns to a
   disquisition in order to repeat and to enfeeble it. It must also be
   added that verses 1-13 appear to be addressed to Judæo-Christians. St
   Paul therein makes concessions to the Jews. How singular it is that, in
   verse 8, Christ is called dachouos Peritoges? We might say that we have
   here a resumé of chapters xii., xiii., xiv., for the use of
   Judæo-Christian readers, which Paul has seized on, to prove by texts
   that the adoption of the Gentiles did not exclude the privilege of
   Israel, and that Christ had fulfilled the ancient promises.

   The portion, xv. 14-33, is evidently addressed to the Church of Rome,
   and to this Church only. Paul expressed himself there without reserve,
   was proper in writing to a Church which he had not seen, and the
   majority of which, being Judæo-Christians, was not directly under his
   jurisdiction. In chapters xii., xiii., xiv., the tone of the letter is
   firmer; the Apostle speaks there with mild authority; he makes use of
   the verb Parachalo, a verb, no doubt, of a very mitigated nature, but
   which is always the word he employs when he speaks to his disciples.

   Verse 33 makes a perfect termination to the Epistle to the Romans,
   according to Paul's method of making terminations. Verses 1 and 2 of
   chapter xvi. might also be admitted as a postscript to the Epistle to
   the Romans; but what follows verse 3 creates veritable difficulties.
   Paul, as though he had not closed his letter with the word Amen,
   undertakes to salute twenty-six persons, not to speak of five churches
   or groups. In the first place, he never thus puts salutations after the
   benediction and the Amen as the finale. Besides, the salutations here
   are not the common salutations that one would employ in addressing
   people one has not seen. Paul had evidently had the most intimate
   relations with the persons he salutes. Each of these persons has his or
   her special characteristics; these have laboured with him; those have
   been imprisoned with him; another has been a mother to him (doubtless
   in caring for him when he was sick); he knows at what date each has
   been converted; all are his friends, his fellow-workers, his dearly
   beloved. It is not natural that he should have so many ties with a
   Church in which he had never been, one that does not belong to his
   school, with a Church Judæo-Christian which his principles forbade him
   labouring for. Not only does he know by their names all the Christians
   in the Church to which he is addressing himself, but he knows also the
   masters of those who are slaves, Aristobulus, Narcissus. Why does he
   designate with so much assurance these two houses, if they are at Rome,
   a place he has never seen? Writing to the Churches which he has
   founded, Paul salutes two or three persons. Why does he salute so
   considerable a number of brothers and sisters of a Church which he has
   never visited?

   If we study in detail the persons he salutes, we shall discover still
   more evidence that this page of salutations was never addressed to the
   Church at Rome. Amongst them we find no persons that we know who formed
   part of the Church at Rome, and we find amongst them many persons who
   assuredly never belonged to it. In the first line we encounter Aquila
   and Priscilla. It is universally admitted that only a few months
   elapsed between the compilation of the first chapter of the Corinthians
   and the compilation of the Epistle to the Romans. Now, when Paul wrote
   the first chapter to the Corinthians, Aquila and Priscilla were at
   Ephesus. In the interval, that apostolic couple were able, it is said,
   to set out for Rome. This is very singular. Aquila and Priscilla were
   of the party which was at first driven from Rome by an edict; we find
   them afterwards at Corinth, then at Ephesus; they return to Rome
   without their sentence of expulsion having been revoked, on the morrow
   of the day when Paul had just said adieu to them at Ephesus. This is to
   attribute to them a life much too nomadic; it is the accumulation of
   improbabilities. Let as add, that the author of the second apocryphal
   epistle of Paul to Timothy supposes Aquila and Priscilla to be at
   Ephesus, which proves that tradition has located them there. The little
   Roman martyrology (the source of posterior compilations) has a
   memorandum, of date the 8th July--"in Asia Minori, Aquilæ et Priscillæ
   uxoris ejus." This is not all. At v. 5, Paul salutes Epenetus, "the
   first-born of Asia in Christ." What! the whole Church of Ephesus has
   gone to Rome to take up its abode! The list of names which follows,
   applies equally as well to Ephesus as to Rome. Doubtless the first
   Church at Rome was principally Greek by language. Amongst the world of
   slaves and freedmen from which Christianity was recruited, the Greek
   names even at Rome were ordinary ones. Nevertheless, in examining the
   Jewish inscriptions at Rome, P. Garrucci has found that the number of
   proper Latin names doubled that of Greek names. Now here, of
   twenty-four names, there were sixteen Greek, seven Latin, one Hebrew,
   so that the number of Greek names is more than double that of Latin
   names. The names of the chiefs of the houses of Aristobulus and
   Narcissus are Greek also.

   The verses, Romans xiv. 3-16, were therefore not addressed to the
   Church at Rome; they were addressed to the Church at Ephesus. The
   verses 17-20 could not have been addressed to the Romans either. St
   Paul there makes use of the word, which is habitual to him, when he
   gives an order to his disciples (parachalo); he expresses himself with
   extreme acerbity in regard to the divisions sown by his adversaries; we
   see that he is there en famille; he knows the condition of the Church
   to which he addresses himself; he is delighted with the good reputation
   of this Church; he rejoices over her as a master would over his pupils
   (eph'umin kairo). These verses have no meaning, if we suppose them
   addressed by the Apostle to a church which must have been strange to
   him. Each sentence proves that he had preached to those to whom he
   wrote, and that they were solicited by his enemies. These verses could
   only have been addressed to the Corinthians or to the Ephesians. The
   epistle, at the end of which they were found, was written from Corinth;
   these verses, which constitute the close of a letter, had, therefore,
   been addressed to Ephesus. Seeing that we have shown that the verses
   3-16 were likewise addressed to the faithful at Ephesus, we obtain than
   a long fragment (xvi. 3-20), which most have formed part of a letter to
   the Ephesians. Hence it becomes more natural to connect with these
   verses, 3-20, verses 1, 2 of the same chapter--verses which might be
   considered as a postscript after the Amen, except that it is better to
   attach them to that which follows. The journey of Phoebe becomes thus
   more probable. Finally, the somewhat imperative commands of xvi. 2, and
   the motive with which Paul applied them, are better understood when
   addressed to the Ephesians, who were under so many obligations to the
   Apostle, than to the Romans, who were not indebted to him for anything.

   The verses 21-24 of chapter xiv. could not, any more than that which
   precedes, have made a part of the Epistle to the Romana. Why should all
   these people, who had never been to Rome, who had never known the
   faithful at Rome, salute the latter? What could these unknown person
   say to the Church of Rome? It is important to remark that all the names
   are those of Macedonians or people who could have become acquainted
   with the Churches of Macedonia. Verse 24 is the close of a letter. The
   verses (xvi.) 21-24 can then be made the close of a letter addressed to
   the Thessalonians.

   The verses 25-27 give on a new finale, which contains nothing topical,
   and which, as we have already said, is found in several manuscripts at
   the end of chapter xiv. In other manuscripts, particularly in the
   Boernerianus and the Augiensis (the Greek part), this termination is
   wanting. Assuredly that portion did not constitute a part of the
   Epistle to the Romans, which terminates with verse (xv.) 33, nor of the
   Epistle to the Ephesians, which terminates with verse (xvi.) 20, nor of
   the Epistle to the Churches of Macedonia, which finishes with the verse
   (xvi.) 24. We arrive, then, at the curious result that the epistle
   closes four times, and in the Codex Alexandrinus five times. This is
   absolutely contrary to the practice of Paul, and even to good sense.
   Here, then, is a difficulty proceeding from some peculiar accident.
   Must we, with Marcion and with Baur, declare the two last chapters of
   the Epistle to the Romans to be apocryphal? We are surprised that a
   critic so acute as Baur should be contented with a solution so crude.
   Why should a forger invent such insignificant details? Why should he
   add to a sacred work a list of proper names? In the first and second
   centuries the authors of apocrypha had almost all some dogmatic motive;
   apostolic writings were interpolated either with a view to some
   doctrine, or to establish some form of discipline. We believe we are
   able to propose a theory more satisfactory than that of Baur. In our
   view, the epistle addrexsed to the Romans was (1) not addressed
   entirely to the Romans, and (2) was not addressed to the Romans only.

   St Paul, advancing in his career, had acquired a taste for encyclical
   epistles, designed to be read in several churches. We presume that the
   intention of the Epistle to the Romans was an encyclical of this kind.
   St Paul, when he had reached his full maturity, addressed it to the
   most important churches, at least to three of them, and, as an
   exception, addressed it also to the Church of Rome. The four endings
   falling at verses, xv. 33, xvi. 40, xvi. 24, xvi. 27, are the endings
   of different copies despatched. When the epistles came to be published,
   the copy addressed to the Church of Rome was taken as a basis; but in
   order not to lose anything, there was annexed to the text thus
   constituted the various parts, and notably the different endings of the
   copies which were set aside. In this way many of the peculiarities are
   explained:--(1) The double use made of the passage xv. 1-13, with the
   chapters xii., xiii., xiv., chapters which, being appropriate only to
   the Churches founded by the Apostle, are not to be found in the copy
   sent to the Romans, whilst the passage xv. 1-13, not being appropriate
   to the disciples of Paul, but, on the other hand, perfectly adapted to
   the Romans; (2) Certain features of the epistle which were only
   partially adapted to the faithful of Rome, and which went even the
   length of indiscretion, if they had been addressed only to the latter;
   (3) The hesitation of the best critics on the question in
   distinguishing whether the epistle was addressed to the Pagan converts
   or to the Judæo-Christiana, a hesitation quite simple by our
   hypothesis, since the principal parts of the epistle had been composed
   for the simultaneous use of several churches; (4) What surprises is,
   that Paul should compose a letter so singularly important for a Church
   with which he was not acquainted, and in respect of which his title
   could be contested; (5) In a word, the capricious peculiarities of the
   chapters xv. and xvi., these nonsensical salutations, these four
   endings, three of which are certainly not to be found in the copy sent
   to Rome. We shall see, in the course of the present volume, how far
   this hypothesis is in accord with all the other necessities of the life
   of St Paul.

   We must not omit the testimony of an important manuscript. The Codex
   Boernerianus omits the name of Rome in the verses 7 and 15 of the first
   chapter. We must not say that the omission is there made in view of its
   being read in the churches; the Boernerian manuscript, the work of the
   philologers of St Gall, about the year 900, proposed to itself a purely
   exegetic aim, and was copied in a very old manuscript.

   I regret that I have not been able to find room in the present book to
   give an account of the last days of the life of St Paul: to have done
   that, it would have been necessary to largely increase the size of this
   volume. Moreover, the Third Book would have thus lost somewhat of the
   historical solidity which characterises it. After the arrival of Paul
   at Rome, in fact, we cease to tread on the ground of incontestable
   data; we begin to grope in the obscurity of legends and of apocryphal
   documents. The next volume (fourth volume of the beginnings of
   Christianity) will contain the end of the life of Paul, the occurrences
   in Judea, the arrival of Peter at Rome, the persecutions of Nero, the
   death of the apostles, the apocalypse, the taking of Jerusalem, the
   compilation of synoptic gospels. Then, a fifth and last volume will
   comprise the compilation of writings more ancient than the New
   Testament, the interior movements of the Church of Asia Minor, the
   progress of the hierarchy and of discipline, the birth of the gnostic
   sects, the definitive constitution of a dogmatic orthodoxy and of the
   episcopate. When once the last book of the New Testament has been
   reduced to writing, when once the authority of the Church constituted
   and armed with a sort of touchstone to discern truth from error, when
   once the small democratic confraternities of the early apostolic age
   have abdicated their power into the hands of the bishop, then is
   Christianity complete. The infant will grow still, but he will have all
   his members; he will no longer be an embryo: he will acquire no more
   essential organs. At the same time, however, the last bonds which
   attached the Christian Church to its mother, the Jewish synagogue, has
   been snapped; the Church exists as an independent being; she has
   nothing left for her mother but aversion. The History of the Origins of
   Christianity ends at this moment. I trust that I shall be spared for
   five years to finish this work, to which I have wished to devote the
   most mature years of my life. It will cost me many sacrifices,
   especially in excluding me from the instruction of the College of
   France, a second aim I had proposed to myself. But one must not be too
   exacting; perhaps he to whom, of two designs, it has been given to
   realise one, ought not to rail against fate, the rather if he has
   understood these designs as DUTIES.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] In a note, the author defines "superscription" to mean the first
   phrase of the texts, and "title "as the heading of each
   chapter.--Translator.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER I.

  FIRST JOURNEY OF PAUL--THE CYPRUS MISSION.

   Journeying from Antioch, Paul and Barnabas, accompanied by John-Mark,
   reached Seleucia. The distance from Antioch to the latter city is a
   short day's journey. The route follows at a distance the right bank of
   the Orontes, winding its way over the outermost slopes of the mountains
   of Pieria, and crossing by fords the numerous streams which descend
   from the heights. On all sides there are copses of myrtles, arbutus,
   laurels, green oaks; while prosperous villages are perched upon the
   sharply-cut ridges of the mountains. To the left, the plain of Orontes
   unfolds to view its splendid cultivation. On the south, the wooded
   summits of the mountains of Daphne bound the horizon. We are now beyond
   the borders of Syria. We stand on soil classical, smiling, fertile, and
   civilised. Each name recalls the powerful Greek colony which gave to
   these regions so high a historical importance, and which established
   there a centre of opposition that sometimes assumed a violent form
   against the Semitic genius.

   Seleucia was the port of Antioch, and the chief northern outlet of
   Syria towards the west. The city was situated partly in the plain and
   partly on the abrupt heights, facing the angle made by the deposits of
   the Orontes at the foot of the Coryphas, about a league and a half to
   the north of the mouth of the river. It was here that the hordes of
   depraved beings, creatures of a rotten secularism, embarked every year
   to invade Rome and to infect it. The dominant religion was that of
   Mount Casius--a beautiful, regularly-formed summit, situated on the
   other side of the Orontes, and with which was associated various
   legends. The coast is inhospitable and tempestuous. The wind descending
   from the mountain tops, gives the waves a back stroke, and produces
   almost always a deep ground swell. An artificial basin, communicating
   with the sea by a narrow channel, shelters ships from the recurring
   shocks of the waves. The quays, the mole formed of enormous blocks are
   still standing and waiting in silence the not far distant day when
   Seleucia shall again become what she was formerly--one of the grandest
   termini in the globe. Paul, in saluting for the last time with his band
   the brethren assembled on the dark sands of the beach, had in front of
   him the beautiful section of the circle formed by the coast at the
   mouth of the Orontes; to the right, the symmetrical cone of the Casius,
   from which was to ascend three hundred years later the smoke of the
   last Pagan sacrifice; to the left, the rugged steeps of Mount Coryphas;
   behind him, in the clouds, the snows of Taurus, and the coast of
   Cilicia, which forms the Gulf of Issus. The hour was a solemn one.
   Although Christianity had for several years extended beyond the country
   which was its cradle, it had not yet reached the confines of Syria. The
   Jews, however, considered the whole of Syria, as far as Amanus, as
   forming part of the Holy Land, and sharing its prerogatives, its rights
   and duties. This, then, was the moment when Christianity really quitted
   its native soil, and launched forth into the vast world.

   Paul had already travelled much in order to spread the name of Jesus.
   He had been for seven years a Christian, and not for a single day had
   his ardent conviction been lulled to rest. His departure from Antioch
   with Barnabas, marked, however, a decisive change in his career. He
   began then that Apostolic life, in which he displayed unexampled
   activity, and an unheard-of degree of ardour and of passion. Travelling
   was then very difficult, when it was not done by sea; for carriage
   roads and vehicles hardly existed. This is why the propagation of
   Christianity made its way along the banks of the large rivers. Pozzuoli
   and Lyons were Christianised when a multitude of towns in the vicinity
   of the cradle of Christianity had not heard tell of Jesus.

   Paul, it seems, journeyed almost always on foot existing doubtless on
   bread, vegetables, and milk. What a life of privations and of trials is
   that of a wandering devotee! The police were negligent or brutal. Seven
   times was Paul put in chains. Hence, he preferred, when practicable, to
   travel by water. Certainly, when it is calm, these seas are delightful;
   but they have also suddenly their foolish caprices; the ship may run
   aground in the sand, and all that one can do is to seize on a plank.
   There were perils everywhere. "In labours more abundant, in stripes
   above measure, in prisons more frequent, in death oft. Of the Jews five
   times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods,
   once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I
   have been in the deep. In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in
   perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the
   heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils
   on the sea, in perils among false brethren. In weariness and
   painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings
   often, in cold and nakedness: I have known all" (2 Cor. xi. 23-27). The
   Apostle wrote that in the year 56, when his trials were far from being
   at an end. For nearly ten years longer he must lead that existence,
   which death alone could worthily crown.

   In almost all his journeys Paul had companions; but he systematically
   refused the assistance from which the other Apostles, Peter, in
   particular, drew much consolation and succour--I mean, a companion in
   his Apostolic ministry, and in his labours. His aversion to marriage
   proceeded from a feeling of delicacy. He did not wish to burden the
   Church with the support of two persons. Barnabas followed the same
   rule. Paul reverted often to that fact--he cost the Churches nothing.
   He deemed it perfectly just that the Apostle should live upon the
   community,--that the catechist should share everything in common with
   the catechumen; but he was sensitive on the point; he had no desire to
   make capital out of that which was legitimate. His constant practice,
   with one single exception, was to earn his subsistence by his own
   labour. With Paul this was a question of morals and of good example;
   for one of his maxims was: "That if any one would not work, neither
   should he eat" (2 Thess. iii. 10-12). He added to it likewise a naïve
   sentiment of personal economy, fearing that people might reproach him
   with what he cost, and exaggerated his scruples, in order to anticipate
   murmurs; for people had come to be very circumspect in regard to
   questions of money, because of having to live among those who thought
   much of it. In every place where Paul took up his abode, he settled
   down and returned to his trade of tent-making. His exterior life
   resembled that of an artisan who makes a tour of Europe, and scatters
   about him the ideas with which he is permeated.

   Such a mode of life, which has become impossible in our modern society
   for any but a working man, was easy in societies in which either
   religious confraternities or commercial aristocracies constituted a
   species of freemasonry. The life of Arab travellers--d'Ibn-Batoutah,
   for example--greatly resembled that which must have been led by St
   Paul. They wandered from one end of the Mahometan world to the other,
   halting in every large town, engaging there in the avocation of judge
   or physician, getting married, finding everywhere a hearty welcome, and
   the chance of employment. Benjamin de Tudela, and the other Jewish
   travellers of the Middle Ages, led a similar life, going from Jewry to
   Jewry, and entering at once upon terms of intimacy with their hosts.
   These Jewries were distinct quarters, enclosed often by a gate, having
   a religious chief, who had an extended jurisdiction. In the centre
   there was a common court, and a place ordinarily used for meetings and
   for prayers. The relations which exist amongst the Jews in our own day,
   present still something of the same character. In every place where
   Jewish life is established and well-organised, the journeys of
   Israelites, who bear with them letters of recommendation, are made from
   ghetto to ghetto. That which takes place at Trieste, at Constantinople,
   at Smyrna, is, in this respect, the exact picture of that which took
   place in the time of St Paul at Ephesus, at Thessalonica, and Rome. The
   new-comer who presents himself on Sabbath at the synagogue, is
   remarked, surrounded, and questioned. He is asked where he hails from,
   who his father is, and what news he brings. In almost all Asia, and in
   a part of Africa, the Jews have thus exceptional facilities for
   travelling,--thanks to the species of secret society which they form,
   and to the neutrality they observe in the intestine quarrels of the
   different countries. Benjamin de Tudela travelled over the whole world
   without having seen any other thing save Jews; Ibn-Batoutah without
   having seen any one except Mahometans.

   These little coteries constituted excellent mediums for the propagation
   of doctrines. Each knew his neighbour well, each closely watched the
   other; nothing could be further removed from the vulgar freedom of our
   modern societies, in which men come in contact with each other so
   little. The divisions of parties in a city were always made according
   to religion, when politics was not the paramount consideration. A
   religious question falling into one of these faithful Israelitish
   communities, set everything on fire, and settled schisms and strifes.
   Most frequently a religious question was but a firebrand which was
   eagerly laid hold of by reason of previous hatreds--a pretext which was
   seized upon for reckoning up and denouncing one another.

   The establishment of Christianity was not discussed outside the
   synagogues, with which latter the coasts of the Mediterranean were
   already covered, when Paul and the other Apostles set out upon their
   missions. These synagogues had ordinarily little to distinguish them;
   they were like the other houses, forming with the quarter of which they
   were the centre and link a small vicus (village) or aingiport (small
   alley). One thing distinguished these quarters; this was the absence of
   ornaments of sculpture vivant, which necessitated recourse for
   decoration to expedients, crude, pronounced, and false. But that which
   more than anything else designated the Jewish quarter to new-comers
   disembarking at the port of Seleucia or Cæsarea, was the type of
   race--young women decked in gaudy colours, white, red and green,
   without medium tints; matrons with pleasing figures, rosy cheeks,
   slightly embonpoint, with kindly, maternal eyes. Having landed, and
   received a warm welcome, the Apostles awaited the Sabbath. They then
   betook themselves to the synagogue. It was a custom, when a stranger
   appeared intelligent or eager to make himself know, to invite him to
   address to the people a few words of edification. The Apostle took
   advantage of this custom, and expounded the Christian thesis. Jesus had
   proceeded precisely in the same manner. Astonishment was at first the
   general feeling. Opposition did not manifest itself until a little
   later, not until some conversions had taken place. Then the elders of
   the synagogues resorted to violence; forthwith they ordered to be
   applied to the Apostle the cruel and shameful chastisements which were
   inflicted on heretics; on other occasions they made an appeal to the
   authorities to have the innovator either expelled or beaten. The
   Apostle did not preach to the Gentiles until after he had preached to
   the Jews. The converts from Paganism were in general the least
   numerous, and yet they almost all were recruited from the classes of
   the population which were already in contact with Judaism, and had been
   brought to embrace it.

   This proselytism, as we see,. was confined to the towns. The first
   apostles of Christianity did not preach in country places. The
   countryman (paganus) was the last to embrace Christianity. The local
   patois, which the Greek had not been able to root out in the country
   districts, was in part the cause of this. To tell the truth, the
   peasant living outside the towns, was quite a rare thing in the
   country, at the time when Christianity first began to spread. The
   organisation of that Apostolic religion, consisting of assemblies
   (ecclesia), was essentially urban. Islamism, in like manner, is also
   par excellence a religion of the town. It is not complete without its
   grand mosques, its schools, its ulemas (doctors), its muezzins (the
   callers to prayers).

   The gaiety, the sprightliness of heart, which these evangelical
   odysseys breathed, were something new, original, and charming. The Acts
   of the Apostles, the expression of that first transport of the
   Christian conscience, is a book of gladness, of serene fervency. Since
   the Homeric poems, no work so full of such genuine sensation had
   appeared. A morning breeze, an odour of the sea--if I may be permitted
   to say so--inspiring a sort of cheerfulness and force, permeates the
   whole book, and made it an excellent compagnon de voyage, an exquisite
   breviary for him who followed the ancient landmarks along the Southern
   seas. It was the second poem of Christianity. The lake of Tiberias and
   its fishing barques had furnished the first. Now, a current more
   powerful, aspirations towards lands more distant, allure us on to the
   high seas.

   The first point at which the three missionaries touched, was the island
   of Cyprus, an ancient, mixed settlement where the Grecian race and the
   Phoenician race, planted at first side by side, had ended by nearly
   exterminating one another. It was the native country of Barnabas, and
   that circumstance doubtless had much to do in determining the direction
   in which the mission should make its first advance. Cyprus had already
   received the seeds of the Christian faith; in any case, the new
   religion embraced several Cypriotes in its fold. The number of Jewries
   there was considerable. It should, however, be remembered that the
   whole circle of Seleucia, Tarsus, and Cyprus was by no means extensive;
   and the small group of Jews scattered over those points, represented
   nearly what would be the parent families established at St Brieuc,
   Saint-Malo, and Jersey. Paul and Barnabas, then, set out for the
   countries with which they were already more or less familiar.

   The Apostolic band disembarked at the ancient port of Salamis. They
   traversed the whole island from east to west, inclining towards the
   south, and probably following the sea coast. It was the most Phoenician
   portion of the island, containing the towns of Citium, Amathontus, and
   Paphos, old Semitic centres whose original customs had not yet been
   effaced. Paul and Barnabas preached in the synagogues of the Jews. Only
   a single incident of the journey has been left on record. It occurred
   at Neo Paphos, a modern town, which had been built at some distance
   from the ancient town, so celebrated for the worship of Venue
   (Palæpaphos). Neo Paphos was at that time, as it would seem, the
   residence of the Roman pro-consul who governed the island of Cyprus.
   This pro-consul was Sergius Paulus, a man of illustrious birth, who, it
   appears (although it occurred often with the Romans), permitted himself
   to be amused with enchantments, and the superstitious beliefs of the
   country in which chance had placed him. He had near him a Jew named
   Bar-jesus, who passed himself off for a magician, and gave himself a
   title which is translated as elim, or "sage." He produced there, it is
   said, scenes analogous to those which took place at Sebaste between the
   Apostles and Simon the magician. Bar-jesus raised a bitter opposition
   against Paul and Barnabas. Later tradition asserts that the occasion of
   this feud was the conversion of the pro-consul. It is related that in a
   public discussion, Paul, in order to silence his adversary, was obliged
   to strike him with temporary blindness, and that the pro-consul, moved
   by that great wonder, was converted.

   The conversion of a Roman of that order at this epoch is a thing
   absolutely inadmissible. Paul, doubtless, took for faith the
   manifestations of interest which Sergius evinced towards him; mayhap
   even he mistook irony for favour. The Orientals do not understand
   irony. Their maxim, moreover, is that he who is not for them is against
   them. The curiosity exhibited by Sergius Paulus was in the eyes of the
   missionaries regarded as a favourable disposition. Like many other
   Romans, Paulus might be very credulous. Probably the sorceries to which
   Paul and Barnabas had more than once recourse, but which we are
   unfortunately precluded from believing, appeared to him very striking
   and more wonderful than those of Bar-jesus. But, from a feeling of
   astonishment to conversion, is a long step. The legend appears to
   attribute to Paulus Sergius the reasonings of a Jew or of a Syrian. The
   Jew and the Syrian regard the miracle as the proof of a doctrine
   preached by the Thaumaturgus. The Roman, if he was enlightened,
   regarded the miracle as a trick by which he could amuse himself, and,
   if he was credulous and ignorant, as one of those things which happened
   now and then. But the miracle to him was no proof of doctrine.
   Absolutely destitute of theological sentiment, the Romans could not
   imagine that a dogma could be the aim that a god proposed to himself in
   working a miracle. The miracle was to them either a fantastical,
   although natural, thing (the idea of the laws of nature was foreign to
   them, unless they had studied the Grecian philosophy), or an act
   revealing to them the immediate presence of divinity. If Sergius Paulus
   had actually believed in the miracles of Paul, the reasoning that he
   would have employed would have been: "This man is very powerful: he is
   perhaps a god;" and not, "The doctrine which this man preaches is the
   truth." In any case, if the conversion of Sergius Paulus rested upon
   motives so flimsy, we believe we are doing an honour to Christianity in
   not calling it a conversion, and in striking off Sergius Paulus from
   the number of the Christians.

   What is probable is that he had for the mission a benevolent regard;
   hence the mission retained for him the remembrance of a wise and good
   man. The supposition of Saint Jerome, according to whom Saul should
   have taken from Sergius Paulus his name of Paul, is but mere
   conjecture: we must not say, however, that that conjecture is
   improbable. It was from this moment that the author of the Acts
   constantly substituted the name of Paul for that of Saul. Perhaps the
   Apostle adopted Sergius Paulus as his patron, and took his name in
   token of clientship. It is possible, too, that Paul, following the
   example of a great many Jews, had two names--the one Hebrew, the other
   obtained by vulgarly Grecianising or Latinising the first (in like
   manner as the Josephs called themselves Hegesippus, etc.)--and that it
   was only at the moment when he entered into more intimate and more
   direct relations with the Pagan world, that he began to bear the single
   name of Paul.

   We do not know how long this Cyprus mission lasted. The mission
   possessed, evidently, no great importance, inasmuch as Paul never
   speaks of it in his epistles; and as he never dreamt of seeing again
   the churches that he had founded in the island, probably he regarded
   the latter as belonging to Barnabas more than to himself. The first
   essay of apostolic journeying, in any case, was decisive in the career
   of Paul. From that time he assumed the tone of master: till then he had
   been as a subordinate of Barnabas. The latter had been longer in the
   Church: he had been his introducer and his guarantor; people were more
   certain of Barnabas. In the course of this mission the rôles were
   exchanged. The talent of Paul for preaching necessitated that the
   office of speaking should devolve almost entirely on him. Henceforward,
   Barnabas was no more than a companion of Paul,--one of his suite. With
   admirable self-abnegation, that truly holy man lent himself to
   everything, and left everything to his intrepid friend, whose
   superiority he recognised. Not so with John-Mark. Disagreements, which
   soon ended in a rupture, broke out between him and Paul. We do not know
   the cause of them. Probably the teachings of Paul as to the relations
   of the Jews and the Gentiles shocked the Jerusalemitish prejudices of
   John, and appeared to him in contradiction with the ideas of Peter, his
   master. Perhaps, also, that ever-increasing self-sufficiency of Paul
   was insupportable to those who each day saw it become more pervading
   and more imperious.

   Nevertheless, it is not probable that Paul, from this time, either
   took, or allowed himself to be given, the title of Apostle. Up till
   now, that title had only been borne by the Twelve of Jerusalem; it was
   not considered as transferable; it was believed that Jesus alone had
   the power to bestow it. Perhaps Paul had already often said to himself
   that he also had received it directly from Jesus, in his vision on the
   road to Damascus; but he had not yet openly arrogated to himself so
   lofty a pretension. It required the grossest provocations of his
   enemies to constrain him to an act which at first he would have
   regarded as one of temerity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  CONTINUATION OF THE FIRST JOURNEY OF PAUL--THE GALATIAN MISSION.

   The mission, satisfied with what it had accomplished at Cyprus,
   resolved to attack the neighbouring coast of Asia Minor. Alone amongst
   the provinces of that country, Cilicia had heard the new gospel, and
   possessed churches. The geographical region that we call Asia Minor was
   by no means united. It was composed of peoples greatly diverse both as
   regards race and social status. The western part and the entire coast
   were embraced, from a remote antiquity, in the great vortex of that
   common civilisation of which the Mediterranean was the centre. Since
   the decadence of Greece, and of the Ptolemaic Egypt, these countries
   were held to be the countries the most lettered that then existed, or,
   at least, countries which produced the greatest number of men
   distinguished in literature. The province of Asia, notably the ancient
   kingdom of Pergamus, was, as is said to-day, at the head of progress.
   But the centre of the peninsula had been partly civilised. Local life
   had continued there as in the times of antiquity. Many of the
   indigenous languages had not yet disappeared. The state of public
   opinion was very backward. To speak the truth, the whole of these
   provinces had but one common characteristic, and that was boundless
   credulity and an extreme penchant for superstition. The ancient
   religions, under their Hellenic and Roman transformation, retained many
   of the features of their primitive form. Several of those religions
   still enjoyed great popularity, and possessed a certain superiority
   over the Greco-Roman worships. No other country has produced so many
   theurgists and theosophists. Apollonius of Tyana was preparing there,
   at the period at which we are now arrived, his strange fate. Alexander
   of Aboniticus and Peregrinus Proteus began soon to seduce the
   provinces; the one by his miracles, his prophecies, and his great
   demonstrations of piety, the other by his legerdemain. Artemidorus of
   Ephesus and Ælius Aristides presented the strange spectacle of men
   combining sincere and truly religious sentiments with ridiculous
   superstitions and the ideas of charlatans. In no part of the empire was
   the pious reaction which was brought about at the end of the first
   century in favour of the ancient religions, and opposed to positive
   philosophy, more pronounced. Asia Minor was, next to Palestine, the
   most religious country in the world. Entire regions, such as Phrygia,
   cities such as Tyana, Venasium, Comana, Cæsarea in Cappadocia,
   Nazianzus, were equally wedded to mysticisms. In many places the
   priests were still all but sovereigns.

   As for the life politic, there was not even a trace of it. All the
   towns, as if in emulation, were striving to outdo each other in their
   immoderate adulation of the Cæsars, and of the Roman functionaries. The
   appellation of "friend of Cæsar" was prized. The cities were disputing
   with childish vanity the pompous titles of "metropole," of
   "very-illustrious," conferred by imperial rescripts. The country had
   submitted to the Romans without a violent conquest, at least without
   national resistance. History does not mention a single serious
   political rising. Brigandage and anarchy, which for a long time had
   erected in Taurus, Isauria, Pisidia impregnable strongholds, had come
   to an end by yielding to the power of the Romans and their allies.
   Civilisation had spread with surprising rapidity. The traces of the
   beneficent actions of Claudius, and of the gratitude of the population
   towards him, despite certain tumultuous agitations, were encountered at
   every turn. It was not as in Palestine, where the ancient institutions
   and manners offered a furious resistance. If we except Isauria,
   Pisidia, the parts of Cilicia which still retained a shade of
   independence, and up to a certain point in Galatia, the country had
   lost all national sentiment. It had never had a dynasty proper. The old
   provincial individualism of Phrygia, Lydia, and Caria had been dead for
   a long time as political units. The artificial kingdoms of Perigamus,
   of Bithynia and of Pontus were likewise dead. The whole peninsula had
   gladly accepted the Roman domination.

   We might add with thankfulness; for never, in fact, had domination been
   legitimatised by so many benefits. "Providence Augustus" was, in good
   truth, the tutelary genius of the country. The cult of the Emperor,
   that of Augustus in particular, and of Livia, were the dominant
   religions of Asia Minor. The temples to those terrestrial gods, always
   associated with the divinity of Rome, were multiplied everywhere. The
   priests of Augustus, grouped by provinces, under archbishops
   (archiereis, a sort of metropolitans or primates), succeeded later in
   forming a clergy analogous to that which became, beginning with
   Constantine, the Christian clergy. The political Testament of Augustus
   had become a kind of sacred text, a public teaching as of beautiful
   monuments, which were entrusted with making offerings on behalf of all,
   and of perpetuating them. The cities and the tribes were rivals for the
   epithets which attested the recollection that they preserved of the
   great Emperor. Ancient Ninoe di Caria argued with his old Assyrian
   religion of Mylitta, in order to establish his connection with Cæsar,
   son of Venus. In all this there was servility and baseness; but over
   and above, there was the sentiment of a new era--a happiness which they
   had not up till now enjoyed, and which, in fact, endured unchanged for
   centuries afterwards. A man who probably assisted at the conquest of
   his country, Denis of Halicarnassus, wrote a Roman history, to
   demonstrate to his countrymen the excellencies of the Roman people, to
   prove to them that that people was of the same race as themselves, and
   that its glory formed a part of theirs.

   After Egypt and Cyrenica, Asia Minor was the country in which there
   were most Jews. There they formed powerful communities, jealous of
   their rights, easily alarmed by persecution, having the vexatious habit
   of always complaining of the Roman authority, and of fleeing for
   protection outside the city They had succeeded in making themselves
   important toll-gatherers, and were in reality privileged, as compared
   with other classes of the population. Not only, in fact, was their
   religion free, but many of the ordinary imposts, which they pretended
   they could not pay conscientiously, were not exacted from them. The
   Romans were very favourable to them in these provinces, and almost
   always took their part in the conflicts which they had with the
   inhabitants of the country.

   Embarking at Neo Paphos, the three missionaries sailed towards the
   mouth of the Cestrus in Pamphylia, and, ascending the river for a
   distance of from two to three leagues, arrived at the eminence of
   Perga, a great and flourishing town, the centre of an ancient worship
   of Diana, almost as much renowned as that of Ephesus. This religion had
   a great resemblance to that of Paphos, and it is not impossible that
   the relations of the two towns, establishing between them a line of
   ordinary navigation, may have determined the sojourn of the Apostles.
   In general, the two parallel coasts of Cyprus and Asia Minor seemed to
   correspond the one to the other. These were the two divisions of the
   Semitic populations, mixed with divers elements, and which had lost
   much of their primitive character.

   It was at Perga that the rupture between Paul and John-Mark was
   consummated. John-Mark left the mission and returned to Jerusalem. This
   incident was doubtless painful to Barnabas, for John-Mark was his
   relative. But Barnabas, accustomed to submit to everything on the part
   of his imperious companion, did not abandon the grand design of
   penetrating into the heart of Asia Minor. The two Apostles plunged into
   the interior, and travelling always to the north, between the basins of
   Cestrus and of Eurymedon, traversed Pamphylia, Pisidia, and pressed on
   as far as mountainous Phrygia. It must have been a difficult and
   perilous journey. That labyrinth of rugged mountains was guarded by a
   barbarous population, habituated to brigandage, and whom the Romans had
   with difficulty subdued. Paul, accustomed to the aspect of Syria, must
   have been surprised at the romantic and picturesque Alpestrine regions,
   with their lakes, their deep valleys, which may be compared to the
   environs of Lake Maggiore and of Tessin. At first one is astonished at
   the singular route of the Apostles--a route which shunned the large
   centres of population and the routes the most frequented. There is,
   moreover, little doubt that they followed in the tracks of the Jewish
   emigration. Pisidia and Lycaonia had towns, such as Antioch in Pisidia,
   and Iconium, in which great colonies of Jews had established
   themselves. There the Jews made many conversions; far away from
   Jerusalem, and freed from the influence of Palestine fanaticism, they
   lived on good terms with the Pagans. The latter came to the synagogue;
   and mixed marriages were not infrequent. Paul had been able to learn
   from Tarsus what advantageous conditions the new faith would find here,
   in order to establish itself and to fructify. Derbe and Lystra are not
   very far from Tarsus. The family of Paul might have had some relations,
   or, at all events, have been well known in these scattered cantons.

   Departing from Perga, the two Apostles, after a journey of about forty
   leagues, arrived at Antioch in Pisidia or Antioch-Cæsarea, in the very
   heart of the high plateaux of the peninsula. This Antioch had continued
   to be a town of mediocre importance until it was raised by Augustus to
   the rank of a Roman colony, with Italian jurisdiction. It then became
   very important, and changed in part its character. Till now it had been
   a town of priests, similar, it would seem, to Comana. The temple which
   had rendered it famous, with its legions of temple slaves and its rich
   domains, was suppressed by the Romans (twenty-five years before
   Christ). But this grand religious establishment, as is always the case,
   left deep traces on the manners of the population. It was doubtless in
   the train of the Roman colony that the Jews had been drawn to Antioch
   in Pisidia.

   According to their custom, the two Apostles presented themselves at the
   synagogue on the Sabbath. After the reading of the Law and the
   prophets, the presidents, seeing two strangers who had the appearance
   of being pious, sent to them inquiring whether they had a few words of
   exhortation to address to the people. Paul spoke, and expounded the
   mystery of Jesus, his death and his resurrection. The impression made
   was marked, and they besought him to come the following Sabbath and
   continue his discourse to them. A great multitude of Jews and of
   proselytes followed them out of the synagogue, and during the whole
   week Paul and Barnabas did not cease to exercise an active ministry.
   The Pagan population were informed of this incident, and their
   curiosity was excited.

   The following Sabbath the whole city assembled at the synagogue; but
   the sentiments of the orthodox party had much changed. They repented of
   the tolerance they had shown the previous Sabbath; the eager multitude
   irritated the notables; a dispute accompanied with violence began. Paul
   and Barnabas bravely withstood the tempest; they were not permitted,
   however, to speak in the synagogue. They retired protesting. "It was
   necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you,"
   said he to the Jews; "but seeing ye put it from you, and judge
   yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles"
   (Acts xiii. 46). From that moment, in fact, Paul became more and more
   confirmed in the idea that his future was not for the Jews but for the
   Gentiles; that his ministry on new soil bore much better fruit; that
   God had specially singled him out to be the Apostle to the nations, and
   to spread the glad tidings to the ends of the earth. His great soul had
   the special characteristic of enlarging and expanding itself
   incessantly. The soul of Alexander is the only one I know that had that
   gift of perennial buoyancy, that indefinable capacity of wishing and of
   embracing.

   The disposition of the Pagan population was found to be excellent. Many
   were converted and were found at the first attempt to be perfect
   Christians. We shall see the same thing take place at Philippi, at
   Alexandria Troas, and in the Roman colonies in general. The attraction
   that a refined worship had for these good and religious peoples--an
   attraction which up till then had been manifested through conversions
   to Judaism--was evinced now through conversions to Christianity.
   Despite its foreign religion, and perhaps on account of a reaction
   against that religion, the population of Antioch, like that of Phrygia
   in general, had a sort of penchant in the direction of monotheism. The
   new religion, not exacting circumcision and not insisting upon certain
   paltry observances, was much better calculated than Judaism to attract
   the pious Pagans; thus, favour was quickly brought over to its side.
   These scattered provinces, lost amongst the mountains, little
   accustomed to authority, without historical celebrity and without any
   importance whatever, were excellent soils for the faith. A Church,
   somewhat numerous, was established. Antioch in Pisidia became a centre
   of propagandism whence the doctrine irradiated all around.

   The success of the new Gospel amongst the Pagans culminated in putting
   the Jews into a fury. A pious intrigue was formed against the
   missionaries. Several of the women of the highest class in the city had
   embraced Judaism; the orthodox Jews prevailed upon them to speak to
   their husbands, so as to obtain the expulsion of Paul and Barnabas. The
   two Apostles, in short, were banished from the city, and from the
   territory of Antioch in Pisidia, by a municipal decree.

   Following the apostolic usage, they shook the dust off their feet
   against the city. They then directed their steps towards Lycaonia, and
   reached, after a march of about five days across a fertile country, the
   city of Iconium. Lycaonia was, like Pisidia, an illiterate country,
   little known, and which had conserved its ancient customs. Patriotism
   had by no means died out there; manners were pure, and the minds of
   men, serious and honest. Iconium was a city of ancient religions and of
   old traditions--traditions which, in many points, approached even those
   of the Jews. The city, still very small, had just received, or was
   about to receive, from Claudius, when Paul arrived there, the title of
   Colony. A high Roman functionary, Lucius Pupius Præsens, procurator of
   Galatia, had been called the second founder of it, and the city hence
   changed its ancient name for that of Claudia or of Claudiconium.

   The Jews, doubtless because of that circumstance, were numerous there,
   and had gained over many partisans. Paul and Barnabas spoke in the
   synagogue: a Church was organised. The missionaries made Iconium a
   second centre of a very active apostleship, and dwelt there a long
   time. It was there that Paul, according to a very popular romance
   during the first half of the third century, must have conquered the
   most beautiful of all his disciples, the faithful and tender Theckla.
   But the story has no foundation to rest on. One asks oneself why, if it
   was by an arbitrary choice, the Asiatic priest, the author of the
   romance, selected for the scene of his narrative the city of Iconium.
   Even to-day the Greek women of that country are celebrated for their
   charms, and exhibit the phenomena of endemic hysteria, which the
   doctors attribute to the climate. Be that as it may, the success of the
   Apostles was very great. Many Jews were converted; but the Apostles
   made always more proselytes outside the synagogue, from amongst those
   sympathetic populations who were no longer satisfied with the old
   religions. The spotless morality of Paul charmed the good Lycaonians;
   their credulity, moreover, disposed them to receive with admiration
   that which they regarded as miracles, and the supernatural gifts of the
   Spirit.

   The tempest which had forced the preachers to quit Antioch in Pisidia,
   broke out afresh at Iconium. The orthodox Jews sought to stir up the
   Pagan population against the missionaries. The city became divided into
   two parties. There was a riot: people spoke of stoning the two
   Apostles. They took flight, and quitted the capital of Lycaonia.

   Iconium is situated near an intermittent lake, at the entrance of the
   great steppe which forms the centre of Asia Minor, and which has, even
   up till now, rebelled against all forms of civilisation. The route
   towards Galatia, properly speaking, and Cappadocia, was closed. Paul
   and Barnabas essayed to compass the foot of the arid mountains which
   form a semicircle round the plain on the south side. These mountains
   are none other than the northern back of the Taurus; but the central
   plain being raised considerably above the level of the sea, Taurus
   attains on that side only a moderate elevation. The country is cold and
   bleak; the soil, now swampy, now sandy, or cracked by the heat, is
   painfully dismal. Alone, the mass of the extinct volcano, called now
   Karadagh, stands like an island in the middle of that boundless sea.

   Two small, obscure towns, the position of which is uncertain, became
   then the theatre of the activity of the Apostles. These two small towns
   were called Lystra and Derbe. Dropped down in the valleys of the
   Karadagh, in the middle of poor people devoted to the raising of
   flocks, in the neighbourhood of the most notorious haunts of brigands
   that antiquity had known, these two towns stood entirely isolated. A
   civilised Roman felt himself there to be in the midst of savages. The
   people spoke Lycaonian. Few Jews were to be found there. Claudius, by
   the establishment of colonies in the inaccessible regions of Taurus,
   gave to these outlandish cantons more order and security than they had
   ever before had.

   Lystra was the first to be evangelised. A singular incident happened
   there. In the first days of the sojourn of the Apostles at that town,
   the rumour spread that Paul had performed a miraculous cure on a lame
   person. The credulous inhabitants, and the friends of the person on
   whom the miracle had been wrought, were thereupon seized with a
   singular idea. It was believed that the Apostles were two divinities
   who had taken human form in order to walk about among mortals. The
   belief in their descent from the gods was widely spread, especially in
   Asia Minor. The life of Apollonius of Tyana became soon to be regarded
   as the sojourn of a god upon earth. Tyana was not far from Derbe. As an
   ancient Phrygian tradition--consecrated by a temple, and annual feast
   and pretty recitations--made Zeus and Hermes to wander thus about in
   company, people applied to the Apostles the names of these two divine
   travellers. Barnabas, who was taller than Paul, was Zeus; Paul, who was
   the chief speaker, was Hermes. There was just outside the gate of the
   town a temple of Zeus. The priest, warned that a divine manifestation
   had taken place, and that his god had appeared in the town, took steps
   to make a sacrifice. The bulls had already been led out and garlands
   placed on the front of the temple, when Paul and Barnabas arrived on
   the scene, rending their clothes and protesting that they were but men.
   The Pagan races, as we have already said, attached to a miracle a
   totally different sense than did the Jews. To the latter, the miracle
   was a doctrinal argument; to the former, it was the immediate
   revelation of a god. The aim of the Apostles, when they were preaching
   to people of that kind, was less of preaching Jesus than of preaching
   God; their preaching thus became again purely Jewish, or rather
   deistical. The Jews who have become proselytes, have always felt that
   that which in their religion is adapted to the universality of mankind
   is at bottom only monotheism; that all the rest, Mosaic institutions,
   Messianic ideas, etc., form, as it were, a secondary series of beliefs,
   constituting the peculiar appanage of the children of Israel, a sort of
   family heritage, which is not transmissible.

   As Lystra had only a few or no Jews of Palestine origin, the life of
   the Apostle there was for a long time very tranquil. One family in that
   town was the centre and the school of the highest piety. It was
   composed of a grandmother named Lois, of a mother named Eunice, and of
   a young son named Timothy. The two women professed, undoubtedly, the
   Jewish religion as proselytes. Eunice had been married to a Pagan, who
   probably was dead before the advent of Paul and Barnabas. Timothy, in
   the society of these two women, advanced in the study of sacred
   literature, and in the sentiments of the most ardent devotion; but as
   he frequently visited the houses of the most devout proselytes, his
   parents had not had him circumcised. Paul converted the two women.
   Timothy, who might be fifteen years of age, was initiated into the
   Christian faith by his mother and his grandmother.

   The reports of these conversions spread to Iconium and to Antioch in
   Pisidia, and re-awakened the anger of the Jews of these two cities.
   They sent emissaries to Lystra, who provoked a disturbance. Paul was
   seized by the fanatics, dragged outside the city, stoned, and left for
   dead. The disciples came to his rescue. His wounds were not serious. He
   re-entered the town, probably by night, and on the morrow set out with
   Barnabas for Derbe.

   They made here a long stay, and won over a great many souls. These two
   Churches of Lystra and of Derbe were the first Churches which were
   composed almost entirely of Pagans. We can understand what a difference
   there must have been between these Churches and those of Palestine,
   formed in the bosom of pure Judaism, or even that of Antioch, encircled
   by a Jewish leaven and in a society already Judaised. Here there were
   subjects completely unprejudiced, honest country folks who were very
   religious, but of a turn of mind quite different from that of the
   Syrians. Till now, the preaching of Christianity had prospered only in
   the large towns, where resided a numerous population, plying their
   trades. Hence-forward, churches were planted in the villages. Neither
   Iconium, nor Lystra, nor Derbe was considerable enough in which to
   found a Church to be compared to that of Corinth or of Ephesus. Paul
   was in the habit of designating the Christians of Lycaonia by the name
   of the province in which they dwelt. Now, this province--we mean
   Galatia--understood the word in the administrative sense in which the
   Romans had applied it.

   The Roman province of Galatia, in fact, by no means embraced simply
   that country, peopled with Gallic adventurers, of which the town of
   Ancyra was the centre. It was an artificial agglomeration,
   corresponding to the transient reunion which was effected at the hands
   of the Galatian King Amyntas. This personage, after the battle of
   Philippi, and the death of Dejotarus, received from Antony, Pisidia,
   then Galatia, together with a part of Lycaonia and of Pamphylia. He was
   confirmed by Augustus in this possession. At the end of his reign
   (twenty-five years B.C.) Amyntas possessed, outside of Galatia properly
   speaking, Lycaonia and Isauria, including even Derbe, the south-east
   and the east of Phrygia, with the towns of Antioch and Apollonia,
   Pisidia and Cilicia Trachæa. All these countries at his death formed a
   single Roman province, with the exception of Cilicia Trachæa and the
   Pamphylian towns. The province which bore the name of Galatia in the
   official nomenclature, at least under the first Cæsars, included
   therefore for certain--(1) Galatia, properly speaking, (2) Lycaonia,
   (3) Pisidia, (4) Isauria, (5) Mountainous Phrygia, with the towns of
   Apollonia and Antioch. This state of things lasted for a long time.
   Ancyra was the capital of this large group, comprising almost the whole
   of central Asia Minor. The Romans were thus not sorry in order to
   decompose nationalities, and to efface recollections, to change the
   ancient geographical acceptations and to create arbitrary
   administrative groups analogous to our departments.

   Paul was accustomed to make use of the administrative name to designate
   each country. The countries he had evangelised, from Antioch in Pisidia
   to Derbe, were called by him "Galatia;" and the Christians of these
   countries were to him "Galatians." That name was to him extremely dear.
   The Churches of Galatia were embraced amongst those for which the
   Apostle had the most affection, and which in turn had for him the
   greatest personal attachment. The recollection of the friendship and
   the devotion which he had found at the houses of these good people, was
   one of the deepest impressions of his apostolic life. Several
   circumstances enhanced the keenness of these recollections. It appears
   that during his sojourn in Galatia, the Apostle was subject to attacks
   of weakness, or of the malady which frequently overtook him. The
   solicitude, the attentions of the faithful proselytes, touched him to
   the heart. The persecutions that they had to suffer together served to
   create between them a strong bond. That little Lycaonian centre had in
   its way great importance: St Paul loved to revert to it, as being his
   first achievement; it was from there that he drew later on two of his
   most faithful companions, Timothy and Gaius.

   He was for four or five years thus absorbed within a quite limited
   circle. He thought less then of those great rapid journeys, which
   towards the end of his life became with him a sort of passion, in order
   to establish firmly the Churches which might serve him as a base of
   operations. We do not know whether during that time he had any
   relations with the Church at Antioch, whose mission he had received.
   The desire of seeing again that Mother Church was awakened in him. He
   determined to make a journey thence, and proceeded by the opposite
   route to the one he had already gone by. The two missionaries visited
   for the second time Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch in Pisidia. They took
   up anew their abodes in these towns, confirming the faithful in the
   faith, exhorting them to perseverance, to patience, and teaching them
   that it was only through tribulation that they could enter into the
   Kingdom of God. For the rest, the constitution of these scattered
   Churches was very simple. The Apostles chose from amongst each of them
   elders who after their departure were the depositaries of their
   authority. The ceremony of their departure was touching. There were
   fastings and prayers, after which the Apostles recommended the faithful
   to God, and departed.

   From Antioch in Pisidia, the missionaries once more attained to Perga.
   They made there, moreover, it appeared, a mission which was crowned
   with success. The city processions, pilgrimages, and grand annual
   panegyrics, were often favourable to the preaching of the Apostles.
   From Perga, after a day's journey, they reached Attalia, the great port
   of Pamphylia. There they embarked for Seleucia; then they returned to
   great Antioch, where they had, by the grace of God, been liberated five
   years before.

   The mission field was by no means a wide one. It embraced the Island of
   Cyprus in the sense of its length, and in Asia Minor a broken line of
   about a hundred leagues. It was the first instance of an apostolic
   journey of that kind: nothing had been pre-arranged. Paul and Barnabas
   had to wrestle with the greatest external difficulties. We must not
   compare these journeys with those of a Francis Xavier or of a
   Livingstone, backed up by rich associations. The Apostles resembled
   much more the Socialist workmen, spreading their ideas from tavern to
   tavern, than the missionaries of modern times. Their trade was forced
   upon them as a necessity; they were compelled to halt in order to
   pursue it, and to regulate their movements according to the localities
   in which they could find work. Hence from delays, from dull seasons,
   there was much time lost. In spite of the enormous obstacles, the
   general results of that first mission were immense. When Paul had
   re-embarked for Antioch, there were several churches of Gentiles. The
   great step had now been made. All steps of that kind which had taken
   place anteriorly had been more or less undecided. For all that, they
   were obliged to give an answer, more or less plausible, to the pure
   Jews at Jerusalem, who maintained that circumcision was the preliminary
   obligation of the Christian profession. Moreover, the question had
   assumed a different form. Another tact of the highest importance was
   again brought to light; that was the excellent disposition which they
   had been able to discover among certain races, attached to mythological
   religions, to receive the gospel. The doctrine of Jesus was evidently
   about to profit by the species of charm which Judaism had until now
   exercised upon the pious Pagans. Asia Minor, in particular, was
   destined to become the second Christian soil. After the disasters which
   were soon to strike the Churches of Palestine, she was destined to be
   the principal home of the new faith, the theatre of the most important
   transformations.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  FIRST AFFAIR IN REGARD TO CIRCUMCISION.

   The return of Paul and Barnabas was hailed in the Church of Antioch
   with a shout of joy. The whole street of Singon was en fête: the Church
   was assembled. The two missionaries related their adventures and the
   things which God had done by them. "God Himself," said they, "had
   opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles" (Acts xiv. 27, 28). They
   spoke of the Churches of Galatia, which were almost wholly composed of
   Pagans. The Church of Antioch, which had for a long time on his account
   recognised the legitimacy of the baptism of the Gentiles, approved
   their conduct. They remained there several months, resting from their
   labours, and refreshing themselves at that source with the apostolic
   spirit. It was then, it appears, that Paul converted and adopted as a
   disciple, companion, and fellow-worker, a young uncircumcised man named
   Titus, who had been born of Pagan parents, and whom we find henceforth
   always with him.

   A serious dissension, which nearly destroyed the work of Jesus, broke
   out at that time, and threw the nascent Church into great disorder.
   This dissension embraced the very essence of the situation. It was
   inevitable. It was a crisis that the new religion could not fail but
   pass through.

   Jesus, in raising religion to the highest summit it had ever attained,
   had not stated very distinctly whether or not he would remain a Jew. He
   had not indicated what he desired to conserve of Judaism. Sometimes he
   asserted that he had come to confirm the Law of Moses, at others, to
   supplant it. To speak the truth, this was, for a great poet like him,
   an insignificant detail. When one has reached the point of knowing the
   Heavenly Father, Him whom one adores in spirit and in truth, one no
   longer belongs to any sect, to any particular religion, or to any
   school; one has the true religion: all practices become of no account;
   one does not despise them, for they are the symbols of what has been or
   is still respectable; but one ceases to impute to them an intrinsic
   virtue. Circumcision, baptism, the Passover, unleavened bread,
   sacrifices, all these become equally secondary matters: one thinks no
   more about them. None of the uncircumcised, moreover, had identified
   themselves with Jesus, or his life; the question did not hence call for
   solution. Like all men of genius, Jesus concerned himself with mind
   alone. Practical questions of the highest importance, questions which
   appeared paramount to inferior minds, questions which caused the
   acutest pain to men of application, had no existence for him.

   At his death the confusion was general. Abandoned to themselves,
   deprived of him who had been for them all a living theology, they
   returned to the practices of Jewish piety. There were men who were in
   the highest degree devout; but the devotion of the times was Jewish
   devotion. They preserved their customs, and fell again into those petty
   observances that ordinary persons looked upon as the essence of
   Judaism. The world esteemed them as holy men; and by a singular change
   of front, the Pharisees, who had served as a butt for the keenest
   satires of Jesus, became almost reconciled to his disciples. It was the
   Sadducees who showed themselves to be the irreconcilable enemies of the
   new movement. The minute observance of the Law appeared to them the
   first condition of being a Christian.

   Very soon people encountered, in looking at things from this point of
   view, the greatest difficulties. For, as soon as the family of
   Christians increased in numbers, it was exclusively amongst the people
   of non-Israelitish origin, amongst the sympathetic adherents of Judaism
   who were uncircumcised, that the new faith found the readiest access.
   To oblige these to become circumcised was out of the question. Peter,
   with admirable practical good sense, recognised this clearly. On the
   other hand, timorous persons, such as James, the brother of the Lord,
   looked upon it as supreme impiety to admit Pagans into the Church, and
   to eat with them. Peter put off as far as he was able all solution of
   the question.

   For the rest, the Jews, on their part, found themselves in the same
   situation, and had taken up a similar position. When proselytes or
   partisans came to them from all parts, the question presented itself to
   them. Some advanced minds, honest laymen ignorant of science, and
   removed from the influence of the doctors, did not insist upon
   circumcision. Sometimes even they dissuaded the new converts from the
   practice. These simple-minded and good souls desired only the salvation
   of the world, and sacrificed all the rest to this. The orthodox, on the
   contrary, with the disciples of Schammai at their head, declared
   circumcision to be indispensable. Opposed to the proselytising of the
   Gentiles, they did nothing to facilitate the cause of religion; on the
   contrary, they exhibited towards the converts a certain coldness;
   Schammai drove them out of his house we are told, with a bâton. This
   division was clearly manifested in respect of the royal family of
   Adiabene. The Jew named Ananias who converted her, and who was by no
   means a savant, strongly dissuaded Izate against circumcision. "One can
   live as perfectly," said he, "as a Jew can, without circumcision; to
   adore God was the really important thing." The pious Helene was of the
   same opinion. A rigorist, named Eleazar, declared, on the contrary,
   that if the king did not undergo circumcision he was an impious person;
   that the reading of the Law was of no avail if one did not observe it,
   and that the highest precept was circumcision. The king, at the risk of
   losing his crown, followed this advice. The petty kings who embraced
   Judaism, in view of the rich marriages that the family of Herod
   offered, submitted to the same rite. But true piety was of a less
   facile composition than politics and avariciousness. Many of the pious
   converts led the Jewish life without being subjected to the rite which
   was reputed by the vulgar as the opening of the door to excesses. It
   was indeed for them a source of perpetual embarrassment. Society
   bigots, in whom prejudices are strong, are accustomed to represent
   their religious practices as matters of good taste, of superior
   education. Whilst in France the devout man, in order to avow his piety,
   is compelled to conquer a sort of shame, and of human respect, with the
   Mussulmans, on the other hand, the man who practices his religion is
   the gentleman; he who is not a good Mussulman is not the person that he
   ought to be; his position is analogous to that of a boorish,
   ill-mannered country man with us. Similarly, in England and in the
   United States, he who does not observe the Sunday, is put to the ban in
   good society. Amongst the Jews, the position of the uncircumcised was
   still worse. Contact with such a being was in their eyes something
   insupportable; circumcision appeared to them as obligatory on every one
   who wished to live amongst them. He who would not submit to it, was a
   creature of low quality; a sort of impure animal that people avoided; a
   wretch with whom a man of good standing could hold no relations.

   The grand duality which is the essence of Judaism, was revealed in
   this. The Law, which was essentially restrictive, and made for the
   purpose of isolating, was totally different in spirit from the Prophets
   who dreamt of the conversion of the world, and embraced the widest
   fields. Two words borrowed from the Talmudic language well defines the
   difference that we have indicated. The agada, the opposite of the
   halaka, designates popular preaching, proposes to itself the conversion
   of the heathen, in opposition to the learned casuistry which only
   thinks of the strict execution of the Law, without aiming at converting
   any one. To use the phraseology of the Talmud, the gospels are the
   agadas; the Talmud, on the contrary, is the highest expression of the
   halaka. It is the agada which has conquered the world and made
   Christianity; the halaka is the foundation of orthodox Judaism, which
   still endures without seeking to extend itself. The agada is
   represented as a thing principally Galilæan; the halaka as a thing
   peculiarly Jerusalemitish. Jesus, Hillel, the authors of apocalypses
   and apochryphas, are agadists, pupils of the Prophets, inheritors of
   their infinite aspirations; Schammai, the Talmudists, the Jews
   posterior to the destruction of Jerusalem, are the halakistes, the
   adherents of the Law, with its strict observances. We shall see, up to
   the time of the supreme crisis of the year 70, the fanaticism of the
   Law increasing each day, and, on the eve of the great national
   disaster, terminating in a sort of reaction against the doctrines of St
   Paul; in those "eighteen measures" which afterwards rendered impossible
   all intercourse between the Jews and the non-Jews, and opened the sad
   history of exclusive Judaism, hateful and hated, which was the Judaism
   of the Middle Ages, and is still the Judaism of the East.

   It is clear that, for nascent Christianity, here was the point upon
   which its future depended. Judaism--did it or did it not impose
   particular rites upon the multitudes which professed it? Did it
   establish a distinction between the monotheistic basis which
   constituted its essence, and the observances with which it was
   surcharged? If the former party had triumphed, as the Schammaites
   wished it should, the Jewish propaganda would have been wiped out. It
   is quite certain that the world would not have become Jewish, in the
   narrow sense of the word. That which constituted the attraction of
   Judaism, was not its rites, which did not differ in principle from
   those of other religions: it was its theological simplicity. We accept
   it as a sort of deism, or religious philosophy; and, in fact--in the
   mind of a Philo, for example--Judaism was itself very closely
   associated with philosophical speculations. With the Essenians it had
   reassumed the form of a social Utopia; with the author of the poem
   attributed to Phocylides, it had become a simple catechism of good
   sense and of honesty; with the author of the treatise of "The Empire of
   Reason," a sort of Stoicism. Judaism, like all religions founded
   primarily upon caste and tribalism, was encumbered by practices
   destined to separate the believer from the rest of the world. These
   practices were no longer an obstacle on the day when Judaism justly
   aspired to become the universal religion, without either exclusion or
   separation. It was as Deism and not as Mosaicism that it was to become
   the universal religion of humanity. "Love all men," said Hillel, "and
   draw them together with the Law; act not otherwise than you would not
   wish that others should act to you. Here is the whole Law, the rest is
   the commentary of it." When we read the treatises of Philo, entitled,
   "Of the Contemplative Life," or, "That Every Honest Man is Free;" when
   we read even the Sibylline verses written by the Jews, we are
   transported into an order of ideas which contain nothing specially
   Jewish, into a world of general mysticism which is not more Jewish than
   Buddhist or Pythagorean. The Pseudo-Phocylides goes the length of
   abolishing the Sabbath. We perceive that all these men, ardent for the
   amelioration of humanity, seek to reduce Judaism to a general morale,
   to strip it of all that it possesses of individuality, and of
   everything that would make of it a restricted religion.

   Three capital reasons, in fact, rendered Judaism a thing very
   exclusive. These were, circumcision, the prohibition of mixed
   marriages, and the distinction between meats permissible or forbidden.
   Circumcision was for adults a painful ceremony; a ceremony, moreover,
   not free from danger, and disagreeable to the last degree. That was one
   of the reasons which interdicted the Jews from leading a life in common
   with other races, and made of them a separate caste. At the baths and
   at the gymnasiums, most important places in ancient cities,
   circumcision exposed the Jews to all manner of affronts. Every time
   that the attention of the Greeks or the Romans was drawn to the
   subject, it was the signal for outbursts of pleasantry. The Jews were
   very sensitive on the point, and avenged themselves by cruel reprisals.
   Many, in order to escape the ridicule, and wishing to pass themselves
   off for Greeks, attempted to dissimulate their original mark by a
   surgical operation, the details of which have been preserved to us by
   Celsus. As for the converts who submitted to that initiatory ceremony,
   there was only one course they could take--that was, to conceal
   themselves to escape the sarcasms. No man of the world could resign
   himself to such a situation, and this was doubtless the reason that the
   conversions to Judaism were much more numerous among the women than
   among the men, the former not being subjected at first to an
   experience, shocking and repulsive in every respect. We find many
   instances of Jewish women being married to Pagans, but there is not a
   single instance of a Jew being married to a Pagan woman. Hence the
   origin of much of the jeering. The necessity made itself felt by a
   broad casuistry which brought peace into troubled households.

   Mixed marriages were the origin of difficulties of a similar kind. The
   Jews regarded these marriages as pure fornication. It was the crime
   that the kanaim punished with the dagger, simply because the Law in not
   prescribing any particular punishment for it, left its repression in
   the hands of zealots. Although united by faith and love to Christ, two
   Christians could thus be prevented from contracting marriage. The
   Israelite converted to Jesus who wished to espouse a sister of the
   Grecian race, expected that union, holy in his eyes, to be called by
   the most outrageous names.

   The prescriptions as to meats being pure or impure were not of the
   least consequence. We can judge of this by that which still takes place
   in our own time. Nudity being no longer a part of modern manners,
   circumcision no longer subjects Israelites to these inconveniences. But
   the necessity of slaughtering for themselves continues to be very
   embarrassing for them. It requires of those who are strict not to eat
   with Christians, and, consequently, to be sequestered from general
   society. That precept is the principal cause which still places
   Judaism, in many countries, in the position of an exclusive sect. In
   countries where Israelites are not separated from the rest of the
   nation, it is a rock of offence; for, to understand it, it is
   sufficient on this point to have seen Puritan Jews arrive from Germany
   or Poland, who are shocked at the licences their co-religionists permit
   on this side of the Rhine. In cities like Salonica, in which the
   majority of the population is Jewish, and where the wealth is in the
   hands of the Jews, the actual trade of the community is on this account
   rendered impossible. Even in ancient times these restrictions were
   irksome. A Jewish law, the relic of innumerable centuries during which
   the responsibilities of property were an essential part of religious
   legislation, stamped the pig with a brand of infamy, which had no
   raison d'être in Europe. That old antipathy, having its origin in the
   East, appeared puerile to the Greeks and the Romans. A multitude of
   other prohibitions had descended from a time when one of the
   pre-occupations of the leaders of civilisation was to constrain their
   subordinates from eating things unclean, or from touching carrion. The
   hygiene of marriage, in fine, had given room for the enacting of a code
   of legal impurities for women sufficiently complicated. The peculiarity
   of these kind of prohibitions is their survival from times when they
   had a raison d'être, and of their becoming at length so vexatious that
   they might have had their origin in what was proper and salutary.

   One particular circumstance gave to the prohibitions in regard to meat
   much importance. The flesh provided for the sacrifices made to the gods
   was considered as impure. Now these meats, after the sacrifices, were
   often carried to the market, where it became very difficult to
   distinguish them; hence the inextricable scruples. The strict Jews did
   not regard as lawful the indiscriminate provisioning of them-selves in
   the market. They held that the seller should be questioned as to the
   origin of the meat, and that before accepting the dish the host should
   be questioned as to how it had been supplied. The imposing of that load
   of casuistry upon converts had evidently been carried to excess.
   Christianity would not have been Christianity if, like the Judaism of
   our day, it had been compulsory to have slaughtering done separately,
   or if the Christian could not, without violating his conscience, eat
   with other men. When one has discovered in that network of difficulties
   religions surcharged with prohibitions pertaining to life; when one has
   seen the Jew in the East; the Mussulmans separated by their ritualistic
   laws, as if by a wall, from the European world, where they might take
   their place, one can comprehend the immense importance of the questions
   which were to be decided at the time at which we are now arrived. The
   question to be decided was, whether Christianity should be a religion
   of formulas and rituals, a religion of ablutions, of purifications, of
   distinctions between things pure and things impure, or, on the other
   hand, the religion of mind, the idealistic cult, which has killed or
   shall kill by degrees religious materialism, all formularies, all
   ceremonies. Or, better still, the question to be decided was whether
   Christianity was to be a petty sect or a universal religion; whether
   the idea of Jesus should be overshadowed by reason of the incapacity of
   his disciples; or whether that idea, by virtue of its original force,
   should triumph over the scruples of backward and narrow minds, which
   were ready to have it replaced and obliterated.

   The mission of Paul and Barnabas had presented the question with such a
   force that there was no way of avoiding a solution. Paul, who in the
   first period of his ministry had, it appears, preached circumcision,
   now declared it useless. He had surreptitiously admitted Pagans into
   the Church; he had constituted Churches composed of Gentiles; Titus,
   his intimate friend, had not been circumcised. The Church at Jerusalem
   could not longer close its eyes to facts so notorious. Broadly
   speaking, this Church was, on the point with which we are now engaged,
   hesitating, or favourable to the party the most backward. The
   conservative senate was there. In close proximity to the Temple, in
   perpetual contact with the Pharisees, the old Apostles, timid and
   narrow-minded, could not lend themselves to the profoundly
   revolutionary theories of Paul. Many of the Pharisees, however, had
   embraced Christianity without renouncing the essential principles of
   their sect. To such persons, the supposition that one could be saved
   without circumcision was blasphemy. To them the Law seemed to remain in
   its entirety. They had been told that Jesus had come to fulfil the Law,
   not to abrogate it. The privileges of the children of Abraham appeared
   to them intact: the Gentiles could not enter into the kingdom of God
   without being previously affiliated with the family of Abraham; in a
   word, before becoming a Christian, it was necessary to be made a Jew.
   Never, we can see, had Christianity had to resolve a more fundamental
   doubt. If one might credit the Jewish party, the love feast even, the
   common repast, would have been impossible; the two sections of the
   Church of Jesus would not have been able to commune the one with the
   other. From the theological point of view, the matter was still more
   serious; the question was to know whether one could be saved through
   the works of the Law or by the grace of Jesus Christ.

   Some members of the Church of Judæa having arrived at Antioch without,
   as it would appear, any mission from the apostolic body, provoked
   discussion. They proclaimed loudly that one could not be saved without
   circumcision. It is necessary to recall that the Christians, who had at
   Antioch a name and a distinct individuality, had nothing of the kind at
   Jerusalem; that which did not oppose whoever came from Jerusalem had
   not in the whole Church much force, for the centre of authority was
   there. People were greatly excited. Paul and Barnabas resisted in the
   most energetic manner. There were long disputes. To bring it to an end,
   it was decided that Paul and Barnabas should go to Jerusalem to consult
   with the Apostles and the Elders on the subject.

   The question had for Paul a personal importance. His action until now
   had been almost entirely independent. He had only spent a fortnight at
   Jerusalem since his conversion, and for eleven years he had not put a
   foot in it. In the eyes of many he was a sort of heretic, teaching on
   his own account, and scarcely in communion with the rest of the
   faithful. He declared proudly that he had had his revelation, his
   apostleship. To go to Jerusalem was, in appearance at least, to forfeit
   his liberty, to subject his apostleship to that of the Mother Church,
   to learn from others what he knew through his own and personal
   revelation. He did not deny the authority of the Mother Church; but he
   defied it, because he was acquainted with the obstinacy of some of its
   members. He therefore took precautions so as not to compromise himself
   too much. He declared that in going to Jerusalem he would not submit to
   any dictation; he even feigned, indulging a pretension that was
   habitual to him, that in this he was obeying a command of Heaven, and
   of having had a revelation on the subject. He took with him his
   disciple Titus, who shared all his opinions, and who, as we have said
   above, was not circumcised.

   Paul, Barnabas, and Titus set out on their journey. The Church at
   Antioch accompanied them on their route as far as Laodicæa-on-the-sea.
   They followed the coast of Phoenicia, then traversed Samaria, finding
   at every step brethren, to whom they recounted the marvels of the
   conversion of the Gentiles. There was great joy everywhere. In this way
   they reached Jerusalem. This was one of the most solemn hours in the
   history of Christianity. The grand doubt was now to be solved. The men
   upon whom rested the whole future of the new religion were going to be
   ranged face to face. Upon their grandeur of soul, upon their
   uprightness of heart depended the future of humanity.

   Eighteen years had rolled on since the death of Jesus. The Apostles had
   grown old. One of them had suffered martyrdom. Others probably were
   dead. We know that the deceased members of the apostolic college were
   not replaced; that the college became extinct when they had
   disappeared. On the part of the Apostles, they formed themselves into a
   college of elders, in which authority was divided. The "Church," the
   reputed depository of the Holy Spirit, was composed of the Apostles, of
   the elders, and of all the brotherhood. Amongst the simple-minded
   brethren themselves there were degrees. Inequality was perfectly
   admissible; but that inequality was altogether moral; it was neither a
   question of external prerogative nor of material advantage. The three
   principal "pillars," as we have said, of the community were still
   Peter, James, the brother of the Lord, and John, the son of Zebedee.
   Many Galileans had disappeared. They had been replaced by a certain
   number of persons belonging to the party of the Pharisees. "Pharisee"
   was synonymous with "devotee"; but all the best saints of Jerusalem
   were also strong devotees. Lacking the mind, the finesse, the grandeur
   of Jesus, they had, after his death, fallen into a kind of stupid
   bigotry, a state similar to that which their master so strongly
   combated. They were incapable of irony; they had almost forgotten the
   eloquent invectives of Jesus against the hypocrites. Some had developed
   into a sort of Jewish Indian priests, after the manner of John the
   Baptist and of Banou, monks totally addicted to formulas, and at whom
   Jesus certainly, if he had been still alive, could not have aimed
   sarcasms enough.

   James, in particular, surnamed the Just, or "the brother of the Lord,"
   was one of the most exact observers of the Law that there was.
   According to certain traditions--very doubtful, it is true--he was even
   an ascetic, practising all the Nazarene abstinences, observing
   celibacy, drinking no intoxicating liquors, eschewing flesh, never
   cutting his hair, forbidding himself anointings and baths, wearing
   neither sandals nor garments of wool, clothed in plain linen. Nothing,
   we see, was more contrary to the idea of Jesus, who, at least from the
   death of John the Baptist, declared affectations of that kind perfectly
   vain. Abstinence--already in favour with certain branches of
   Judaism--became the fashion, and formed the dominant trait of the
   fraction of the Church which, later on, was to be connected with a
   pretended Ebion. The pure Jews were opposed to those abstinences; but
   the proselytes, particularly the women, inclined much to them. James
   did not stir from the Temple; he remained there alone, it is said, for
   long hours in prayer, until the callus of his knees had contracted,
   like those of the chamois. It is believed that he passed his time there
   after the manner of Jeremiah, a penitent for the people, weeping for
   the sins of the nation, and turning aside the chastisements that
   threatened them. He had only to raise his hands to heaven to perform
   miracles. He had been surnamed the Just, and also Obliam, that is to
   say, "Rampart of the people," because it was supposed that it was his
   prayers which prevented the Divine wrath from sweeping everything away.
   The Jews, as we are assured, held him in the same veneration as the
   Christians. If that singular man was really the brother of Jesus, he
   must have been at least one of those inimical brothers who abjured him
   and wished him arrested; and it is probable to such recollections that
   Paul, irritated by a mind so narrow, made allusion when he wrote
   concerning these pillars of the Church at Jerusalem:--"Whatsoever they
   were, it maketh no matter to me; God accepteth no man's person" (Gal.
   ii. 6). Jude, the brother of James, was, it seems, in entire agreement
   with his ideas.

   To sum up, the Church at Jerusalem had been more and more broadened by
   the spirit of Jesus. The dead weight of Judaism had borne it down.
   Jerusalem was for the new faith an unwholesome centre, and would have
   ended by destroying it. In that capital of Judaism, it was very
   difficult to cease being a Jew. Moreover, new men, like St Paul, all
   but systematically avoided residing there. Forced now, under pain of
   being separated from the primitive Church, to come to confer with their
   elders, they found themselves in a position full of hardship; and the
   work, which could not live except by the power of concord and of
   abnegation, ran an immense risk.

   The interview, in fact, was singularly protracted and embarrassing.
   People listened favourably at first to the account that Paul and
   Barnabas gave of their missions; for every one, even the most Judaised,
   was of opinion that the conversion of the Gentiles was the harbinger of
   the Messiah. The curiosity to see the man of whom so much was being
   said, and who had led the sect into so new a path, was at first very
   lively. They glorified God for having made an Apostle out of a
   persecutor. But when they came to circumcision, and the obligation of
   practising the Law, dissension broke out in all its force. The
   Pharisean party set forth its pretensions in the most uncompromising
   manner. The party in favour of emancipation responded with triumphant
   force. They cited the cases of several uncircumcised persons who had
   received the Holy Ghost. If God made no distinction between Pagans and
   Jews, how could they have the temerity to do it for Him? How could that
   be held for unclear which God had purified? Why impose a yoke on the
   converts that the race of Israel had not been able to bear? It was
   through Jesus that one was saved, and not through the Law. Paul and
   Barnabas advanced in support of that thesis the miracles which God had
   wrought for the conversion of the Gentiles. But the Pharisees objected
   with no less force that the Law was not abolished; that one never
   ceased to be a Jew; that the obligations of a Jew remained ever the
   same. They refused to hold relations with Titus, who was uncircumcised;
   they openly accused Paul of infidelity, and of being an enemy of the
   Law.

   The most admirable characteristic in the histories of the origins of
   Christianity is that that radical and serious division, embracing a
   question of the first importance, did not occasion in the Church a
   complete schism, which would have been its ruin. The eager and
   impulsive mind of Paul had here a splendid opportunity of displaying
   itself; his sound practical sense, his sagacity, and his judgment,
   remedied everything. The two parties were eager, excited, almost harsh
   to one another; nobody rejected his advice; the question was not yet
   shaped; people remained united in the common work. A superior bond, the
   love that every one had for Jesus, the remembrance which all
   entertained for him, were stronger than the divisions. The most
   fundamental dissension that was ever produced in the bosom of the
   Church, did not lead to reprobation. This is a great lesson that
   succeeding centuries have seldom been able to imitate.

   Paul understood that in large and heated assemblies he could never
   succeed, because that there narrow minds would always have the sway,
   and because Judaism was too long at Jerusalem for one to hope to be
   able to extort from it a concession of principles. He went and saw
   separately all personages of consideration, in particular, Peter,
   James, and John. Peter, like all men who exist for the most part on
   elevated sentiment, was indifferent to questions of party. These
   disputes grieved him; he wished for union, concord, and peace. His
   timid and rather contracted mind detached itself with difficulty from
   Judaism; he would have preferred that the new converts had accepted
   circumcision, but he saw the impossibility of such a solution. Deep and
   tender natures are always undecided; they sometimes even have to resort
   to a little dissimulation. They desire to please everybody--no question
   of principle seems with them to outweigh the value of peace. They let
   themselves be carried away by different parties, and to making
   contradictory promises and engagements. Peter sometimes committed this
   by no means heinous fault. To Paul, he was for uncircumcision; to the
   strict Jews, be sided with the partisans of circumcision. The soul of
   Paul was so grand, so sincere, so full of the new zeal which Jesus had
   brought into the world, that Peter could not fail to sympathise with
   him. They loved each other, and when they were together, it was as
   sovereigns of the entire world of the future, which they divided
   between them.

   It was doubtless at the close of one of their conversations that Paul,
   with the exaggeration of language and the verve that were habitual to
   him, said to Peter, "We quite understand one another; yours is the
   gospel of circumcision; mine is the gospel of uncircumcision." Paul
   laid hold of these words later on as a sort of regular treaty, which
   ought to be accepted by all the Apostles. It is difficult to believe
   that Peter and Paul should dare to repeat outside their private
   conversations words which would have injured to the highest degree the
   pretensions of James, and probably even those of John. But the words
   were uttered. These large schemes, which were hardly those of
   Jerusalem, struck greatly the enthusiastic soul of Peter. Paul made
   upon him the greatest impression, and won him over completely. Up to
   this time Peter had travelled little; his pastoral visits had not, it
   seems, been extended beyond Palestine. He must have been about fifty
   years of age. Paul's eagerness for travelling, the recitals of the
   apostolic journeys, the projects that had been communicated to him in
   regard to the future, fired his zeal. It was from this time that Peter
   was seen to absent himself from Jerusalem, and to lead in his turn the
   wandering life of apostleship.

   James, with the sanctity of a life so equivocal, was the chief of the
   Judaistic party. It was through him that almost all the conversions of
   Pharisees had been made: the exigencies of that party were imposed on
   him. Everything tends to the belief that he did not make any concession
   upon the dogmatic principle; nevertheless, a moderate and conciliatory
   opinion soon began to make itself manifest. The legitimacy of the
   conversion of the Gentiles was admitted; it was declared that it was
   useless to be disquieted in regard to what concerned circumcision; it
   was only necessary to maintain a few interesting prescriptions, the
   morale or the suppression of which would shock too keenly the Jews. In
   order to reassure the Pharisean party, it was remarked that the
   existence of the Law was not for the sake of compromise, seeing that
   Moses had from time immemorial, and would always be, for the people to
   be read in the synagogues. The converted Jews thus remained submissive
   to the entire Law, and the exemptions only concerned the converted
   Pagans. In practice, however, people were to avoid shocking those who
   had more contracted ideas. It was probably these moderate persons, the
   authors of that harmless contradiction, who counselled Paul to induce
   Titus to let himself be circumcised. Titus, in fact, had become one of
   the principal difficulties of the situation. The converted Pharisees of
   Jerusalem willingly supported the idea that, far removed from them, at
   Antioch, or in the depths of Asia Minor, there were Christians
   uncircumcised. But in their midst at Jerusalem, to be obliged to
   associate with them, and thus to commit a flagrant violation of that
   Law to which they were attached to the bottom of their hearts, this was
   what they could not consent to.

   Paul took the most infinite precautions in acceding to this demand. It
   was indeed owned that it was not as a matter of necessity that the
   circumcision of Titus was demanded, as Titus would remain a Christian
   even if he did not submit to that rite; but it was asked of him as a
   mark of condescension for the brethren whose consciences were pledged,
   and who otherwise could not hold relations with him. Paul consented,
   but not without uttering some severe words against the authors of such
   an exaction, against those false brethren who only had entered the
   Church to diminish the extent of the liberties created by Jesus. He
   protested that be would in nothing submit his opinions to theirs; that
   the concession he had made was for once only, for the sake of the
   general good, and of peace. With such reservations he gave his consent,
   and Titus was circumcised.

   That concession cost Paul much, and the sentence in which he spoke of
   it is one of the most original that he ever wrote. The language that it
   cost him seemed not to be able to run off his pen. The sentence, at
   first sight, appeared to mean that Titus was not circumcised, whilst it
   implied that he was. The remembrance of that painful moment often
   returned to him; that semblance of returning to Judaism appeared to him
   sometimes as a denying of Jesus; he re-assured himself by saying,--"And
   unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews." Like all
   men who possess a multiplicity of ideas, Paul set little store by
   forms. He perceived the vanity of everything which was not a thing of
   the soul, and when the supreme interests of conscience were at play,
   he, usually so stubborn, abandoned all else.

   The capital concession which involved the circumcision of Titus,
   appeased much of the ill-feeling. It was admitted that in distant
   countries in which the new converts had no daily intercourse with the
   Jews, it would be sufficient if they abstained from blood, together
   with meats offered in sacrifice to the gods, or suffocated, and that
   they observed the same laws as the Jews in regard to marriage, and the
   relations between the sexes. The use of pork meat, the interdiction of
   which was everywhere the symbol of Judaism, was left free. It was
   almost the embodiment of the Noachic precepts; that is to say, which it
   was supposed had been revealed to Noah, and which were imposed on all
   proselytes. The idea that the blood was the life, that the blood was
   life itself, inspired in the Jews an extreme horror for meats from
   which the blood had not been let. To abstain from these was for them a
   precept of natural religion. Demons were supposed to be particularly
   greedy of blood, so in eating meat not bled people ran the risk of
   having for companion of the food they partook of a demon. A man who
   about that period wrote under the usurped name of the celebrated Greek
   moralist Phocylides a short course of Jewish natural morals, simplified
   the usages of the non-Jews, by seizing upon similar solutions. That
   bold impostor did not essay to convert his reader to Judaism; he sought
   merely to inculcate on him the "Noachical precepts," with some greatly
   modified Jewish rules in regard to meat and to marriage. The first of
   these rules was altered by him to accord with hygienic requirements and
   alimentary convenience, to the abstaining from things forbidden or
   unclean; the second had reference to the regulating and the purifying
   of sexual relations. All the rest of the Jewish ritual went for
   nothing.

   For the rest, that which issued from the assembly at Jerusalem was only
   agreed to by word of mouth, and was not even stated in very strict
   terms, for we shall see them frequently set aside. The idea of dogmatic
   canons emanating from a council was not yet heard of. By reason of
   profound good sense, these simple people attained to the loftiest
   pinnacle of policy. They saw that the only way of escaping great
   questions was to leave them unresolved, to take a middle course which
   would please no one, and to leave problems to wear themselves out, and
   to die from lack of a raison d'être.

   People were content to be divided. Paul explained to Peter, James, and
   John the gospel that he preached to the Gentiles; the former entirely
   approved of it, finding nothing in it to reprimand, and not attempting
   to add anything thereto. Paul and Barnabas were heartily given the
   right hand of fellowship; their immediate right divine to the
   apostleship of the Pagan world was admitted; people recognised in them
   a sort of peculiar grace for what was the special object of their
   vocation. The title of Apostle of the Gentiles, which Paul had already
   assumed, was, as he assures us, officially conferred on him; and
   without doubt people accorded to him, at least by tacit assent, the
   fact which he prized the most, to wit, that he had had his special
   revelation as direct as those who had seen Jesus; in other words, that
   his vision on the way to Damascus was of as much importance as the
   other appearances of Christ risen from the dead. All that was required
   of the three representatives of the Church of Antioch in return, was
   not to forget the poor at Jerusalem. The Church of that city, in fact,
   by reason of its communistic organisation, its peculiar
   responsibilities, and the misery which reigned in Judea, appeared to be
   nearing its last gasp. Paul and his party accepted gladly that idea.
   They hoped by a kind of contribution to shut the mouth of the
   intolerant Jerusalemitish party, and to reconcile it with the thought
   that he existed for the Church of the Gentiles. By means of a trifling
   tribute they purchased liberty of thought, and remained in
   communication with the central Church, outside of which one did not
   dare hope for salvation.

   In order that no doubt should remain as to the reconciliation, it was
   decided that Paul, Barnabas, and Titus, in returning to Antioch, were
   to be accompanied by two of the principal members of the Church at
   Jerusalem, Judas Bar-Saba and Silvanus or Silas, who were charged with
   disavowing the brethren from Judæa who had created the trouble in the
   Church at Antioch, and to render witness to Paul and Barnabas, whose
   services and devotion were recognised. The joy at Antioch was very
   great. Judas and Silas held the rank of prophets: their inspired speech
   was appreciated extremely by the Church at Antioch. Silas was so much
   charmed with that atmosphere of life and of liberty, that he had no
   desire to return to Jerusalem. Judas alone returned to the Apostles,
   and Silas attached himself to Paul by bonds of brotherhood, which every
   day became more intimate.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV.

  SLOW PROPAGATION OF CHRISTIANITY: ITS INTRODUCTION AT ROME.

   An idea which, above all things, it is necessary to get rid of, when
   the question at issue is the propagation of Christianity, is that that
   propagation had to be made by succeeding missionaries, and by preachers
   similar to those of modern times, who have to go from city to city.
   Paul and Barnabas and their companions were the only ones who sometimes
   proceeded in this manner. The rest was done by workmen whose names
   remain unknown. Alongside the Apostles who attained celebrity, there
   was thus an obscure apostleship, whose agents were not dogmatists by
   profession, but who were none the less most efficacious. The Jews of
   the period were nomads par excellence. Merchants, servants, small
   tradesmen, they visited all the large towns of the coast, and pursued
   their calling. Active, industrious, polite, they brought with them
   their ideas, their good example, their exaltation, and dominated these
   populations, degraded in point of religion, with all the superiority
   that the enthusiastic man possesses over those that are indifferent.
   Those affiliated to the Christian sect travelled like the other Jews,
   and carried the glad tidings with them. It was a sort of familiar
   preaching, and much more persuasive than any other. The gentleness, the
   gaiety, the good humour, the patience of the new believers, caused them
   to be received gladly everywhere, and conciliated their minds.

   Rome was one of the first points attacked in this manner. The capital
   of the Empire had heard the name of Jesus long before all the
   intermediate countries could have been evangelised, just as a high
   summit is illuminated when the valleys lying between it and the sun are
   still in darkness. Rome was, in fact, the rendezvous of all the
   Oriental religious, the point of the Mediterranean with which the
   Syrians had the most intercourse. They arrived there in enormous bands.
   Like all poor populations going up to attack the large cities in quest
   of fortune, they were obedient and humble. With them disembarked troops
   of Greeks, Asiatics, and Egyptians, all speaking Greek. Rome was
   literally a bilingual city. The language of the Jewish world and of the
   Christian world of Rome was for three centuries Greek. Greek was at
   Rome the language of all that was most wicked and most honest, of all
   that was the best and the most base. Rhetoricians, grammarians,
   philosophers, noble pedagogues, preceptors, servants, intriguers,
   artists, singers, dancers, brokers, artisans, preachers of new sects,
   religious heroes--they all spoke Greek, The old Roman burgess class
   lost ground each day, swamped as it was by this flood of strangers.

   It is in the highest degree probable that about the year 50 several
   Jews from Syria, already Christians, entered the capital of the Empire,
   and disseminated their ideas there. In fact, among the good
   administrative measures of Claudius, Suetonius placed the following:
   "He expelled the Jews from Rome, who, at the instigation of Chrestus,
   indulged frequently in riots." Certainly, it is possible that there
   might have been at Rome a Jew named Chrestus who fomented troubles
   amongst his co-religionists, and which led to their expulsion. But it
   is much more probable that the name of Chrestus was none other than
   that of Christ himself. The introduction of the new faith provoked,
   doubtless, in the Jewish quarter at Rome, altercations, quarrels,
   scenes analogous, in a word, to those which had already taken place at
   Damascus, at Antioch in Pisidia, and at Lystra. Wishing to put an end
   to these disorders, the police were compelled to take measures for the
   expulsion of the perturbators. The chiefs of police may have inquired
   superficially into the nature of the quarrel, which interested them so
   little; a report addressed to the Government may have proved that the
   agitators called themselves Christiani, that is to say, partisans of a
   certain Christus; that name being unknown, it may have been changed
   into Chrestus, in consequence of the custom of unlettered persons
   giving to the names of strangers a form appropriate to their habits.
   Hence, in order to come to a conclusion that there existed a man of
   that name, who had been the provoker and the leader of the riots, was
   but a short step to take; the inspectors of police might have
   overlooked the fact, and, without further inquiry, pronounced sentence
   of banishment against the two parties.

   The principal Jewish quarter in Rome was situated on the other side of
   the Tiber; that is to say, in the part of the city the poorest and the
   most filthy, probably in the neighbourhood of the actual Porta Portese.
   Here was situated formerly, as in our own times, the port of Rome, the
   place where merchandise was unloaded which had been brought in flat
   boats from Ostia. It was the quarter of the Jews and of the Syrians,
   "nations born to servitude" as is remarked by Cicero. The first nucleus
   of the Jewish population at Rome had, in fact, been formed of freedmen,
   descendants, for the most part, of those who had been carried prisoners
   to Rome by Pompey. They had undergone slavery without changing any of
   their religious habits. That which is admirable about Judaism, is that
   simplicity of faith which makes the Jew, though transported a thousand
   leagues from his country, at the end of many generations a Jew still of
   the purest type. The intercourse between the synagogues of Rome and
   those of Jerusalem was continual. The first colony had been reinforced
   by numerous emigrants. These poor people disembarked by hundreds at
   Ripa, and lived there by themselves in the quarter adjacent to
   Transtevere, serving as street porters, engaging in small commerce,
   exchanging matches for broken glasses, and presenting to the haughty
   Italian population a type which, later, should become to them too
   familiar --that of a mendicant skilled in his art. A Roman who
   respected himself never put his foot into these debased quarters. It
   was treated as a suburb given over to contemned classes, and to
   disreputable avocations; tanneries, sausage factories, steeping
   troughs, were relegated there. So the unfortunates lived quite
   tranquilly in that despised corner, in the midst of bales of
   merchandise, infamous taverns, and of litter porters (Syrians), who had
   here their general quarters. The police did not enter it except when
   the quarrels were bloody, or when they were too often repeated. Few of
   the quarters of Rome were so free; politics had nothing to do with it.
   Not only was religion practised in ordinary times without opposition,
   but every facility was afforded for active propagandism.

   Protected by the contempt which they inspired, little sensitive,
   moreover, to the railleries of the people of the world, the Jews of
   Transtevere led thus a very active, religious, and social life. They
   possessed a few kakamin (schools); nowhere was the ritual and
   ceremonial of the Law more scrupulously observed; the synagogues had
   the most perfect organisation that ever was known. The titles of
   "father" and of "mother of the synagogue" were much prized. Some rich
   converts took biblical names; they converted their slaves along with
   themselves; the Scroll was explained by the doctors; they built places
   of prayer, and showed themselves to be proud of the consideration they
   enjoyed in that little world. The poor Jew, when begging, found the
   opportunity, in a trembling voice, to whisper into the ear of the grand
   Roman dame a few sentences of the Law, and often gained over the
   matron, who had given him a handful of small change. To observe the
   Sabbath and the Jewish feasts was, according to Horace, the
   characteristic which classes a man amongst the weak-minded, that is to
   say, with the multitude, unus multorum. Universal benevolence, the
   felicity of reposing with the just, assisting the poor, purity of
   manners, the sweetness of family life, the mild perception of death,
   which was considered as a sleep, are the sentiments which are found on
   the Jewish inscriptions, together with that special note of touching
   unction of humility, certain hope, which characterises Christian
   inscriptions. There were many Jews, men of the world, rich and
   powerful, such as Tiberius Alexander, who attained to the highest
   honours of the Empire, and who twice or thrice exercised an influence
   of the first order in public affairs, and had even, to the great
   chagrin of the Romans, his statue in the Forum; but the latter were no
   longer good Jews. The Herods, although ostentatiously practising their
   religion at Rome, were also far from (it was only through their
   relations with the Pagans) being true Israelites. The poor remained
   faithful, esteeming these worldlings as renegades; in like manner, we
   see in our day the Polish or Hungarian Jews treat with severity the
   aristocratic French Israelites who have deserted the synagogue, and
   have had their children educated in Protestantism, so as to make their
   circle more exclusive.

   A world of ideas were thus propounded on the common wharf where was
   unloaded the merchandise of the whole world; but all this is lost in
   the tumult of a large city like London or Paris. Certainly the proud
   patricians, who, in their promenades upon the Aventine cast their eyes
   to the other side of the Tiber, could not suspect that the future was
   being prepared in the pile of poor houses erected at the foot of
   Janiculum. The day when, under the reign of Claudius, a certain Jew,
   initiated in the new beliefs, placed foot on the ground opposite the
   Emporium, that same day no one knew in Rome that the founder of a
   second Empire, another Romulus, lodged at the gate on a bed of straw.
   Near the gate was a kind of lodging-house, well known to the people and
   the soldiers, which went under the name of Taberna meritoria. There was
   shown here, in order to attract the credulous, a pretended fountain of
   oil, issuing from the rocks. Very soon that fountain of oil was
   regarded by the Christians as symbolical. It was pretended that its
   appearance had coincided with the birth of Jesus. It appears that later
   on the Taberna was made into a church. Who knows whether the oldest
   souvenirs of Christianity were not connected with that resort! Under
   Alexander Severus we see the Christians and the tavern-keepers
   contending for a certain spot which had formerly been public, and which
   that good Emperor adjudged to the Christians. One feels that one is
   here upon the natal soil of an old popular Christianity. Claudius,
   about that time, struck with the "progress of foreign superstitions,"
   believed that he was performing an act of good conservative policy in
   re-establishing the soothsayers. In a report made to the Senate,
   complaint was made of the indifference of the times for the ancient
   usages of Italy, and for good discipline. The Senate had invited the
   Pontiffs to see whether it was possible to re-establish the old
   customs. Everything went well, in consequence, and it was believed that
   these respectable impostures were saved for all eternity.

   The great question of the moment was the attainment of Agrippa to
   power, the adoption of Nero by Claudius, and his ever-increasing
   fortune. No one thought of the poor Jew who uttered for the first time
   the name of Christus in the Syrian colony, and expounded the faith
   which brought happiness to those amongst whom he was living. Others
   soon arrived. The letters from Syria, brought by the newcomers, spoke
   of the movement which was increasing more and more. A small circle was
   formed. Everybody "smelled the garlick." These ancestors of the Roman
   prelates were poor proletariats, filthy, undistinguished, ill-mannered,
   clothed in dirty smock-frocks, and had the bad breath of people who are
   ill-fed. Their hovels had that odour of misery which exhales from
   persons poorly nourished and clothed, and huddled up in a small room.
   They soon became numerous enough to make a noise. They preached in the
   ghetto, and the orthodox Jews resisted them. What with the tumultuous
   scenes which were taking place; what with the scenes recurring night by
   night; what with the Roman police being interviewed; what (little
   caring to know what was the cause of the trouble) with addressing a
   report to the superior authority, and laying the troubles to the
   account of a certain Chrestus, whom it was impossible to get hold of;
   what with the expulsion of the agitators having been decided on--there
   was nothing in that which was not plausible. The passage in Suetonius,
   and, better still, that of the Acts, would seem to imply that all the
   Jews were driven out on that occasion; but such a thing is not to be
   supposed. The likelihood is that the Christians, the partisans of the
   seditious Chrestus, were alone expelled. Claudius, in general, was
   favourable to the Jews, and it is even not impossible that the
   expulsion of the Christians, of which we have just been speaking, took
   place at the instigation of the Jews--the Herods, for example. These
   expulsions, however, were always only temporary and conditional. The
   tide, arrested for the moment, always returned. The edict of Claudius
   was, in any case, of little consequence, since Josephus does not
   mention it, and in the year 58 Rome had already a new Christian Church.

   The founders of this first Church at Rome, destroyed by the decree of
   Claudius, are unknown. But we know the names of two Jews who were
   exiled in consequence of the emeutes of the Porta Portese. They were an
   old pious couple, the one Aquila, originally a Jew from Pontus,
   following the same calling as St Paul, that of an upholsterer, the
   other Priscilla, his wife. They sought refuge at Corinth, where we soon
   see them en rapport with St Paul, whose intimate friends and zealous
   fellow-workers they became. Aquila and Priscilla are hence the two
   oldest known members of the Church at Rome. But they are hardly
   remembered. Legend, which is always unjust, because it is always swayed
   by political motives, has expelled from the Christian Pantheon these
   two obscure workers, in order to attribute the honour of the foundation
   of the Church of Rome to a name more illustrious, corresponding better
   to the proud pretensions of universal dominion which the capital of the
   Empire, now become Christian, could not abdicate. For us, it is not at
   the theatrical basilica which has been consecrated to St Peter, it is
   at the Porta Portese, that ancient ghetto, where we really find the
   starting-point of Western Christianity. It is the traces of those pier
   wandering Jews, who carried with them the religion of the world,--those
   men who hardly dreamt, in their misery, of the kingdom of God--we must
   search out and embrace. We do not contest with Rome its essential
   title; Rome was probably the first spot of the Western world, and even
   of Europe, where Christianity was established But in place of these
   proud and magnificent churches, in place of these insulting devices,
   Christus vincit, Christus regit, Christus imperat--Christ conquers,
   Christ reigns, Christ governs--it would be much better to erect a
   little chapel to the two good Jews of Pontus who were expelled by the
   police of Claudius for belonging to the party of Chrestus.

   After the Church of Rome (if it was not even anterior) the most ancient
   Western Church was that of Pozzuoli. St Paul found Christians there
   about the year 61. Pozzuoli was in a certain sense the port of Rome; it
   was at least the place where the Jews and the Syrians who came to Rome
   disembarked. This strange soil undermined by fire; these Phlegreens
   fields; that sulphur bed; these caverns full of burning vapours, which
   seemed the breath of hell; these sulphurous waters; these myths of
   giants, and of demons buried in the burning valleys, a sort of
   Gehennas; these baths, which appeared to the austere Jews and the
   enemies of total nudity the acme of abomination--greatly impressed the
   imaginations of the new emigrants, and have left a deep trace on the
   apocalyptic compositions of the times. The follies of Caligula, of
   which we still see traces, left also in these places terrible
   recollections.

   In any case, one capital feature, as we have already had occasion to
   remark, is, that the Church at Rome was not, like the Churches of Asia
   Minor, of Macedonia and of Greece, a foundation of the school of Paul.
   It was a Judæo-Christian creation, connected directly with the Church
   at Jerusalem. Paul was never here on his own ground; he found in that
   great Church many shortcomings, which he treated with indulgence, but
   which offended his exalted idealism. Attached to circumcision, and to
   exterior practices; ebionite by its taste for abstinences, and by its
   doctrine, more Jew than Christian, in regard to the person and the
   death of Jesus; strongly attached to millenarianism, the Roman Church
   presented in its early days the essential features which have
   distinguished it during its long and marvellous history. The direct
   daughter of Jerusalem, the Roman Church has always had an ascetic,
   sacerdotal character, and been opposed to the Protestant tendency of St
   Paul. Peter was its veritable chief; then, being penetrated by the
   political and hierarchical spirit of old Pagan Rome, it became, in
   truth, the new Jerusalem, the city of the pontificate, of religion,
   hierarchical and solemn, of material sacraments, which are their own
   justification, the city of ascetics, after the manner of Jacques
   Obliam, with its callosities on the knees and its plates of gold on the
   forehead. She was to be the church of authority. If it can be believed,
   the special sign of the apostolic mission was the showing of a letter
   signed by the Apostles, the producing of a certificate of orthodoxy.
   The good and the evil that the Church at Jerusalem did for infant
   Christianity, the Church of Rome did for the Church universal. It was
   in vain that Paul addressed to them his beautiful epistle, in order to
   explain to them the mystery of the cross of Jesus and of salvation by
   faith alone. This epistle the Church at Rome but vaguely comprehended.
   But Luther, fourteen and a half centuries later, comprehended it, and
   opened a new era in the secular series of the alternative triumphs of
   Peter and Paul.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V.

  SECOND JOURNEY OF PAUL--ANOTHER SOJOURN AT GALATIA.

   Hardly had Paul returned to Antioch, when he began forming new
   projects. His ardent soul could not brook repose. On the one hand, he
   proposed to enlarge the rather limited field of his first mission: on
   the other, the desire to see again his dear Churches of Galatia, to
   confirm them in the faith, pursued him incessantly. The tenderness
   which that strange nature appeared in some respects to lack, had been
   transformed into a powerful faculty of loving the communities which he
   had founded. He had for his Churches the sentiments that other men have
   for that which they love the most. This was indeed a special gift of
   the Jews. The feeling of association with which they were imbued caused
   them to give to the esprit de famille applications altogether novel.
   The synagogue and the church were thus what the monastery was to the
   Middle Ages, the beloved home, the hearth of the warmest affections,
   the roof under which people sheltered that which they held most dear.

   Paul communicated his design to Barnabas. But the friendship of the two
   Apostles, which had been proof against the severest tests, which no
   susceptibility of amour propre, no freak of character had been able to
   lessen, received now a cruel blow. Barnabas proposed to Paul to take
   John, surnamed Mark, with them: Paul flew into a passion. He could not
   pardon John-Mark for having abandoned the first mission at Perga, at
   the moment when it had entered upon the most perilous stage of the
   journey. The man who had once refused to go on with the work, appeared
   to him as unworthy of being enrolled anew. Barnabas defended his
   cousin, whose motives, in fact, it is probable Paul judged with too
   much severity. The quarrel waxed very hot: it was impossible to come to
   an understanding. That old friendship which had been the condition of
   the evangelic preaching, gave place for a time to a miserable question
   of individuals. To speak truly, it is allowable to suppose that the
   rupture was based on deeper reasons. It is a miracle that the always
   increasing pretensions of Paul, his pride, his eagerness to be absolute
   chief, had not already twenty times rendered relations impossible
   between two men whose reciprocal positions had entirely changed.
   Barnabas had not the genius of Paul; but who can tell whether in the
   true hierarchy of souls, which is regulated by the order of goodness,
   he did not occupy a still higher rank? When we recall what Barnabas had
   been to Paul; when we think that it was he who at Jerusalem had
   silenced the not altogether groundless defiances of which the new
   convert was the object;--who went to seek at Tarsus the future Apostle,
   as yet isolated and uncertain as to his path;--who introduced him into
   the young and active life of Antioch;--who, in a word, made him an
   Apostle,--one cannot help seeing in that open rupture a motive of
   secondary importance, a gross act of ingratitude on the part of Paul.
   But the exigencies of the work were too powerful for him. What man of
   action is there that has not once in his life committed a great crime
   of the heart?

   The two Apostles then separated from each other. Barnabas and John-Mark
   embarked at Seleucia for Cyprus. History from this point loses sight of
   his wanderings. While Paul marches on to glory, his companion, falling
   into obscurity the moment he quitted him who illuminated him with his
   rays, wears himself out with the labours of an unrecorded apostleship.
   The enormous injustice which often regulates the things of this world,
   presides over history like as over everything else. Those who undertake
   the rôle of self-devotion and unostentation, are ordinarily forgotten.
   The author of the Acts, with his ingenuous conciliatory policy, has,
   without wishing it, sacrificed Barnabas to the desire that he
   entertained of reconciling Peter to Paul. By a sort of instinctive lack
   of the principle of compensation, on the one hand diminishing and
   subordinating the importance of Paul, on the other, the author has
   enhanced the importance of Paul at the expense of a modest
   fellow-worker, who had not a part cut out for him, and who was not
   weighted in history with the unequal weights which result from the
   arrangements of parties. Hence arises the ignorance in which we are
   placed as to what belongs to the apostleship of Barnabas. We only know
   that that apostleship continued to be very active. Barnabas remained
   faithful to the grand rules which Paul and he had established during
   their first mission. He did not take with him in his peregrinations
   female companions; he lived always by his work, never accepting
   anything from the Church. He again encountered Paul at Antioch. The
   imperious temper of Paul provoked a fresh discord between them; but the
   nature or sentiment of the holy work carried all before it; the
   communion between the two Apostles remained intact. Labouring each in
   his own way, they remained in communication the one with the other,
   mutually informing one another of their labours. In spite of the
   greatest dissensions, Paul continued always to treat Barnabas as a
   fellow-worker, and to consider him as dividing with himself the work of
   the apostleship of the Gentiles. Ardent, hot-headed, and susceptible,
   Paul soon forgot, when the great principles to which he had devoted his
   life were not in question.

   In place of Barnabas, Paul selected for his companion Silas, the
   prophet of the Church at Jerusalem, who had remained at Antioch. He was
   probably not sorry at the defection of John-Mark, who, it seems, wished
   to be near Peter. Silas possessed, it is said, the title of a Roman
   citizen, which, joined with his name of Silvanus, induces the belief
   that he was not of Judea, or that he had already had occasion to
   familiarise himself with the world of the Gentiles. Both departed,
   recommended by the brethren to the grace of God. These forms were not
   at that time vain. People believed that the finger of God was
   everywhere; that each step of the Apostles of the new kingdom was
   directed by the immediate inspiration of Heaven.

   Paul and Silas journeyed by land. Taking to the north, across the plain
   of Antioch, they traversed the defile of Amanus, the Assyrian passes;
   then rounding the end of the Gulf of Issus they crossed the northern
   ridge of Amanus by the Amanida pass; they then traversed Cilicia,
   passing probably through Tarsus, emerging from Taurus doubtless by the
   celebrated Cilician passes--one of them the most frightful mountain
   pass in the world; penetrating thence into Lycaonia; finally reaching
   Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium.

   Paul found his dear Churches in the same state in which he had left
   them. The faithful had persevered, and their numbers had increased.
   Timothy, who was but an infant at the time of his first journey, had
   become an excellent subject. His youth, his piety, and his
   intelligence, delighted Paul. All the faithful of Lycaonia testified
   highly of him. Paul attached him to himself, loved him tenderly, and
   always found in him a zealous collaborateur, or, rather, a son (it is
   Paul himself who uses this expression). Timothy was a man of great
   candour, modesty, and reserve. He had not assurance enough to undertake
   the chief rôles; he lacked authority, especially in Greek countries,
   where the minds of the people were frivolous and fickle; but his
   self-denial made of him an unequalled deacon and secretary to Paul.
   Paul moreover declared that he had not another disciple who was so
   completely according to his heart. Impartial history is compelled to
   withhold, to the advantage of Timothy and of Barnabas, a portion of the
   glory monopolised by the all-absorbing personality of Paul.

   Paul, in attaching Timothy to himself, foresaw grave embarrassments. He
   feared that, in his communications with the Jews, Timothy,
   uncircumcised as he was, could only be a source of repulsion and of
   trouble. It was, in fact, known everywhere that his father was a Pagan.
   A multitude of timorous people would decline to hold intercourse with
   him: the quarrels, which had hardly been laid to rest by the interview
   at Jerusalem, would be revived. Paul recalled the difficulties he had
   experienced in regard to Titus. He resolved to anticipate these; and,
   in order to avoid being brought later to make a concession to the
   principles he had recoiled from, he circumcised Timothy himself. This
   was altogether in conformity with the principles which had guided him
   in the affair of Titus, and which he always practised. But he had never
   been induced to say that circumcision was necessary to salvation; for,
   in his eyes, that would have been an error of faith. Yet circumcision
   being in itself not a wicked thing, he thought that it might be
   practised, in order to avoid scandal and schism. His great rule was
   that an apostle ought to be all things to all men, and to yield to the
   prejudices of those whom he wished to gain over, when these prejudices
   in themselves were merely frivolous, and did not contain anything
   absolutely reprehensible. But, at the same time, as if he had a
   presentiment of the tests that the faith of the Galatians was about to
   be put to, he made them promise never to listen to another teacher than
   himself, and to anathematise all other teaching save his own.

   From Iconium Paul probably went to Antioch in Pisidia, and completed
   thus the visit of the principal Churches in Galatia, founded during his
   first journey. He resolved then to enter upon new territory; but grave
   doubts restrained him. The thought of attacking the West of Asia Minor,
   that is to say, the province of Asia, came into his mind. It was the
   part of Asia the most populated. Ephesus was the capital of it; it
   contained the beautiful and flourishing cities of Smyrna, Pergamos,
   Magnesia, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Colossus, Laodicæa,
   Hierapolis, Tralles, Miletus, in which the centre of Christianity was
   soon to be established. It is not known what turned St Paul away from
   carrying his efforts in that direction. "The Holy Spirit," says the
   writer of the Acts, "forbade him going to preach in Asia." The
   Apostles, it must be borne in mind, were reputed to obey, in choosing
   the direction of their courses, inspirations from on high. Sometimes
   there were real motives, reflections, or positive indications which
   they dissimulated under this language. Sometimes there was also the
   absence of motives. The opinion that God made known to man his
   volitions by means of dreams, was widespread, just as it is still in
   our day in the East. A dream, a sudden impulse, an unpremeditated
   movement, an inexplicable noise (bath kôl), appeared to them as the
   manifestations of the Spirit, and decided the route of the mission.

   What is certain is that, from Antioch in Pisidia, instead of going in
   the direction of the brilliant provinces of the south-east of Asia
   Minor, Paul and his companions plunged more and more into the heart of
   the peninsula, which contained provinces much less celebrated and less
   civilised. They traversed Phrygia Epictetus, passed probably through
   the towns of Synnada and Æzana, and reached the confines of Mysia.
   There, their indecision returned. Should they turn to the north towards
   Bithynia, or continue west and enter Mysia? They essayed first to enter
   Bithynia, but untoward events supervened, which they took for the
   indications of the will of Heaven. They imagined that the spirit of
   Jesus did not wish that they should tarry in that country. They then
   traversed Mysia from one end to the other, and arrived at
   Alexandria-Troas, a considerable port almost opposite Tenedos, and not
   far from the site of ancient Troy. The apostolic band made thus, in
   almost a single journey, a distance of more than a hundred leagues,
   across a country little known, and which, destitute of Roman colonies
   and Jewish synagogues, did not offer them any of the facilities they
   had found elsewhere.

   These long journeys in Asia Minor, full of sweet ennuis and mystical
   dreams, are a singular mixture of sadness and of charm. Often the route
   is hard; certain cantons are peculiarly rugged and barren. Other parts,
   on the contrary, are full of freshness, and do not correspond at all to
   the ideas that we are accustomed to embrace in that vague phrase, the
   East. The mouth of the Orontes marks, both in relation to nature and in
   relation to races, a well-defined line of demarcation. Asia Minor, both
   for aspect and for the style of landscape, recalls Italy or our South,
   at the eminence of Valence and of Avignon. The European is not out of
   his native climate there, as he is in Syria or in Egypt. It is, if I
   may say so, an Aryan, not a Semitic country, and it is not to be
   doubted that one day it will be occupied anew by the Indo-European race
   (Greeks and Armenians). Water there is abundant: the towns are as if
   inundated by it. Certain points, such as Nymphi, Magnesia in Siplyus,
   are veritable paradises. The smooth mountain slopes which bound almost
   everywhere the horizon, present such varieties of infinite forms, and
   sometimes of fantastic shapes, that they would be regarded as idle
   fancies if an artist dare to imitate them. There are summits indented
   like the teeth of a saw, sides torn and slashed, strange cones, and
   perpendicular walls, in which are finely exposed to view all the
   beauties of the stone. Thanks to the numerous chains of mountains, the
   waters are living and sparkling. Long rows of poplars, small
   plane-trees, in the wide surface of the winter torrents, superb stumps
   of trees, where the feet plunge into pools, and which jut out in dark
   tufts from the foot of each mountain, these are the solace of the
   traveller. At the source of each stream the caravans stop to water. The
   journey continues for days and days upon the narrow lines of antique
   pavement which for centuries have borne travellers so diverse, and
   oftentimes fatigued; but the halts are delicious. A repose of an hour,
   a piece of bread eaten upon the banks of these limpid streams, running
   in beds of pebbles, sustains one for a long time.

   At Troas, Paul, who in certain parts of that journey seems not to have
   followed any well-defined plan, became once more irresolute as to which
   route he should choose. Macedonia appeared to him to offer a fine
   harvest. It appears that he was confirmed in that idea by a Macedonian
   whom he encountered at Troas. He was a doctor, an uncircumcised
   proselyte, by the name of Lucanus or Lucas. This Latin name would lead
   one to believe that the new disciple belonged to the Roman colony of
   Philippi; his rare knowledge, in fact, of nautical geography and of
   navigation would, however, rather incline to the idea that he was a
   Neapolitan: the ports and all the coast of the Mediterranean appear to
   have been remarkably familiar to him.

   This man, to whom was reserved so important a part in the history of
   Christianity, seeing he was to be the historian of the Christian
   origins, and seeing his judgment, self-deceptive as to the future, was
   to regulate the ideas that were formed in the early times of the
   Church, had received a sufficiently careful Jewish and Hellenic
   education. He had a gentle and conciliatory mind, a tender and
   sympathetic soul, a modest temperament, inclining to self-effacement.
   Paul loved him much, and Luke, on his part, was always faithful to his
   master. Like Timothy, Luke appeared to have been born expressly to be
   the companion of Paul. Submission and blind confidence, unbounded
   admiration, a desire to be submissive, unlimited devotion, were his
   habitual sentiments. It might be said that it was this absolute
   abnegation of self that made le moine hibernais in the hands of his
   abbot. The ideal of "the disciple" was never so perfectly realised.
   Luke was literally fascinated by the superiority of Paul. His
   affability as a man of the people proclaimed itself incessantly; his
   idle fancy showed him always to be a model of perfection and of
   happiness; an honest man, a good master in his family, of which he was
   the spiritual head; a Jew at heart, who was converted with all his
   house. He esteemed the Roman officers, and unhesitatingly believed them
   to be virtuous. One of the objects he admired the most was a good
   centurion, pious, benevolent towards the Jews, well served, well
   obeyed. He had probably studied the Roman army at Philippi, and had
   been much struck with it. He naturally supposed that discipline and the
   hierarchy were things of a moral order. His esteem for the Roman
   functionaries was also great. His title of doctor implies that he
   possessed medical knowledge, which is proved besides by his writings,
   but does not imply a scientific and rational culture, which few doctors
   possessed then. What Luke was par excellence was "the man of firm
   will"--the true Israelite at heart, he to whom Jesus brought peace. It
   is he who has transmitted to us, and who probably composed, those
   delicious canticles of the birth and of the infancy of Jesus, those
   hymns of the angels, of Mary, of Zachariah, of old Simeon, in which
   shone out in tones so clear and so joyous the happiness of the new
   alliance, the Hosanna of the pious proselyte, the accord re-established
   between the fathers and the sons in the enlarged family of Israel.

   Everything tends to the belief that Luke was touched by grace at Troas;
   that he was attached from that time to Paul, and persuaded him that he
   would find in Macedonia an excellent field. His words made a great
   impression upon the Apostle. The latter believed he saw in a vision a
   Macedonian, standing up, who invited him, saying unto him, "Come over
   and help us." This was received by the apostolic group as a command of
   God that they should go to Macedonia, and they waited only a favourable
   opportunity to depart thence
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI.

  CONTINUATION OF Tl9E SECOND JOURNEY OF PAUL--THE MACEDONIAN MISSION.

   The mission at this point entered upon entirely new ground. It was what
   was called the province of Macedonia; but these regions had not formed
   a portion of the Macedonian kingdom since the time of Philip. They
   were, in reality, portions of Thracia, anciently colonised by the
   Greeks, then absorbed by the powerful monarchy the centre of which was
   at Pella, and which was included for two hundred years in the great
   Roman unity. Few countries in the world were, in fact, purer in race
   than the countries situated between Hæmus and the Mediterranean. That
   they were composed of diverse branches was true, but each genuinely
   belonged to the Indo-European family, which were superimposed on it. If
   we except some Phoenician influences coming from Thasos and from
   Samothracia, almost nothing foreign had penetrated into the interior.
   Thracia, which was in great part Celtic, had remained faithful to the
   Aryan life: she preserved the ancient religions, under a form which
   appeared barbarous to the Greeks and Romans, but which, in reality, was
   only primitive. As for Macedonia, it was probably the region the most
   honest, the most serious, the most pious of the ancient world. It was
   originally a country of feudal boroughs, not of large independent
   towns; now, the latter is, of all administrations, that which has best
   conserved human morality, and placed the most forces in reserve for the
   future. Monarchical through steadfastness of mind and through
   abnegation, filled with antipathy for charlatanism, and for the
   frequent barren agitations of small republics, the Macedonians
   presented to Greece the type of a society analogous to that of the
   Middle Ages, founded upon loyalism, upon faith in legitimacy and
   heredity, and upon a conservative spirit, equally removed from the
   grovelling despotism of the East, and from that democratic fever which,
   inflaming the blood of the people, wears out quickly those who abandon
   themselves to it. Thus disencumbered from the causes of social
   corruption that democracy almost always brings in its train, and yet
   free from the iron chains which Sparta had invented to fortify herself
   against revolution, the Macedonians were the people of antiquity who
   most resembled the Romans. They recall in some other respects the
   German barons, brave, dissipated, rude, proud, faithful. If they
   realised but for a moment what the Romans knew how to establish in a
   durable manner, they would have had less honour in having survived
   their attempt. The little kingdom of Macedonia, without factions or
   seditions, with its good interior administration, was the most solid
   nationality that the Romans had to combat in the East. A strong
   patriotic and legitimist spirit reigned there to such a degree that
   after their defeats we see the inhabitants take fire with a singular
   facility against the impostors who pretended to continue their old
   dynasty.

   Under the Romans, Macedonia remained a land worthy and pure. It
   furnished to Brutus two excellent legions. We do not see the
   Macedonians, like the Syrians, the Egyptians, the Asiatics, rushing to
   Rome in order to enrich themselves with the fruits of their evil
   practices. Despite the terrible substitution of races which followed,
   it may be said that Macedonia has always preserved the same character.
   It is a country placed under the normal conditions of European
   life,--wooded, fertile, watered by splendid rivers, possessing interior
   sources of wealth; whilst that Greece, meagre, poor, singular in
   everything, has nothing left it but glory and beauty. A land of
   miracles, like Judæa and Sinai, Greece flourished once, but can never
   flourish again. She has created something unique, which cannot be
   reproduced. It seems that when God has once manifested Himself in a
   country, He blasts it for ever. A laud of klephtes and of artists,
   Greece cannot again take an original part on the day when the world
   enters into the channels of wealth, of industry, of abundant
   consumption: she can only produce genius. In passing through it one is
   astonished that a powerful race was able to live upon that pile of arid
   mountains, in the middle of which is a somewhat humid and deep valley,
   a little plain, a kilometre in extent--all this compels our wonder.
   Never has there been so plainly seen the opposition which exists
   between opulence and high art. Macedonia, on the contrary, will one day
   resemble Switzerland or the south of Germany. Its villages are like
   clumps of gigantic trees. She has everything that is required for
   becoming a country of great culture, and of great industry--vast
   plains, rich mountains, verdant prairies, extended prospects, very
   different from those charming little mazes of the site of Greece.
   Solemn and grave, the Macedonian peasant has no longer anything of the
   assurance and the vivacity of the Hellenic peasant. The women,
   beautiful and chaste, work in the fields like the men. We might say, a
   country of Protestant peasants: it is a beautiful and strong race,
   laborious, steady, loving its country, and full of the future.

   Embarking at Troas, Paul and his companions (Silas, Timothy, and
   probably Luke) set sail with a fair wind, touched the first evening at
   Samothracia, and the morrow approached Neapolis, a town situated upon a
   small promontory opposite the Isle of Thasos. Neapolis was the port of
   the great city of Philippi, situated about three leagues thence in the
   interior. It was the point where the great Egnatine road, which
   traversed Macedonia and Thracia from west to east, touched the sea.
   Taking this road, which they did not need to quit until reaching
   Thessalonica, the Apostles ascended the stony slope cut in the rocks
   which overlooked Neapolis, emerged from the little chain of mountains
   which forms the coast, and entered the beautiful plain in the centre of
   which stands, detached upon a projecting promontory of the mountain,
   the city of Philippi.

   This rich plain, the lowest portion of which is composed of a lake and
   of marshes, communicates with the basin of Strymon from behind Pangea.
   The gold mines which at the Hellenic and Macedonian epoch had made the
   country celebrated, were now almost abandoned. But the military
   importance of the position of Philippi, squeezed in between the
   mountain and the morass, had given to it a new life. The battle which
   ninety-four years before the arrival of the Christian missionaries had
   opened its gates, brought to it an unexpected splendour. Augustus had
   established there one of the most considerable Roman colonies, under
   the jus italicum. The city was much more Latin than Greek; Latin was
   there the common tongue; the religions of Latium seemed to have been
   transported thither intact. The surrounding plain, dotted with towns,
   was equally, at the epoch at which we have now arrived, a kind of Roman
   canton, thrown into the heart of Thracia. The colony was inscribed in
   the Voltinian tribune. It had been formed principally of the wrecks of
   the Antonine party, which Augustus had cantoned on these coasts; it was
   there mixed with portions of the old Thracian stock. In any case, it
   was a hard-working population, living orderly and peaceably; besides,
   it was very religious. The confraternities flourished there,
   particularly those under the patronage of the god Sylvain, who was
   considered as a sort of tutelary genius of the Latin domination. The
   mysteries of the Bacchus of Thracia embraced exalted ideas in regard to
   immortality, and made the population familiar with the views of a
   future life, and of an idyllic paradise very similar to that which
   Christianity had spread. Polytheism was in these countries less
   complicated than elsewhere. The religion of Sabazius, common to Thracia
   and to Phrygia, in close rapport with the ancient Orpheism, and yet
   detached by the syncretism of the times from the Dionysian mysteries,
   included the germs of monotheism. A certain infantile simplicity of
   taste prepared the way for the Gospel. Everything indicated habits
   honest, serious, and amiable. One felt oneself to be in a centre
   analogous to that in which the agronomic and sentimental poetry of
   Virgil was created. The ever green plain was favourable for the varied
   culture of vegetables and flowers. Splendid fountains, gushing from the
   base of the mountain of shining marble which crowned the city,
   diffused, when properly applied, wealth, shade and freshness. The
   thickets of poplars and willows, of fig trees and cherry trees and of
   wild vines, exhaled the sweetest odours, and scented the brooks, which
   abounded on all sides. Moreover, the prairies, which were overrun or
   covered with monster roses, exhibited herds of dull-eyed buffaloes,
   with enormous horns, with their heads just above the water; whilst the
   bees and the swarms of black and blue butterflies gyrated from flower
   to flower. Pangaea, with its majestic summits, which were covered with
   snow till the middle of June, stretched out as if to unite the city
   across the morass. Beautiful ranges of mountains bounded the horizon on
   all the other sides, leaving only an aperture through which the sky
   vanished, and showing in the clear distance the basin of Strymon.

   Philippi offered to the mission a most appropriate field. We have
   already seen that in Galatia the Roman colonies of Antioch in Pisidia
   and of Iconium had very favourably received the new doctrine. We shall
   observe the same thing at Corinth and at Alexandria-Troas. The
   population, which had been for a long time settled there, and
   possessing ancient local traditions, gave few signs of innovations. The
   Jewry of Philippi, if there was one, was little important; at most, it
   was limited probably to the women celebrating the Sabbath. Even in the
   towns in which there were no Jews, the Sabbath was usually celebrated
   by some of the people. In any case, it seems clear that there was no
   synagogue there. When the apostolic band entered the city, it was on
   the first day of the week. Paul, Silas, Timothy, and Luke remained some
   days within doors, awaiting, according to custom, the Sabbath day.
   Luke, who knew the country, remembered that the people who had adopted
   Jewish customs were wont to assemble on that day without in the
   suburbs, upon the banks of a small secluded rivulet, which issued from
   the ground a league and a half from the city, from an enormous boiling
   spring, and which was called Gangas or Gangites. Perhaps it went then
   by the antique Aryan name of the sacred rivers (Ganga). What is certain
   is that the peaceful scenes recounted in the Acts, and which marked the
   first establishment of Christianity in Macedonia, took place at the
   same spot where a century before the fate of the world had been
   decided. Gangites marked the spot in the great battle of the year 42
   before Jesus Christ, where were placed the foremost ensigns of Brutus
   and of Cassius.

   In towns where there was no synagogue, the meetings of those who were
   affiliated to Judaism were held in small hypethral erections, or
   frequently simply in the open air in enclosed spaces, which were called
   proseuchæ. People delighted in establishing these oratories near the
   sea or rivers, so as to have facilities for ablutions. The Apostles
   repaired to the place indicated. Many women, in fact, resorted there
   for devotion. The Apostles spoke to them, and proclaimed to them the
   mystery of Jesus. They were listened to attentively. One woman, in
   particular, was touched. "The Lord," says the writer of the Acts,
   "opened her heart." She was called Lydia or Lydian, because she was
   from Thyatira. She traded in one of the principal products of Lydian
   industry--purple. She was a pious person, of the order of those who
   were called "believing in God," that is to say, a Pagan by birth, but
   observing the precepts denominated "Noachic." She was baptised, with
   all her house, and did not rest until, through much entreaty, she
   induced the four missionaries to take up their abode with her. They
   remained there some weeks, teaching each Sunday at the place of prayer,
   upon the banks of the Gangites.

   A small Church, almost wholly composed of women, was formed. It was
   very pious, very obedient, and most devoted to Paul. Besides Lydia,
   this Church embraced within its bosom Evhodia and Syntyche, who with
   the Apostle fought valiantly for the Gospel, but who sometimes had
   disputes in regard to the ministry of deaconesses. Epaphroditus, a
   courageous man, whom Paul treated as a brother, a fellow-worker, a
   companion in arms; Clement, and others still, whom Paul called "his
   fellow-workers, and whose names," said he, "are written in the book of
   life." Timothy was also much beloved of the Philippians, and he had for
   them great devotion. It was the only Church from which Paul accepted
   pecuniary succour, because it was rich, and was little burdened by poor
   Jews. Lydia was undoubtedly the principal author of these gifts. Paul
   accepted them from her, for he knew her to be strongly attached to him.
   This woman gave from the heart; one had not to fear reproaches on her
   part, nor for an interested return. Paul preferred, doubtless, to be
   indebted to a woman (probably a widow), of whom he was sure, rather
   than to men, in respect of whom he would have been less independent, if
   he had had some acquaintance with them.

   The absolute purity of Christian manners disarmed all suspicion.
   Perhaps, moreover, it is not too audacious to suppose that it is Lydia
   whom Paul, in his Epistle to the Philippians, calls "my dear spouse."
   That expression can be taken, if one so desires, as a simple metaphor.
   Is it, nevertheless, absolutely impossible that Paul may have
   contracted with that sister a union more intimate? The only thing
   certain is, that Paul did not take this sister with him in his
   journeys. Notwithstanding this, a whole branch of ecclesiastical
   tradition has claimed that he was married.

   The character of the Christian woman became more and more outlined. To
   the Jewish woman, sometimes so strong, so devoted; to the Syrian woman,
   who is indebted to the soft languor of a distempered organisation for
   flashes of enthusiasm and of love; to Tabitha, Mary Magdalen, succeeded
   the Greek women, Lydia, Phoebe, Chloe, vivacious, gay, active, amiable,
   distinguished, open-hearted to all, yet nevertheless circumspect,
   giving themselves up to their master to whom they were subordinate,
   capable of the greatest things, because they were contented to be the
   fellow-labourers of the men and their sisters, and to aid them when
   they performed worthy actions. These Greek women, sprung from a fine
   and healthy race, experienced at the turn of life a change which
   transformed them. They became pale, and their eyes wandered
   languishingly; they then covered the bands of thick hair which bounded
   their cheeks with a black veil, and devoted themselves to austere
   cares, and brought to bear on these an animated and intelligent ardour.
   The "female servant," or Greek deaconess, surpassed even her of Syria
   and of Palestine in courage. These women, guardians of the secrets of
   the Church, ran the greatest dangers, and endured every torment, rather
   than divulge anything. They created the dignity of their sex, and
   justly too, because they did not speak of their rights; they did more
   than the men, in assuming the attitude of limiting themselves to
   serving the latter.

   An incident happened which hastened the departure of the missionaries.
   The city began to speak of them, and public imagination was engaged
   already upon the marvellous virtues which were attributed to them. One
   morning, as they were repairing to the place of prayer, they
   encountered a young slave--probably a ventriloquist--who passed for a
   witch, and predicted the future. Her masters made a great deal of money
   out of that ignoble performance. The poor girl, either because she
   possessed indeed a spirit of divination, or because she was tired of
   her infamous calling, had no sooner perceived the missionaries than she
   started to follow them, uttering loud cries. The faithful pretended
   that she was rendering homage to the new faith and to those who
   preached it. This was repeated several times. At length, one day, Paul
   exorcised her. The girl, calmed, pretended to be freed from the spirit
   which tormented her. But the anger of her masters was extreme. Through
   the healing of the girl they lost their livelihood. They entered a
   process against Paul, and Silas as his accomplice, and caused them to
   be taken to the agora, before the duumvirs.

   It would have been difficult to found a claim for indemnity upon such
   peculiar grounds. The plaintiffs laid special stress on the fact of the
   trouble caused in the city, and of illegal preaching. "They preach
   customs," said they, "that we are not allowed to follow, inasmuch as we
   are Romans." The city, in fact, was under the Italian law, and liberty
   of worship became the more constrained the nearer people were to the
   Roman city. The superstitious population, excited by the masters of the
   witch, made, at the same moment, a hostile demonstration against the
   Apostles. These sorts of petty uprisings were frequent in ancient
   towns. The newsmongers, the unemployed, the "plunderers of the agora,"
   as Demosthenes had already denominated them, lived on them. The
   duumvirs, believing that they were dealing with ordinary Jews,
   condemned--without informing themselves of, or inquiring into, the
   position of the accused--Paul and Silas to be beaten. The lictors
   divested the Apostles of their garments, and beat them cruelly in
   public. They were next cast into prison, put in one of the innermost
   cells, and had their feet made fast in the stocks.

   Whether they had not been allowed to speak in their own defence, or
   whether they purposely had courted the glory of suffering humiliation
   for their Master, it does not appear that either Paul or Silas took
   advantage of their title of citizens before the tribunal. It was during
   the night in the prison that they declared their rank. The jailor was
   much troubled. Thus far he had treated the two Jews with harshness; now
   he found himself in the presence of two Romans, Paulus and Silvanus,
   unlawfully condemned. He washed their wounds, and gave them to eat. It
   is probable that the duumvirs were informed at the same time; for early
   in the morning they sent the lictors to order the jailor to release the
   captives. The Valerian and the Porcian laws were express. The
   application of stripes to a Roman citizen constituted a grave offence.
   Paul, taking advantage of this circumstance, refused thus to leave his
   confinement. He demanded, it is related, that the duumvirs should
   themselves come and give him his liberty. The embarrassment of the
   latter was somewhat great. They came and besought Paul to quit the
   city.

   The two prisoners, once at liberty, repaired to the house of Lydia.
   They were received as martyrs. They addressed to the brethren a few
   parting words of exhortation and consolation, and departed. In no city
   had Paul ever been so beloved, and so much loved. Timothy, who was not
   implicated in the prosecution, and Luke, who played a secondary part,
   remained at Philippi. Luke did not see Paul again until five years
   after.

   Paul and Silas, having departed from Philippi, followed the Egnantine
   road, which led to Amphipolis. This was one of the most beautiful day's
   journey Paul ever experienced. In leaving the plain of Philippi, the
   road enters a smiling valley, dominated by the peaks of Panga. The
   natives cultivated there flax and the plants of the most temperate
   countries. Large villages were to be seen in every indentation of the
   mountain. The Roman road was made of marble flagstones. At each step,
   almost under every plane tree, deep wells filled with water, coming
   directly from the snowy vicinage, and filtering through the thick
   layers of permeable earth, presented themselves to the traveller.
   Through the openings in the white marble rocks issued rivulets of
   incomparable limpidity. It is in such a locality that one learns to
   place pure water in the first rank of the gifts of Nature. Amphipolis
   was a large city, the capital of a province, and about an hour's
   journey from the mouth of the Strymon. The Apostles do not appear to
   have stopped there, probably because it was a purely Hellenic city.

   From Amphipolis the Apostles, after quitting the estuary of Strymon,
   proceeded between the sea and the mountain, across the thick woods and
   the prairies which extend to the sand on the sea shore. The first halt,
   under the plane trees, near a cooling fountain which issues from the
   sand, a few steps from the sea, is a delicious place. The Apostles then
   entered Aulon of Arethusa, a deep rent, a kind of Bosphorus cut
   perpendicularly, which served as an outlet from the interior lakes to
   the sea, and passed, probably without any one knowing it, by the side
   of the tomb of Euripides. The beauty of the trees, the freshness of the
   air, the rapidity of the waters, the strong growth of the ferns and
   shrubs of all kinds, recall the prospect of Grand Chartreuse or of
   Grésivaudan, thrown into the bottom of a furnace. The basin of the
   lakes of Mygdonia, in fact, is torrid, having, as we might say,
   surfaces of molten lead; the snakeweeds, raising their heads out of the
   water and seeking the shade, imprint there only a few wrinkles. The
   flocks, towards the south, crowded together round the foot of the
   trees, seem shrivelled up. If it were not for the hum of the insects
   and the song of the birds, which alone in creation can resist such
   oppression, it might be regarded as the kingdom of the dead.

   Traversing the small town of Apollonia, without halting, Paul skirted
   the south side of the lakes, and continuing almost as far as the bottom
   of the plain whose depressed centre they occupy, he arrived at the foot
   of the small range of heights which form the east side of the gulf of
   Thessalonica. When one attains the summits of these hills, the outline
   of Olympus is seen in all its splendour. The base and the middle
   regions of the mountain are blended with the azure of the sky; the
   snows of the summit appear as an ethereal dwelling suspended in space.
   But, alas! the holy mountain had been already disenchanted. Man had
   ascended it, and had clearly seen that the gods no longer dwelt there.
   When Cicero, in his exile at Thessalonica, saw their white summits, he
   knew that there was there only snow and rocks. Paul, doubtless, had no
   regard for these enchanted places belonging to another race. A great
   city was before him, and from experience he divined that he would find
   there an excellent base for establishing something grand.

   Since the Roman domination, Thessalonica had become one of the most
   important commercial ports of the Mediterranean. It was a very wealthy
   and populous city. It had a grand synagogue, serving as a religious
   centre to the Judaism of Philippi, of Amphipolis, and of Apollonia, all
   of which had only oratories. Paul followed here his usual practice. For
   three consecutive Sabbaths he spoke in the synagogue, repeating his
   uniform discourse on Jesus, proving that he was the Messiah, that the
   Scriptures had found in him their fulfilment, that he had to suffer,
   and that he had risen again. Some Jews were converted; but the
   conversions were numerous, especially among the Greeks "fearing God."
   It was always this class which furnished to the new faith its most
   zealous adherents.

   The women came in crowds. All that was best in the feminine society of
   Thessalonica had already for a long time observed the Sabbath and the
   Jewish ceremonies; the élite of these pious dames flocked to the new
   preachers. The ordinary phenomena of thaumaturgy, of glossology, of the
   gifts of the Holy Spirit, of mystical effusions, and of ecktases were
   produced. The Church of Thessalonica soon rivalled that of Philippi in
   piety and in delicate attentions to the Apostle. Paul nowhere expended
   more ardour, tenderness, and penetrating grace. This man, naturally
   vivacious and passionate, exhibited in his mission a surprising
   gentleness and calmness; he was a father, a mother, a nurse, as he
   himself said; while his austerity and rudeness served but to enhance
   his charm. Stubborn and stern natures have, when they wish to be
   unctuous, unequalled powers of seduction. Severe language, never
   flattery, has much more chance of being made agreeable, with women in
   particular, than softness, which is often the indication of feeble and
   interested views.

   Paul and Silas lived at the house of one Jesus, an Israelite by race,
   who, according to the usage of the Jews, had Grecianised his name to
   that of Jason; but they would accept nothing but lodgings. Paul
   laboured at his trade night and day, in order to cost the Church
   nothing. The rich purple merchants of Philippi and the sisterhood
   would, moreover, have been grieved if others than they had furnished to
   the Apostle the things requisite for existence. On two occasions,
   during his sojourn at Thessalonica, Paul received from Philippi an
   offering which he accepted. That was altogether contrary to his
   principles; his rule was to maintain himself, without receiving
   anything from the Churches; yet he would have made a scruple about
   refusing this present of the heart: the pain that he would have given
   to pious women prevented him. Perhaps, moreover, as we have already
   stated, he preferred to contract obligations from the women, who never
   restrained his action, except in regard to men like Jason, in respect
   of whom he desired to preserve his authority.

   Nowhere, it seems, had Paul so much as at Thessalonica succeeded in
   realising his ideal. The population to which he addressed himself was
   chiefly composed of laborious workmen; Paul entered into their spirit:
   he preached to them order, industry, and to hold fast to the good in
   sight of the heathen. A complete new series of precepts were added to
   his lessons; to wit, economy, application to business, industrial
   honour founded upon ease and independence. By a contrast, which ought
   not to surprise us, he expounded to them, at the same time, the most
   fantastic mysteries of the Apocalypse that had ever been described to
   them. The Church at Thessalonica was a model that Paul afterwards
   delighted to cite, and whose good odour, like a perfume of edification,
   spread everywhere. There were nominated, besides Jason, among the
   notables of the Church, Gaius, Aristarchus, and Secundus; Aristarchus
   was circumcised.

   That which had happened twenty times before happened again at
   Thessalonica. The discontented Jews fomented trouble. They employed a
   band of idlers, of vagabonds, and of those poor creatures of every
   description who in ancient cities passed the day and night under the
   columns of the basilicas, ready to make a noise for whoever paid them
   for it. They went in a body to assail the house of Jason. They called
   loudly for Paul and Silas. As they did not find them, the rioters
   seized Jason, together with some of the faithful, and brought them
   before the politarcs or magistrates. The most confusing cries were
   raised. "Revolutionaries are in the city," said some, "and Jason has
   received them." "All these people," said others, "are in revolt against
   the edicts of the emperor." "They have a king they call Jesus," said a
   third party, The excitement was great, and the politarcs were somewhat
   alarmed. They compelled Jason and the faithful who had been arrested
   with him to give bail, then sent them away. The following night the
   brethren led Paul and Silas out of the city, and had them conducted to
   Beræa. The persecutions of the Jews against the little Church
   continued, but that only served to consolidate it.

   The Jews of Beræa were more liberal and better educated than those of
   Thessalonica. They listened willingly, and allowed Paul, without
   interruption, to expound his ideas in the synagogue. For several days
   it was to them a lively source of curiosity. They passed the time in
   perusing the Scriptures, in order to find there the texts cited by
   Paul, and to see whether they were correct. Many were converted, among
   others a certain Jew, named Sopater or Sosipater, son of Pyrrhus. Here,
   nevertheless, as in all the other Churches of Macedonia, the women were
   in the majority. The converts belonged all to the Greek race, to that
   class of devout persons who, without being Jews, practised the Jewish
   ceremonies. Many Greeks and proselytes were also converted, and the
   synagogue for once remained peaceable. The storm came from
   Thessalonica. The Jews of that city, learning that Paul had preached
   with success at Beræa, came to the latter city, and renewed there their
   plotting. Paul was again obliged to depart hurriedly, and without
   taking Silas with him. Many of the brethren of Beræa accompanied him as
   an escort.

   The warning given by the synagogues of Macedonia was such that
   sojourning in this country seemed to have become impossible to Paul. He
   saw himself tracked from city to city, and the rioters to spring up, as
   it were, from under his feet. The Roman police were not very hostile to
   him; but they acted in the circumstances according to the habitual
   practice of police. When there was disturbance in the street, they
   would blame everybody, and without fretting themselves as to that which
   served as the true pretext for the excitement, they would beg of people
   to be quiet or to move on. It was in effect an encouragement to
   disturbance, and to establish in principle that it only needed a few
   fanatics to deprive a citizen of his liberty. The policeman never
   piques himself much on philosophy. Paul hence resolved to depart, and
   to go to some distant country, where the hatred of his adversaries
   could not follow him. Leaving Silas and Timothy in Macedonia, he, with
   the Beræans, directed his steps towards the sea.

   Thus ended that brilliant Macedonian mission, the most successful of
   any that Paul had as yet accomplished. Churches composed of entirely
   new elements had been formed. It was no longer the easy-going Syrian
   woman, the good-natured Lycaonian woman; it was the subtle, delicate,
   elegant, spiritual races, who, prepared by Judaism, now embraced the
   new religion. The coast of Macedonia was completely covered with Greek
   colonies. The Greek genius had there borne its choicest fruits. These
   noble Churches of Philippi and of Thessalonica, composed of the most
   distinguished women of each city, were unquestionably the two greatest
   conquests that Christianity had yet made. The Jewish woman was
   outstripped; submissive, retired, and obedient, participating little in
   religion, the latter was not easily converted. It was the woman
   "fearing God," the Greek woman, wearied of the goddesses brandishing
   their spears on the summit of the Acropolis, the virtuous woman turning
   her back on a worn-out Paganism, and seeking the pure religion, who was
   attracted heavenwards. These were the second foundresses of our faith.
   Next to the Galileans who followed Jesus and served him, Lydia, Phoebe,
   the obscure pious women of Philippi and of Thessalonica are the true
   saints to whom the new faith owed its most rapid progress.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII.

  CONTINUATION OF THE SECOND JOURNEY OF PAUL--PAUL AT ATHENS.

   Paul, accompanied still by the faithful Beræans, sailed for Athens.
   From the end of the Gulf of Thermmus to Phalera, or to Piræus, the
   voyage in a small craft occupies three or four days. The traveller
   passes the foot of Olympus, of Ossa, and of Pelion; he follows the
   sinuosities of the interior sea which Euboea separates from the rest of
   the Ægæan Sea, and touches the singularly narrow strait of Euripus. On
   either bank one skirts that truly holy ground where perfection is at
   once discovered, where the ideal has really existed,--that soil which
   has seen the noblest of races found at once art, science, philosophy,
   and politics. Paul, no doubt, experienced on landing there that species
   of filial sentiment which cultivated men experience when touching this
   venerated soil. It was another world: his holy ground was elsewhere.

   Greece had not recovered from the terrible blows she had received
   during the previous centuries. Like the sons of Earth, these
   aristocratic tribunes had torn one another to pieces; the Romans had
   completely exterminated them; the old families had nearly disappeared;
   the ancient cities of Thebes and of Argos had become poor villages;
   Olympus and Sparta had been humiliated; Athens and Corinth were the
   sole survivors. The country was almost a desert: the images of
   desolation which we gather from the descriptions of Polybius, Cicero,
   Strabo, and Pausanias are heart-rending. The appearances of liberty
   which the Romans had left in the towns, and which only disappeared
   under Vespasian, were little else than irony. The wicked administration
   of the Romans had ruined everything; the temples were no longer
   maintained; at each step there were pedestals from which the conquerors
   had stolen the statues, or which adulation had consecrated to the new
   rulers. Peloponesus, in particular, had been struck dead. Sparta had
   killed her; consumed by the proximity of this foolish Utopia, that poor
   country never sprang into life again. At the Roman epoch, moreover, the
   administration of the large cities had absorbed and superseded the
   numerous small ruling centres: Corinth attracted to itself all the
   life.

   The race, if we except Corinth, had, however, remained quite pure; the
   number of Jews outside of Corinth was inconsiderable. Greece had
   received but a single Roman colony. The invasions of slaves and of
   Albanians, which have so completely changed the Hellenic blood, did not
   take place till later. The old religions were still flourishing. Some
   women, unknown to their husbands, practised much in secret, at the far
   corner of the gymnasiums, the foreign superstitions, especially those
   of the Egyptians. The sages, however, protested. "What a God he must
   be," said they, "who is pleased with the surreptitious homage of
   married women! A wife ought not to have other friends besides those of
   her husband. The gods, are they not our best friends?"

   It seems that, either during the voyage or at the moment of his arrival
   in Athens, Paul regretted having left his companions in Macedonia.
   Perhaps that new world astonished him, and he found him-self there too
   much isolated. What is certain is, that in dismissing the faithful
   Beræans he charged them to request Silas and Timothy to come and join
   him at the earliest possible moment.

   Paul therefore found himself for some days alone at Athens. This had
   not happened to him for a long time. His life had been as a whirlwind,
   and he had never journeyed without two or three companions. Athens, to
   the world, was something unique--at all events, something totally
   different from anything that Paul had seen before; hence, he was
   extremely embarrassed. In waiting for his companions, he amused himself
   by roaming, in the widest sense, over the city. The Acropolis, with the
   innumerable statues which covered it, and which constituted it a museum
   such as had never before been seen, must, in particular, have been to
   him a subject of the deepest reflection.

   Athens, although she had suffered much from Sylla, although, like
   Greece, she had been pillaged by the Roman administrators, and was
   already in part despoiled by the gross avidity of its masters, had yet
   the appearance of being ornamented with almost all her master-pieces of
   art. The monuments of the Acropolis were intact. Some clumsy additions
   of detail, quite a sufficient number of mediocre works which were
   already glittering in the sanctuary of high art, some silly
   substitutions, which consisted in placing Romans on the pedestals of
   ancient Greeks, had not changed the sanctity of that immaculate temple
   of the beautiful. Poecile, with its brilliant decoration, was as fresh
   as it was on the fast day. The exploits of the odious Secundus Carinas,
   the purveyor of statues for the gilded House, did not commence until
   some years after, and Athens suffered less from this than did Delphos
   and Olympus. The false taste of the Romans for colonnaded cities had
   not penetrated here; the houses were poor and by no means commodious.
   That exquisite city was moreover an irregular city, with narrow streets
   which were the conservators of its old monuments, and archaic souvenirs
   were preferred to streets scientifically laid out. Many of these
   marvellous things affected Paul but little; he beheld the only perfect
   objects which had ever existed, which shall ever exist,--the Propylæum,
   that chef-d'oeuvre of grandeur; the Parthenon, which absorbed every
   other grandeur save its own; the Temple of Victory without wings,
   worthy of the battles which it consecrated; the Erechthæum, a prodigy
   of elegance and of finish; the Errhephoræ, these divine young women
   with a bearing so full of grace; he beheld all that, and his faith was
   not overcome, nor was he disquieted. With the prejudices of the
   iconoclastic Jew, insensible to the plastic beauties which blinded him,
   he took these incomparable figures for idols. "His spirit," says his
   biographer, "was stirred in him when. he saw the city wholly given to
   idolatry." Ah! thou lovely and chaste images, true gods and goddesses,
   tremble! Behold him who raised against you the hammer! The fatal words
   had gone forth: "Ye are idols!" The error of that pitiful little Jew
   was your death-warrant!

   Surrounded by so many things which he did not understand, there were
   two which greatly struck the Apostle: first, the very religious
   character of the Athenians, which was manifested by a multitude of
   temples, altars, and sanctuaries of every description, symbols of a
   tolerant eclecticism which they carried into religion; in the second
   place, certain anonymous altars which were erected to the "unknown
   gods." These altars were somewhat numerous at Athens and in the
   environs. Other cities of Greece possessed them also. Those at the port
   of Phalera (Paul must have seen them on landing) were celebrated; they
   belonged to the legends of the Trojan War. They bore this
   inscription:--"To the unknown gods." Some of them were even thus
   inscribed:--

   AGEOSTOIThEOI

   "To an unknown God." These altars owed their existence to the extreme
   scrupulousness of the Athenians for things religious, and to their
   habit of seeing in everything the manifestation of a mysterious and
   special power. Fearing, without knowing it, to offend some god of whose
   name they were ignorant, or of neglecting a powerful god, or even of
   wishing to obtain a favour which might depend upon a certain divinity
   with whom they were unacquainted, they either erected anonymous altars,
   or placed up the afore-mentioned inscriptions. It is possible, too,
   that these fanciful inscriptions were taken from altars which were
   originally anonymous, to which, in the work of making a general census,
   had to be affixed some such an epigraph, for lack of the knowledge of
   that which properly belonged to them. Paul was greatly surprised at
   these dedications. Interpreting them with his Jewish mind, he imputed
   to them a meaning which did not belong to them. He believed that they
   had reference to a God called par excellence "The Unknown God." He saw
   in that Unknown God the God of the Jews, the only God, towards whom
   Paganism itself might have had some mysterious aspirations. This idea
   was the more natural, because in the eyes of Pagans that which in
   particular characterised the God of the Jews was, that he was a God
   without name, a doubtful God. It was further probable that it was in
   some religious ceremony, or m some philosophical discussion, that Paul
   heard the hemistiche:--

   Tou gar chai genos esmen

   borrowed from the hymn of Cleanthes to Jupiter, or from the Phenomena
   of Aratus, and which was frequently used in the religious hymns. He
   grouped in his mind those features of local colouring, and sought to
   compose a discourse on them appropriate to his new auditors: for he
   felt that here it was necessary for him to modify greatly his
   preaching.

   Certain it is Athens was far from being then what she had been for
   centuries, the centre of human progress, the capital of the republic of
   mind. Faithful to her ancient character, this divine mother of art was
   one of the last asylums of liberalism and of the republican spirit. She
   was what might be called a city of opposition. Athens was always on the
   side of the lost cause. She energetically declared for the independence
   of Greece, and for Mithridates against the Romans, for Pompey against
   Cæsar, for the republicans against the triumvirs, for Antony against
   Octavius. She raised statues to Brutus and to Cassius by the side of
   those of Harmodius and of Aristogiton; she honoured Germanicus to the
   point of compromising herself; she merited the insults of Piso. Sylla
   plundered her in an atrocious manner, and dealt the final blow to her
   democratic constitution. Augustus, although merciful to her, did not
   show her any favour. Her title as a free city was never taken away, but
   the privileges of free cities were gradually diminished under the
   Cæsars and the Flavii. Athens was thus in the condition of a city
   suspected and disgraced, but justly ennobled through her disgrace. At
   the advent of Nerva, there began for her a second life. The world,
   having returned to reason and to virtue, recognised its mother. Nerva,
   Herod Atticus, Hadrian, Antonine, Marcus Aurelius, restored her,
   endowing her even with monuments and new institutions. Athens became
   again for four centuries the city of philosophers, of artists, of
   genius, the holy city of every liberal soul, the pilgrim city of those
   who loved the beautiful and the true.

   But let us not anticipate events. At the sad moment at which we are now
   arrived, the ancient splendour had disappeared, and the new had not yet
   dawned. She was no longer "the city of Theseus," and was not yet "the
   city of Hadrian." In the century before our era, the philosophic school
   of Athens had been very brilliant; Philo of Larissa, and Antiochus of
   Ascalon, had continued or modified the academy; Cratippus taught there
   peripatetics, and understood how to be at once the friend, the master,
   the consoler, or the protégé of Pompey, of Cæsar, of Cicero, and of
   Brutus. Romans, the most celebrated and most eminent in business,
   attracted to the Orient by ambition, halted at Athens to listen to the
   philosophers in vogue. Atticus, Crassus, Cicero, Varro, Ovid, Horace,
   Agrippa, Virgil, either studied or resided there as amateurs. Brutus
   passed there his last winter, dividing his time between the peripatetic
   Cratippus and the academician Theomnestus. Athens was, on the eve of
   the battle of Philippi, a centre of opinion of the highest importance.
   The instruction which was given there was entirely philosophic, and
   much superior to the insipid eloquence of the school of Rhodes. That
   which was indeed prejudicial to Athens was the advent of Augustus and
   the universal pacification. The precepts of philosophy were from that
   time suspected--the schools lost their importance and their activity.
   Rome, on the other hand, by reason of the brilliant literary evolution
   which she had achieved, became for some time semi-independent of Greece
   in regard to matters of thought. Other centres were formed: as a school
   of varied instruction, Marseilles was preferred. The original
   philosophy of the four great sects had come to an end. Eclecticism, a
   sort of flabby, unsystematic style of philosophising, had commenced. If
   we except Ammonius of Alexandria, the master of Plutarch, who founded
   about that time at Athens a species of literary philosophy, which was
   to become the fashion, beginning with the reign of Hadrian, there was
   no one illustrious, about the middle of the first century, in the one
   city of the world which had produced or attracted the most celebrated
   men. The figures which were now consecrated with deplorable prodigality
   on the Acropolis were those of consuls, of pro-consuls, of Roman
   magistrates, and of members of the imperial family. The temples which
   were erected there were dedicated to the goddess Rome, and to Augustus.
   Nero had even his statues there. Artists of talent having been
   attracted to Rome, the Athenian works of the first century were, for
   the most part, of a mediocre quality that is surprising. Still
   monuments, such as the clock of Andronicus Cyrrhesta, the portico of
   Athene Archegetes, the temple of Rome and of Augustus, the mausoleum of
   Philopappus, were either a little anterior or posterior to the time
   when Paul saw Athens. Never had the city, during its long history, been
   more mute and peaceful.

   She still preserved, however, a great portion of her nobility. She
   still occupied the first rank in the regards of the world. Despite the
   harshness of the times, the respect for Athens was profound, and every
   one bowed to her. Sylla, though so terrible in consequence of her
   rebellion, had pity on her. Pompey and Cæsar, before the battle of
   Pharsalia, caused it to be proclaimed by a herald that all the
   Athenians were to be spared, as priests of the goddesses Thesmophores.
   Pompey gave a large sum of money to adorn the city: Cæsar refrained
   from avenging himself on her, and contributed to the erection of one of
   the monuments. Brutus and Cassius, who comported themselves as private
   persons, were received and flattered like heroes. Antony loved Athens,
   and liked to reside there. After the battle of Actium, Augustus
   pardoned her for the third time, and his name, like that of Cæsar, was
   inscribed on an important monument. His family and entourage were
   looked upon at Athens as benefactors. The Romans were at great pains to
   prove that they left Athens free and honoured. Spoiled children of
   fame, the Athenians lived thenceforward on the recollections of their
   past history. Germanicus, while be resided at Athens, wished to be
   preceded by only one lictor. Nero, though not superstitious, did not
   dare to enter the city for fear of the Furies which lived under the
   Areopagus,--of those terrible "Semnes," which the parricides dreaded.
   The recollection of Orestes made him tremble. He dare no more affront
   the mysteries of Eleusis, at the threshold of which the herald
   proclaimed that the profligate and the impious were to be careful not
   to approach. Noble foreigners, descendants of dethroned kings, came to
   spend their fortunes at Athens, and were delighted to find themselves
   decorated with high-sounding and mock titles. All the small barbarian
   kings emulated one another in rendering service to the Athenians, and
   in restoring their monuments.

   Religion was one of the principal causes of this exceptional favour.
   Essentially municipal and political in its origin, having for its basis
   the myths relating to the foundation of the city and to its divine
   protectors, the religion of Athens was at first only the religious
   consecration of patriotism and of the institutions of the city. It was
   the cult of the Acropolis. "Aglaure" and the oath which the young
   Athenians took upon the altar had no other meaning; just as if religion
   with us consisted in drawing the conscription, in drilling, and in
   honouring the colours. It soon became insipid enough; it possessed
   nothing infinite, nothing that touched man through his destiny, nothing
   universal. The railleries of Aristophanes against the gods of the
   Acropolis proved by themselves alone that these gods could not bring
   every race under subjection. The women were turned early in the
   direction of petty foreign devotions like those of Adonis. The
   mysteries, in particular, were successful; philosophy in the hands of
   Plato was a kind of delicious mythology, whilst art created for the
   multitude images really admirable. The Athenian gods became the gods of
   beauty. The old Athene Poliade was but a mannikin, without apparent
   arms, swathed in a peplos, like the old virgin of Loretta. Toreutic
   accomplished an unexampled miracle; she made realistic statues after
   the model of the Italian and Byzantine Madonnas, adorned with
   appropriate ornaments, which were at the same time marvellous
   masterpieces. Athens succeeded in possessing, after a sort, one of the
   most perfect religions of antiquity. This religion underwent at that
   time a kind of eclipse, on account of the misfortunes of the city. The
   Athenians were the first to defile their sanctuary. Lachares stole the
   gold from the statue of Athene. Demetrius Poliorcetes was installed by
   the inhabitants themselves in the opisthodome of the Parthenon. He
   harboured his courtesans near himself, and people were amused by the
   scandals that such surroundings must have caused to the chaste goddess.
   Aristion the last defender of the independence of Athens, permitted the
   immortal lamp of Athene Poliade to be extinguished. Such, however, was
   the glory of that unique city, that the universe seemed to take to
   heart the adoption of her goddess, at the moment when she deserted her.
   The Parthenon, through the action of foreigners, regained her honours.
   The mysteries of Athens were a religious attraction for the whole Pagan
   world.

   But it was principally as a city of schools that Athens exercised a
   peculiar prestige. That new destiny which, through the assiduity of
   Hadrian and Marcus Aurelius, came to possess a character so decided,
   had been begun two centuries before. The city of Miltiades and Pericles
   had been transformed into a university city, a sort of Oxford, the
   resort of all the young noblesse, who scattered gold in handfuls. It
   contained nothing but professors, philosophers, rhetoricians,
   pedagogues of every description, sophmores, tutors, gymnasts,
   pædotribes, hoplomates, masters of fencing and of riding. From the time
   of Hadrian the cosmetists or prefects of the students assumed to a
   certain extent the importance and the dignity of the archons. People
   fixed the date of the years by them: the old Greek education, destined
   in principle to form the free citizen, became the pedagogic law of the
   human species. Alas! she produces henceforth little else than
   rhetoricians; bodily exercises, formerly a real occupation of the
   heroes upon the banks of the Illissus, became now a mere matter of
   pose. A circus grandeur, the gestures of Franconi, have replaced solid
   grandeur. But it is the peculiar attribute of Greece to have ennobled
   everything. Even the work of the schoolman became with her a moral
   ministry. The dignity of the professor, in spite of more than one
   abuse, was one of her creations. The jeunesse dorée could sometimes
   remember the fine discourses of its masters. She was, like all youths,
   republican; she flocked to the appeal of Brutus; she was mown down at
   Philippi. The day was employed in declaiming on tyrannicide and on
   liberty, in celebrating the noble death of Cato, and in making a eulogy
   on Brutus.

   The population had always been sprightly, spirituelle, curious. Every
   one lived in the open air, in perpetual contact with the rest of the
   world, breathing, under smiling skies, a serene atmosphere. The
   strangers, who were numerous and eager after knowledge, evinced great
   activity of mind. Publicity, the journalism of the ancient world--if
   one may be permitted to make use of such an expression--had its centre
   at Athens. The city not being commercial, everybody had but one care,
   which was to learn the news, to be made au courant of what was said and
   of what was being done in the universe. It is very remarkable that the
   great development of religion did not destroy rational culture. Athens
   might have been at once the most religious city of the world, the
   Parthenon of Greece, and the city of philosophers. When we see in the
   theatre of Dionysius the marble arm-chairs which surround the orchestra
   bearing each the name of the priesthood the titulary of which came to
   sit there, we should say that here was a city of priests; and yet it
   was pre-eminently the city of free-thinkers. The religions in question
   had neither dogmas nor holy writ. They had not for physics the horror
   that Christianity has always evinced, and which has led it to condemn
   positive researches. The priest and the Epicurean atomist, except for a
   few broils, lived peaceably enough together. The true Greeks were
   perfectly contented with such accord, founded not upon logic, but upon
   mutual tolerance and mutual regard.

   This was for Paul a species of existence altogether new. The cities in
   which he had up till now preached were for the most part commercial
   cities, resembling Leghorn or Trieste, and having large Jewries rather
   than brilliant centres, cities of the great world and of great culture.
   Athens was profoundly Pagan; Paganism was bound up with every pleasure,
   with every interest, with every glory of the city. Paul hesitated a
   great deal. Timothy at length arrived from Macedonia; Silas, for
   reasons which we do not know was not able to come.

   There was a synagogue at Athens, and Paul disputed in it with the Jews,
   and with the "devout persons;" but in such a city any successes in the
   synagogue counted for little. That brilliant agora in which was
   displayed so much mind, that portico Poecile in which was asked every
   conceivable question, tempted him. He spoke there not as a preacher
   addressing himself to the multitude assembled, but as a stranger
   feeling his way--putting forth his ideas timidly, and seeking to create
   for himself some point d'appui. "Jesus and the resurrection"
   (anastasis) appeared foreign words, and destitute of meaning. Several
   of them, as it would appear, took anastasis for the name of a goddess,
   and believed that Jesus and Anastasia were some new divine couple that
   these Oriental dreamers had come to preach. Some Epicurean and Stoic
   philosophers, it is said, came near and listened.

   This first contact of Christianity with Greek philosophy was not very
   encouraging. We have never seen a better example of how men of mind
   ought to distrust themselves and to guard against laughing at an idea,
   however foolish it may seem to them. The bad Greek spoken by Paul, his
   incorrect and halting phraseology, were not calculated to make him
   accredited at Athens. The philosophers turned their backs disdainfully
   at his barbarous speech. "He is a babbler" (spermologos), said some.
   "He is a preacher of strange gods," said others. No one could have
   suspected that this babbler would one day supplant them, and that, four
   hundred and seventy-four years later, their professorships would be
   suppressed as useless and injurious, in consequence of the preaching of
   Paul. What a grand lesson! Proud of their superiority, the Athenian
   philosophers disdained the questions pertaining to popular religion. In
   their midst superstition flourished. Athens almost equalled in that
   respect the most religious cities of Asia Minor. The aristocracy of
   thinkers cared little for the social wants which made themselves felt
   under the cover of so many unpolished worships. Such a renunciation is
   always punished. When philosophy declares that she will not occupy
   herself with religion, religion responds by extinguishing her; and this
   is just, for philosophy is something only when she shows to humanity
   the way, when she takes up seriously the infinite problem which is the
   same for all.

   The liberal spirit which reigned at Athens assured Paul of complete
   security. Neither Jews nor Pagans attempted anything against him; but
   that tolerance was even worse than hatred. Moreover, the new doctrine
   produced a lively reaction, at least in the Jewish society; here it
   could find only curious and blasé auditors. It appears that one day the
   auditors of Paul, wishing to obtain from him a sort of official
   exposition of his doctrine, conducted him to the Hill of Mars, and
   there summoned him to declare what religion he preached. It is indeed
   possible that there is some legend here, and that the celebrity of the
   Areopagus may have led the narrator of the Acts, who had not been an
   eyewitness, to select this illustrious audience to enable him to
   deliver on his hero a pompous discourse, a philosophic harangue. This
   hypothesis, nevertheless, is not necessary. The Areopagus had retained,
   under the Romans, Its ancient organisation. It had even seen its
   prerogatives increased, as a result of the policy which led the
   conquerors to suppress in Greece the ancient democratic institutions,
   and to replace them by the Council of Notables. The Areopagus had
   always been the aristocratic corporation of Athens: it gained what the
   democracy had lost. Let us add that people were living in an epoch of
   literary dilettanteism, and that that tribunal, by its classic
   celebrity, enjoyed a great prestige. Its moral authority was recognised
   by the entire world. The Areopagus thus became again, under Roman
   domination, what it had been at different times in the history of the
   Athenian Republic, a political body, almost divested of judicial
   functions, the real senate of Athens, intervening only in certain
   cases, and constituting a conservative nobility of retired
   functionaries. Beginning with the first century of our era, the
   Areopagus figures in the inscriptions as head of the powers of Athens,
   superior to the Council of Six Hundred, and to the people. The erection
   of statues, in particular, was made by it, or at least with its
   authorisation. At the epoch at which we are now arrived, it had just
   decreed a statue to Queen Berenice, daughter of Agrippa I., with whom
   we shall soon see Paul en rapport. It seems also that the Areopagus
   exercised a certain superintendence over instruction. It was a chief
   council of religious and moral censure, before which was brought all
   that concerned laws, manners, medicine, luxury, ædileship, the
   religions of the city; and there is no-thing unlikely in the fact that
   when a novel doctrine was promulgated, that the preacher should be
   invited to come and make his declarations before such a tribunal, or at
   least to the place in which it held its sessions. Paul, it is said,
   stood up in the middle of the assembly and spoke thus:

   "Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too
   superstitious. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found
   an altar with this inscription:--To the Unknown God.' Whom, therefore,
   ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. God that made the world,
   and all things therein, seeing that he is lord of earth, dwelleth not
   in temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as
   though he needed anything, seeing he giveth to all life and breath, and
   all things. And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell
   on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before
   appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. That they should seek
   the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he
   be not far from every one of us. For in him we live and move and have
   our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are all
   his offspring.' Forasmuch, then, as we are the offspring of God, we
   ought not to think that the godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
   stone, or graven by art of man's device. And the times of this
   ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to
   repent. Because he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the
   world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he
   hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the
   dead" (Acts xvii. 22-31).

   At these words, according to the narrator, Paul was interrupted.
   Hearing him speak of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and
   others said:--"We will hear thee again of this matter."

   If the discourse which we have just related was really delivered, it
   must indeed have produced a very singular impression upon the
   cultivated minds which heard it. That almost barbarous speech, now
   incorrect and formless, now scrupulously correct; that unequal
   eloquence, strewn with happy fancies and disagreeable failings; that
   profound philosophy, embracing beliefs the most singular, and
   extending, seemingly, to another world. Immensely superior to the
   popular religion of Greece, such a doctrine was in many things below
   the level of the current philosophy of the age. If, on the one hand, it
   extended the hand to that philosophy through the elevated notion of
   divinity and the beautiful theory which it proclaimed of the moral
   unity of the human mind, on the other, it embraced in part supernatural
   beliefs that no informed mind could admit. In any case, it is not
   surprising that Christianity had no success in Athens. The motives
   which were to work the success of Christianity, were elsewhere than in
   the circle of letters. They were lodged in the hearts of pious women,
   in the secret aspirations of the poor, the slaves, and the afflicted of
   every description. Before philosophy could approach the new doctrine,
   it was necessary that philosophy itself should be much debased, and
   that the new doctrine should be renounced from the grand chimera of the
   near judgment, that is to say, from the concrete ideas with which from
   its first formation it had been enveloped.

   Whether it was delivered by Paul, or by one of his disciples, this
   discourse, in any case, shows us an endeavour, almost the only one in
   the first century, made to reconcile Christianity with philosophy, and
   even, in one sense, with Paganism. The author, giving proof of a
   breadth of views most remarkable amongst the Jews, discovers in all
   races a sort of innate sense of the divine, a sort of secret instinct
   of monotheism which might lead to the knowledge of the true God. To be
   believed in, Christianity is nothing more than natural religion, which
   one arrives at by consulting simply one's own heart, and by
   interrogating oneself conscientiously--the two-sided idea which was
   soon to reproach Christianity with deism, and to inspire a pride of
   which it had been shorn. This is the first example given of the tactics
   of certain apologists of Christianity, in advance of philosophy, using
   or feigning to use scientific language; speaking with complaisance or
   politeness of the reason advanced by the other side of wishing to have
   it believed, by means of skilfully grouped quotations, that in the main
   it might be understood by lettered people; but which led to
   misunderstandings that were inevitable, for they plainly declared their
   opinions, and spoke of their supernatural dogmas. One can already
   perceive the effort to translate into the language of Greek philosophy
   Jewish and Christian ideas; one can foresee Clement of Alexandria and
   Origen. Biblical ideas, and those of Greek philosophy, aspired to
   embrace one another; but in order to that many concessions had to be
   made; for that God in which we live and move is far removed from the
   Jehovah of the prophets, and from the celestial father of Jesus.

   Be that as it may, the times were far from being ripe for such an
   alliance; at any rate, it was not to take place at Athens. Athens, at
   the point which it had reached in history, that city of grammarians, of
   gymnasts, and of fencing-masters, was likewise as ill adapted as it was
   possible to be, for receiving Christianity. The power over vassals, the
   hardness of heart of the schoolman, were unpardonable sins in the eyes
   of grace. The pedagogue is the least convertible of men; for he has a
   religion of his own, which is routine, faith in old authors, and a
   taste for literary exercises. This satisfies him, and extinguishes in
   him all other desires. There has been found at Athens a series of
   hermes-portraits of cosmetics of the second century. The latter are
   splendid men, grave, majestic, with a noble mien, and yet Hellenic.
   From the inscriptions we learn of the honours and pensions which were
   conferred on them: the really great men of the ancient democracy never
   had so many of these. Assuredly if Paul had encountered some of the
   predecessors of these superb pedants, he could not have achieved much
   more success than, during the Empire, would have had a romancist imbued
   with neo-Catholicism, attempting to convert to his views a
   Universitarian attached to the religion of Horace, or than would in our
   own days a socialist humanitarian declaiming against English prejudices
   before the fellows of Oxford or Cambridge.

   In a society so different from that in which he had till now lived, in
   the midst of rhetoricians and professors of dialectics, Paul found
   himself indeed from home. His thoughts constantly reverted to the dear
   Churches of Macedonia and Galatia, where he had discovered such an
   exquisite religious sentiment. He thought many times of departing for
   Thessalonica. A lively desire carried him thence, the more so as he had
   received news that the faith of the young Church had been subjected to
   many severe tests, and he feared that the proselytes might succumb to
   the temptations. Some obstacles, that he attributed to Satan, prevented
   him from carrying out that project. When he could no longer forbear, as
   he himself said, he separated once more from Timothy, whom he sent to
   Thessalonica to confirm, to exhort, and to console the faithful, and
   remained alone again at Athens.

   He laboured there with renewed vigour, but the soil was unpropitious.
   The sprightly Athenian mind was diametrically opposed to that tender
   and profound religious disposition which produced conversions, and
   which was predestined to Christianity. The truly Hellenic ground was
   little inclined to the doctrine of Jesus. Plutarch, living in an
   atmosphere purely Greek, had not the least wind of it in the first half
   of the second century. Patriotism, attachment to old recollections of
   country, turned the Greeks against exotic worships. "Hellenism" became
   an organised, almost rational religion, which admitted a great part of
   philosophy. The "gods of Greece" appeared to wish to be regarded as the
   universal gods of humanity.

   That which characterised the religion of Greece formerly, that which
   still characterises it in our day, is the want of infinity, of the
   unconfined, of compassion, of feminine softness. The profoundness of
   German and Celtic religious sentiment is lacking in the true Hellenic
   race. The piety of Greek orthodoxy consists in practices and in
   exterior signs. The orthodox Churches, sometimes very elegant, have
   none of the terrors which one feels in a Gothic Church. In that
   Oriental Christianity there are no tears, prayers, or outward
   compunctions. The funerals there are almost gay. They take place at
   night, or at the setting of the sun, when the shadows have become
   lengthened, and are accompanied by songs set in a medium key, and are a
   display of bright colours. The fanatical gravity of the Latins is
   distasteful to those brisk, cheerful, and sprightly races. The infirm
   one is not cast down; he watches death softly approach; all about him
   is smiles. Herein lies the secret of that divine gaiety of the Homeric
   poems and of Plato--the narration of the death of Socrates in Phædon
   shows hardly a taint of sadness. Life produces its flower, then its
   fruit; what is wanted more? If, as it can be maintained, the
   pre-occupation of death is the most important characteristic of
   Christianity and of modern religious sentiment, then the Greek race is
   the least religious of races. It is a superficial race, treating life
   as a thing devoid of the supernatural, and having no future. Such
   simplicity of conception is owing in great measure to the climate, to
   the purity of the atmosphere, to the astonishing joy that one breathes,
   but even more so to the instincts of the Hellenic race, finely
   idealistic. Anything--a tree, a flower, a lizard, a tortoise, calls up
   the recollection of a thousand metamorphoses which have been sung by
   the poets; a jet of water, a small crevice in the rock which is called
   a cave of the nymphs; a well with a drinking-cup at the brink; an arm
   of the sea so narrow that the butterflies cross it, and nevertheless
   navigable for the largest ships, like the Bosphorus; orange groves,
   cypress trees, whose shades are reflected on the sea; a small pine wood
   in the midst of rocks--suffice in Greece to produce the contentment
   which is awakened by beauty. People walk in the gardens during the
   night to listen to the nightingales; sit down in the clear moonlight to
   play the flute; go to drink the pure mountain water, carrying with them
   a piece of bread, and a flask of wine, which is drunk while singing. At
   family feasts, there is suspended above the doors a crown of branches,
   to match with the headpieces of flowers; on days of public festivals,
   thyrsi are carried, adorned with leaves; the days are passed in
   dancing, playing with tame goats; these are the delights of the Greeks,
   the pleasures of a race, poor, economical, eternally young, inhabiting
   a charming country, finding its welfare within itself, and in the gifts
   that the gods have given it. The shepherd's song or pastoral, after the
   manner of Theocritus, was in the Hellenic countries a reality. Greece
   al-ways delighted in that unpretentious species of delicate and amiable
   poetry, the species the. most characteristic of her literature, the
   mirror of her own life, though almost always silly and artificial. Good
   humour and the delights of life are Greek traits par excellence. This
   race is always twenty years old; for she, indulgere genio is not the
   deep drinking of the English, or the gross diversions of the French; it
   is simply to think that nature is kind, that one can and one ought to
   unbend to it. For Greece, in fact, nature is a counsellor of elegance,
   a mistress of justice and of virtue:--"concupiscence." The idea that
   nature induces us to do evil is to her a not-sense. The taste for
   personal adornment which distinguishes the palicare, and which is
   exhibited with so much innocence in the Greek girl, is not the pompous
   vanity of the barbarian, the vulgar pretension of the bourgeois,
   swollen with the ridiculous pride of an upstart; it is the pure and
   delicate sentiment of unsophisticated youth, which feels itself to be
   the legitimate heir of the true inventors of beauty.

   Such a race, one can understand, would have received Jesus with a
   smile. It was a subject these exquisite children were incapable of
   learning from us--serious, profound, really simple devotion without
   glory, goodness without parade. Socrates is a moralist of the first
   order, but he has nothing to do with the history of religion. The Greek
   always appears to us a little cold and heartless; he has wit, action,
   subtlety, but has nothing of the pensive or the melancholic. On the
   other hand, with us Celts and Germans, the source of our genius is our
   heart. Our deepest recesses (au fond de nous) resemble a fairy
   fountain, a fountain clear, fresh, and deep, in which is reflected the
   infinite. With the Greek, love of self and vanity is mixed with
   everything; vague sentiment is unknown to him; reflection upon his own
   destiny ap-pears to him unprofitable. Pushed to the length of
   caricature, so incomplete a mode of understanding life as it is
   conditioned, at the Roman epoch, the græculus esuriens, grammarian,
   artist, charlatan, acrobat, physician, amuser of the whole world,
   greatly resembling the Italian of the sixteenth and seventeenth
   centuries; at the Byzantine epoch, the theological sophist making
   religion degenerate into subtle disputes; in our day, the modern Greek,
   sometimes foolishly vain and ungrateful; the orthodox fathers, with
   their egotistical and materialistic religion. Unfortunate he who
   arrests that decadence! Shame upon him who, in front of the Parthenon,
   dreams of holding it up to ridicule! Nevertheless, this has to be
   acknowledged: Greece was never seriously Christian, nor is she to this
   day. No race in our Middle Ages was less romantic, more destitute of
   chivalrous sentiment. Plato built all his theory of the beautiful en se
   passant without reference to woman. To think of a woman in order to be
   incited to do great things! a Greek would have been surprised at such
   language. For him, he thought of men assembled around the agora, he
   thought of his country. In this respect the Latins were nearer to us.
   Greek poetry, incomparable in the grander species of it, such as the
   epic, the tragic, the disinterested lyric poetry, had not, it seems,
   the sweet elegiac note of Tibullus, of Virgil, of Lucretius, a note so
   much in harmony with our sentiments, so closely related to that which
   we love.

   The same difference is found between the piety of St Bernard, of St
   François d'Assisi, and that of the saints of the Greek Church. These
   splendid schools of Capadocia, of Syria, of Egypt, of the Fathers of
   the desert, approximate the philosophical schools. The popular holy
   writings of the Greeks are more mythological than those of the Latins.
   The majority of the saints represented in the iconostase of a Greek
   house, before which a lamp burns, are not great authors, great men like
   saints of the West: they are often fanciful beings, old gods
   transfigured, or at least a combination of historic and mythological
   personages, like St George. And that admirable temple of St Sophia! It
   is an Aryan temple: the whole human species might have made its prayers
   there. Not having had either people, inquisition, scholasticism, or
   Middle Age barbarism, having always preserved a leaven of Arianism,
   Greece rejected with greater facility than any other country a
   supernatural Christianity, just as those Athenians of former times were
   at once (thanks to a sort of vivacity which was a thousand times more
   profound than the seriousness of our dull races) the most superstitious
   of peoples, and the nearest approach to Rationalism. The popular Greek
   songs are still to-day charged with Pagan images and ideas. Differing
   so widely from the West, the East remained during the Middle Ages, and
   down to modern times, true "Hellenists;" at bottom more Pagan than
   Christian, living on a religion of old Greek patriotism, and of old
   authors. These Hellenists were, in the fifteenth century, the promoters
   of the Renaissance in the West, to which they affixed Greek texts, the
   basis of all civilisation. The same spirit has presided, and will
   continue to preside, over the destinies of new Greece. When we have
   fully studied that which made of us bears the caul of a cultivated
   Hellenist, we see that there is in him very little Christianity: he is
   Christian in form, as a Persian is a Mussulman, but at bottom he is
   "Hellenist." His religion is the adoration of the ancient Greek genius.
   He pardons every heresy to philo-Hellenism, to him who admires its
   past: he is much less a disciple of Jesus and of St Paul, than of
   Plutarch and of Julian.

   Wearied by his little success at Athens, Paul, without awaiting the
   return of Timothy, departed for Corinth. He had not formed at Athens
   any considerable Church. There were only a few isolated persons, among
   others a certain Dionysius, who belonged, it is said, to the Areopagus,
   and a woman, named Damaris, who had adhered to his doctrines. This was,
   then, in his apostolic career, his first and almost only check.

   Even in the second century the Church at Athens is of little
   importance. Athens was one of the cities which was the last to be
   converted. After Constantine, she is the centre of opposition against
   Christianity, the bulwark of philosophy. By a rare privilege she
   preserved the temples intact. These prodigious monuments, protected
   through the ages, thanks to a sort of instinctive respect, were to come
   down to us as an eternal lesson of good sense and honesty, given by
   artists of genius. Even to-day we feel that the Christian covering
   which is spread over the old Pagan foundation is very superficial. It
   is hardly necessary to modify the actual names of the churches at
   Athens to find again the names of the ancient temples.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIIL

  CONTINUATION OF THE SECOND JOURNEY OF PAUL--FIST SOJOURN AT CORINTH.

   Departing from Phalera or Piræus, Paul arrived at Cenchrea, which was
   the port of Corinth on the Ægæan Sea. It is a pretty enough little
   harbour. It is surrounded by verdant hills and pine woods, and is
   situated at the extremity of the Gulf of Saronica. A beautiful open
   valley, nearly two leagues in extent, reaches from that port to the
   great city built at the foot of the colossal dome from which can be
   seen the two seas.

   Corinth was a field much better adapted than Athens to receive the new
   seed. It was not like Athens a sort of sanctuary of thought, a city
   sacred and unique to the world; it was even hardly a Hellenic city.
   Ancient Corinth had been razed to. its foundations by Mummius. For a
   hundred years the soil of the Achaian Confederation was desert. In the
   year 44 B.C. Julius Cæsar rebuilt the city and made it an important
   Roman colony, which he peopled principally with freedmen. This is
   equivalent to saying that the population was very heterogeneous. It was
   composed of a conglomeration of those peoples of every sort and of
   every origin which loved Cæsar. The new Corinthians remained for a long
   time strangers to Greece, where they were regarded as intruders. Their
   entertainments consisted of the brutal games of the Romans, which were
   repulsive to true Greeks. Corinth became thus a city like so many
   others on the shores of the Mediterranean, very populous, wealthy,
   brilliant, frequented by many strangers, a centre of commercial
   activity, one of those conglomerate cities, in short, which no longer
   contained patriots. The dominant trait which rendered its name
   proverbial was the exceeding corruption of manners which was remarked
   there. In this again it constituted an exception amongst the Hellenic
   cities. The purely Greek manners were simple and gay, and could on no
   account be held to be luxurious and debauched. The affluence of the
   mariners who were attracted thence by the two ports, had made of
   Corinth the last sanctuary of the worship of Venus Pandemos, a remnant
   of the ancient Phoenician establishments. The great temple of Venus had
   more than a thousand consecrated courtesans; the whole city was like a
   vast pandemonium, where numerous strangers, sailors particularly,
   resorted to spend their wealth foolishly.

   There was at Corinth a colony of Jews, which was probably established
   at Cenchrea, one of the ports which was used in trading with the East.
   A short time before the arrival of Paul, a colony of Jews, which had
   been expelled from Rome by the edict of Claudius, had disembarked, and
   among the number were Aquila and Priscilla, who, it seems, at that time
   already professed the faith of Christ. From all this there resulted a
   concomitance of circumstances most favourable. The isthmus formed
   between the two masses of the Greek continent has always been the seat
   of a world-wide commerce. It had always been one of those emporiums,
   quite irrespective of race or of nationality, designed to be the
   headquarters, if I might say so, of infant Christianity. New Corinth,
   on account of its having few Hellenic nobility, was a city already
   semi-christianised. With Antioch, Ephesus, Thessalonica, and Rome, she
   became an ecclesiastical metropolis of the first rank. But the
   immorality which reigned should at the same time have presaged that the
   first abuses in the history of the Church would be produced there. In a
   few years Corinth shall present tows the spectacle of incestuous
   Christians, and of drunken people sitting down to the table of Christ.

   Paul quickly divined that a long sojourn at Corinth would be necessary.
   He resolved hence to take up there a fixed abode, and to prosecute his
   trade of upholsterer. Now, strictly speaking, Aquila and Priscilla
   followed the same trade as Paul. He went there to live with them, and
   the three set up a small shop, which was stocked by them with
   ready-made articles.

   Timothy, whom Paul had sent from Athens to Thessalonica, soon rejoined
   him. The news from the Church at Thessalonica was excellent. All the
   faithful continued in the faith and in charity, and in their attachment
   to their master. The persecutions of their fellow-citizens had not
   shaken them; brotherly love prevailed throughout Macedonia. Silas, whom
   Paul had not seen since his flight from Beræa, had probably been joined
   by Timothy, and returned with the latter. What is certain is, that the
   three companions found themselves reunited at Corinth, and that they
   lived there together for a long time.

   The attention of Paul was, as usual, first directed to the Jews. Each
   Sabbath he spoke in the synagogue. He found there dispositions greatly
   diverse, One family, that of Stephenephorus or Stephanus, was
   converted, and were all baptised by Paul. The orthodox resisted
   energetically, even to the extent of injuring and of anathematising
   them. One day, finally, there was an open rupture. Paul shook the dust
   off his raiment upon the incredulous of the assembly, made them
   responsible for the consequences, and declared to them that, seeing
   they closed their ears to the truth, he would go unto the Gentiles.
   Having uttered these words, he left the hall. He taught henceforth in
   the house of one Titus Justus, a man that feared God, and whose house
   was contiguous to the synagogue. Crispus, the chief of the Jewish
   community, belonged to the party of Paul; he was converted with his
   whole house, and Paul baptised him himself, a thing of rare occurrence.

   Many others, both Jews and Pagans, and those "fearing God," were
   baptised. The number of converted Pagans appeared to be here relatively
   considerable. Paul displayed prodigious zeal. Several divine visions
   which came to him during the night fortified him. The fame of the
   conversions he had made at Thessalonica, nevertheless, preceded him,
   and had favourably disposed the religious society in his behalf. The
   supernatural phenomena were not wanting: there were some miracles.
   Innocence was not the same thing here as at Philippi and Thessalonica.
   The corrupt manners of Corinth crossed sometimes the threshold of the
   Church; at any rate, all those who entered it were not equally pure.
   But, in return, few of the Churches were more numerous; the community
   of Corinth irradiated the whole province of Achaia, and became the home
   of Christianity in the Hellenic peninsula. Without speaking of Aquila
   and of Priscilla--almost received in the rank of apostles--and of Titus
   Justus, of Crispus, of Stephanus--mentioned above--the Church numbered
   in its bosom Gaius, who was himself also baptised by Paul, and who
   extended hospitality to the Apostle during the second sojourn of the
   latter in Corinth; Quartus, Achaicus, Fortunatus, Erastus, rather an
   important personage, who was treasurer of the city; a woman named
   Chloe, who had a numerous household. We have only vague and uncertain
   notions in regard to one Zenas, a doctor of Jewish law. Stephanus and
   his household constituted the most influential group, the one which had
   the most authority. All the converts, nevertheless, with the probable
   exception of Erastus, were simple-minded people, without much
   instruction, without social distinction, drawn, in a word, from the
   humblest ranks.

   The port of Cenchrea had likewise its Church. Cenchrea was in great
   part peopled by Orientals. There one could reverence Isis and Eschmoun,
   while the Phoenician Venus was not neglected. It was like Calamaki in
   our days, less a city than a mass of shops and inns for seafaring men.
   In the midst of the corruption of these filthy hovels of seafarers,
   Christianity produced its miracle. Cenchrea possessed an admirable
   deaconess, who, one day, as we shall see later on, concealed under the
   folds of her woman's garments the whole future of Christian theology,
   the writing which was to regulate the faith of the world. She was named
   Phoebe. She was an active person, never at rest, always eager to render
   service, and who was very precious to Paul.

   The sojourn of Paul at Corinth lasted for eighteen months. The
   beautiful rock of Acrocorinth, the snowy summits of Helicon and of
   Parnassus, remained for a long time in his regards. Paul contracted in
   that new religious family some deep friendships, although the taste of
   the Greeks for disputation displeased him; while on more than one
   occasion his natural timidity may have been increased by the
   disposition of his auditors to subtlety. He could not detach himself
   from Thessalonica, from the simplicity he had found there, from the
   lively affections he had there left behind him. The Church at
   Thessalonica was the model which he never ceased to proclaim, and
   to-wards which he always reverted. The Church at Philippi, with its
   pious women, its rich and good Lydia, was not allowed to be forgotten.
   That Church, as we have seen, enjoyed a singular privilege; which was,
   to nourish the Apostle when his labour did not suffice to do so. At
   Corinth he received from her fresh succour. As if the somewhat
   sprightly nature of the Corinthians, and of the Greeks in general, had
   inspired him with distrust, he would not accept anything of this kind
   from them, although more than once he found himself reduced to want
   during his sojourn in their midst.

   It was with difficulty, nevertheless, that the anger of the orthodox
   Jews, always so active, was restrained from breaking out. The
   preachings of the Apostle to the Gentiles, his broad principles in
   regard to the adoption of all those who believed, and their
   incorporation into the family of Abraham, irritated to the highest
   pitch the partisans of the exclusive privilege of the children of
   Israel. The Apostle, on his part, was not very sparing in hard words.
   He announced to them that the anger of God was about to break out
   against them. The Jews had recourse to the Roman authorities. Corinth
   was the capital of the province of Achaia, comprising the whole of
   Greece, and which ordinarily was joined to Macedonia. The two provinces
   had been made senatorials by Claudius, and in virtue of which they had
   a pro-consul. That position was filled at the time of which we speak by
   one of the most amiable and best instructed men of the century--Marcus
   Annæus Novatus, elder brother of Seneca. who had been adopted by the
   rhetorician L. Junius Gallio, one of the litterateurs of the society of
   the Senecas: Marcus Annæus Novatus took hence the name of Gallio. He
   had a great mind and a noble soul, was a friend of the poets and of the
   celebrated authors. Every one who knew him adored him. Statius called
   him dulcis Gallio, and probably he was the author of some of the
   tragedies which proceeded from that literary roof. He wrote, it seems,
   upon natural philosophy. His brother dedicated to him his book on Anger
   and Happy Life; people attributed to him one of the most intellectual
   works of the period. It appears that it was his high Hellenic culture
   which, under the learned Claudius, led to his selection for the
   administration of a province which all governments, somewhat
   enlightened, surrounded with delicate attentions. His sanctity obliged
   him to abandon the post. Like his brother, he had, under Nero, the
   honour of expiating by his death his distinction and his honesty.

   Such a man was little disposed to agree to the demands of fanatics
   coming to ask the civil power, which they protested against in secret,
   to rid them of their enemies. One day Sosthenes, the new ruler of the
   synagogue, who had succeeded Crispus, brought Paul before the judgment
   seat, and accused him of preaching a religion contrary to the law.
   Judaism, in fact, which had old authorisations, and all sorts of
   guarantees, pretended that the dissentient sect, as soon as they had
   made a schism in the synagogue, enjoyed no longer the charters of a
   synagogue. The situation was one which would have brought before the
   French law liberal Protestants on the day they separated themselves
   from recognised Protestantism. Paul was going to answer, but Gallio
   restrained him, and, addressing the Jews, said: "If it were a matter of
   wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason were that I should bear
   with you; but if it be a question of words and of names, and of your
   law, look ye to it, for I will be no judge of such matters." This was
   an admirable response, worthy of being set up as a model to civil
   governments when they are invited to meddle with religious questions.
   Gallio, after he had pronounced it, gave orders to drive away both
   parties. A great tumult ensued. Everybody was seized with the desire to
   fall upon Sosthenes, and he was beaten before the judgment seat, and no
   one could tell whence the blows proceeded. Gallio paid little heed, and
   caused the place to be cleared. The sage politician had avoided
   entering into a dogmatic quarrel; the well-educated man refused to mix
   himself up with a quarrel of vulgar people; and when he saw violence
   break out, he sent every one away.

   No doubt it would have been wiser not to appear so disdainful. Gallio
   was well inspired in declaring himself to be incompetent to judge in a
   question of schism and of heresy; but yet men of mind have sometimes
   little prescience! It was discovered later that the quarrel of these
   abject sectaries was the great affair of the century. If, instead of
   treating a religious and social question with that unceremoniousness,
   the government had taken the trouble to make an impartial
   investigation, to make a searching public investigation, and to
   discontinue giving an official sanction to a religion become completely
   absurd; if Gallio had been disposed to take into account what it was
   that constituted a Jew and a Christian, to read Jewish books, to keep
   himself au courant of what was passing in the subterranean world; if
   the Romans had not been so narrow-minded, so little addicted to the
   study of science, many misfortunes would have been avoided. How very
   singular! There was, in the case now under consideration, on the one
   hand, a man who was one of the most intellectual and the most studious;
   on the other, a soul which was one of the most robust and the most
   original of his time, and they passed the one before the other without
   either perceiving the fact; and, surely, if the first blows had fallen
   upon Paul instead of upon Sosthenes, Gallio would have been equally
   indifferent. One of the things which causes the most faults to be
   committed by people of the world, is the superficial disgust which
   badly educated and unmannerly people inspire in them yet manners are
   only a matter of form, and those who have them not are found sometimes
   not to be destitute of good sense. The society man, with his frivolous
   sneers, passes continually, without knowing it, the man who is going to
   create the future; they do not belong to the same world; yet the common
   error of society people is to think that the world which they see is
   the entire world.

   These difficulties, however, were not the only ones that the Apostle
   had to encounter. The Corinthian mission was thwarted by obstacles
   which, for the first time, he had met with in his Apostolic
   career,--obstacles proceeding from the bosom of the Church itself, from
   intractable men who had been introduced to it, and who opposed him, or
   from many Jews who had been attracted to Jesus, but more attached than
   Paul to legal observances. The false spirit of the degenerated Greek
   who, starting from the fourth century, corrupted Christianity so much,
   was already making itself felt. The Apostle then called to mind his
   beloved Churches at Macedonia, that unlimited docility, that purity of
   morals, that frank cordiality, which had procured for him at Philippi
   and Thessalonica such happy days. He was seized with an ardent desire
   to go and see once more the faithful of the Lord, and when be received
   from them an expression of the same desire, he could hardly restrain
   himself. In order to comfort himself in this embarrassment, and to
   protect himself from the importunities of those with whom he was
   surrounded, it pleased him to write to them. The epistles dated from
   Corinth bear the imprint of a kind of sadness,--praises of the most
   lofty description for those to whom Paul wrote; but these letters were
   completely silent, or contained some unfavourable allusions to those
   from whose midst he wrote.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX.

  CONTINUATION OF THE SECOND JOURNEY OF PAUL--FIRST EPISTLES--INTERIOR CONDITION
  OF THE NEW CHURCHES.

   It was at Corinth that the apostolic life of Paul attained its highest
   degree of activity. To the cares of the grand Christianity which he was
   engaged in founding, he had just added the prepossessions of the
   communities that he had left behind him. A sort of jealousy, as he has
   told us himself, devoured him. He thought less at that moment of
   founding new Churches than of caring for those which he had created.
   Each of his Churches was to him as a bride which he had promised to
   Christ, and which he wished to preserve pure. The power that he claimed
   over these little corporations was absolute. A certain number of rules,
   which he regarded as having been laid down by Jesus himself, was the
   sole canonical law anterior to himself that he recognised. He was
   thought to have divine inspiration for adding to those rules all those
   which the new circumstances called for, and which had to be obeyed. But
   was not his example a supreme rule to which all his spiritual children
   might conform themselves?

   Timothy, whom he employed to visit the Churches that were far away from
   him, could not, had he been indefatigable, satisfy the immense ardour
   of his master. It was then that Paul conceived the idea of supplying by
   correspondence what he was prevented from saying himself or through his
   principal disciples. There did not exist in the Roman Empire anything
   which resembled our postal establishment for private letters; all
   correspondence had to be forwarded incidentally, or by express. St Paul
   hence made it a point to take everywhere with him persons of a second
   order, who could be used as messengers. Correspondence between the
   synagogues already existed in Judaism. The envoy charged with bearing
   the letters was himself a dignitary drawn from the synagogues. The
   epistolary style formed amongst the Jews a species of literature which
   was continued amongst them down to the heart of the Middle Ages, as a
   consequence of their dispersion. Without doubt, from the period when
   Christianity was extended to the whole of Syria, Christian epistles
   existed; but in the hands of Paul these writings, which up till then
   had not, for the most part, been preserved, were, equally with his
   speaking, the instruments of progress in the Christian faith. It was
   held that the authority of the Epistles equalled that of the Apostle
   himself; they were all to be read before the Church assembled; some of
   them had even the character of circular letters, and were communicated
   successively to various Churches. The reading of the correspondence
   thus became an essential part of the offices of the Sabbath. And it was
   not merely at the moment of its reception that a letter served thus for
   the edification of the brethren; deposited in the Church archives, it
   was taken from there on days of assembling, and read as a sacred
   document, and as a perpetual source of instruction. The epistle was
   thus the form of primitive Christian literature. It was an admirable
   form, perfectly adapted to the conditions of the times, and to the
   natural aptitude of Paul.

   The condition of the new sect, in fact, did not by any means permit of
   connected discourse. Infant Christianity was wholly disengaged from
   texts. The hymns even were composed by each for him-self, and were not
   written. People believed in watching for the final catastrophe. The
   sacred books, which we call the "Scriptures," were the books of the
   ancient Law. Jesus had added no new book. He must return to fulfil the
   ancient Scriptures, and to open an age in which he himself would be the
   living book. Letters of consolation and of encouragement were the only
   means which could produce a similar state of mind. If already, about
   the time at which we are arrived, there had been more than a small
   booklet, designed to assist the memory in regard to "the sayings and
   doings" of Jesus, these booklets were of an entirely private character.
   They were not authentic, official writings, universally received in the
   community; they were notes of which persons au courant of events took
   little account, and were considered as altogether an inferior authority
   to tradition.

   Paul, as regarded himself, had not a mind adapted to the composition of
   books. He had not the patience that is required for writing; he was
   incapable of system; the labour of the pen was disagreeable to him, and
   he preferred to delegate it to others. Correspondence, on the contrary,
   so obnoxious to those who are accustomed to employ art in putting forth
   their ideas, suited well his feverish activity, and the necessity of
   expressing on the spur of the moment his impressions. Now brisk, crude,
   polite, snarlish, sarcastic, then suddenly tender, delicate, almost
   roguish and coaxing; happily expressed and polished to the highest
   degree; skilful in sprinkling his language with reticences, reserves,
   infinite precautions, malignant allusions, and ironical dissimulations,
   he came to excel in a style which required above everything original
   impulses. The epistolary style of Paul is the most individual that we
   have ever had. Its language, if I may say so, is ground up (hoyee),
   without a single consecutive phrase. It would be impossible to violate
   more audaciously, I do not say the genius of the Greek language, but
   the logic of human language. It might be described as a rapid
   conversation, stenographed and reproduced without corrections. Timothy
   was quickly trained to fulfil for his master the functions of
   secretary, and as his language came to resemble somewhat that of Paul,
   he replaced him frequently. It is probable that in the Epistles and
   perhaps in the Acts we have more than one page of Timothy; but such was
   the modesty of that singular man, that we have no certain marks by
   which to single them out.

   Even when Paul corresponded directly, he did not write with his own
   hand; he dictated; sometimes when the letter was finished he re-read
   it. His impetuous soul carried him away at such moments; he made
   marginal additions to it, at the risk of injuring the context, and of
   producing suspended and entangled sentences. He transmitted the letter
   thus effaced, regardless of the numberless repetitions of words and of
   ideas which it contained. With his marvellous fervour of soul, Paul has
   yet a singular poverty of expression. A phrase besets him, he recurs to
   it in a page at every turn. It was not sterility, it was
   contentiousness of mind and complete indifference to the requirements
   of a correct style. In order to avoid the numerous frauds to which the
   passions of the times gave rise, the authority of the Apostle and the
   material conditions of antique epistolography, Paul was in the habit of
   sending to the Churches a specimen of his writing, which was easily
   recognisable; this done, it was sufficient for him, according to a
   usage then general, to put at the end of his letters some words in his
   own hand as a guarantee of their authenticity.

   There is no doubt that the correspondence of Paul was considerable, and
   that what is remaining of if to us constitutes only a small portion.
   The religion of the primitive Churches was so detached in every way, so
   purely idealistic, that people did not realise the immense value of
   such writings. Faith was everything: each one carried it in one's
   heart, and cared little for stray leaves of papyrus, which, besides,
   were not holograph. These epistles were for the majority mere
   occasional pieces; nobody suspected that one day they would become
   sacred books. It was only towards the end of the life of the Apostle
   that people bethought themselves of retaining his letters because of
   their intrinsic merit,--of passing them on and of preserving them. Then
   each Church guarded preciously its own, consulted them often, had
   regular lectures on them, allowed copies to be taken of them; still, a
   multitude of letters of the first period were irrecoverably lost. As
   for the letters in response to those of the Churches, all have
   disappeared; and it could not be otherwise; Paul in his wandering
   existence never had any other archives than his memory and his heart.

   Two letters only of the second mission remain with us: they are the two
   epistles to the Church at Thessalonica. Paul wrote them from Corinth,
   and joined with his own name in the superscription those of Silas and
   Timothy. They have the appearance of being composed at a short interval
   from one another. They are two productions full of unction, tenderness,
   emotion, and charm. In them the Apostle does not conceal his preference
   for the Churches of Macedonia: He made use of the latter to give
   utterance to that love for glowing expressions, for images the most
   endearing; he represents himself as the kind nurse cherishing her
   children in her bosom, as a father charging his children. This was
   indeed what Paul was for the Churches he had established. He was an
   admirable missionary, and, what was more, an admirable director of
   consciences. Never did he appear to better advantage than in having the
   charge of souls; never did any one take up the problem of the education
   of man in a more enthusiastic and thorough manner. But it must not be
   thought that he acquired that ascendency through fawning and flattery.
   No; Paul was blunt, disagreeable, and sometimes ill-tempered. In no
   respect did he resemble Jesus; he had not his charming indulgence, his
   habit of excusing everybody, his divine incapacity of seeing evil. He
   was often imperious, and made his authority to be felt with a
   haughtiness which shocks us. He commanded, he blamed severely, he spoke
   of himself with assurance, and unhesitatingly held himself up as a
   model. But what haughtiness! what purity! what disinterestedness! Upon
   the last point he is painfully minute. Ten times he reverts with pride
   to the apparently puerile fact that he had cost no man anything, that
   he had never eaten gratis the bread of any one, that he had laboured
   day and night with his hands, although he might well have done like the
   other Apostles, and lived by religion. The bent of his zeal was, in a
   manner infinite, a love of souls.

   The kindness, the innocence, the fraternal spirit, the unlimited
   charity of the primitive Churches, are a spectacle which will never
   again be seen. It was wholly spontaneous, unconstrained, and yet these
   little associations were as solid as iron. Not only could they resist
   the perpetual bickerings of the Jews, but their interior organisation
   possessed surprising force. In order to understand them, it is
   necessary to think, not of our grand churches open to all, but of
   religious orders endowed with a most intense individual life,--of
   confraternities firmly consolidated, in which the members by turns
   embraced, animated, quarrelled with, loved, hated one another. These
   Churches had a kind of hierarchy: the oldest members, the most active,
   those who were en rapport with the Apostle, enjoyed a precedence! But
   the Apostle himself was the first to repress everything which had the
   appearance of domineering; he held himself to be only "the promoter of
   the common joy."

   The "elders" were sometimes elected by the common voice,--that is to
   say, by a show of hands,--sometimes installed by the Apostle, but
   always considered as chosen by the Holy Spirit, that is to say, by that
   superior instinct which directed the Church in all its acts. People
   began already to call them "deacons" (episcopi, a word which in the
   language of politics had passed into the eranes), and to consider them
   as "pastors" charged with the conduct of the Church. Certain of them,
   moreover, were regarded as having a sort of speciality for teaching;
   these were catechists, going from house to house, and imparting the
   word of God in private admonitions. Paul made it a rule, at least in
   particular cases, that the catechumen, during his instruction, was to
   share all that he possessed in common with his catechist.

   Full authority belonged to the Church assembled. This authority was
   extended to the minutest details of private life. All the brethren
   watched one another, corrected one another. The Church assembled, or at
   at least those who were called "the devout," reprimanded those who were
   in fault, consoled the cast-down, and undertook the office of skilled
   directors, versed in the knowledge of the heart. Public penitences had
   not yet been instituted; but they no doubt already existed in embryo.
   As no exterior force restrained the faithful, nor prevented them from
   splitting or abandoning the Church, we should have thought that such an
   organisation, which appears to us insupportable, in which is only to be
   seen a system of espionage and of accusation, would speedily have come
   to an end. But nothing of the kind. We do not find, at the period at
   which we have now arrived, a single example of apostacy. Every one
   submitted humbly to the sentence of the Church. He whose conduct was
   irregular, or who had strayed from the traditions of the Apostles, or
   who was not attentive to his duties, was marked; he was avoided; no one
   would hold communion with him. He was treated as an enemy, though he
   was at the same time admonished as a brother. This isolation covered
   him with shame, and he repented. The gaiety in these little companies
   of good people living together, always sprightly, occupied, eager,
   loving and hating much, the gaiety, I say, was very great. Verily the
   words of Jesus had been fulfilled; the reign of the meek and lowly had
   come, and had been manifested by the extreme felicity which flowed from
   every heart.

   People had a perfect horror of Paganism, but were very tolerant in
   their treatment of Pagans. Far from fleeing from them, people sought to
   attract them and to gain them over. Many of the faithful had been
   idolaters, or had parents who were; they knew with what good faith one
   might be in error. They recalled their honest ancestors, who had died
   without having known saving truth. A touching custom, baptism for the
   dead, was the consequence of that sentiment. People believed that in
   being baptised for those of their ancestors who had not received holy
   water, they conferred on them the merits of the sacrament; thus the
   hope of not being separated from those that they loved was not
   frustrated. A profound idea of solidarity dominated every one; the son
   was saved through his parents, the father through the son, the husband
   through the wife. People could not be brought to condemn a man of good
   intentions, or who through any side way whatever clung to the saints.

   Manners were severe, though not sad. That virtuous gloom which the
   rigorists of modern times (Janissaries, Methodists, etc.) preach as a
   Christian virtue, had no existence then. The relations between men and
   women, far from being interdicted, were multiplied. One of the scoffs
   of the Pagans was to represent the Christians as effeminate, deserting
   common society for the conventicles of young women, old women, and
   children. Pagan nakednesses were severely condemned. The women, in
   general, were closely veiled: not a single precaution for protecting
   timid chastity was omitted; but the bashful woman is also a voluptuous
   woman, and the ideal dream which is in man is susceptible of a thousand
   applications. When we read the Acts of St Perpetue, the legend of St
   Dorothy, we see that they are the heroines of an absolute purity; but
   how little do they resemble a Port Royal female religionist! Here,
   one-half of the instincts of humanity is suppressed; there, these
   instincts, which later on came to be regarded as Satanic suggestions,
   had received only a new direction. It may be said that primitive
   Christianity was a sort of moral romanticism, a powerful revulsion of
   the faculty of loving. Christianity did not diminish that faculty; it
   took no precautions against it; it did not place it under suspicion--it
   nourished it with air and with light. The danger of these liberties was
   not yet manifest. In the Church, the bad was, in some sort, impossible,
   for the root of evil, which is wicked desire, was taken away.

   The position of catechist was often filled by women. Virginity was
   regarded as a state of sanctity. This preference accorded to the
   celibate was not a negation of love and of beauty, like that which
   found place in the barren and unintelligible asceticism of later
   centuries. It was, in a woman, that just and true sentiment which
   virtue and beauty prize so much the more the more it is concealed; so
   that she who has not found that rare peril of strong love, guards, by a
   sort of pride and of reserve, its beauty and moral perfection for God
   alone, for God conceived as jealous, as the co-partner of close
   secrets. Second marriages, though not forbidden, were regarded as a
   mark against one. The popular sentiment of the century ran in that
   groove. The beautiful and touching expression of sumbios became the
   ordinary word for "spouse." The words Virginius, Virginia,
   Parthenichos, indicating the husbands who had not formed other
   alliances, became terms of eulogy and of tenderness. The spirit of the
   family, the union of husband and wife, their reciprocal esteem, the
   recognition by the husband of the cares and the foresight of his wife,
   permeated in a touching manner the Jewish inscriptions, which in this
   only reflected the sentiment of the humble classes amongst which the
   Christian propaganda recruited converts. It is a singular thing that
   the most elevated ideas on the sanctity of marriage have been spread in
   the world by a people amongst whom polygamy had never been universally
   interdicted. But it required, in the fraction of Jewish society in
   which Christianity was formed, that polygamy should actually be
   abolished, since the Church did not seem to think that such an enormity
   needed to be condemned.

   Charity, brotherly love, was the supreme law, and common to all the
   churches and all the schools. Charity and chastity were par excellence
   Christian virtues,--virtues which made a success of the new gospel, and
   converted the entire world. One was commanded to do good to all:
   nevertheless, co-religionists were regarded as being worthy of
   preference. A taste for work was held to be a virtue. Paul, a good
   workman, vigorously reproved indolence and idleness, and repeated often
   that naïf proverb of a man of the people: "He that would not work,
   neither should he eat." The model that he conceived was a punctual
   artisan, peaceable, applying himself to his work, eating
   tranquilly--his mind at ease--the bread that he earned. But how far are
   we from the primitive ideal of the Church at Jerusalem, wholly
   communistic and monastical, or even from that of Antioch, wholly
   preoccupied with prophecies, with supernatural gifts, with apostleship!
   Here the Church is an association of honest workmen, cheerful, content,
   not jealous of the rich, for they are more happy than the latter, for
   they know that God does not judge like the worldly, and prefers the
   honest soiled hand to the white and intriguing hand. One of his
   principal virtues was to conduct his affairs orderly; "that ye may walk
   honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have lack of
   nothing." There were some members of the Church, of whom St Paul had
   heard tell, who worked not at all, but were busy-bodies, and who are
   severely reprimanded. That combination of practical good sense and of
   delusion ought not to surprise. Does not the English race in Europe and
   in America present to us the same contrast, so full of good sense as
   regards things of this world, so absurd as regards things pertaining to
   heaven? Quakerism, even, commenced with a tissue of absurdities, and
   retained them until the day, thanks to the influence of William Penn,
   it became something practical, great, and fruitful.

   The supernatural gifts of the Holy Spirit, such as prophecy, were not
   neglected. But we can well see that in the Churches of Greece, composed
   of Jews, these fantastic exercises possessed no longer much meaning,
   and we can believe that they soon fell into desuetude. Christian
   discipline turned on a kind of deistic piety, which consisted in
   serving the true God, in praying and in doing good. A powerful hope
   gave to these precepts of pure religion the efficacy that they of
   themselves never could possess. The dream that had been the soul of the
   movement inaugurated by Jesus, continued still to be the fundamental
   dogma of Christianity; everybody believed in the near future of the
   kingdom of God, in the unseen manifestation of a great glory, from the
   midst of which the Son of Man would appear. The idea that people had of
   that marvellous phenomena was the same as in the times of Jesus. A
   great storm--that is to say, a terrible catastrophe--was near at hand:
   that catastrophe would strike all those whom Jesus would not have
   saved. Jesus was to show himself in the heavens as "king of glory,
   surrounded by angels." Then the judgment was to take place. The saints,
   the persecuted, were to go and range themselves about Jesus, in order
   to enjoy with him eternal rest. The unbelievers who had persecuted them
   (the Jews especially) were to be the prey of fire; their punishment was
   to be eternal death. Chased from before the face of Jesus, they were to
   be hurried away to the abyss of destruction. A destroying fire, in
   short, was to be lighted and was to consume the world and all those who
   had rejected the gospel of Jesus. That final catastrophe was to be a
   kind of great and glorious manifestation of Jesus and his saints, an
   act of supreme justice, a tardy reparation for the iniquities which had
   been up to that time the rule of the world.

   Objections were naturally raised against this strange doctrine. One of
   the principal of them arose from the difficulty of conceiving what
   should be the portion of the dead at the moment of the advent of Jesus.
   Since the visit of Paul, there had been several deaths in the Church at
   Thessalonica, and these first deaths had made, on all sides, a very
   deep impression. Was it necessary to compassionate, and to regard as
   excluded from the kingdom of God, those who had thus disappeared before
   the solemn hour? The ideas upon individual immortality and a special
   judgment were yet too little developed to enable people to sustain auy
   such objection. Paul responded with remarkable clearness:--

   "That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye
   may have lack of nothing. But I would not have you to be ignorant,
   brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as
   others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose
   again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
   For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
   alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them
   which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
   shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and
   the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive and remain
   shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
   in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord."

   People sought to discover the day of that grand appearance. St Paul
   condemned these inquisitive speculations, and made use of them in order
   to show the almost worthlessness of the words themselves which people
   had attributed to Jesus.

   "But of the times and the season, brethren, ye have no need that I
   write unto you. For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord
   so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and
   safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a
   woman child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, are not in
   darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the
   children of light, and the children of the day; we are not of the
   night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but
   let us watch and be sober."

   The preoccupation of that near catastrophe was extreme. The enthusiasts
   believed that they had discovered the date by means of special
   revelations. There existed already several apocalypses; people went
   even the length of causing forged letters of the Apostle to be
   circulated, in which this end of things was announced,--

   "Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   and by our gathering together unto him, That ye be not soon shaken in
   mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as
   from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you
   by any means; for that day shall not come, except there come a falling
   away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition. Who
   opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God or that is
   worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing
   himself that he is God. Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you,
   I told you these things! And now ye know what withholdeth that he might
   be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work;
   only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. And
   then shall the Wicked be revealed, whom that Lord shall consume with
   the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his
   coming; even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
   power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
   unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love
   of the truth that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall
   send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie."

   We see that in these texts, written twenty years after the death of
   Jesus, only a single essential element has been added to the
   description of the day of the Lord such as Jesus had conceived it,
   namely, the character of an Anti-Christ, or false Christ, which was to
   spring up before the grand appearance of Jesus himself--a sort of
   Satanic Messiah, who was to work miracles, and desire to be worshipped.
   Apropos of Simon the Magician, we have already met with the singular
   idea that the false prophets worked miracles exactly like the true
   prophets. The opinion that the judgment of God would be preceded by a
   terrible catastrophe, by the spread of impiety and abominations, by the
   passing triumph of idolatry, by the advent of a sacrilegious king, was,
   however, very ancient, going back as far as the first origins of the
   apocalyptic doctrines. Gradually that ephemeral reign of evil, the
   precursor of the final victory of the good, which would happen to the
   Christians, would be personified in a man who was conceived to be the
   exact converse of Jesus, a sort of Christ of the infernal regions.

   The type of that future misleader was composed in part out of
   recollections of Antiochus Epiphanes, such as he is presented in the
   book of Daniel, combined with the reminiscences of Balaam, of Gog and
   Magog, of Nebuchadnezzar, and partly from ideas borrowed from the
   circumstances of the times. The ghastly tragedy that was being enacted
   at Rome at that moment, in face of the world, could not fail but excite
   greatly the imaginations of men. Caligula, the anti-deity, the first
   emperor who sought to be worshipped during his life, suggested in all
   probability the circumstance to Paul, when the aforesaid person exalted
   himself above all the pretended gods, all the idols, and took his seat
   in the temple of Jerusalem, desirous of being regarded as God himself.
   The Anti-Christ was thus conceived in the year 54 as a continuer of the
   foolish sacrilege of Caligula. Reality affords but too many
   opportunities to explain away such presages. A few months after Paul
   wrote that strange passage, Nero came to the throne. It was in him that
   the Christian conscience should see later on the hideous precursor of
   the coming of Christ. What was the cause, or rather who was the
   personage, that alone, in the year 54, still prevented, according to
   Saint Paul, the appearance of Anti-Christ? This has been left in
   obscurity. The question's here asked may perhaps have been a mysterious
   secret, no strange thing in politics, which the faithful discussed
   among themselves, but which they did not commit to paper, for fear of
   compromising one another. The mere seizure of a letter would have
   sufficed to bring about the most atrocious persecutions. Here, as in
   other points, the habit which the early Christians had of not writing
   down certain things, has created for us irremediable obscurities. It
   has been supposed that the personage in question was the Emperor
   Claudius, and we have seen in the language of Paul a play of words on
   his name,--Claudius = qui claudit = ho chatechou. At the date when that
   letter was written, in fact, the death of poor Claudius--circumvented
   by fatal snares laid by the villainous Agrippa--seemed only to be a
   question of time; everybody expected it; the Emperor himself spoke of
   it; dark presentiments showed themselves at every turn; natural
   prodigies like those which, fourteen years later, struck so forcibly
   the author of the Apocalypse, tormented the popular imagination. People
   spoke in terror of the monstrous foetus,--of a son which had the long
   claws of a sparrow-hawk; all this made people tremble for the future.
   The Christians, like ordinary people, participated in these terrors;
   the prognostications, and the superstitious fears of natural
   calamities, were the essential cause of the Apocalyptic fears.

   That which is clear; that which still is revealed for us in these
   inestimable documents; that which explains the wonderful success of the
   Christian propaganda, is the spirit of devotion, the high morality
   which reigned in those little Churches. They might be compared to the
   reunions of the Moravian brothers, or to pious Protestants addicted to
   the extremest devotion, or, again, to a sort of third order of a
   Catholic congregation. Prayer and the name of Jesus were constantly on
   the lips of the faithful. Before each act, before partaking of food,
   for example, they pronounced a short benediction or short act of grace.
   It was looked upon as an injury done to the Church, to bring an action
   before the civil judges. The belief in the near destruction of the
   world raised a revolutionary ferment which carried into every mind a
   great portion of its sourness. The invariable rule of the Apostle was,
   that it was necessary for one to abide in the state to which one had
   been called. "Is any person called (being) circumcised, let him not
   dissimulate circumcision; is any person called uncircumcised, let him
   not be circumcised; is any one a virgin, let her remain a virgin; is
   any one married, let such remain married; is any one a slave, seek not
   to be made free; and even if one can obtain one's freedom, let such a
   one remain in slavery. The slave who is called, is the free servant of
   Christ; the free man who is called, is the slave of Christ." A
   marvellous resignation had taken possession of souls, which rendered
   everything indifferent, and shed over all the weariness of that world,
   extinct and forgotten.

   The Church was a permanent source of edification and of consolation. It
   must not be imagined that the Christian gatherings of those times were
   modelled after the cold assemblies of our days, in which the
   unforeseen, the individual initiative, had no part. It is rather of the
   English Quakers, the American Shakers, and the French Spiritualists,
   that one must think. During the meeting all were seated, and each spoke
   when he felt inspired. The inspired one would then rise up, and
   deliver, through the impulse of the Spirit, discourses of various
   forms, which it is difficult for us to distinguish to-day--psalms,
   canticles of acts of grace, eulogies, prophecies, revelations, lessons,
   exhortations, consolations, and treatises on language. These
   improvisations, considered as divine oracles, were sometimes chanted,
   sometimes delivered in a speaking tone of voice. Each invited his
   neighbour to do this; each excited the enthusiasm of others: it was
   what was called singing to God. The women remained silent. As every one
   believed oneself to be constantly visited by the Spirit, every image,
   every throb which crossed the brain of the believers, seemed to contain
   a deep meaning, and, with the most perfect good faith in the world,
   they drew a real nourishment of soul from pure illusions. After each
   eulogy, each prayer thus improvised, the multitude had a collective
   inspiration through the word Amen. In order to mark the diverse acts of
   the mystic seance, the president interposed, either by the invitation
   Oremus; or by a sigh directed towards heaven--Sursum Corda! or in
   recalling that Jesus, according to his promise, was in the midst of the
   assembled--Dominus Vobiscum. The cry Kyrie Eleison was also repeated
   frequently in a suppliant and plaintive tone.

   Prophecy was esteemed a high gift: some women were endowed with it. In
   many cases, especially when the matter in hand had reference to
   philology, people hesitated; people sometimes even believed themselves
   to be dupes of a cunning device of the evil spirits. A particular class
   of the inspired, or, as was said, of the "spiritual," was charged with
   the interpretation of these fantastic outbursts,--to find sense in
   them, to discern the minds from which they proceeded. These phenomena
   had great efficacy in the conversion of Pagans, and were regarded as
   the most demonstrative miracles. The Pagans, in fact--at least those of
   them who were supposed benevolent--were drawn into the assemblies. Then
   there would often follow strange spectacles. One or several of the
   inspired would address the intruder, address him alternately with
   rudeness or with gentleness, reveal to him inner secrets which he
   believed he himself only knew, and unfold to him the sins of his past
   life. The wicked were astonished, confounded. The shame of that public
   manifestation, which in that assembly had been exposed in a state of
   spiritual nudity, created between him and the brethren a strong bond,
   which was not again to be broken. A sort of confession was sometimes
   the first act which was done in entering the sect. The intimacy, the
   affection which such exercises established between the brothers and the
   sisters, was without reserve: all became indeed as one person. It
   required nothing less than a perfect spirituality to hinder such
   relations from springing up, and to check abuse.

   We can conceive the immense attraction that a soul-movement so active
   would exercise amongst a society freed from moral bonds, especially
   amongst the common classes, who were neglected equally by the state and
   by religion. Hence the grand lesson which is to be derived from that
   history for our century; the times resemble each other; the future
   belonged to the party who took up the masses and educated them. But, in
   our days, the difficulty is indeed greater than it has ever been. In
   antiquity, upon the coasts of the Mediterranean, material life could be
   simple: the wants of the body were secondary, and easily satisfied.
   With us, these wants are numerous and imperative; popular associations
   are weighed to the earth as with a weight of lead. It was the sacred
   feast, "the Lord's Supper" especially, that had an immense moral
   efficacy; it was considered as a mystic act by which all were
   incorporated with Christ, and as a consequence united in the same body.
   There was hence a perpetual lesson of equality, of fraternity. The
   sacramental words which were connected with the last supper of Jesus
   were present to all. It was believed that that bread, that wine, that
   water, were the body and blood of Jesus himself. Those who partook of
   it were accounted to eat Jesus, were united to him, and bound to him by
   an ineffable mystery. The prelude to it was the giving of "the holy
   kiss," or "kiss of love," without any of the scruples which came to
   trouble the innocence of another golden age. Ordinarily the men gave it
   to one another, and the women gave it amongst themselves. Some
   Churches, however, pressed the holy liberty to the point of not making
   any distinction of sexes in the kiss of love. Profane society, little
   capable of comprehending such purity, made this the occasion of divers
   calumnies. The chaste Christian kiss awakened the suspicions of the
   libertines, and soon the Church was constrained to the point of taking
   severe precautions; but in the beginning it was an essential rite
   inseparable from the Eucharist, and completing the high signification
   of the symbol of peace and love. Some abstained from it in youth, and
   in the time of mourning and of fasting.

   The first monastic Church at Jerusalem broke bread every day. Twenty or
   thirty years after, people had come to celebrate the holy feast only
   once a week. This celebration took place in the evening, and, according
   to the Jewish usage, by the light of numerous lamps. The day chosen for
   this was the day following the Sabbath, the first day of the week. This
   day was called "the day of the Lord," in rememberance of the
   "resurrection," and also because it was believed that on the same day
   God had created the world. Alms were done, and collections made on this
   day. The Sabbath, which all Christians probably celebrate still in a
   manner not equally scrupulous, was distinct from the day of the Lord.
   But without doubt the day of rest tended more and more to be confounded
   with the day of the Lord, and it is permissible to suppose that in the
   Churches of the Gentiles, who had no reason to prefer the Saturday,
   that change was already made. The ébonim of the East, on the contrary,
   rested on Saturday.

   Little by little the supper tended to become purely symbolical in form.
   At the first it was a real supper, at which one ate as much as one
   wanted, only with an elevated mystic intention. The supper was prefaced
   by a prayer. As at the dinners of the Pagan fraternities, each brought
   his basket and consumed what he brought: the Church, no doubt,
   furnishing the accessories, such as hot water, pilchards, that which
   was called the ministerium. People loved to think of two invisible
   servants, Irene (Peace) and Agapæ (Love), the one pouring out the wine,
   the other mixing it with hot water; and, perhaps, at certain moments
   during the repast, one would be heard to say, with a sweet smile, to
   the deaconesses (ministræ), that from which they derived their names:
   Irene, da calda (hot water)--Agape, misce me (pour me out). A spirit of
   delicate reserve and of discreet sobriety presided at the feast. The
   table at which people sat was in the form of a hollow semi-circle, or
   of a crescent, sigma (a symbol); the elder was placed in the centre;
   the cups or saucers which were used for drinking out of were the
   objects of particular care. The bread and the wine, which were blessed,
   were carried to the absent by the minister of the diocese.

   In time the supper came to be no more than a ceremony. People ate at
   home to appease hunger; at the assembly people eat only a few
   mouthfuls; drank only a few sups, in view of the symbol. People were
   led by a kind of logic to distinguish the common fraternal repast from
   the mystical act which consisted solely of a fraction of bread. The
   fraction of bread became each day more sacramental; the supper, on the
   contrary, in proportion as the Church increased, became more profane.
   Sometimes the supper was reduced almost to nothing, and in being thus
   reduced, lost all the importance of a sacramental act. Sometimes the
   two things subsisted, but separately; the supper was a prelude or a
   sequel to the Eucharist; people dined together before or after the
   communion. Then the two ceremonies were separated entirely; the pious
   repasts were acts of charity towards the poor, sometimes the remnants
   of Pagan usages, and had no longer any connection with the Eucharist.
   As such, they were in general suppressed in the fifth century. The
   "eulogia" or "consecrated bread" remained, then, the sole souvenir of a
   golden age in which the Eucharist was invested with the more complex
   and less purely analytic forms. For a long time, still, however, the
   custom was preserved of invoking the name of Jesus in drinking, and
   people continued to consider as a eulogy the act of breaking bread and
   of drinking together, which were the last traces, and the traces
   well-nigh effaced, of the admirable institutions of Jesus.

   The name which, at the first, the eucharistic feast bore, expressed
   admirably all that there was in that excellent rite of divine efficacy
   and of salutary morality. They were called agapæ, that is to say,
   "loves" or "charities." The Jews--the Essenians especially--had already
   attached a moral sense to the religious feasts; but in passing into the
   hands of another race, these Oriental usages took an almost
   mythological significance. The Mythriatic mysteries which began soon to
   be developed in the Roman world had as their principal rite the
   offering of bread and of the cup, over which were pronounced certain
   words. The resemblance was such, that the Christians explained it as a
   ruse of the devil, who wished by this means to have the infernal
   pleasure of counterfeiting their most holy ceremonies. The secret bonds
   between all these things are very obscure. It was easy to foresee that
   grave abuses would so quickly be mixed up with such practices, that one
   day the feast (the agapæ, properly speaking) would fall into desuetude,
   and that there would only remain the eucharistic wafer, the sign and
   memorial of the primitive institution. One could no longer be surprised
   to learn that strange mysteries should be made the pretext for
   calumnies, and that the sect which pretended to eat, under the form of
   bread and wine, the body and the blood of its founder, should be
   accused of renewing the feasts of Thyestes, of eating infants covered
   with pastry, and of anthropophagistic practices.

   The annual feasts were always the Jewish feasts, especially Easter and
   Pentecost. The Christian Easter was generally celebrated on the same
   day as the Jewish Passover. Nevertheless, the cause which had
   transferred the holy-day of each week from the Saturday to the Sunday
   regulated also Easter, not from usage and Jewish souvenirs, but from
   the souvenirs of the passion and of the resurrection of Jesus. It is
   not impossible that, from the time of Paul, in the Churches of Greece
   and Macedonia, that change had already been effected. In any case, the
   thought of that fundamental feast was profoundly modified. The passage
   of the Red Sea became a thing of little account after the resurrection
   of Jesus; people no longer thought of it, except to find in it a figure
   of the triumph of Jesus over death. The true Paschal Lamb was
   henceforth Jesus, who had been offered up for all; the true unleavened
   breads were truth, justice; the old leaven had lost its power, and
   ought therefore to be rejected. For the rest, the feast of the Passover
   had indeed more anciently undergone with the Hebrews an analogous
   change of signification. It was certainly in its origin a feast of
   spring time, which was connected by an artificial etymology with the
   remembrance of the flight from Egypt.

   Pentecost was also celebrated on the same day as with the Jews. Like
   Easter, that feast took a signification altogether new, which put into
   the shade the old Jewish idea. Right or wrong, people believed that the
   principal incident of the Holy Spirit upon the assembled Apostles had
   taken place on the day of Pentecost which followed the resurrection of
   Jesus; the ancient harvest festival of the Semites became thus in the
   new religion the feast of the Holy Ghost. About the same time that
   feast underwent an analogous transformation amongst the Jews; it became
   with them the anniversary of the promulgation of the law upon Mount
   Sinai.

   No edifice had been built or any building rented expressly for the
   meetings;--no art, consequently no images. The assemblies took place in
   the houses of the brethren the best known, or who had a room well
   adapted for the purpose. People preferred for this the apartments
   which, in Oriental houses, formed the first floor, and corresponding to
   our drawing-room floor. These apartments are high, containing numerous
   windows, very fresh, very airy; it was here that one received one's
   friends, where one held feasts, where one prayed, where one laid out
   the dead. The groups thus formed constituted "domestic churches," or
   pious coteries full of moral activity, and resembling greatly those
   "domestic colleges," examples of which were to be found about that time
   in the bosom of Pagan society. All great things are thus founded in
   inconsiderable centres, where one is tightly squeezed the one against
   the other, and where souls are warmed by a powerful love.

   Up to this time Buddhism alone had elevated man to this degree of
   heroism and of purity. The triumph of Christianity is inexplicable, if
   it is studied only in the fourth century. It happened with Christianity
   as happens almost always in human things: it succeeded when it began to
   decline morally; it became official when it no longer had anything to
   rest upon except itself; it came into vogue when its true period of
   originality and of youth had passed away. But it did none the less
   merit its high recompense: it had merited this by its three centuries
   of virtue, or by the incomparable predilection for the good which it
   had inspired. When we think of that miracle, no hyperbole about the
   excellence of Jesus appears illegitimate. It was he, always he, who was
   the inspirer, the master, the principle of life in his Church. His
   divine mission grew each year, and this was but just. He was no longer
   only a man of God, a great prophet, a man approved and authorised of
   God, a man powerful in works and in speech; these expressions which
   suffice, which were sufficient for the faith and the love of the
   disciples of early times, passed now for silly fables. Jesus is the
   Lord, the Christ, a personage entirely superhuman, not yet God, but
   very near being it. One lives in him, one dies in him, one rises in
   him; almost everything that one says of God, one says of him. He was in
   truth already a divine personality, and when it is wished to identify
   him with God, it is only a question of words, a mere "communication of
   idioms" as the theologians say. We shall see that Paul himself attained
   to this: the most advanced formulas that are to be found in the Epistle
   to the Colossians existed already in germ in the older epistles. "For
   to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we
   in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
   him" (1 Cor. viii. 6). Again, and Jesus shall be the logos, creator;
   the most exaggerated of the consubstantialists of the ninth century
   could already be foreshadowed.

   The idea of the Christian redemption in the Churches of Paul underwent
   a similar transformation. People knew little of the parables or the
   moral teachings of Jesus: the Gospels did not yet exist. Christ, having
   lived, is not to the Churches something approaching a real personage:
   he is the image of God, a heavenly minister, having taken upon himself
   the sins of the world, charged with reconciling the world to God; he is
   a divine reformer, creating all things new, and abolishing the past. It
   is death for all; all are dead through him to the world, and ought no
   longer to live, except for him. He was rich in all the richness of
   divinity, and he became poor for us. All Christian life ought hence to
   be a contradiction of the human sense: weakness is the true strength,
   death is the true life; cardinal wisdom is folly. Happy he who carries
   in his body the dying of Jesus, he who is continually exposed to death
   for Jesus' sake. He shall live again with Jesus; he shall see his glory
   face to face, and shall be transformed unto him, rising uninterruptedly
   from glory to glory. The Christian thus lives in the hope of death, and
   in a state of perpetual groaning. In proportion as the exterior man
   (the body) falls into ruin, the interior man (the soul) is renewed. One
   moment of tribulation is worth more to him than an eternity of glory.
   What matters it that his terrestrial house is dissolved? He has in
   Heaven an eternal house, not made with hands. Terrestrial life is
   exile; death is return to God, and equivalent to the absorption of all
   that is mortal in life, only the treasure of hope which the Christian
   carries in earthen vessels, and until the great day when all shall be
   made manifest before the judgment seat of Christ, he must tremble.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER X.

  RETURN OF PAUL TO ANTIOCH--QUARREL BETWEEN PETER AND PAUL--COUNTER-MISSION
  ORGANISED BY JAMES, BROTHER OF THE LORD.

   Paul, however, felt the necessity of revisiting the Churches of Syria.
   It was three years since he had left Antioch; notwithstanding that his
   stay there had been shorter than formerly, this new mission had become
   much more important. The new Churches, recruited from lively, energetic
   populations, brought to the feet of Jesus homage of an infinite value.
   Paul had just recounted all this to the Apostles, and bid them attach
   themselves to the Mother Church, the model of all others. In spite of
   his taste for independence, he felt sure that, outside of the communion
   of Jerusalem, there was only schism and dissension. The admirable
   mixture of opposite qualities which could be discerned in him, allowed
   him to ally, in the most unexpected fashion, docility with pride,
   revolt with submission, severity with gentleness. Paul chose as a
   pretext for his departure the celebration of the Passover of the year
   54. To give the utmost solemnity to his resolution, and to avoid the
   possibility of changing his decision, he made a vow to celebrate that
   Easter at Jerusalem. The mode of performing vows of this kind was to
   shave the head, and to undertake to say certain prayers, and to abstain
   from wine during thirty days before the festival. Paul said good-bye to
   his Church, had his head shaved at Cenchrea, and embarked for Syria. He
   was accompanied by Aquila and Priscilla, who intended to stop at
   Ephesus, and perhaps also by Silas. As for Timothy, it is probable that
   he did not go away from Corinth or from the shores of the Ægæan Sea. We
   find him again at Ephesus within a year.

   The ship stayed for some days at Ephesus. Paul had time to go to the
   synagogue and to dispute with the Jews. They begged him to stay; but he
   put forward his vow, and declared that at any cost he would celebrate
   the festival in Jerusalem; all they could get from him was a promise to
   return. He took leave then of Aquila and Priscilla, and of those with
   whom he had already entered into relationships, and took ship again for
   Cæsarea of Palestine, whence he speedily made his way to Jerusalem.

   There he celebrated the festival in the way in which he had vowed to
   do. Perhaps this Hebrew scruple was a concession, like so many others,
   that he made to the spirit of the Church at Jerusalem. He hoped by an
   act of great devotion to obtain pardon for his daring, and to
   conciliate the Judaisers. The discussions were scarcely pacified, and
   peace was only kept for the sake of business. It is probable that he
   profited by the opportunity to remit to the poor people in Jerusalem a
   considerable amount of money as alms. Paul, as usual, stayed for a very
   short time in the metropolis: here there were susceptibilities which
   could not have failed to bring about divisions if he had prolonged his
   stay. He, accustomed to live in the exquisite atmosphere of his truly
   Christian Churches, found here, under the name of Brethren of Jesus,
   only Jews. He thought that they did not give a sufficiently exalted
   place to Jesus; he grew indignant that, after Jesus, people should be
   found to attribute any value whatever to those things which had existed
   before him.

   The head of the Church of Jerusalem was now James, the brother of the
   Lord. It was not that the authority of Peter had diminished, but he was
   no longer resident in the city. Partly in imitation of Paul, he had
   embraced the active apostolic life. The idea that Paul was the Apostle
   of the Gentiles, and Peter the Apostle of the Circumcision, had more
   and more gained ground. In accordance with this idea, Peter went about
   preaching the Gospel to the Jews all over Syria. He carried about with
   him a sister, as spouse and deaconess, thus giving the first example of
   a married Apostle--an example which the Protestant missionaries more
   lately followed. John, surnamed Mark, appeared always also as his
   disciple, his companion, and his interpreter, a circumstance which
   causes it to be generally believed that the Prince of the Apostles knew
   no Greek. Peter had in some sort adopted John-Mark, and treated him as
   a son.

   The details of the pilgrimage of Peter are unknown to us. What was told
   about him in later days is mainly fabulous. We only know that the life
   of the Apostle of the Circumcision was, like that of the Apostle of the
   Gentiles, a series of trials. It may be believed also that the
   itinerary which serves as foundation for the fabulous acts of Peter--a
   journey which conducts the Apostle from Jerusalem to Cæsarea, from
   Cæsarea along the coast by Tyre, Sidon, Beyrout, Byblos, Tripoli,
   Antaradus to Laodicea-upon-the-sea, and from Laodicea to Antioch--is
   but imaginary. The Apostle certainly visited Antioch; we think even
   that he used it as his headquarters after a certain date. The lakes and
   the ponds formed by the Orontes and the Arkeuthas about the town, which
   furnished to the lower classes of the people fresh water fish of
   inferior quality, perhaps afforded him the opportunity of again taking
   up his old trade of fisherman.

   Many of the brothers of the Lord, and some members of the Apostolic
   College, travelled even from the bordering parts of Judæa. As Peter,
   and in a different manner to that of the missionaries of the school of
   Paul, they travelled with their wives, and lived at the cost of the
   Churches. The trade which they had exercised in Galilee was not, like
   that of Paul, of a nature to enable them to subsist upon it, and they
   had abandoned it a long time ago. The wives who accompanied them, who
   were called "sisters," were the origin of those novices, a kind of
   deaconesses and of nuns, living under the direction of a clergyman, who
   played an important part in the history of ecclesiastical celibacy.

   Peter having thus ceased to be the resident chief of the Church of
   Jerusalem, several members of the Apostolic Council having in the same
   way taken up with an itinerant life, the first place in the Mother
   Church was given up to James. He was thus "the bishop of the Hebrews,"
   that is to say, of that part of the disciples who spoke the Semitic
   languages. That did not compromise the chief part of the universal
   Church: no one had been exigent enough to claim the right to such a
   title, people being divided between Peter and Paul; but his presidency
   of the Church at Jerusalem, joined to his quality of brother of the
   Lord, gave James an immense power, since the Church at Jerusalem always
   remained the centre of concord. James was, moreover, very old; some
   ambitious movements, too much prejudice, were the consequences of such
   a position. All the faults which must later make the Court of Rome the
   flail of the Church, and the principal agent of its corruption, were
   already germinating in this primitive community of Jerusalem.

   James was a worthy man in many respects, but with a narrow mind, that
   Jesus would have assuredly pierced with his keenest railleries, if he
   knew him, or even if be knew him as he has been represented to us. Was
   he really the brother, or only a cousin-german, of Jesus? All the
   witnesses in this respect agree so well together, that one is forced to
   believe the latter hypothesis. But, in that case, Nature must have
   played one of her most fantastic tricks. Perhaps this brother, being
   converted only after the death of Jesus, possessed less of the true
   tradition of the Master than those who, without being his relations,
   had accompanied him in his lifetime. It is less surprising that two
   children born of the same mother, or of the same family, should have
   been at first enemies, then reconciled; should remain so profoundly
   diverse, that the only known brother of Jesus would have been a kind of
   Pharisee, an ascetic exterior, a devotee tainted with all the
   absurdities that Jesus attacked without mercy. One thing is certain,
   namely, that the person who has been called up to this time "James,
   brother of the Lord," or "James the Just," or the "Rampart of the
   People," was in the Church of Jerusalem the representative of the most
   intolerant Jewish party. Whilst the active Apostles travelled all over
   the world, in order to conquer it for Jesus, the brother of Jesus at
   Jerusalem did all that was possible to destroy their work, and to
   contradict Jesus after his death, in a more profound fashion perhaps
   than he had done in his life-time.

   This society of half-converted Pharisees, this world which was in
   reality more Jewish than Christian, living around the temple,
   preserving the old practices of the Jewish religion, as if Jesus had
   not declared them vain, formed unbearable company for Paul. That which
   particularly annoyed him was the opposition of all this class to his
   missionary work. Like the Jews of the strict observance, the partisans
   of James did not wish to make proselytes. The ancient religious parties
   often had such contradictions. On the one hand, they proclaimed that
   they alone had possession of the truth; on the other, they only wished
   to enlarge their sphere: they pretended to preserve the truth for
   themselves. French Protestantism presents in our days a similar
   phenomenon. Two opposite parties, the one desiring, before everything
   else, the preservation of old customs; the other capable of gaining to
   Protestantism a world of new adherents, being produced in the bosom of
   the reformed Church. The conservative party has waged, in a second
   ground, a war to the knife. It has repulsed with scandal all that has
   resembled an abandonment of the family traditions, and it has preferred
   to the brilliant destinies that are offered to them, the pleasure of
   remaining a little club, without importance, shut up, composed of
   well-thinking men,--that is to say, of men partaking of the same
   prejudices, and regarding the same things as aristocratic. The feeling
   of defiance that the members of the old party of Jerusalem experienced
   before the stern missionary who introduced to them multitudes of new
   brethren without titles of Jewish nobility, must be something
   analogous. They looked upon themselves as overruled, and instead of
   falling at the feet of Paul, and thanking him, they found in him a
   disturber, an intruder who forced his way with men recruited from every
   place. More than one hard word, it seems, had been exchanged. It is
   probable that at this moment James, the brother of the Lord, conceived
   the unsuccessful project of overthrowing the work of Jesus,--I mean the
   project of a counter mission charged to follow the Apostle of the
   Gentiles, to contradict his dogmas, to persuade converts that they must
   be circumcised, and practise all the Law. Sectarian movements are not
   produced without schisms of this kind; when one recalls the heads of
   Saint-Simonianism quarrelling amongst themselves, but yet remaining
   ardent Saint-Simonians, and as such voluntarily reconciled by the
   survivors after his death.

   Paul avoided these scandals by setting out as soon as possible for
   Antioch. It was probably then that Silas left him. The latter was the
   founder of the Church at Jerusalem. He remained there, and henceforth
   attached himself to Peter. Silas, as the compiler of the "Acts,"
   appears to have been a conciliatory man, oscillating between the two
   parties, and in turn attached to each of the two chiefs; a thoroughly
   good Christian, and of the opinion which in triumphing saved the
   Church. Never, in fact, did the Christian Church bear in its bosom a
   cause of schism so deep as that which agitated it at this moment.
   Luther and the most fossilised scholar differed less than Paul and
   James. Thanks to some gentle and generous spirits--Silas, Luke,
   Timothy--all the attacks were softened, all the heartburnings
   concealed. A beautiful tale, calm and dignified, has not allowed it to
   be seen that the fraternal understanding in these years was traversed
   by such terrible rents.

   At Antioch Paul breathed freely. He there met with his old companion
   Barnabas, and without doubt they felt great joy at seeing each other;
   for the motive which had separated them for a short time was not a
   question of principle. Perhaps Paul also found at Antioch his disciple
   Titus, who had not shared the second journey, but who henceforth
   attached himself to him. The recital of miraculous conversions wrought
   by Paul astonished the young and active Church. Paul, for his part,
   felt a lively joy at revisiting the town which had been the cradle of
   his apostleship--the places where, ten years before, he had conceived
   the Church which had conferred on him the title of Missionary of the
   Gentiles. An incident of the greatest gravity was soon to interrupt
   these sweet effusions, and to revive with a degree of gravity those
   divisions which up to then had been lulled for a moment.

   Whilst Paul was at Antioch, Peter arrived there. This at first only
   redoubled the joy and cordiality. The Apostle of the Jews and the
   Apostle of the Gentiles loved each other as very good and very ardent
   natures always love each other, when they found themselves in relation
   to each other. Peter communicated without reserve with the converted
   Pagans, and even, in open violation of the Jewish Law, he did not
   object to eating with them; but soon this good understanding was
   disturbed. James had executed his fatal project. Some brethren,
   provided with letters of recommendation signed by him as the chief of
   the Twelve, and as the only one who had the right to authorise a
   mission, set out from Jerusalem. Their pretext was that one could not
   preach the doctrine of Christ if he had not been to Jerusalem to
   compare his doctrine with that of James, the brother of the Lord, and
   if he did not carry an attestation from the latter. Jerusalem was,
   according to them, the source of all faith,--of every apostolic
   commission: the true Apostles lived there. Whoever preached without a
   letter of authority from the chief of the Mother Church, and without
   having sworn obedience to him, ought to be repelled as a false prophet
   and a false apostle, as an emissary of the devil. Paul, who had no such
   letters, was an intruder, boasting of personal relations with them
   without reality, and of a mission the title to which he could not
   produce. He alleged his visions, contending even that the fact of
   having seen Jesus in a supernatural fashion was worth much more than
   the fact of having known him personally. "What can be more chimerical?"
   said the Jerusalemites. No vision was so valuable as the evidence of
   the senses: visions are not actualities. The spectre that he saw was
   perhaps an evil spirit: idolaters had visions as well as saints. When
   the apparition was questioned, it answered all that was wanted: the
   spectre shone for an instant, and then disappeared quickly; there was
   no time to talk to it at leisure. The mind of the dreamer was not his
   own: in that state volition ceases. To see the Son out of the flesh!
   but that is impossible: one would die of it. The superhuman brightness
   of that light would kill. Even an angel, to make himself visible, is
   obliged to assume a body!"

   The emissaries cited on this head a number of visions which had been
   seen by infidels and heretics, and concluded from them that the chief
   Apostles, those who had seen Jesus, had an immense superiority. They
   even declared that they could show texts of Scripture proving that
   visions came from an offended God, whilst to converse face to face was
   the privilege of his friends. "How can Paul assert that by an interview
   of an hour Jesus had rendered him capable of teaching? It needed a
   whole year of lessons for Jesus to form his Apostles. And if Jesus
   really appeared to him, how did he know that he did not teach the
   reverse of the doctrine of Jesus? Let him prove the reality of the
   interview which he had had with Jesus, by conforming himself to His
   precepts, by loving His Apostles, by not declaring war with those whom
   Jesus had chosen. If he wished to serve the truth, let him make himself
   the disciple of Jesus' disciples, and then he could be a useful
   auxiliary."

   The question of ecclesiastical authority and of individual revelation,
   of Catholicism and of Protestantism, showed itself with a real
   grandeur. Jesus had settled nothing clearly in this matter. So long as
   he lived, and throughout the first years following his death, Jesus was
   so essentially the soul and body of His little Church, that no idea of
   government or of constitution offers itself. Now, on the contrary, it
   was necessary to know if there was a power representing Jesus, or if
   the Christian conscience remained free; if to preach Jesus,
   subscription to articles of faith were necessary, or if he had the
   command received from Jesus sufficed. As Paul did not offer any other
   proof of his immediate mission than his affirmation, his position was
   weak in many ways. We shall see with what prodigies of eloquence and of
   activity the great innovator, attacked in every quarter, will face all
   assaults and maintain his position without absolutely breaking with the
   Apostolic College, whose authority he recognised each time that his
   liberty was not straitened. But the struggle rendered him less amiable
   to us. A man who disputes, resists, speaks of himself; a man who
   maintains his opinion and his prerogative, who gives pain to others,
   who denounces them to their face, such a man is antipathetic to us.
   Jesus, in such a case, yielded everything, escaped from his difficulty
   by some charming word.

   The emissaries of James arrived at Antioch. James, while admitting that
   converted Gentiles could be saved without observing the Law of Moses,
   in no way admitted that a true Jew, a circumcised Jew, could, without
   sin, violate the law. The scandal of the disciples of James was at its
   height when they saw the chief of the Churches of the circumcision act
   like a true Pagan, and destroy those exterior compacts that a
   respectable Jew looked upon as titles of nobility and marks of his
   superiority. They spoke keenly to Peter, who was much frightened. This
   man, profoundly good and just, wanted peace above everything: he
   scarcely knew how to contradict anybody. This made him changeable: at
   least he was so to all appearance; he was easily disconcerted, and did
   not know how to find a quick reply. Already, from the life of Jesus,
   this kind of timidity, coming from awkwardness rather than from want of
   heart, had led him into a fault which cost him many tears. Knowing
   little about argument, incapable of holding up his head against
   contradiction, in difficult cases he was silent and hesitated. Such a
   kind of temper made him again commit a great act of feebleness. Placed
   between two classes of people, one of whom he could not content without
   annoying the other, he isolated himself completely, and lived apart,
   refusing all communications with the uncircumcised. This manner of
   acting keenly wounded the converted Gentiles. What was graver still,
   was that all the circumcised imitated him; even Barnabas allowed
   himself to follow this example, and avoided uncircumcised Christians.

   Paul's anger was extreme. When we recall the ritual meaning of the meal
   in common, refusing to eat with a part of the community meant
   excommunication. Paul broke out into reproaches, treated this kind of
   thing as hypocrisy, accused Peter and his imitators of falsifying the
   meaning of the gospel. The Church must soon assemble: the two Apostles
   would meet there. To his face, and before all the assembly, Paul
   violently apostrophised Peter, and reproached him for his
   inconsequence. "If thou," said he to him, "being a Jew, livest after
   the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
   Gentiles to live as do the Jews?"

   Then he developed his favourite theory of the salvation coming by
   Jesus, and not by the Law,--of the abrogation of the Law by Jesus. It
   is probable that Peter did not answer him. Exactly, it was Paul's
   advice; as all men who seek by innocent artifices to get out of a
   difficulty, he did not pretend to be right; he only wanted to satisfy
   one side, and not to alienate others. In this manner one only succeeds,
   as a general rule, in being in opposition to everybody.

   Only the removal of the envoys of James made an end to the
   disagreement. After their departure, good Peter began again without
   doubt to eat with the Gentiles as before. These singular alternatives
   of violence and of fraternity are one of the features of a Jewish
   character. Modern critics conclude from certain passages in the Epistle
   to the Galatians that the quarrel between Peter and Paul absolutely
   made them contradict each other, not only in the "Acts" but in other
   passages from the Epistle to the Galatians. Ardent men pass their life
   in disputing with each other, without ever actually quarrelling. It is
   not necessary to judge these tempers after the manner of things whose
   actions happen in our time between men well educated and susceptible
   upon the point of honour. This last word, in particular, has scarcely
   ever had any meaning to the Jews.

   It seems certain, nevertheless, the quarrel of Antioch left deep
   traces. The great Church on the borders of the Orontes was split in
   two, if we are permitted to explain thus, that in two parishes there
   was on the one hand the parish of the circumcised, on the other, that
   of the uncircumcised. The separation of these two portions of the
   Church continued for a long time. Antioch, as they tell us later, had
   two bishops, one appointed by Peter and the other by Paul. Evhode and
   Ignatius are named as having filled up after the Apostles that office.

   As for the animosity of the emissaries of James, it only increased. The
   quarrel of Antioch left them a feeling, the indignant expression of
   which, a century after, one still finds in the writings of the
   Judæo-Christian section. The eloquent adversary who had almost
   destroyed the Church of Antioch, without any real reason became their
   enemy. They vowed vengeance, which even in his lifetime raised up for
   him troubles without number, and after his death bloody anathemas and
   atrocious calumnies. Passion and religious enthusiasm are far from
   overcoming human weaknesses. On leaving Antioch, the agents of the
   Jerusalemite party vowed to overthrow the foundations of Paul, to
   destroy his Churches, and to throw down what he had built up with so
   much labour. It seems that on this occasion new letters were sent from
   Jerusalem in the name of the Apostles. It is possible that a specimen
   of those hateful letters may have been preserved for us in the Epistle
   of Jude, brother of James, and like him "brother of the Lord," which
   forms part of the canon. It is a manifesto of the most violent
   description against nameless adversaries, who are presented as rebels
   and impure men. The style of this piece, which comes much nearer to
   classic Greek than that of the greater portion of the writings of the
   New Testament, has much analogy with the style of the Epistle of James.
   James and Jude did not probably know any Greek: the Church of Jerusalem
   had perhaps Hellenic secretaries for communications of this kind.
   "Beloved, when I gave all diligence to, write unto you of the common
   salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you and exhort you, that
   ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto
   the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were
   before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the
   grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God,
   and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance,
   though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people
   out of the land of Egypt, afterwards destroyed them that believed not.
   And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
   habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto
   the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
   cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to
   fornication, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
   eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh,
   despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the
   archangel, when, contending with the devil, disputed about the body of
   Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, the
   Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of things which they know not,
   but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they
   corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of
   Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and
   perished in the gainsaying of Core. These are spots in your feasts of
   charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear:
   clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose
   fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots.
   Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars,
   to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. And Enoch,
   also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the
   Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon
   all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their
   ungodly deeds which they have committed, and of all their hard speeches
   which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers,
   complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh
   great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of
   advantage. But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before
   of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: how that they told you there
   should be mockers in the last time who should walk after their own
   ungodly lusts."

   Paul from this moment was for a section of the Church one of the most
   dangerous of heretics, a false Jew, a false Apostle, a false prophet, a
   new Balaam, a Jezebel, a villain who prophesied (lit. preluded.) the
   destruction of the temple--in two words, a Simon Magus. Peter was
   angrier than all, and was always busy in fighting him. They were
   accustomed to designate the Apostle of the Gentiles by the sobriquet of
   Nicholas (Conquerer of the People), a name akin to Balaam. This seemed
   a happy nickname; a Pagan seducer, who had visions although an infidel,
   a man who persuaded people to sin with Pagan women, appeared the true
   type of Paul, this false missionary, this partisan of mixed marriages.
   His disciples for the same reason were called Nicolaitans. Far from
   forgetting his character of persecutor, they insisted on it in a most
   odious fashion. His gospel was a false gospel. It was of Paul that the
   question was raised, when the fanatics of the party talked between
   themselves in innuendoes of a person whom they called "the apostate,"
   or "the enemy," or "the impostor," the forerunner of Anti-Christ, that
   the chief of the Apostles follows in his footsteps to repair the evil
   which he does. Paul was "the frivolous man" of whom the Gentiles,
   having seen their ignorance, have received the doctrine which is
   opposed to the Law; his visions, which he calls "depths of God," they
   qualified as "the depths of Satan," his Churches, they named "the
   synagogues of Satan;" in spite of Paul, they proclaim boldly that the
   Twelve only are the foundation of the Church of Christ. A whole legend
   begins from this time to be formed against Paul. They refuse to believe
   that a true Jew could have been capable of committing such an atrocity
   as that of which he had been guilty. They pretended that he had been
   born a Pagan, and that he had been made a proselyte. And why? Calumny
   is never without plenty of reasons for it. Paul was circumcised because
   he wished to marry the daughter of the High Priest. The High Priest,
   being a wise man, having refused her to him, Paul, out of spite, began
   to declaim against circumcision, the Sabbath, and the Law. . . . That
   is the reward which one obtains from fanatics for having served their
   cause, otherwise than they understand it; let us say rather, for having
   served the cause which they lost by their narrow spirit and their
   foolish exclusiveness.

   James, on the contrary, became for the Judæo-Christian party the head
   of all Christianity, the bishop of bishops, the president of all the
   good Churches, of those that God had truly founded. It was probably
   after his death that they created for him this apocryphal character;
   but there is no doubt that legend in this case may be based in several
   respects upon the real character of the hero. The grave and rather
   emphatic delivery of James; his manners, which recalled a sage of the
   old world, a solemn Brahmin or an antique mobed; his pompous and
   ostentatious sanctity made him conspicuous in the popular eye, an
   official, holy man, even already a species of Pope. The
   Judæo-Christians accustomed themselves to believe that he had been
   clothed with the Jewish priesthood; and as a sign of the High Priest
   was the pétalon or breastplate of gold, they decorated him with it.
   "The Rampart of the people," with his golden breastplate, thus became a
   sort of Jewish bonze, an imitation High Priest, for the use of the
   Judæo-Christians. They supposed that, as the High Priest, he entered,
   by virtue of a special permission, once a year into the sanctuary; they
   even pretended that he belonged to the sacerdotal race. They asserted
   that he had been ordained by Jesus the bishop of the Holy City; that
   Jesus had entrusted him with his own episcopal throne. The
   Judæo-Christians made a good many of the people of Jerusalem believe
   that it was the merits of this servant of God which held off the
   thunderbolt which was ready to burst on the people. They nearly went as
   far as creating for him as for Jesus, a legend founded upon biblical
   passages, where they pretended that the prophets had spoken of him in
   parables.

   The image of Jesus in this Christian family became smaller year by
   year, whilst in the Churches of Paul it took more and more colossal
   proportions. The Christians of James were simple, pious
   Jews--hasidim--believing in a Jewish mission of Jesus; the Christians
   of Paul were good Christians in the sense which has prevailed ever
   since. The Law, the temple, sacrifices, high priests, all became
   indifferent to them. Jesus has replaced everything else, abolished
   everything else; to attach a meaning of sanctity to what has been
   before, is to do injury to the merits of Jesus. It was natural that to
   Paul, who had not seen Jesus, the wholly human figure of the Galilæan
   Master should transform itself into a metaphysical type much more
   easily than for Peter and the others who had talked with Jesus. To
   Paul, Jesus is not a man who has lived and taught; he is Christ who has
   died for our sins, who saves us, who justifies us; He is an altogether
   Divine being: we partake of him; we communicate with Him in a wonderful
   manner; He is for man Wisdom and Righteousness, Santification and
   Redemption; He is the King of Glory, All Powerful in Heaven and Earth,
   which is soon to be delivered to Him; He is only inferior to God the
   Father. If this school only had written the Scriptures, we should not
   touch upon the person of Jesus, and we might doubt its existence. But
   those who know Him, and who guarded His memory, possibly wrote about
   this time the first notes upon which these Divine writings (I speak of
   the Gospels) which have made the fortune of Christianity, and which
   have transmitted to us the essential features of the most important
   character which has ever been known.
     __________________________________________________________________

TROUBLES IN THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA.

   The emissaries of James, having left Antioch, bent their steps towards
   the Churches of Galatia. The Jerusalemites had for a long time known of
   the existence of these Churches; it was even with regard to them that
   the question of the circumcision was first raised, and that what was
   called the Council of Jerusalem was held. James had probably
   recommended his confidential agents to attack this important point, it
   being one of the centres of Paul's power.

   Success was easy for them. These Galatians were men readily seduced;
   the last one who had come to speak to them in the name of Jesus was
   almost certain to be right. The Jerusalemites had soon persuaded a
   great number of them that they were not good Christians. They
   incessantly repeated to them that they ought to be circumcised, and to
   observe all the Law. With the puerile vanity of fanatical Jews, the
   deputies represented circumcision as a corporal advantage; they were
   proud of it, and did not admit that one could be as much a man without
   this privilege as he ought to be. The habit of ridiculing the Pagans,
   representing them as inferior beings and badly brought up, introduced
   these grotesque ideas. The Jerusalemites poured out at the same time
   against Paul a flood of invective and disparagement. They accused him
   of posing as an independent Apostle, although he had received his
   mission from Jerusalem, or else they had seen him at different times
   betake himself to the school of the Twelve, as a disciple. Was not his
   coming to Jerusalem a recognition of the superiority of the Apostolic
   College? What he knew he had learned from the Apostles; he had accepted
   the rules which they had drawn up. This missionary who pretended to
   dispense with circumcision, knew very well the need of preaching and of
   practising it. Turning his concessions against him, they alleged cases
   when they had seen him recognise the necessity of Jewish practices;
   perhaps they did not recall in particular the facts relative to the
   circumcision of Titus and Timothy. How could he, who had never seen
   Jesus, dare to speak in the name of Jesus? It was Peter, it was James,
   who ought to be held to be the true Apostles--the depositaries of
   revelation.

   The consciences of these good Galatians were troubled. One party
   abandoned the doctrine of Paul, yielded to the new doctors, and were
   circumcised; the other party remained faithful to their first master.
   The trouble, in all these cases, was profound: they said the harshest
   things to each other.

   This news on reaching Paul filled him with anger. Jealousy, which
   formed the basis of his character, and susceptibility, often already
   put to the test, were excited in the highest degree. It was the third
   time that the Pharisaical party of Jerusalem attempted to demolish his
   work as he accomplished it. The kind of cowardice which there is in
   attacking weak, docile men without defence, and who only lived in
   confidence on their master, revolted him. He could restrain himself no
   longer. At the same time, the daring and vehement Apostle dictated that
   admirable epistle, that may well be compared, except for the art of
   writing, with the most beautiful classical works, and in which his
   impetuous nature is painted in letters of fire. The title of "Apostle"
   that he had at first taken timidly, he now took as assumed in defiance,
   to reply to his adversaries, and in the maintenance of what he believed
   to be the truth.

   "Paul an Apostle (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and
   God the Father, who raised him from the Dead); and all the brethren
   which are with me, unto the Churches of Galatia:

   "Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
   Christ, who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from
   this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father:
   to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

   "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
   grace of Christ unto another gospel: which is not another; but there be
   some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But
   though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you
   than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we
   said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel
   unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed. For do I now
   persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased
   men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

   "But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me
   is not after man. For I neither received it of man, neither was I
   taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. For ye have heard of
   my conversation in time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond
   measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it: and profited in
   the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more
   exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it
   pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by
   his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
   heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood: neither went
   I up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me; but I went
   into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I
   went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. But
   other of the Apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's brother. Now
   the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.

   "Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia; and was
   unknown by face unto the Churches of Judæa which were in Christ; but
   they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times past, now
   preacheth the faith which once he destroyed And they glorified God in
   me.

   "Then, fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem with
   Barnabas, and took Titus with me also. And I went up by revelation, and
   communicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles,
   but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I
   should run, or had run in vain. But neither Titus, who was with me,
   being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised: and that because of
   false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our
   liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into
   bondage, to whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour: that
   the truth of the gospel might continue with you. But of these who
   seemed to be somewhat (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me.
   God accepteth no man's person), for they who seemed to be somewhat in
   conference added nothing to me; but contrariwise, when they saw that
   the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed onto me, as the gospel
   of the circumcision was unto Peter (for he that wrought effectually in
   Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me
   toward the Gentiles), and when James, Cephas and John, who seemed to be
   pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me
   and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the
   heathen, and they unto the circumcision. Only they would that we should
   remember the poor; the same which I also was forward to do.

   "But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
   because he was to be blamed. For before that certain came from James,
   he did eat with the Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew and
   separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision. And the
   other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also
   was carried away with their dissimulation. But when I saw that they
   walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto
   Peter, before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner
   of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
   Gentiles to live as do the Jews? We, who are Jews by nature, and not
   sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the
   works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have
   believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
   Christ, and not by the works of the law; for by the works of the law
   shall no flesh be justified. But if, while we seek to be justified by
   Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is therefore Christ the
   minister of sin? God forbid. For, if I build again the things which I
   destroy, I make myself a transgressor. For I through the law am dead to
   the law, that I might live unto God. I am crucified with Christ;
   nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ Liveth in me; and the life
   which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God,
   who loved me and gave himself for me. I do not frustrate the grace of
   God, for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.

   "O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey
   the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set
   forth, crucified among you? This only would I learn of you, Received ye
   the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? Are ye
   so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit are ye now made perfect by the
   flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain.
   He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles
   among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of
   faith? Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
   righteousness. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same
   are the children of Abraham. And the scripture, foreseeing that God
   would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel
   unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then
   they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. . . . . . But
   before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith
   which should afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the law was our
   schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by
   faith, but after that faith has come we are no longer under a
   school-master. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
   Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptised into Christ have put on
   Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
   there is neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
   And if ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according
   to the promise. Now I say that the heir, as long as he is a child,
   differeth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all; but is
   under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father. Even
   so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of the
   world: but when the fulness of the time was come God sent forth his Son
   made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the
   law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are
   sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
   crying, Abba, Father, Wherefore thou art no more a servant but a son,
   and if a son then an heir of God through Christ.

   "Howbeit then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by
   nature are no gods. But now, after that ye have known God, or rather
   are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements,
   whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? Ye observe days, and
   months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed
   upon you labour in vain.

   "Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are; ye have not
   injured me at all. Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I
   preached the gospel unto you at the first. And my temptation, which was
   in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel
   of God, even as Christ Jesus. Where is then the blessedness ye spake
   of? for I bear you record, that, if it had been possible, ye would have
   plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me. Am I therefore
   become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? They zealously affect
   you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect
   them. But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing,
   and not only when I am present with you. My little children, of whom I
   travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you, I desire to be,
   present with you now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of
   you. . . . . .

   "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us
   free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Behold, I,
   Paul, say unto you that, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
   nothing. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he
   is a debtor to do the whole law. Christ is become of no effect unto
   you, whosoever of you are justified by the law: ye are fallen from
   grace. For we, through the Spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness
   by faith. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth anything,
   nor uncircumcision, but faith, which worketh by love.

   "Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth?
   This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you. A little leaven
   leaveneth the whole lump. I have confidence in you through the Lord,
   that ye will be none otherwise minded; but he that troubleth you shall
   bear his judgment, whosoever he be. And I, brethren, if I yet preach
   circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? Then is the offence of
   the cross ceased? I would they were even cut off which trouble you.

   "For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty: only use not liberty
   for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all
   the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed
   that ye be not consumed one of another. This I say then, Walk in the
   Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh
   lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these
   are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that
   ye would. But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.
   Now, the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: Adultery,
   fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
   variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
   murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which I tell
   you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do
   such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the
   Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
   faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they
   which are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
   lusts. . . . ."

   Paul wrote this epistle at a single sitting, as if filled with an
   interior fire. According to his habit, he wrote with his own hand, in
   postscript, "Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with
   mine own hand."

   It seems natural that he should finish with the usual salutation; but
   he was too much animated: his fixed idea possessed him. The subject
   being exhausted, he again returns to it with some keen remarks:--

   "As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you
   to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the
   cross of Christ. For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep
   the law, but desire to have you circumcised that they may glory in your
   flesh. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our
   Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
   the world. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything,
   nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according
   to this rule, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of
   God. From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the
   marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
   be with your spirit. Amen."

   Paul despatched this letter at once. If he had taken an hour's
   reflection, it is doubtful whether he would have let it be sent. We do
   not know to whom it was entrusted; Paul doubtless had it carried by one
   of his disciples, whom he charged with a journey into Galatia. The
   epistle, in fact, is not addressed to a particular community; each of
   those little Churches of Derbe, of Lystra, of Iconium, of Antioch in
   Pisidia, was not considerable enough to serve as a metropolis to the
   others; the Apostle, on the other hand, gives no instruction to the
   receivers as to the manner of circulating his letter. The effect that
   the letter produced upon the Galatians is also unknown. Without doubt
   it confirmed the party of Paul; it probably, however, did not entirely
   extinguish the opposite party. Almost all the Churches henceforward
   will be divided into two camps. The Church of Judæa will maintain its
   pretensions until the fall of Jerusalem (A.D. 70). It is only at the
   end of the first century that a true reconciliation will come about,
   partly at the expense of Paul's glory, which will during nearly a
   hundred years be cast into the shade, but for the full triumph of its
   fundamental ideas. The Judæo-Christians from this moment will only be a
   sect of old fanatics, dying out slowly and obscurely, and only ending
   towards the close of the fifth century in the remoter districts of
   Syria. Paul, in revenge, will be nearly disavowed. His title of
   Apostle, refused him by his enemies, will be feebly defended by his
   friends. The Churches which notoriously owe their foundation to him,
   will wish it to be thought that they were founded by him and by Peter.
   The Church of Corinth, for example, will do the most flagrant violence
   to history to show that she owes her origin to Peter as well as to
   Paul. The conversion of the Gentiles will pass for the collective work
   of the Twelve; Papias, Polycrates, Justin, Hegesippus, seem to labour
   to suppress the share of Paul in the work, and nearly ignore his
   existence. It is only when the idea of a canon of new sacred writings
   will be established that Paul will regain his importance. His epistles
   will then emerge in some way from the archives of the Churches to
   become the base of Christian theology, which they will renew from age
   to age.

   At the distance at which we now stand, the victory of Paul appears
   complete. Paul recounts to us, and perhaps exaggerates, the injuries
   that have been done to him. Who will tell us the injuries of Paul? The
   mean intention which he attributes to his adversaries of following in
   his footsteps to carry away for themselves the affection of his
   disciples and to glorify themselves afterwards over the circumcision of
   these simple men, is not this a travesty? May not the recital of his
   relations with the Church of Jerusalem, different as it is from that of
   the Acts, be a little arranged for the needs of the moment? The
   pretence of having been an Apostle by divine right from the very day of
   his conversion, is it not historically inaccurate! in this sense, that
   the conviction of his own apostleship slowly took possession of him,
   and arrived at its completion only after his first great mission. Was
   Peter really so much to be blamed as Paul asserted? The conduct of the
   Galilean Apostle, on the contrary, was not it that of a conciliatory
   man, preferring brotherliness to principle, wishing to content
   everybody, yielding to avoid scandal, and blamed by all, precisely
   because he was right. We have no means of answering these questions.
   Paul was very egotistical; it is not impossible that he more than once
   attributed to a private revelation what he had learnt from his elders.
   The Epistle to the Galatians is so extraordinary a work, the Apostle
   there paints himself with so much artlessness and truth, that it would
   be absolutely unjust to turn against him a document which does so much
   honour to his talent and his eloquence. The cares of a narrow orthodoxy
   are not ours; to others belong the right of explaining how one can be a
   saint, whilst abusing the ancient Cephas. Paul is not degraded from the
   companionship of great men when he is proved to be sometimes hasty,
   passionate, pre-occupied with his own defence, and fighting his
   enemies. In everything that is truly Protestant, Paul has the faults of
   a Protestant. It requires time and much experience to enable him to see
   that each dogma is not worth the trouble of violent resistance and of
   wounding charity. Paul is not Jesus. How far we are from thee, dear
   Master. Where is thy tenderness, thy poesy? Thou who didst consider the
   lilies, dost thou recognise as thy disciples these disputants, these
   men who are so bitter about precedence, who wish that every body should
   originate with them alone. They are men, thou wast a God. Where should
   we be, if thou wert known to us only by the simple letters of him who
   calls himself thy Apostle. Happily, the perfumes of Galilee still live
   in some faithful memories. Perhaps already the Sermon on the Mount is
   written on some secret sheet. The unknown disciple who bears this
   treasure truly bears the future.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XII

  THIRD JOURNEY OF PAUL--FOUNDATION OF THE CHURCH AT EPHESUS.

   Less great, less possessed by the sacred genius whicn had seized upon
   him, Paul was made use of in these barren disputes. To reply to little
   minds, he was obliged to make himself as mean as they were: these
   miserable quarrels had absorbed him. Paul scorned them as a man of
   superior genius should. He went straight forward, and left time to
   decide between him and his enemies. The first rule for a man devoted to
   great things, is to refuse mediocre men the power of turning him aside
   from his way. Without discussing with the delegates of James as to
   whether it were right or wrong to preach to the Gentiles and to convert
   them, Paul only thought of beginning again, even at the risk of
   encountering new anathemas. After some months passed at Antioch he
   departed on a third mission, on this occasion to his dear Galatian
   Churches. At times he was in great perplexity with regard to these
   Churches; he regretted having grieved them by using harsh language to
   them; he wished to change his tone, to correct by the gentleness of his
   words the asperity of his letter. Paul wished above all things to dwell
   at Ephesus, which he had only touched at first in order to constitute a
   preaching centre such as there was at Thessalonica and Corinth. The
   field of that third mission was thus very nearly that of the second.
   Asia Minor, Macedonia, and Greece were the provinces that Paul in some
   sort assigned to himself.

   He set out from Antioch, accompanied probably by Titus. He followed the
   same track as on his second journey, and visited for the third time the
   Churches of the centre of Asia Minor--Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, Antioch
   in Pisidia. He speedily regained his authority, and soon effaced such
   false impressions as still remained, and which his enemies had sought
   to raise against him. At Derbe he took as assistant a new disciple,
   named Gaius, who followed him. These good Galatians were full of
   docility, but weak in the faith. Paul, accustomed to express himself
   with firmness, treated them with a severity that sometimes even he
   himself was afraid they would take for harshness. He had scruples; he
   was afraid that he had spoken to his children in a manner that perhaps
   did not express clearly enough the affection there was for them in his
   heart.

   The motives that had made him in his second journey abstain from
   preaching the gospel to pro-consular Asia existing no longer, Paul,
   after having finished his tour in Galatia, set out for Ephesus. This
   was in the middle of the summer. From Antioch in Pisidia, the most
   natural route to follow should have led him to Apamea-Cibotus, and
   thence into the basin of the Lycus, to the three neighbouring towns of
   Colosse, of Laodicæa, of Hierapolis. These three towns for some years
   will form an active centre of Christian work, and Paul will be in close
   communication with them. But for the moment he did not stop here, and
   made acquaintance with no one. Going round the rock of Cadmas, he
   passed into the valley of Meander, towards the inns of Carura, a great
   highway of the roads of Asia. Thereçe, a beautiful and easy route,
   leads, in three days, by Nysa, Tralles, and Magnesia, to the summits of
   the chain which separates the waters of the Meander from those of the
   Caystrus. A ravine, where the ancient road and the torrent dispute the
   narrow space, descends into "the prairie of Asia," sung of by the
   Homerides, that is to say, into the plain where the Caystrus forms a
   lagoon before reaching the sea. It is a beautiful Greek site, with a
   clear horizon, formed sometimes of from five to six mountain heights,
   or bounded by low hills. The swans and the beautiful birds which met
   there at that time even as now gave all the charm of antiquity. There,
   partly in the marshes, partly hanging to the declivities of Mount
   Coressus, supported, besides, by Mount Prion and its surroundings on
   another little isolated hill, rose the immense town destined to be the
   third capital of Christianity after Jerusalem and Antioch.

   We have already had occasion several times to remark that Christianity
   was most readily accepted in the smaller towns of the Roman Empire. The
   policy of that Empire had been to multiply isolated municipalities;
   isolated as regards race, religion, and patriotism. Ephesus was like
   Alexandria, Antioch, and Corinth, a typical town of this kind. It is
   easy thus to imagine what are still, in our days, the great towns of
   the Levant. What strikes the traveller when he goes through these
   labyrinths of infectious bazaars, of narrow and filthy courtyards, of
   temporary structures, which do not seem expected to last long?--it is
   the litter of a noble, of a political, and even of a municipal spirit.
   In these swarms of men, vulgarity and good instincts, idleness and
   activity, impertinence and amiability, meet each other: everything is
   found there excepting what constitutes an old local aristocracy; I
   would say glorious remembrances cultivated in common. With all that,
   there is much gossiping, prattling, levity; nearly everybody knows
   everybody else, and the people for ever occupy themselves with each
   other's business; there is something active, passionate, unsteady,--a
   vain curiosity of frivolous folk, greedy after the smallest novelty,
   ever ready to follow the fashion, never capable of setting it.
   Christianity was a fruit of that species of fermentation which usually
   arises in societies of this kind, where men, freed from the prejudices
   of birth and race, take up more readily the philosophical attitude
   which calls itself cosmopolitan and humanitarian, than the peasant, the
   burgess, the noble, or feudal citizen can do. Like the Socialism of our
   days, like all new ideas, Christianity germinates in what may be called
   the corruption of great towns. This corruption, in fact, is often only
   a plainer and freer life, a greater indication of the hidden forces of
   humanity.

   Formerly, as now, the Jews in such mixed towns held a very conspicuous
   position. That place was, to a small extent, what Smyrna and Salonica
   are at the present day. Ephesus especially possessed a very populous
   Jews' quarter. The Pagan inhabitants were fanatical enough, as happens
   in all towns which are centres of pilgrimages and famous rites. The
   devotion to Artemis of Ephesus, spreading over the entire world,
   supported several considerable industries. But the importance of the
   town as the capital of Asia, the movement of business, the wealth of
   the people, of every race, made Ephesus a very useful centre for the
   diffusion of Christian ideas. These ideas found nowhere a better
   reception than in the populous commercial cities, full of strangers,
   visited by Syrians, Jews, and that population of uncertain origin who
   from time to time have commanded all the ports of the Mediterranean.

   For centuries Ephesus had been nothing more than a purely Hellenic
   town. Formerly Ephesus had shone in the first rank, the least artistic
   among the Greek cities; but now and then she had allowed herself to be
   seduced by the manners of Asia. The town always had a bad reputation
   among the Greeks. Corruption, the introduction of luxury, was,
   according to the Greeks, a result of the effeminate manners of Ionia;
   at this time, and in this way, Ephesus was the centre and the
   abridgment of Ionia. The domination of the Lydians and of the Persians
   had destroyed energy and patriotism alike. Ephesus, like Sardis, was
   the most advanced point of Asiatic influence upon Europe. The excessive
   importance which the worship of Artemis took there, extinguished the
   scientific spirit, and favoured the over-flowing of all superstitions.
   It was an almost theocratic town; the fêtes there were numerous and
   splendid; the right wing of the temple peopled the town with
   courtesans. The scandalous sacerdotal institutions maintained there
   appeared each day more devoid of all sense of shame. That brilliant
   country of Heraclites, of Parhasius, perhaps of Apella, was only a town
   of porticoes, of stadia, of gymnasia, of theatres, a town of
   common-place sumptuosity, in spite of the masterpieces of painting and
   of sculpture that she still guards.

   Although the gate had been spoilt by the engineers of Attains
   Philadelphus, the town increased rapidly, and became the principal
   emporium of the region on this side of the Taurus. It was the port of
   landing for what came from Italy and Greece, a sort of hostelry or mart
   on the threshold of Asia. Produce of every kind was heaped together
   there, and the town became a cosmopolitan one, where the socialistic
   ideas gained ground among the men who had lost all idea of patriotism.
   The country was extremely rich; the commerce immense; but nowhere was
   public spirit at a lower ebb. The inscriptions breathed the most
   shameful servility, the most absolute submission to the Romana.

   It has been called the meeting-place of harlots and their prey. The
   town swarmed with magicians, diviners, mummers, and flute players;
   eunuchs, jewellers, sellers of amulets and medals, and romancers. The
   title of "Ephesian novels" designated, like that of "Milesian fables,"
   a species of literature, Ephesus being one of the towns which was
   especially chosen as the scene of love romances. The softness of the
   climate, in fact, put aside serious things: dancing and music remained
   the sole occupation. Public life degenerated into bacchanalian
   festivities: there was no such thing as study. The most extravagant
   miracles of Apollonius are reputed to have happened at Ephesus. The
   most celebrated Ephesian of the time at which we have now arrived was
   an astrologer named Balbilas, who possessed the confidence of Nero and
   Vespasian, and who appears to have been a scoundrel. A beautiful
   Corinthian temple, whose ruins can be seen at the present day, was
   raised about the same period. It was perhaps a temple dedicated to poor
   Claudius, whom Nero and Agrippa had just "drawn to heaven with a hook,"
   according to the happy word of Gallio.

   Ephesus had already been reached by Christianity when Paul went to
   sojourn there. We have seen that Aquila and Priscilla had remained
   there, after having set out from Corinth. This pious couple, to whom,
   by a singular destiny, it was reserved to figure in the origin of the
   Churches of Rome, of Corinth, of Ephesus, formed a little nucleus of
   disciples. Of this number, doubtless, was that Epasnetus whom St Paul
   calls "the first-fruits of Achaia unto Christ," and whom he loved so
   much. Another much more important conversion was that of a Jew named
   Apollonius or Apollos, originally of Alexandria, who had settled at
   Ephesus a little after the first journey of Paul. He had acquired in
   the Jewish schools of Egypt a profound knowledge of the Scriptures, an
   ingenious manner of interpreting them, a sublime eloquence. He was a
   kind of Philo, in quest of new ideas which then dawned on all parts of
   Judaism. In his journeys, he found him-self of the same belief with the
   disciples of John the Baptist, and had received their baptism. He had
   also heard them speak of Jesus, and it seems certain that from that
   time he accorded to the latter the title of Christ; but his idea of
   Christianity was incomplete. On his arrival at Ephesus he betook
   himself to the synagogue, where he had much success by his lively and
   inspired delivery. Aquila and Priscilla heard him, and were enraptured
   to receive such an auxiliary. They took him aside, instructed him more
   fully, and gave him more precise ideas upon certain points. As they
   were not very clever theologians themselves, they did not dream, it
   seems, of re-baptising him in the name of Jesus. Apollos formed around
   him a little group, whom he taught his doctrine, corrected by Aquila
   and Priscilla, but on whom he merely bestowed the baptism of John, the
   only one he knew. After some time he wished to pass into Achaia, and
   the brethren of Ephesus gave him a very warm letter of recommendation
   to those of Corinth.

   It is under these circumstances that Paul arrived at Ephesus. He lodged
   with Aquila and Priscilla, as he had already done at Corinth;
   associated himself anew with them, and worked in their shop. Ephesus
   was justly celebrated for its tents. The artisans of this trade
   probably inhabited the poor suburbs which extended from Mount Prion to
   the steep hill of Aia-Solouk. There doubtless was the first Christian
   household; the apostolic basilicas were there, the venerated graves of
   all Christianity. After the destruction of the temple of Artemis,
   Ephesus having exchanged its Pagan celebrity for an equally celebrated
   Christianity, and having become a town of the first order in the
   memories and legends of the new worship. Byzantine Ephesus was wholly
   grouped round a hill which had the advantage of possessing the most
   precious monuments of Christianity. The old site being exchanged from
   an infectious marsh, where an active civilisation had ceased to
   regulate the course of the waters, the old town had been abandoned
   little by little; its gigantic monuments, in consequence of their
   nearness to navigable canals and the sea, had been made use of as
   quarries, and thus the town had been displaced for nearly a league.
   Perhaps the choice of a domicile which some poor Jews in the reign of
   Claudius or Nero had made was the first cause of this removal. The most
   ancient Turkish conquest continued the Byzantine tradition; a great
   Mussulman town succeeded to the Christian town, which still exists in
   the midst of so many memories of ruin, fever, and oblivion.

   Paul was not here, as he was in his first missions, in the midst of a
   synagogue, ignorant of the new mystery, which he must endeavour to gain
   over. He had before him a Church which had been formed in the most
   original and spontaneous fashion, with the aid of two good Jewish
   merchants, and of a strange doctor, who was still only half a
   Christian. The company of Apollos was composed of about twelve members.
   Paul questioned them, and perceived that their faith was still
   incomplete: in particular, they had never heard of the Holy Ghost. Paul
   completed their instruction, re-baptised them in the name of Jesus, and
   "laid his hands on them." The Spirit immediately descended on them;
   they spake with tongues, and prophesied like perfect Christians.

   The Apostle sought to enlarge this little circle of believers. He was
   not afraid of finding himself here in the presence of the intellectual
   and scientific spirit which had stopped him short at Athens. Ephesus
   was not a great intellectual centre. Superstition reigned there without
   any control; everybody lived in foolish preoccupations of demonology
   and theology. The magic formulas of Ephesus (Ephesia Grammata) were
   celebrated, books of sorcery abounded, and a number of men employed
   their time in these foolish puerilities. Apollonius of Tyana was at
   Ephesus about this time.

   Paul, according to his habit, preached in the synagogue. During the
   space of three months, he did not cease each Sabbath to teach the
   Kingdom of God. He had little success. They did not come against him
   with riotings or severities, but they received his doctrine with
   insulting and scornful words. He then resolved to renounce the
   synagogue, and re-united himself to part of his disciples in a place
   which they called Schole Turannou, "The school of one Tyrannus."
   Perhaps it was a public spot there, one of those scholæ or semicircular
   vaults (or apses) which were so numerous in ancient towns, and which
   served as xystes for conversation and free instruction. Perhaps, on the
   other hand, it served as a private hall of a personage--of a
   grammarian, for example--named Tyrannus. In general, Christianity
   profited very little by these scholæ, which nearly always formed parts
   of the hot baths and gymnasia. The favourite place of the Christian
   propaganda, after the synagogue, was the private house, the chimney
   corner, In this vast metropolis of Ephesus. preaching might, however,
   be done openly. During two years, Paul did not cease to speak in the
   Schola Tyranni. This prolonged teaching in a public place, after a
   little time, made noise enough. The Apostles supplemented it by
   frequent visits to the houses of those who had been converted or
   touched. All pro-consular Asia heard the name of Jesus, and several
   Churches, subordinate to Ephesus, were established around. They also
   spoke of certain miracles effected by Paul. His reputation as a worker
   of miracles had reached such a point that people eagerly sought for the
   "hand-kerchiefs and aprons" which had touched his garment, to apply
   them to the sick. They believed that a medical virtue was exhaled from
   his body, and was so transmitted.

   The taste of the Ephesians for magic introduced episodes still more
   shocking. Paul was believed to have a great power over devils. It
   appears that the Jewish exorcists sought to steal his charms and to
   exorcise "in the name of Jesus whom Paul preacheth." There is a legend
   of the misadventure of these quacks, who pretended to be sons or
   disciples of a certain High Priest named Scæva. Having wished to drive
   out an evil spirit by means of the aforesaid formula, they were grossly
   insulted by the possessed man, who not content with that, threw himself
   upon them, tore their clothes in pieces, and beat them soundly. The
   degradation of the popular mind was such, that many Jews and many
   Pagans believed in Jesus for such a poor motive. These conversions took
   place above all among the men who occupied themselves with magic.
   Struck by the superiority of Paul's formula, the lovers of occult
   sciences came to him to exchange confidences concerning their
   practices. Many even brought their books of magic and burnt them; they
   valued at fifty thousand pieces of silver (drachmæ) the price of the
   Ephesia Grammata burnt in this manner.

   Let us turn our eyes away from these sad shadows. All that is done by
   the popular ignorant masses is spotted with unpleasantness. Illusion,
   chimera, are the conditions of the great things created by the people.
   It is only the work of wise men which can be pure; but wise men are
   usually powerless. We have a physiology and a medicine very superior to
   that of Paul; we are disengaged from a crowd of errors of which he
   partook, alas! and it is to be feared that we may never do a thousandth
   part of what he did. It is only when humanity as a whole shall be
   instructed, and reach a certain point of positive philosophy, that
   human affairs will be led by reason. One would never understand the
   history of the past if one did not refuse to treat as good and great
   movements in which many mean and equivocal features are mixed up.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIII.

  PROGRESS OF CHRISTIANITY IN ASIA AND PHRYGIA.

   The ardour of Paul during his stay at Ephesus was extreme. There were
   difficulties every day, numerous and animated adversaries. As the
   Church of Ephesus was not purely a foundation of Paul, it counted in
   its bosom the Judæo-Christians, who, upon important points, resisted
   energetically the Apostle of the Gentiles. They were like two flocks
   accusing each other, and denying to each other the right of speaking in
   the name of Jesus. The Pagans, for their part, were discontented with
   the progress of the new faith, and already manifested themselves as
   dangerous. On one occasion, in particular, Paul ran so grave a danger
   that he compares the position in which he was on that day to that of a
   man exposed to wild beasts. Perhaps the incident happened at the
   theatre, which would render the expression altogether just. Aquila and
   Priscilla saved him, and risked their heads for him.

   The Apostle forgot all, however, for the word of God had become
   fruitful. All the western part of Asia Minor, especially the basins of
   the Meander and the Hermus, was covered with Churches at this time, of
   which, without doubt, Paul was in a manner more or less directly the
   founder. Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, probably
   Tralles, thus received the germs of the faith. These towns had already
   important Jewish colonies. The gentleness of manners, and the great
   tediousness of provincial life, in the heart of a rich and beautiful
   country, dead for centuries to all political life, and pacified nearly
   to a level, had prepared many souls for the joys of a pure life. The
   softness of the Ionian manners, so inimical to national independence,
   was favourable to the development of moral and social questions. These
   good populations, without military spirit, effeminate, if I dare say
   it, were naturally Christian. The family life appears to have been very
   strong among them; the habit of living in the open air, and, for the
   women, upon the threshold of their doors, in a delicious climate, had
   developed great sociability. Asia, with its Asiarchs, presidents of the
   games and spectacles, seemed a pleasure company, an association of
   diversions and fêtes. The Christian population even to-day has the
   charm of gaiety; the women have the clear complexion, the vague and
   sweet eyes, beautiful blonde hair, a retiring and modest disposition,
   involving the sentient life of their beauty.

   Asia became thus, in some sort, the second province of the kingdom of
   God. The towns of this country, apart from its monuments, did not
   perhaps differ essentially then from what they are to-day clusters of
   wooden houses without order, with open balconies covered with an
   inclined roof; quarters often placed in tiers one upon the other, and
   always intermingled with beautiful trees. The public buildings
   necessary in a hot country to a life of pleasure and repose were of a
   surprising grandeur. There were not here, as in Syria, artificial
   constructions, very little adapted to comfort, walled towns, rendered
   necessary by the predatory habits of the Bedouin. Nowhere does the
   fulness of a sure and satisfied civilisation show itself in more
   imposing forms than in the ruins of these "magnificent cities of Asia."
   Every time that the beautiful countries of which we speak are crushed
   into pieces by fanaticism, war, or barbarity, they will become
   mistresses of the world by richness; they hold nearly all the sources
   of it, and thus force the great number of the more noble people to mass
   themselves up among them. Ionia, in the first century, was very
   populous, and covered with towns and villages. At this period, the
   misfortunes of the civil wars were forgotten. With powerful
   associations of workmen (ergasiai, sunergasai, sumbioseis), analogous
   to those of Italy and Flanders in the Middle Ages, they name their
   dignitaries, raise public monuments, erect statues, construct works of
   public utility, found charitable institutions, give every kind of sign
   of prosperity, of welfare, of moral activity. Side by side with the
   manufacturing towns, such as Thyatira, Philadelphia,
   Hieropolis--principally engaged in the great industries of Asia,
   carpets, the dyeing of cloth, the wool, leather--was developed a
   prosperous agriculture. The varied products of the districts of the
   Hermus and the Meander, the mineral riches of Imolus and of Messogio
   sources of the treasures of the old Assyrian town Lydia, had produced
   at Tralles above all an opulent middle-class, which contracted
   alliances with the kings of Asia, almost even became itself royal.
   These upstarts ennobled themselves in a more honourable manner by their
   literary labours and their generosity. It is true that we must not look
   in their works for either delicacy or Hellenic perfection. We feel, in
   contemplating such parvenu monuments, that all nobleness was lost when
   these people were raised. The municipal spirit, however, was still very
   energetic. The citizen who had become king, or reached Cæsar's favour,
   contended for an official position in the city, and expended his
   fortune in embellishing it. This movement of construction was in full
   force in the time of St Paul, partly on account of the earthquakes
   which, notably in the reign of Tiberius, had desolated the country, and
   which necessitated much repairing.

   A rich province of Southern Phrygia, in particular the little basin of
   the Lycus, a tributary of the Meander, was soon formed into active
   Christian centres. Three towns close to each other--Colossus or
   Colosse, Laodicæa upon the Lycus, and Hieropolis--there diffused the
   Word of Life. Colosse, which had formerly been of most importance,
   seemed to decline; it was an old city which remained faithful to the
   ancient manners, and which would not change them. Laodicæa and
   Hieropolis, on the contrary, became, under the Roman rule, very
   considerable towns. The summit of this beautiful country is Mount
   Cadmas, the father of all the mountains of Eastern Asia, massive and
   gigantic, full of dark precipices, and crowned with snow throughout the
   year. The waters which flow from it nourish upon the slopes of the
   valleys orchards full of fruit trees, which are traversed by rivers
   abounding in fish, and brightened by tame storks. The other side
   exhibits the strangest freaks of nature. The petrifying quality of the
   water of one of the tributaries of the Lycus, and the enormous mineral
   stream which falls in a cascade from the mountains of Hieropolis, have
   sterilised the plain and formed crevasses, grotesque caverns, beds of
   subterranean rivers, of fantastic basins, like petrified snow, serving
   as a reservoir to the waters, which glisten with all the colours of the
   rainbow; deep trenches through which roll a series of resounding
   cataracts. On this side the heat is extreme, the soil being simply a
   vast plain paved with limestone; but upon the heights of Hieropolis the
   purity of the air, the splendid light, the view of the Cadmas, floating
   like an Olympus in a dazzling atmosphere, the burning summits of
   Phrygia vanishing in the blue of heaven in a rosy hue, the opening of
   the Meander, the oblique sections of Messogio, the distant snowy
   summits of the Imolus, are absolutely dazzling. Saint Philip lived
   there; Paphas also; there Epictetus was born. All the valley of the
   Lycus offers the same character of dreamy mysticism. The population was
   not originally Greek; it was partly Phrygian. There was also, it would
   appear, around the Cadmas an ancient Semitic establishment, probably an
   annexe of Lydia. This peaceful valley, separated from the rest of the
   world, became for Christianity a place of refuge. Christianity
   underwent, as we shall see, grave trials.

   The evangelist of these regions was Epaphroditus or Epaphras of
   Colosse, a very zealous man, a friend and fellow-worker with Paul. The
   Apostle had only passed through the valley of the Lycus; he had never
   remained there; but these Churches, composed chiefly of converted
   Pagans, were not less completely dependent on him. Epaphras exercised
   upon the three villages a sort of episcopacy. Nymphadore, or Nymphas,
   who gathered a Church in his house at Laodicæa; the rich and benevolent
   Philemon, who, at Colosse, presided over a similar conventicle; Appia,
   deaconess of this town, perhaps the wife of Philemon; Archippus, who
   also filled an important function there, recognised Paul as chief. The
   last appears even to have worked directly with Paul. The Apostle called
   him his "companion in arms." Philemon, Appia, and Archippus must have
   been relatives or in intimate connection with each other.

   Paul's disciples travelled constantly, and reported to their master.
   Each one, though hardly converted, was a zealous catechist, spreading
   around him the faith with which he was filled. The delicate moral
   aspirations which prevailed in the country propapagated the movement
   like a train of gunpowder. The catechists went everywhere; as soon as
   they were received, they were jealously guarded; all and each tried to
   supply their wants. A cordiality, a joy, an infinite benevolence,
   prevailed by degrees, and touched the hearts of all. Judaism, besides,
   had preceded Christianity in these regions. Jewish colonies had been
   founded there by exiles from Babylon two centuries and a half before,
   and had perhaps carried there some of those industries (carpet-making,
   for example) which under the Roman emperors produced in the country so
   much wealth and so many strong associations.

   Did the preaching of Paul and his disciples reach Great Phrygia, the
   region of Azanes, of Synnades, of Colia, of Docimius? We have seen that
   in his two first journeys, Paul preached in Phrygia Parorea; that in
   his second journey he traversed Phrygia, Epicteta, without preaching;
   that in his third journey he traversed Apamea, Cibotos, and Phrygia,
   called at a later date Pacatiana. It is extremely probable that the
   remainder of Phrygia, as well as Bithynia, owed to Paul's disciples the
   seeds of Christianity. About the year 112, Christianity appears in
   Bithynia as a worship which had taken root, which had penetrated all
   the ranks of society, which had invaded the villages and the rural
   districts, as well as the towns and cities, and had brought about a
   long cessation of the official worship, so that the Roman authority was
   reduced by it to command the restoration of Pagan sacrifices. Some of
   the proselytes returned to the temples, and the victims, now made
   slaves, found buyers here and there. About the year 112, some men, on
   being asked if they were Christians, replied that they had been, but
   they had ceased to be "more than twenty years ago"--a clear proof that
   the first Christian preaching took place during the lifetime of Paul.

   Phrygia was thenceforward, and remained for three hundred years, an
   essentially Christian country. There first begins the public profession
   of Christianity; there, from the third century, are to be found upon
   monuments exposed to every one's eyes, the word ChRESTIANOS or
   ChRISTIANOS: these epitaphs, without openly avowing Christianity,
   exhibit Christian dogmas in a veiled form; there, from the time of
   Severus the Second, great towns adopted upon their coins biblical
   symbols, or, rather, assimilated their old traditions to biblical
   story. A large number of the Ephesian and Roman Christians came from
   Phrygia. The names which are shown oftenest upon the Phrygian monuments
   are old Christian names--names belonging specially to the Apostolic
   age, those which fill the martyrology. It is very probable that this
   prompt adoption of the doctrine of Jesus was natural to the race and to
   the former religious institutions derived from the Phrygian people.
   Apollonius of Tyana had, it is said, temples among these simple
   populations: the idea of gods clothed in human form appeared very
   natural to them. What remains of ancient Phrygia often breathes
   something of religion, of morality, of depth, of something analogous to
   Christianity. Some good workers, near to Cotia, made a vow "to the
   saintly and just God;" not far from there, another vow is addressed to
   "the holy and just God." Such an epitaph in verses of this province,
   not very classical in style, incorrect and bad in form, seems imprinted
   with a very modern sentiment of a touching kind of romance. The country
   itself differs much from the rest of Asia. It is sad, austere, sombre,
   bearing the profound imprint of old geological catastrophes, burnt, or
   rather incinerated, and agitated by frequent earthquakes.

   Pontus and Cappadocia heard the name of Jesus at about the same time.
   Christianity illuminated all Asia Minor like a sudden fire. It is
   probable that the Judæo-Christians laboured on their part to spread the
   Gospel there. John, who belonged to this party, was received in Asia as
   an Apostle with authority superior to that of Paul. The Apocalypse,
   addressed in the year 68 to the Churches of Ephesus, of Smyrna, of
   Pergamos, of Thyatira, of Sardis, of Philadelphia, and of
   Laodicæa-upon-the-Lycus, is obviously written for Judæo-Christians.
   Without doubt, between the death of Paul and the composition of the
   Apocalypse, there was in Ephesus and in Asia a second Judæo-Christian
   mission. Otherwise, if Paul had been during ten years the sole chief of
   the Churches of Asia, we should find it difficult to understand why he
   had been so quickly forgotten there. St Philip and Paphias, the glories
   of the Church of Hieropolis; Miletum, the glory of that of Sardis, were
   Judæo-Christians. Neither Paphias nor Polycrates of Ephesus quote Paul;
   the authority of John has absorbed everything, and John is for these
   Churches a great Jewish priest. The Churches of Asia in the second
   century, the Church of Laodicæa especially, are the scene of a
   controversy which attacks the vital question of Christianity, and the
   traditional party of which shows itself very distant from the ideas of
   Paul. Montanism is a kind of return towards Judaism in the heart of
   Phrygian Christianity. In other words, in Asia, as in Corinth, the
   memory of Paul, after his death, appears to have suffered during one
   hundred years a kind of eclipse. The very Churches which he had founded
   abandoned him, as one who had gone too far, so that in the second
   century Paul appears to have been discarded.

   This reaction must have set in shortly after the Apostle's death,
   perhaps even before. The second and third chapters of the Apocalypse
   are a cry of hate against Paul and his friends. This Church of Ephesus,
   which owes so much to Paul, is praised be-cause "it cannot bear with
   them which are evil," for having known how to "try them which say they
   are apostles and are not, and have found them liars," for hating "the
   deeds of the Nicolaitans, which 1 also hate," adds the celestial voice.
   The Church of Smyrna is congratulated on being the object of the
   insults of men "which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the
   synagogue of Satan." "But I have a few things against thee," says the
   Divine voice to the Church of Pergamos, "because thou hast there them
   that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
   stumbling-block before the children of Israel,--to eat things
   sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication. So hast thou also
   them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans." "Notwithstanding I
   have a few things against thee," says the same voice to the Church of
   Thyatira, "because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth
   herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
   fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. And I gave her
   space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not . . . But unto
   you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this
   doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak;
   I will put upon you none other burden." And to the Church of
   Philadelphia, "Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan,
   which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make
   them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved
   thee." Perhaps the vague reproaches addressed by the All-Seeing to the
   Churches of Sardis and Laodicæa included also some allusions to the
   great debate which broke up the Church of Jesus.

   Let us say, then, if Paul had been the only missionary of Asia, one
   could not conceive that, so soon after his death (even supposing that
   he was dead when the Apocalypse appeared), his adherents could be
   represented as in a minority in the Churches of this country; one could
   not conceive that the Church of Ephesus, of which above all he was the
   principal founder, would have bestowed upon him an insulting nickname.
   Paul, as a rule, refused to trespass on the ground of others, to preach
   to, and to work in, the Churches which he had not established. But his
   enemies did not observe the same discretion. They followed him step by
   step, and applied themselves to destroy his works by insults and
   calumny.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIV.

  SCHISMS IN THE CHURCH OF CORINTH--APOLLOS--FIRST SCANDALS.

   At the same time that he took his share in the vast propaganda which
   gained Asia to the worship of Jesus, Paul was absorbed by the gravest
   pre-occupations. The care of all the Churches that he had founded,
   weighed upon him. The Church of Corinth especially inspired him with
   the gravest disquiet. During the three or four years which had elapsed
   since the departure of the Apostle from the port of Cenchrea, trouble
   of every kind had incessantly agitated this Church. Greek levity had
   indeed produced certain phenomena which had nothing to do with the
   points that Christianity had touched.

   We have seen that Apollos, after a short stay at Ephesus, where Aquila
   and Priscilla had worked at his Christian education, had set out for
   Corinth, with urgent letters from the brethren in Asia to those of
   Achaia, The knowledge and the eloquence of this new doctor were much
   admired by the Corinthians. Apollos equalled Paul in his knowledge of
   the Scriptures, and he greatly surpassed him in his literary culture.
   The Greek which he spoke was excellent, whilst that of the Apostle was
   extremely defective. He had also, it seems, the exterior gifts of the
   orator, which failed in Paul, the imposing attitude, the easy
   eloquence. What is quite certain is, that at Corinth he had remarkable
   success. His arguments with the Jews upon the question of knowing if
   Jesus was the Messiah, were regarded as very strong, and he made many
   conversions.

   Apollos and St Paul appeared, among the new sect, in different aspects.
   They were the only well-instructed Jews in the Jewish manner who had
   embraced the doctrine of Jesus. But they came from different schools.
   Paul came from the Pharisaism of Jerusalem, corrected by the liberal
   tendencies of Gamaliel. Apollos came from the Judæo-Hellenic school of
   Alexandria: such things we know by Philo; perhaps he was already
   instructed in the theories of the logos, and was the introducer of
   these theories into Christian theology. Paul had the kind of feverish
   ardour, the intense fanaticism, which characterises the Jew of
   Palestine. Natures like that of Paul only change once in their life;
   the direction of their fanaticism once found, they press on without
   ever deviating or examining anything. Apollos, more curious and more
   critical, was ready to inquire into everything. He was a man of talent
   rather than an Apostle. But everything makes one believe that he joined
   to this talent great sincerity, and that he was a very affectionate
   man. At the time of his arrival at Corinth he had not seen St Paul. It
   was only by Aquila and Priscilla that he knew the Apostle of whom soon,
   without wishing it, he was going to be the rival.

   Among the light-hearted and brilliant populations of the shores of the
   Mediterranean, factions, parties, divisions are a social necessity.
   Life without that appears tedious. These people are bent on procuring
   for themselves the satisfaction of hating and of loving, of excitement,
   of jealousy, of triumphing over an opponent, even in the most trivial
   matters. The object of the division is insignificant; it is the
   division that is wanted, and that is sought for its own sake. Personal
   questions become, in societies of this kind, all important. When two
   teachers or two doctors meet in a little town of the south, the town
   divides into two parties on the merits of each of them. The two
   preachers, the two doctors, may be warm friends; they will not prevent
   their names from becoming the signal of keen contests, the banners of
   two opposing camps.

   It was thus at Corinth. The talent of Apollos turned all heads. His
   manner was absolutely different from that of Paul. The latter charmed
   by his boldness, his passion, the keen impression of his ardent soul;
   Apollos by his speech, which was elegant, correct, and assured. Some
   people, who did not greatly love Paul. and who perhaps did not owe
   their conversion to him, highly preferred Apollos. They treated Paul as
   an unpolished man, without education, a stranger to philosophy and
   polite learning. Apollos was their doctor; they swore only by Apollos.
   The disciples of Paul, doubtless, replied eagerly, and under-valued the
   new doctor. Although Paul and Apollos were in no wise enemies, although
   they regarded themselves as fellow-labourers, and although there was no
   difference of opinion between them, their names became thus the ensigns
   of two parties, who quarrelled, in spite of the two doctors, with quite
   sufficient vivacity. The bitterness continued, even after the departure
   of Apollos. He, in fact, fatigued perhaps by the zeal displayed for
   him, and showing himself above all these petty rivalries, left Corinth,
   and returned to Ephesus. He there found Paul, with whom he had long
   conversations, and consolidated a friendship which, without being that
   of the disciple or of the intimate friend, was one of two great souls,
   worthy of understanding and of loving each other.

   That was not the only cause of trouble. Corinth was a place much
   frequented by strangers. The port of Cenchrea saw great numbers of Jews
   and Syrians disembark every day, many of whom were already Christians,
   but of another school than that of Paul, and by no means well disposed
   to the Apostle. The emissaries of the Church of Jerusalem, whom we have
   already met at Antioch and in Galatia, upon the footsteps of Paul, had
   reached Corinth. These new-comers, great orators, full of boasting,
   fortified with letters of recommendation from the Apostles of
   Jerusalem, rose against Paul, scattered suspicions upon his honesty,
   questioned or denied his title of Apostle, and pushed their indelicacy
   so far as to maintain that Paul himself did not believe that he was
   really an Apostle, since he did not profit by the ordinary privileges
   of an Apostle. His disinterestedness was made use of against him. They
   represented him as a vain, frivolous, inconstant man, speaking and
   menacing without much effect; they reproached him with glorifying
   himself whenever opportunity offered, and of appealing to pretended
   favours from Heaven. They scoffed at his visions. They dwelt upon the
   fact that Paul had not known Jesus,--that he had not, in consequence,
   any right to speak of him.

   At the same time, they represented the Apostles of Jerusalem,
   especially James and Peter, as the true Apostles, the arch-apostles, in
   some way. The new-comers, simply because they were of Jerusalem,
   claimed a relationship with Christ after the flesh, considering the
   bond that they had with James and with those whom Christ had chosen in
   his lifetime. They held that God had established a single Doctor, who
   is Christ, who had instituted the Twelve. Proud of their circumcision
   and of their Jewish descent, they sought to impose as much as possible
   the yoke of legal observances. There was thus at Corinth, as there was
   nearly everywhere else, a "party of Peter." The division was profound.
   "I am of Paul," said some; "I am of Apollos," said others; "I am of
   Cephas," said others still. Some people, finally wishing to pose as
   superior spirits to these quarrellers, created a very spiritual title
   for themselves. They invented as the name by which they would designate
   themselves, that of the "party of Christ." When the discussion got
   warm, and when the names of Paul, Apollos, Peter (Cephas) crossed them
   in the battle, they intervened with the name of that One whom they
   forgot. "I am of Christ," said they, and, as these juvenilities did not
   exclude at the bottom a truly Christian spirit, the remembrance of
   Jesus had a powerful effect in restoring concord. The name of this
   "party of Christ" involved nevertheless something of hostility against
   the Apostle, and a certain ingratitude, since those who were opposed to
   the "party of Paul" seemed to wish to efface the trace of an
   apostleship to which it owed its knowledge of Christ.

   Contact with the Pagans caused to the young Church no small dangers.
   These dangers came from Greek philosophy, and from bad morals, which
   everywhere assailing the Church in some degree, here penetrated it and
   undermined it. We have already seen that at Athens philosophy had
   stopped the progress of the preaching of Paul. Corinth was far from
   being a town of as high culture as Athens; there were, however, many
   well-instructed men there, who received the new doctrines very ill. The
   cross, the resurrection, the approaching restoration of all things,
   appeared to them follies and absurdities. The faith of many was shaken,
   and the attempt to bring about an impossible reconciliation altered the
   gospel. The irreconcilable struggle between positive science and the
   supernatural elements of the Christian faith began. This contest will
   only finish by the complete extinction of positive science in the
   Christian world in the sixth century; the same contest will be revived
   with positive science on the threshold of modern times.

   The general immorality of Corinth produced upon the Church the most
   disastrous effects. Many Christians had not been able to break
   themselves away from loose habits, which, from being common, had almost
   ceased to be thought culpable. They talked of strange and almost
   unheard of scandals even in the assembly of the saints. The bad habits
   of the town crossed the threshold of the Church, and corrupted it. The
   Jewish rules about marriage, which all parts of the Christian Church
   proclaimed imperative and absolute, were violated: Christians even
   lived publicly with their mothers-in-law. A spirit of vanity, of
   frivolity, of disputation, of foolish pride, reigned among many. It
   seemed as if there was not another Church in the world, so much did
   this community walk in its own ways without caring for others. The
   gifts of the Spirit, speaking with tongues, prophesying, the gift of
   miracles, formerly subjects of so much edification, degenerated into
   shocking scenes. Hence arose strange disorders in the Church. The
   women, formerly so submissive, were here very bold, almost claiming
   equality with the men. They wished to pray aloud, to prophesy in the
   Church, and that without a veil, their long hair disordered, making the
   assembly witness of their ecstasies, of their drunken effeminacy, of
   their pious lubricities.

   But it was the agapes (love feasts) or mystic feasts above all which
   gave an opportunity for the most crying abuses. The scenes of rioting
   which followed the Pagan sacrifices were there reproduced. Instead of
   all things being common, each ate the part that he had brought; some
   went nearly drunk, others very hungry. The poor were covered with
   shame; the rich seemed by their abundance to insult those who had
   nothing. The remembrance of Jesus, and of the high significance which
   he had given to this repast, appeared forgotten. The corporal state of
   the Church was for the rest bad enough; there were many sick, and
   several had died. Death, in the state in which the mind of the faithful
   then was, caused much surprise and hesitation; sickness was held as a
   trial of faith or as a chastisement.

   Had four years then sufficed to take all the virtue out of the work of
   Jesus? Certainly not. There were still edifying families, in particular
   that of Stephanas, who was entirely devoted to the service of the
   Church, and was a model of evangelical activity. But the conditions of
   Christian society were already much changed. The little Church of
   saints of the latter day was thrown into a corrupted, frivolous world
   very little given to mysticism. There were already bad Christians. The
   time was gone by when Ananias and Sapphira were struck dead for having
   kept back some little property. The sacred feast of Jesus had become a
   debauch, and the earth did not open to devour him who went out drunk
   from the table of the Lord.

   These evil tidings reached Paul one upon another, and filled him with
   sadness. The first rumours only mentioned some faults against good
   morals. Paul wrote on this subject an epistle that we no longer have.
   He therein forbade to the faithful all communication with persons whose
   life was not pure. Some ill-intentioned men affected to give to this
   order a meaning which rendered it impossible to be executed. "Are we at
   Corinth then," said they, "to have communications with irreproachable
   people only? . . . . But what is he thinking of? It is not only from
   Corinth, it is from the world that we must depart." Paul was obliged to
   revert to this order, and explain it.

   He knew the divisions which agitated the Church a little later,
   probably in April, by the brothers whom he called "them which are of
   the house of Chloe." Just at this moment he thought of leaving Ephesus.
   Some motives which we do not know detained him there for some time. He
   sent into Greece before him, with powers equal to his own, his disciple
   Timothy, accompanied by several brothers, amongst others a certain
   Erastus, probably another than the treasurer of the town of Corinth,
   who bore the same name. Although the principal object of their journey
   was Corinth, they passed through Macedonia. Paul intended to take this
   journey himself, and, according to his custom, he caused his disciples
   to precede him to announce his arrival.

   Shortly after the message of Chloe, and before Timothy and his
   companion had arrived at Corinth, new envoys from this town came to
   find Paul. These were the deacon Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus,
   three men very dear to the Apostle. Stephanas was according to the
   Apostle's expression, "the first fruits of Achaia," and since the
   departure of Aquila and Priscilla he had held the first rank in the
   community, or at least in the party of Paul. The envoys brought a
   letter asking for explanations with regard to the former epistle of
   Paul, and for solutions of divers cases of conscience, in particular
   touching marriage, the meats sacrificed to idols, spiritual exercises,
   and the gifts of the Holy Ghost. The three envoys added by word of
   mouth details of the abuses which had been introduced. The annoyance of
   the Apostle was extreme, and, regardless of consolation that the pious
   messengers gave him, he lost his temper in the presence of such
   feebleness and levity. He had fixed his departure for after Easter,
   which was probably two months later on; but he wished to pass through
   Macedonia. He could not even now be at Corinth in less than three
   months. He immediately resolved to write to the sick Church, and to
   reply to the questions they had addressed to him. As Timothy was not
   with him, he took as a secretary a disciple unknown to the others,
   named Sosthenes, and, by a delicate attention, he wished that the name
   of this disciple should figure in the subscription of the letter along
   with his own.

   He began by an appeal to concord, and, under the appearance of
   humility, by an apology for his preaching,--

   "Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of
   Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? was Paul
   crucified for you? or were ye baptised in the name of Paul? I thank God
   that I baptised none of you but Crispus and Gaius; lest any should say
   that I baptised in mine own name. And I baptised also the household of
   Stephanas: besides I know not whether I baptised any other. For Christ
   sent me not to baptise, but to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of
   words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect. For the
   preaching of the cross is to them that perish, foolishness; but unto us
   which are saved it is the power of God. For it is written, I will
   destroy the wisdom of the wise, I will bring to nothing the
   understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe?
   where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the
   wisdom of this world? For after that in the wisdom of God the world by
   wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
   save them that believe. For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks
   seek after wisdom. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
   stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which
   are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the
   wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and
   the weakness of God is stronger than men. For ye see your calling,
   brethren, how that many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
   many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the
   world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the
   world to confound them which are mighty; and base things of the world,
   and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which
   are not, to bring to nought things that are: that no flesh should glory
   in his presence. . . .

   "And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of
   speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. For I
   determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ and him
   crucified. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
   trembling. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words
   of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that
   your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
   God. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the
   wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to
   nought, but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
   wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory; which none
   of the princes of this world knew; for had they known it they would not
   have crucified the Lord of glory. But as it is written, Eye hath not
   seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
   things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath
   revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all
   things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of
   a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of
   God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not
   the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might
   know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which things also
   we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the
   Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But the
   natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are
   foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, be-cause they are
   spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet
   he himself is judged of no man. . . .

   "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as
   unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk,
   and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither
   yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among
   you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as
   men? For when one saith, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos,
   are ye not carnal? Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers
   by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? I have
   planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then neither is
   he that planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but God, that
   giveth the increase . . . For we are labourers together with God; ye
   are God's husbandry, ye are God's building. According to the grace of
   God which is given unto me, as a wise master-builder, I have laid the
   foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed
   how he buildeth thereupon. For other foundation can no man lay than
   that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. . . . Know ye not that ye are the
   temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? . . . Let no
   man deceive himself. If any among you seemeth to be wise in this world,
   let him become a fool, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of this
   world is foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in
   their own craftiness. And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the
   wise, that they are vain. Therefore let no man glory in men. For all
   things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
   life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours;
   and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's.

   "Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and
   stewards of the mysteries of God. . . . But with me it is a very small
   thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment; yea, I
   judge not mine own self . . . but he that judgeth me is the Lord. . . .
   Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
   will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
   manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have
   praise of God.

   "And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself
   and to Apollos for your sakes that no one of you be puffed up for one
   against another . . . Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned
   as kings without us: and I would to God ye did reign, that we also
   might reign with you. For I think that God hath set forth us, the
   Apostles, last, as it were, appointed to death: for we are made a
   spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for
   Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are
   strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised. Even unto this present
   hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and
   have no certain dwelling-place; and labour, working with our own hands;
   being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed,
   we entreat; we are made as the filth of the world, and are the
   offscourings of all things unto this day!

   "I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn
   you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye
   not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
   gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me. For this cause
   have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and faithful in
   the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways, which be in
   Christ, as I teach everywhere in every Church. Now some are puffed up,
   as though I would not come to you. But I will come to you shortly, if
   the Lord will, and will know, not the speech of them which are puffed
   up, but the power. For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.
   What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the
   spirit of meekness?"

   After this general apology, the Apostle approaches each of the abuses
   which had been pointed out to him, and the questions which had been put
   to him. It is for the incestuous an extreme severity.

   "It is reported commonly among you that there is fornication among you,
   and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles,
   that one should have his father's wife. And ye are puffed up, and have
   not rather mourned, that he hath done this deed might be taken away
   from you. For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
   judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so
   done this deed. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
   gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the
   flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the name of the Lord Jesus."

   There can be no doubt: it is a sentence of death that Paul pronounces.
   Terrible legends were circulated as to the effect of the
   excommunications. It is to be remembered, besides, that Paul seriously
   believed in the working of miracles. By only delivering to Satan the
   body of the blameable, he doubtless believed himself to be indulgent.

   The order that Paul had given in a preceding letter (lost) to the
   Corinthians, to avoid the shameless, had brought about mistakes. Paul
   developed his idea. The Christian has not to judge the world without,
   but to be severe only upon those who are within. A single spot on the
   purity of life ought to be sufficient to exclude one from the Christian
   society; it is forbidden so much as to eat with a delinquent. Thus it
   may seem in a convent, a congregation of pious persons, occupied in
   watching and judging each other, much more than in a church, in the
   modern sense of the word. The whole Church, in the eyes of the Apostle,
   is responsible for the faults committed within its bosom. This
   exaggeration of severity had its reason for its existence in ancient
   society, which sinned in so many other ways. But we feel that such an
   idea of sanctity is narrow-minded, illiberal, contrary to the morality
   of him whom we formerly called "a good fellow;" a morality whose
   fundamental principle is to busy oneself as little as possible with
   other people's conduct. The question is only to know if society can
   exist without censuring bad manners, and if the future will not bring
   back something analogous to the ecclesiastical discipline that modern
   liberalism has so jealously suppressed.

   The ideal type of moral perfection, according to Paul, is a man,
   gentle, honest, chaste, sober, charitable, unfettered by riches.
   Humility of condition and poverty are almost necessary for one who
   would be a Christian. The words "miser, greedy one, thief," are nearly
   synonymous; at least the vices which they designate are liable to the
   same reproach. The antipathy of this little world for the great profane
   society was strange. Paul, following in that the Jewish tradition,
   reproves as an act unworthy of the faithful any reference to the courts
   of law.

   "Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the
   unjust, and not before the saints? Do ye not know that the saints shall
   judge the world? and if the world be judged by you, are ye unworthy to
   judge the smallest matters? . . . Know ye not that we shall judge
   angels? How much more things that pertain to this life? If then ye have
   judgments of things pertaining to the life, set them to judge who are
   least esteemed in this church. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that
   there is not a wise man among you? No, not one that shall be able to
   judge between his brethren? But brother goeth to law with brother, and
   that before the unbelievers. Now therefore there is utterly a fault
   among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather
   take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?
   Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren!"

   The relations of the sexes were a matter of the gravest difficulty. The
   Apostle was occupied with them constantly when he wrote to the
   Corinthians. The coldness of Paul gives to his morality something
   sensible, but at the same time monastic and narrow. The sexual
   attraction is in his eyes an evil, a shame. Since it cannot be
   suppressed, it must be regulated. Nature, for Saint Paul, is evil, and
   grace consists in contradicting and mastering it. He has, nevertheless,
   beautiful expressions as to the respect that man owes to his body: God
   will raise it, the bodies of the faithful are the temples of the Holy
   Ghost, the members of Christ. What a crime then it is to take the
   members of Christ to make them the members of a harlot! Absolute
   chastity is most valuable, virginity is the perfect state; marriage has
   been established as a lesser evil. But, from the time when it is
   contracted, the two parties have equal rights over each other. The
   interruption of conjugal relations ought only to be admitted for a time
   and in view of religious duties. Divorce is forbidden, save in the case
   of mixed marriages, where the unbeliever first retires.

   Marriages contracted between Christians and unbelievers may be
   continued. "For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
   the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband," in the same manner
   that the children are sanctified by the parents. One can, moreover,
   hope that the faithful spouse will convert the unfaithful. But new
   marriages can only be between Christians. All these questions will
   present themselves under the most singular light, since the end of the
   world was believed to be at hand. In the state of crisis which existed,
   pregnancy and the begetting of children appeared anomalies. There is
   little marrying in the sect, and one of the most untoward consequences
   for those who had associated these was the impossibility of
   establishing their daughters. Many murmured, finding that thing
   unbecoming and contrary to custom. To prevent greater evils, and out of
   regard for the fathers of families, who had on their hands marriageable
   daughters, Paul permitted marriage, but he did not conceal the contempt
   and disgust which he had for that estate, which he found disagreeable,
   full of trouble, and humiliating.

   "The time is short; it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as
   though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and
   they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as
   though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing
   it, for the fashion of this world passeth away. But I would have you
   without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things that
   belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married
   careth for the things of the world, how he may please his wife. There
   is a difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman
   careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body
   and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of the
   world, how she may please her husband. And this I speak for your own
   profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is
   comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction."

   Religious exaltation always produces such sentiments. Orthodox Judaism,
   which, however, showed itself opposed to celibacy, and which treated
   marriage as a duty, had doctors who reasoned like Paul. "Why should I
   marry?" said Rabbi ben Azai. "I am in love with the Law; the human race
   can be perpetuated by others." Later on, as will appear, Paul expressed
   upon this subject much juster thoughts, and saw in the union of man and
   wife a symbol of the love of Christ for his Church; he placed as the
   supreme law of marriage the love of the man on the one hand, and the
   submission of the woman on the other; he recalled the admirable chapter
   of Genesis in which the mysterious attraction of the two sexes is
   explained by a philosophical fable of a divine beauty.

   The question of the meats offered to idols is resolved by St Paul with
   great good sense. The Judæo-Christians held that total abstinence from
   such meats was a duty, and it appears that it had been agreed at the
   Council of Jerusalem that they should be generally forbidden. Paul has
   broader views. According to him, the circumstance of a piece of meat
   having been part of a sacrificed beast is insignificant. The false gods
   being nothing, the meat which is offered to them is not defiled. Any
   meat exposed in the market may be bought freely, without there being
   any need for asking questions as to the origin of each morsel. A
   reserve, however, ought to be made: there are scrupulous consciences
   which take that for idolatry; and the enlightened man ought to be
   guided not only by principle, but also by charity. He ought to forbid
   himself the things which are permitted, if weak brethren are
   scandalised by it. Knowledge exalts, but charity edifies. "All things
   are lawful unto you, but all things are not expedient; but all this
   edify not. Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth." It
   is one of the favourite ideas of Paul, and the explanation of several
   episodes of his life, in which one sees him subdue himself out of
   regard for timorous persons, to observances which he did not consider
   of the least value. "If the meat that I eat," says he, "innocent as it
   is, scandalises my brother, I will renounce eating it for ever."

   Some faithful people, however, went a little further. Constrained by
   family relationships, they took part in the festivities which followed
   the sacrifices, and which took place in the temples. Paul blames this
   custom, and, according to a method of reasoning familiar to him, starts
   on a different principle from that which he had just before admitted.
   The gods of the nations are devils; to participate in their sacrifices,
   is to have commerce with devils. One cannot at the same time
   participate at the table of the Lord and at the table of devils, or
   drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils. The feasts which are
   held in the houses are not of the same importance: it is not necessary
   to go there, nor to disquiet oneself about the providing of meats; if
   you are told that any meat has been sacrificed to the gods, from a
   scandal which must result, abstain from it. In general, avoid that
   which can be a stumbling-block for the Jew, the Pagan, the Christian;
   subordinate in practice one's own liberty to that of others, all the
   while maintaining one's rights; in everything seek to please all.

   "Follow my example," he continues. "Am I not an apostle? am I not free?
   have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord?
   If I be not an apostle unto others, yet, doubtless, I am to you: for
   the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord. Mine answer to them
   that do examine me is this, Have we not power to eat and to drink? Have
   we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles,
   and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? Or I only and Barnabas,
   have not we power to forbear working? Who goeth a warfare anytime at
   his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit
   thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the
   flock? . . . If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
   thing that ye shall reap your carnal things? If others be partakers of
   this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless, we have not used
   this power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of
   Christ. . . . What is my reward then? Verily, that, when I preach the
   gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse
   not my power in the gospel. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
   might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law;
   to them that are without law, as without law (being not without law to
   God, but under the law to Christ), that I might gain them that are
   without law. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak:
   I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
   some. . . . Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one
   receiveth the prize. So run, that ye may obtain. And every man that
   striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to
   obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible. I therefore so
   run, not as uncertainly; so fight I; not as one that beateth the air:
   but I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by
   any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a
   castaway."

   As for the question of the place of women in the church, we can easily
   see that the Apostle will decide it with his unyielding harshness. He
   blames the bold efforts of the Corinthian women, and recalls them to
   the practice of other communities. Women ought not to speak or even ask
   questions in church. The gift of tongues is not for them. They ought to
   be submissive to their husbands. If they wish to know anything, let
   them ask their husbands at home. It is also shameful for a woman to
   appear without a veil in church, unless she be shorn or shaven. The
   veil is, moreover, necessary "because of the angels." It was supposed
   that the angels present at divine service are capable of being tempted
   by the sight of the hair of women, or at least of being distracted by
   this sight from their duty, which is to bear to God the prayers of the
   saints. "The head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is
   the man; and the head of Christ is God. . . . For a man indeed ought
   not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God;
   but the woman is the glory of the man. For the man is not of the woman;
   but the woman of the man . . . but all things of God."

   The related observations on the "Supper of the Lord" have an immense
   historical interest. This feast became more and more the essential part
   of Christian worship. More and more also is spread abroad the idea that
   Jesus himself was eating there. That, without doubt, was metaphorical;
   but the metaphor in the Christian language of this time was not openly
   distinct from the reality. In every case this sacrament was in a great
   degree a sacrament of union and of love.

   "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
   blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
   the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, and one body: for
   we are all partakers of that one bread. Behold Israel after the flesh;
   are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar? . . .
   For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you,
   That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread:
   And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is
   my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.' After
   the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This
   cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink
   it, in remembrance of me.' For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
   this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come. Wherefore whosoever
   shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall
   be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine
   himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For
   he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation
   to himself, not discerning the Lord's body."

   The penalty incurred by not acknowledging the high sanctity of the
   Supper of the Lord is not eternal damnation--there are temporal trials,
   or even death--death being often an expiation which saves the soul.
   "There are perhaps," adds the Apostle, "among you many feeble men,
   sick, and numerous deaths. If we judge ourselves, we shall not be
   judged. But the judgments of the Lord are corrections which preserve us
   from being judged with the world," that is to say, condemned in
   eternity. For the moment the Apostle limits himself to ordaining that
   those who come to the agapes shall wait for each other, that they must
   eat at home to satisfy their appetite, and that they must guard the
   mystical significance of the Lord's Supper. He will "set the rest in
   order" when he comes to them.

   The Apostle then traces the theory of the manifestations of the Spirit.
   Under the badly-defining names of "gifts," "services" (offices), and
   "powers," he arranges thirteen functions, constituting all the
   hierarchy and all the forms of supernatural activity. Three functions
   are openly designated and subordinated to each other. They are, 1st,
   the function of an apostle; 2d, that of a prophet; 3d, that of a
   teacher. Then come gifts, services, or powers which, without conferring
   so elevated a permanent character, serve for perpetual manifestations
   of the Spirit. These are, 1st, the word of wisdom; 2d, the word of
   knowledge; 3d, faith; 4th, the gifts of healing; 5th, the power of
   working miracles; 6th, the discerning of spirits; 7th, the gift of
   speaking in divers kinds of tongues; 8th, the interpretations of
   tongues thus spoken; 9th, the works of charity; 10th, the cares of
   administration. All these functions are good, useful, necessary; they
   ought neither to undervalue nor to envy each other. All have the same
   source. All the "gifts" come from the Holy Ghost, all the "services"
   come out from Christ, all the "powers" come from God. The body has
   several members, and yet is one; the division of functions is necessary
   in the Church as in the body. These functions can no more be divided
   from each other than the eye can be divided from the hand, or the head
   from the feet. All jealousy between them is therefore misplaced.
   Without doubt they are not equal in dignity, but they are justly the
   most feeble members which are the most necessary; they are the feeblest
   members which are the most honoured, the most carefully surrounded, God
   having wished to establish in this way a compensation, so that there
   might be neither schism nor jealousy in the body. The members ought to
   be careful of each other; if one suffers, all suffer. The advantages
   and the glory of one are the advantages and the glory of the other. To
   what good besides are these rivalries? There is a way open to all, the
   gift which has an immense superiority over all others.

   Borne along by a truly prophetical inspiration beyond the confused
   ideas and blundering which he had just exposed, Paul then wrote this
   admirable passage, the only one in all Christian literature which can
   be compared to the discourses of Jesus.

   "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
   charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And
   though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and
   all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
   mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all
   my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and
   have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and
   is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not
   puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not
   easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
   rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things,
   hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charity never faileth; but
   whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues,
   they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For
   we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is
   perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I
   was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as
   a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now
   we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in
   part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. And now abideth
   faith, hope, and charity, these three; but the greatest of these is
   charity."

   Versed in experimental psychology, Paul went a little further. He had
   said,--"Brethren, leave illusions. These inarticulate stammerings,
   these ecstasies, these miracles, are the dreams of your infancy. That
   which is not visionary--that which is eternal--is what I have just
   preached to you." But then if he had not been of his time, he would not
   have done what he did. Is it not already a great deal to have indicated
   this capital distinction of eternal religious truths, which are
   infallible, and of those which, like the dreams of the first age, come
   to nought? Has he not done enough for immortality by having written
   this sentence, "The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life?" Woe to
   him who would stop on the surface, and who, for the sake of two or
   three visionary gifts, would forget that in this strange
   enumeration--among the diaconies and the charismata of the primitive
   Church, are the care of those who suffer, the administration of
   charitable funds, reciprocal assistance! Paul enumerates these duties
   in the last place, and as humble things. But his piercing glance can
   still read the truth here. "Take care," says he, "that our humblest
   members are justly the most honoured." Prophets, speakers with tongues,
   doctors, you will pass. Deacons, devoted widows, administrators of the
   good of the Church, you will remain: you build for eternity."

   In the laying down of rules relative to spiritual exercises, Paul shows
   his practical spirit. He puts preaching highly above the gift of
   tongues. Without absolutely denying the reality of the gift of tongues,
   he makes on this subject reflections which are equivalent to blaming
   it. The gift of tongues does not speak to men; it speaks to God. No one
   can understand it; it only edifies him who is speaking. Preaching, on
   the contrary, serves for the edification and consolation of all. The
   gift of tongues is only good if it be interpreted--that is to say, if
   other faithful people specially endowed for that intervene, and know
   that they hold the sense of it. By itself, it is like indistinct music;
   we hear the sound of the flute or cithara, but know not the piece that
   these instruments are playing. It is like a badly-blown trumpet: it
   makes a great noise, but as it says nothing clear, nobody obeys the
   uncertain signal or prepares for the combat. If the tongue does not
   give clearly articulated sounds, it does but beat the air; a discourse
   in a tongue that no one understands has no meaning. Thus much of the
   gift of tongues is without interpretation. Moreover, the gift of
   tongues in itself is barren; the meaning of it remains without fruit.

   "Else when thou shalt bless with the Spirit, how shall he that
   occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks,
   seeing he understandest not what thou sayest? For thou verily givest
   thanks well, but the other is not edified. I thank my God I speak with
   tongues more than ye all; yet in the Church I had rather speak five
   words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others
   also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Brethren, be not
   children in understanding; howbeit in malice be ye children, but in
   understanding be men. . . . If therefore the whole Church be come
   together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in
   those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are
   mad? But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or
   one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all; and thus
   are the secrets of the heart made manifest; and so falling down on his
   face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. How
   is it then, brethren? When ye come together, every one of you hath a
   psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an
   interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying. If any man speak
   in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and
   that by course; and let one interpret. But if there be no interpreter,
   let him keep silence in the Church, and let him speak to himself and to
   God. Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. If
   anything be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his
   peace. For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn and all
   may be comforted. And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the
   prophets. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in
   all churches of the saints. . . . Wherefore, brethren, covet to
   prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues. Let all things be done
   decently and in order."

   Some strange noises, which were called the gift of tongues, and in
   which were mixed Greek, Syriac, the words anathema maran atha, the
   names of "Jesus, of Lord," greatly embarrassed simple men. Paul, when
   consulted on this subject, practised what was called "the discerning of
   spirits," and to distinguish in this confused jargon what might come
   from the spirit and what might not.

   The fundamental dogma of the primitive Church, the resurrection, and
   the approaching end of the world, hold a considerable place in this
   epistle. The Apostle returns to it eight or nine different times. The
   renewal will be by fire. The saints will be the judges of the world,
   even of the angels. The resurrection, which of all Christian dogmas was
   the most repugnant to the Greek spirit, is the object of particular
   attention. Many, whilst admitting the resurrection of Jesus, his
   approaching appearance, and the restoration that he was about to
   accomplish, did not believe in the resurrection of the dead. When there
   was a death in the community, it was to them a scandal and an
   embarrassment. Paul had no difficulty in showing them their illogical
   position: "If the dead be not raised, neither is Christ raised any the
   more--all hope is vain." Christians have much more cause to complain
   than other men; the truly wise are those who say, "Let us eat and
   drink, for to-morrow we die." The resurrection of Jesus is the
   guarantee of the resurrection of all. Jesus has made the first step,
   his disciples will follow him in the day of his glorious manifestation.
   Then will begin the reign of Christ: all other power but his will be
   destroyed. Death will be the last enemy that he will vanquish: all will
   be submitted to him, God alone excepted, who has submitted all things
   to him. The Son, in fact, will be eager to render homage to God, and to
   submit himself to him, that God may be all in all.

   "But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body
   do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except
   it die: And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that
   shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other
   grain: but God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every
   seed his own body. All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one
   kind of flesh of man, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and
   another of birds. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies
   terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of
   the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another
   gory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star
   differeth from another in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
   dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is
   sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is
   raised in power: It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
   body. . . . Behold, I shew you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but
   we shall be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
   last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
   incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put
   on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this
   corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
   put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
   written, Death is swallowed up in victory. death, where is thy sting? O
   grave, where is thy victory? . . . But thanks be to God, which giveth
   us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."

   Alas, the Christ came not. All died one after another. Paul, who was
   believed to be one of those who would live till near the great
   appearance, died in his turn. We shall see how neither faith nor hope
   stopped for that. No experience, however desolating it may be, appears
   decisive to humanity, when it is concerned with these sacred dogmas in
   which it finds, not without reason, its consolation and joy. It is easy
   for us to find that after a time that these hopes were exaggerated; it
   were well, nevertheless, that those who have partaken of them had not
   been so clear sighted. Paul tells us candidly that, if he had not
   counted upon the resurrection, he would have led the life of a
   peaceable citizen, wholly occupied with his vulgar pleasures. Some
   sages of the first order--Marcus Aurelius, Spinoza, for example--have
   gone further, and have practised the highest virtue without hope of
   reward. But the crowd is never heroic. It has needed a generation of
   men persuaded that they would not die, it has needed the attraction of
   an immense immediate reward, to draw from man that enormous sum of
   devotion and of sacrifice which has founded Christianity. The great
   chimera of the approaching kingdom of God has been thus the maternal
   and creative idea of the new religion. We shall soon assist at the
   transformation that the necessity of things will bring about in this
   belief. About the years 54-58 it had attained its highest degree of
   intensity. All the letters of Paul written about this time are, so to
   speak, impregnated with it. The two Syriac words Maran atha--"The Lord
   is at hand," were the passwords amongst Christians,--the lively and
   short expression that they used to each other to encourage one another
   in their hopes
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XV.

  CONTINUATION OF THE THIRD JOURNEY OF PAUL--THE GREAT CONTRIBUTION--DEPARTURE
  FROM EPHESUS.

   Paul, according to his habit, added to the end of the letter,--

   "The salutation of me, Paul, with mine own hand. If any man love not
   the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema. Maran atha."

   He confided his letter to Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, who had
   brought that of the Corinthians to him. Paul thought the three deputies
   would reach Corinth in nearly the same time as Timothy. He feared that
   the youth and timidity of his disciple were badly received in the
   mocking society of Corinth, and that they did not accord him enough
   authority. The Apostle recommended them in the most pressing way to
   treat Timothy as himself, and expressed a desire to see him again as
   soon as possible. He did not wish to leave Ephesus without his valuable
   companion, whose presence had become a sort of necessity to him.

   Paul strongly urged Apollos to join Stephanas, and to return to
   Corinth, but Apollos wished rather to postpone his departure. From this
   moment we lose sight of him. Tradition, however, continues to regard
   him as a disciple of Paul. It is probable, in truth, that he continued
   his apostolic career, putting to the service of the Christian doctrine
   his Jewish erudition and his elegant style.

   Paul, however, revolved in his mind boundless projects, in which he
   believed, according to his constant habit, that he saw the dictates of
   the Spirit. There happened to Paul, what often happens to persons
   accustomed to a species of activity. He could not leave what had been
   the occupation of his life. Travelling had become necessary to him: he
   sought occasions for it. He wished to revisit Macedonia, Achaia, then
   to visit Jerusalem anew, then to set out to try new missions in
   countries farther off, and not yet reached by the faith, such as Italy
   and Spain. The idea of going to Rome tormented him. "I must see Rome,"
   he often said. He foresaw that the centre of Christianity would one day
   be there, or at least that decisive events would happen there. The
   journey to Jerusalem was another project which greatly pre-occupied him
   far more than a year.

   To calm the jealous feelings of the Church of Jerusalem, and to fulfil
   one of the conditions of the peace which was signed at the time of the
   interview of the year 51, Paul had prepared a great contribution in the
   Churches of Asia Minor and of Greece. We have already seen that one of
   the bonds which marked the dependence of the provincial Churches on
   those of Judlea, was the obligation of alms. The Church of Jerusalem,
   partly through the fault of those who composed it, was always in
   distress. Mendicants abounded there. In the earliest ages, the leading
   characteristic of Jewish society was that there was neither poverty nor
   riches. For two or three centuries, there had been at Jerusalem rich,
   and consequently poor, people. The true Jew, turning his back on
   Gentile civilisation, became day by day more destitute of resources.
   The public works of Agrippa II. had filled the town with starving
   masons; buildings were demolished merely for the sake of not leaving
   thousands of workmen without work. The Apostles and their companions
   suffered like every one else by this state of things. It was necessary
   that the suffering Churches, active, laborious, should save these holy
   men from dying of hunger. Whilst supporting impatiently the pretensions
   of the brethren of Judæa, their supremacy and their titles of nobility
   were not doubted in the provinces. Paul had for them the greatest
   regard. "You are their debtors," said he to his faithful ones; "for if
   the Gentiles have been made partakers of spiritual things with the
   saints of Judæa, their duty is all the more to minister to them in
   carnal things." It was, moreover, an imitation of the custom which had
   for a long time obtained among the Jews of all parts of the world, to
   send contributions to Jerusalem. Paul thought a large alms, which he
   would himself carry to the Apostles, would cause him to be much better
   received by the old college who pardoned him with so much reluctance
   for doing great things without their assistance, and would be, in the
   eyes of these hungry nobles, the best mark of submission. How could
   they treat as schismatics and rebels those who gave such substantial
   proofs of generosity, and of fraternal and respectful sentiment?

   Paul began the gathering about the year 56. He wrote of it first to the
   Corinthians, then to the Galatians, and without doubt to other
   Churches. He returned to it in his new letter to the Corinthians. There
   were in the Churches of Asia Minor and Greece people in easy
   circumstances, but none with large for-tunes. Paul knew the economical
   habits of the world in which he had lived. The insistence with which he
   presents his maintenance as a heavy charge with which he was not
   desirous of burdening the Churches, proves that he himself suffered
   from the petty embarrassments of poor men, obliged to be careful about
   trifles. He thought that if, in the Churches of Greece, they waited his
   arrival before collecting the alms, the business would be a failure. He
   still wished each one on Sunday to put aside an amount, proportioned to
   his means, for this pious end. This little treasure of charity thus
   constantly added to, must wait his arrival. Then, the Churches would
   elect deputies, whom Paul would send with letters of recommendation to
   bear the offering to Jerusalem. Perhaps even, if the result was worth
   the trouble, Paul would go in person, and in that case the deputies
   would accompany him. So much honour, and so much happiness, to go to
   Jerusalem, to travel in company with Paul, greatly agitated the
   believers. An emulation in well-doing, skilfully encouraged by the
   great master in the art of the direction of souls, kept everybody on
   the alert. This contribution was, during some months, the thought which
   sustained life, and made all hearts to beat.

   Timothy soon returned to Ephesus, as Paul had desired him. He brought
   the news later than that of the departure of Stephanas; but there is
   reason to believe that he had left the town before Stephanas went there
   on his return; for it is by Titus that Paul learnt later the effect
   that his new letter had produced. The situation at Corinth was always
   very strained. Paul modified his projects, resolved to touch first at
   Corinth, to remain there a little time, afterwards to accomplish his
   journey from Macedonia, to make a second and longer sojourn at Corinth,
   and afterwards, resuming his first plan, to set out for Jerusalem,
   accompanied by Corinthian deputies. He believed that he ought to inform
   the Church of Corinth immediately of his change of resolution. He
   charged Titus with a message and the most delicate communications for
   the rebellious Church. The disciple was at the same time to press for
   the realisation of the contribution that Paul had ordered. Titus, it
   would seem, at first declined; he feared, like Timothy, the giddy and
   inconsiderate temper of the men of Corinth. Paul reassured him,--told
   him what he thought of the qualities of the Corinthians, extenuated
   their faults, dared to promise him a warm reception. He gave him for a
   companion a "brother" whose name is not known to us. Paul was near the
   last days of his stay at Ephesus; nevertheless it was agreed that he
   should wait in this town for the return of Titus.

   But new trials had just compelled him anew to modify his designs. Few
   periods in the life of Paul were so troubled as this. For the first
   time he found the limit overrun, and avowed that all his strength had
   departed. Jews, Pagans, Christians, hostile to his supremacy, appeared
   to be sworn together against him. The situation of the Church of
   Corinth gave him a kind of fever; he sent messenger after messenger to
   it; he daily changed his resolution with regard to it. Sickness,
   probably, befell him there: he believed he was about to die. A riot
   which had taken place at Ephesus still further complicated the
   situation, and obliged him to set out without awaiting the return of
   Titus.

   The temple of Diana offered a terrible obstacle to the preaching of the
   new cult. This gigantic establishment, one of the wonders of the world,
   was the life and reason for existence of the entire town, by its
   colossal riches, by the number of strangers whom it attracted, by the
   privileges and celebrity which it conferred upon the city, by the
   splendid festivals of which it was the occasion, by the trades which it
   maintained. Superstition had here the most sure of guarantees, that of
   material interest, never so happy as when it can disguise itself under
   the pretext of religion.

   One of the industries of the town of Ephesus was that of the
   silversmiths, who made little shrines of Diana. Strangers carried away
   with them these objects, which, placed afterwards upon their tables or
   in the interior of their houses, represented to them the celebrated
   sanctuary. A great number of craftsmen were employed in this work. Like
   all manufacturers living by the piety of pilgrims, these workmen were
   very fanatical. To preach a religion opposed to that which had enriched
   them, appeared to them a piece of frightful sacrilege; it was as if in
   our days one were to declaim against the worship of the Virgin at
   Fourvières or La Salette. One of the formulas in which were summed up
   the new doctrine was: "The gods made with hands are not gods." This
   doctrine had become sufficiently public to cause anxiety to the
   silversmiths. Their chief, named Demetrius, excited them to a violent
   manifestation, maintaining that he himself acted before all for the
   honour of the temple that Asia and the whole world worshipped. The
   workmen rushed into the streets, crying, "Great is Diana of the
   Ephesians!" and in a short time all the town was filled with confusion.

   The crowd was borne along to the theatre, the ordinary place of
   assembly. The theatre of Ephesus, whose immense outline, despoiled of
   nearly all its completeness--still to be seen on the flanks of Mount
   Prion--was perhaps the greatest in the world. It is estimated that it
   must have held at least 56,000 people. As the immense seats were formed
   in the side of the hill, an enormous crowd could in an instant spread
   itself over from the top and completely inundate it. The lower part of
   the theatre, moreover, was surrounded by colonnades and open porticoes;
   and being in the neighbourhood of the forum, of the market, of several
   gymnasia, the whole place was always open. The tumult was at its height
   in an instant. Two Christians of Thessalonica, Caius and Aristarchus,
   who had joined Paul at Ephesus, and were attached to him as companions,
   were in the hands of the rioters. Great was the trouble among the
   Christians. Paul wished to enter into the theatre and harangue the
   people; his disciples begged him to do nothing of the kind. Some of the
   rulers who knew him also persuaded him not to commit such an
   imprudence. The most diverse cries were heard in the theatre; the
   majority did not know why they had come. There were many Jews, who put
   forward a certain Alexander, who made a sign with his hand demanding
   silence; but when they recognised him as a Jew, the noise was
   redoubled; during two hours, no other cry was heard but "Great is Diana
   of the Ephesians!" It was with difficulty that the chancellor of the
   town could make them listen to him. He represented the honour of the
   great Diana as beyond all reproach; besought Demetrius and his workmen
   to have a trial of those who he believed had displeased them, begged
   everybody to return to the legal ways, and showed the consequences that
   such seditious movements might bring upon the town, if they could not
   justify themselves in the eyes of the Roman authority. The crowd
   dispersed. Paul, who had fixed his departure some days from that time,
   did not wish to prolong this perilous situation. tie resolved to take
   his departure as soon as possible.

   In terms of the letter which he had sent by Titus to the Christians of
   Corinth, Paul would first of all embark for that town. But he was
   cruelly perplexed: the anxieties that he had because of Achaia rendered
   him undecided. At the last moment, he again changed his route. The time
   did not appear to him opportune for a visit to Corinth; there was much
   discontent, and a disposition to proceed with vigour. Perhaps his
   presence might provoke revolt and schism. He did not know what effect
   his letter had produced, and he was very anxious about it. He believed
   himself, moreover, to be stronger at a distance than near at hand: his
   presence impressed people very little; his letters, on the contrary,
   were his triumph. In general, men who have a certain timidity prefer to
   write rather than speak. He preferred then not to go to Corinth until
   he had seen Titus again, but rather to write anew to the indocile
   Church. Thinking that severity is exercised better at a distance, he
   hoped that his new letter would bring his adversaries to a better state
   of mind. The Apostle resumed, therefore, his former plan of travelling.
   He summoned the faithful, addressed his farewells to them, gave orders
   that, when Titus should arrive, he should be sent to Troas, and set out
   for Macedonia, accompanied by Timothy. Perhaps he took, as assistants
   from thence, the two deputies of Ephesus, Tychicus and Trophimus,
   charged to bear to Jerusalem the offerings of Asia. This must have been
   in the month of June in the year 57. Paul's sojourn at Ephesus had
   lasted three years.

   During so long an apostleship, he had had time to give to this Church a
   strength proof against all trials. Ephesus will be henceforth one of
   the metropolitan cities of Christianity, and the place in which its
   most important transformations will occur. It was necessary, moreover,
   that this Church should be exclusively Pauline, like the Churches of
   Macedonia, and the Church of Corinth. There were those who worked
   against him at Ephesus, enemies there were for certain, and in ten
   years we shall see the Church of Ephesus cited as a model for having
   known how to do justice to "those who call themselves apostles without
   being so," for having unmasked their imposture, and for the vigorous
   hate that it bore to the "Nicolaitans," that is to say, to the
   disciples of Paul. The Judæo-Christian party existed without doubt at
   Ephesus from the first year.

   Aquila and Priscilla, the assistants of Paul, continued after his
   departure to be the centre of the Church. Their house, in which the
   Apostle had dwelt, was the place of meeting of all that was most pious
   and zealous. Paul was pleased to celebrate every-where the merits of
   this respectable couple, to whom he recognised that he owed his life.
   All the Churches of Paul had for them a great veneration. Epænetus, the
   first Ephesian whom they converted, came after them; then a certain
   Mary, who appears to have been a deaconess, an active and devoted
   woman; then Urbane, whom Paul names his co-operator; then Apelles, to
   whom Paul gives the title "approved in Christ;" then Rufus, "chosen in
   the Lord," who had an aged mother, whom the Apostle, out of respect,
   called "My mother." Besides Mary, other women, true sisters of charity,
   were vowed to the service of the faithful. These were Tryphena and
   Tryphosa, "who labour in the Lord;" then Persis, particularly dear to
   Paul, and who had valiantly worked with him. There were still Ampliatus
   or Amplias, the Jew Herodion, Stachys, beloved by Paul; a Church or
   conventicle composed of Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes,
   and many others; another Church or a little society composed of
   Philologus and Julia, of Nereus and "his sister" (that is to say,
   probably his wife), of Olympas, and of several others. Two great houses
   of Ephesus, those of Aristobulus and of Narcissus, counted among their
   slaves several of the faithful. Finally, two Ephesians, Tychicus and
   Trophimus, were attached to the Apostle, and were henceforth in the
   number of his companions. Andronicus and Junia were also at this time
   at Ephesus. These were members of the primitive Church of Jerusalem; St
   Paul had the greatest respect for them "because they had been in Christ
   before him." He calls them "of note among the Apostles." It is a new
   detail that in the trial that Paul calls "his battle against the
   beasts," they probably had shared of his prison.

   At a much more perilous time appeared Artemas, who is said to have been
   a companion of Paul; Alexander the coppersmith, Phygellus Hermogenus,
   who seems to have left an evil reputation behind him,--provoked schisms
   or excommunications, and to have been considered as traitors in the
   school of Paul; Onesiphorus and his house, who, on the contrary, would
   have shown themselves more than once full of love and devotion towards
   the Apostle.

   Several of the names which have just been enumerated are the names of
   slaves; thus much we see in their peculiar designations, in which is
   the ironical emphasis which make them so like to the grotesque names
   that are given to negroes in the colonies. It is not improbable that
   there were already among the Christians many persons of servile
   condition. Slavery, in many cases, did not induce so complete an
   attachment to the master's house as our modern domesticity. The slaves
   of certain categories were free to mix together, to associate to a
   certain extent, to form brotherhoods, a kind of tontine or club, in
   view of their funerals. It is not impossible that several of the pious
   men and women who had given themselves up to the service of the Church
   were slaves, and that the hours that they gave to the diaconate were
   those that their masters allowed them. At the time in which these
   events happened, the servile class comprised many polished, resigned,
   virtuous, well-instructed persons. The highest lessons on morality came
   from slaves; Epictetus passed a great part of his life in servitude.
   The Stoics, the sages, spoke as did St Paul to the slave: "Remain as
   thou art; do not think of setting thyself free." It is not necessary to
   judge of the lower classes in the Greek towns by our populace of the
   same age, dull, brutal, sensual, incapable of distinction. This
   refined, delicate, polished something that one feels in the relations
   of the first Christians is a tradition of Greek elegance. The humble
   workmen of Ephesus, whom St Paul salutes with so much cordiality, were
   without doubt persons of a gentle nature, with a touching honesty,
   relieved by excellent manners, and by the peculiar charm that there is
   in the civility of the poorer classes. Their serenity of soul, their
   content, were perpetual sermons. "See how these Christians love one
   another!" was the exclamation of the Pagans, surprised at this innocent
   and tranquil air, at this profound and attractive gaiety. After the
   preaching of Jesus, it is the divine work of Christianity; it is his
   second miracle,--a miracle drawn truly from the living forces of
   humanity, and of that in it which is best and most holy.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVL

  CONTINUATION OF THE THIRD JOURNEY OF PAUL--SECOND STAY OF PAUL IN MACEDONIA.

   Paul, on leaving Ephesus, probably went by land, for at least part of
   the way. He had calculated, in fact, that Titus, going by sea from
   Ephesus to Troas would have reached this latter point before him. This
   calculation was not verified. Arrived at Troas, he did not meet Titus
   there, which caused him a lively concern. Paul had already passed by
   Troas; but it does not appear that he had preached there. This time he
   found very favourable dispositions. "A door was opened unto me of the
   Lord." Troas was a Latin town in the style of Antioch in Pisidia and of
   Philippi. A certain Carpus welcomed the Apostle, and lodged him at his
   house; Paul employed the days during which he was waiting for Titus in
   founding a Church. He succeeded admirably, for, some days afterwards, a
   company of the faithful accompanied him to the shore, when he set out
   for Macedonia. It was about five years since he had embarked from the
   same port, at the demand of a Macedonian man whom he had seen in a
   vision. Never assuredly had a dream counselled greater things or
   brought about more beautiful results.

   This second stay of Paul in Macedonia must have occupied six months,
   from June to November 57. Paul employed himself all this time in
   confirming his beloved Churches. His principal residence was at
   Thessalonica; he was constrained, however, to dwell also for some time
   at Philippi and at Beræa. Troubles which had filled the last months of
   his stay at Ephesus seemed to pursue him. During the first days after
   his arrival he had no rest. His life was a continual struggle: the
   gravest apprehensions stood in his way. These cares and afflictions did
   not assuredly come from the Churches of Macedonia. There could not be
   more perfect Churches, more generous, more devoted to the Apostle;
   nowhere had he met with so much heart, nobleness, and simplicity. He
   found a good many bad Christians--sensual, earthly--on whose account
   the Apostle expressed himself with much vivacity, calling them "enemies
   of the Cross of Christ whose end is destruction, whose God is their
   belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things," and
   upon whom he denounces eternal ruin; but it is doubtful if they
   belonged to the actual flock of the Apostle. It is from the side of the
   Church of Corinth that these great anxieties come. He fears more and
   more lest his letter may not have stirred up the indifferent, and may
   have armed his enemies.

   Titus at last rejoined him, and consoled him for all his griefs. He
   brought, in a word, good news, although the clouds were far from being
   wholly dissipated. The letter had produced the most profound effect. At
   its reading, Paul's disciples had listened in tears. Nearly all had
   testified to Titus, whilst shedding tears, the profound affection that
   they bore for the Apostle, sorrow for having grieved him, the desire of
   seeing him again, and of obtaining pardon from him. These Greek
   natures, unsteady and inconstant, came back to the right path as
   quickly as they had left it. His expressions frightened them. They
   supposed that the Apostle was armed with the most terrible powers;
   before his threats, all those who owed their faith to him, trembled and
   sought to exculpate themselves. They had not indignation enough against
   the guilty; each sought by his zeal against others to justify himself,
   and to turn aside the severity of the Apostle. Titus was overwhelmed by
   Paul's disciples with the most delicate attentions. He came back
   enchanted by the reception that they had given him, by the fervour, by
   the docility, by the goodwill that he had found in the spiritual family
   of his master. The subscription was not much advanced, but there was a
   hope that it would be fruitful. The sentence pronounced against the
   incestuous had been softened, or rather Satan, to whom Paul had given
   them up, did not execute the decree. The sinner was allowed to live on;
   the Apostle had the credit of giving an indulgent consent to what was
   after all a mere following of the course of nature. They did not even
   chase him absolutely from the Church, but they avoided having relations
   with him. Titus had conducted all this business with consummate
   prudence, and as skilfully as Paul would have done it himself. The
   Apostle never experienced keener joy than at the reception of this
   news. During some days, he altogether lost his self-command. He
   repented of having grieved such good souls; then, on seeing the
   admirable effect that his severity had produced, he became full of joy.

   This joy was not unmixed. His enemies were far from yielding; the
   epistle had exasperated them, and they made the keenest criticisms upon
   it. They noted that it was hard and insulting to the Church; they
   accused the Apostle of pride and vanity; "His letters," said they, "are
   severe and energetic; but his figure is mean, and his speech without
   authority." They attributed to personal hate his rigour towards the
   incestuous. They treated him as a foolish, extravagant, conceited, and
   indiscreet man. The changes in his plans of journey were presented as
   proofs of instability. Agitated by this double news, the Apostle set
   about dictating to Timothy a new letter, destined, on the one hand, to
   lessen the effect of the first, and to bear to his beloved Church,
   which he believed himself to have wounded, the expression of his
   paternal sentiments; on the other, to reply to the adversaries who had
   failed for the moment to carry away the hearts of his children from
   him.

   As for his enemies, Paul knew that he had not disarmed them. At each
   instant there are lively and smart allusions to these people "which
   corrupt the word of God," above all, to those letters of recommendation
   which they have turned to his detriment. His enemies are false
   apostles, deceitful workers, who disguise themselves as the apostles of
   Christ. Satan sometimes changes himself into an angel of light;
   therefore is it astonishing if his ministers transform themselves into
   ministers of righteousness? Their end shall be according to their
   works. They pretend that he has not known the Christ. He does not agree
   with them; because for him his vision on the road to Damascus has been
   a true personal relationship with Jesus. But, after all, what does it
   matter? Since Christ is dead, all are dead with Christ, to carnal
   considerations. For himself, he no longer knows any one according to
   the flesh. If he has known Christ after the flesh, he knows him no
   more. Let them not force him to be other than he is. When he is amongst
   them, he is humble, timid, embarrassed; but he hopes they will not
   oblige him to use the arms which have been given to him to destroy
   every fortress opposed to Christ, to destroy all scorners who raise
   themselves against the knowledge of God, and to submit every thought to
   the yoke of Jesus; it is easy to see that he knows how to punish
   disobedience. Those who describe themselves as of the party of Christ
   ought to remember, that he, Paul, is also of the school of Christ. The
   power that the Lord has given him to edify, do they wish to oblige him
   to use it to destroy? They try to make the Corinthians believe that he
   seeks to frighten them by his letters. Let those who use this language
   take care lest he be forced to write to them in even severer terms. It
   is not of the number of men who vaunt themselves and who have just
   hawked about right and left their letters of recommendation. His letter
   of recommendation is the Church of Corinth. This letter, he bears in
   his heart; it is legible for all; it is not written in ink, but by the
   Spirit of the living God, not upon tables of stone, but upon the tables
   of the heart. He only measures it in its proper proportion, he only
   compares it himself. He only arrogates to himself authority over the
   Churches which he has founded; he is not like men who wish to extend
   their power over countries in which they have not shown themselves in
   their own person, and who, after having yielded to him, Paul, the
   Gospel of the Circumcision, have just now gathered the fruit of a work
   which they had at first opposed. Each to his own ground. He need not
   boast of the works of others, nor vaunt him-self verbosely and without
   measure; the portion that God apportioned to him is beautiful enough,
   since it has been his lot to bear the Gospel to Corinth; and still he
   hopes to go farther away. But it is in God alone that he finds his
   glory.

   This modesty was not feigned. But it is difficult for a man of action
   to be modest; he runs the risk of being taken literally. The least
   egotistical of the Apostles is incessantly compelled to speak of
   himself. He calls himself an abortion, the least of the saints, the
   least of the Apostles, unworthy of that name, since he has persecuted
   the Church of God; but do not believe that for all that he resigns his
   prerogative.

   "But by the grace of God I am what I am: and His grace which was
   bestowed upon me was not in vain; but I laboured more abundantly than
   they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. . . .

   "For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles. But
   though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been
   thoroughly made manifest among you in all things. Have I committed an
   offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have
   preached to you the gospel of God freely? I robbed other Churches,
   taking wages of them to do you service. And when I was present with
   you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lacking
   to me, the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied: and in all
   things I have kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and so will I
   keep myself. As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of
   this boasting in the regions of Achaia. Wherefore? because I love you
   not? God knoweth. But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off
   occasion from them which desire occasion; that wherein they glory, they
   may be found even as we. . . ."

   Arming himself with the accusation of madness, that his adversaries
   raised against him, he accepts for a moment this position which they
   have lent him, and, under the mask of oratorical irony, he makes the
   madman throw in the face of his adversaries the harshest truths.

   [2] "I am a fool, it is agreed; very well, bear with my folly for a
   moment. You that are wise, ought to be indulgent to fools. And then,
   you shew so much tolerance for men who put you into servitude, who
   devour you, who extort your money, and who, after that, are puffed up
   with pride, and strike you in the face. Let us go on, since it is the
   fashion to sing one's own glory, let us sing ours. All that can be said
   in this kind of folly, I can say like them. They are Hebrews; so am I.
   They are Israelites; so am I They are of the race of Abraham; so am I.
   They are ministers of Christ (ah I speak as a fool), I am more. In
   labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more
   frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I forty
   stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned,
   thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep;
   in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
   perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in
   the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
   among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often,
   in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. And
   outside of these accidents, snail I recall my daily anxieties, the care
   of all the Churches? Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended,
   and I burn not? . . . . But I only wish to glory in my infirmities
   . . . . it is in our infirmities that the strength of Christ is more
   manifest. That is why I glory in my infirmities, in my injuries, in my
   necessities, in my persecutions, in my sufferings for Christ, for when
   I am weak in the flesh I am strong in Christ.

   "Truly I am become a fool in glorying; you have compelled me. I should
   have been exempt from it, if you had wished to charge yourselves with
   my apology to those who attack me. I am nothing; but I yield in nothing
   to the very chiefest Apostles. Truly I have wrought the signs of an
   Apostle among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty
   deeds. For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches,
   except it be that I myself was not burdensome to you? Forgive me this
   injustice. It is the third time that I have announced my approaching
   arrival to you. This time I will not be burdensome to you; for I seek
   not yours, but you. For the children ought not to lay up for the
   parents, but the parents for the children. And, I will very gladly
   spend and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you the
   less I be loved.

   "But if it be so, it may be said I have not been directly in your
   charge, but, crafty rogue that I am, I have skilfully swindled you of
   the silver that I refused to accept. Did I gain anything by any of
   those whom I have sent to you? I sent Titus to you, and with him a
   brother whom you know. Did Titus make a profit out of you? Walked we
   not in the same spirit and in the same steps? . . . For I fear lest,
   when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be
   found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings,
   wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults. And lest
   when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall
   bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the
   uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have
   committed. This is the third time I am coming unto you . . . I told you
   before, and warn you, absent as present, the second time; and being
   absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all
   other, that, if I come again, I will not spare: since ye seek a proof
   of Christ speaking in me . . . Therefore I write these things being
   absent, lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the
   power which the Lord hath given me."

   Paul, we see, had reached that great state of exaltation in which the
   religious founders of the first order lived. His thoughts lifted him
   out of himself. The manner in which to execute the contribution for the
   poor of Jerusalem was at this time his consolation. Macedonia showed an
   exemplary zeal in it. Those excellent souls gave with a joy, with an
   eagerness, which ravished the Apostle. Nearly all the members of the
   sect had suffered in their little way through having adhered to the new
   doctrine; but in their poverty they still knew how to find something
   for a work which the Apostle designated as excellent. The hopes of Paul
   were more than fulfilled; the faithful nearly went down on their knees,
   to beg the Apostle to accept the necessarily small donations which they
   were able to offer. They would have given themselves, if the Apostle
   would have accepted them. Paul, pushing his delicacy almost to
   exaggerated refinement, and wishing, as he said, to be irreproachable
   not only before God but before men, requiring that they should choose
   at the election deputies charged to carry the offering of each Church,
   carefully sealed, so as to disperse the suspicions that malevolence
   would certainly cast upon him concerning his management of considerable
   funds. These deputies followed him already everywhere, and formed
   around him a kind of escort always ready to execute his missions. They
   were those whom he calls "the envoys of the Churches, the glory of
   Christ"

   Cleverness, suppleness of language, the epistolary dexterity of Paul,
   were employed entirely in this work. He employed to recommend it to the
   Corinthians the most moving and tenderest phrases; he commanded
   nothing; but, knowing their charity, he allowed himself to give them
   advice. It was a year since they had begun; he was now anxious himself
   to finish; goodwill did not suffice. It is not a question of worrying
   oneself to put others at ease. The rule in such affairs is equality, or
   rather reciprocity. For the moment, the Corinthians are rich and the
   saints of Jerusalem are poor, it is for the former to help the latter,
   the latter will help the former in turn. Thus he himself will verify
   the saying: "He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that
   gathered little had no lack."

   Paul prayed the faithful Titus to return to Corinth and to continue the
   work of charity there which he had so well begun. Titus had desired
   this mission, and received it with eagerness. The Apostle gave him two
   companions, whose names we do not know. One was of the number of the
   deputies who had been elected to bear the offering from Macedonia to
   Jerusalem; "his praise," says Paul, "is in the Gospel throughout all
   the Churches." The other was a brother "whom Paul had oftentimes proved
   diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great
   confidence which he had in the Church of Corinth." Neither of those
   indications suffices to settle who is meant. Paul prayed the
   Corinthians to keep up the good opinion which he had tried to give of
   them to these three persons, and employs to excite their generosity a
   little charitable manoeuvre which raises a smile.

   "For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of you to
   them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal hath
   provoked very many. Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of
   you should be vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready:
   lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared,
   we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this confident boasting.
   Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, that they
   would go before unto you and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye
   had notice before, that the same might be ready as & matter of bounty,
   not as of covetousness. But this I say, he which soweth sparingly,
   shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully, shall reap
   also bountifully. Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so
   let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a
   cheerful giver. . . . Now he that ministereth seed to the sower both
   minister bread for your food, and multiply your. seed sown, and
   increase the fruits of righteousness. . . . For the administration of
   this service not only supplieth the want of the saints, but is abundant
   also by many thanksgivings unto God; whilst by the experiment of this
   ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
   Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto
   all men; and by their prayer for you, which long after you for the
   exceeding grace of God in you. Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable
   gift!"

   This letter was carried to Corinth by Titus and by the two brethren who
   accompanied him. Paul remained still for some months in Macedonia. The
   times were still very hard. Scarcely ever has there been a Church which
   has not had to contend with ever-recurring difficulties. Patience is
   the recommendation that the Apostle addresses the oftenest.
   "Tribulations, distresses, pangs, cudgellings, prisons, bad treatment,
   vigils, fastings,--purity, long-suffering, honesty, sincere charity,
   such is our life; sometimes honoured, sometimes despised, sometimes
   slandered, sometimes respected; held as impostors, as well as truthful
   ones; as unknown, yet well known (of God); as dying, whilst we live; as
   men whom God chastises and yet we do not die; as sorrowful, yet always
   rejoicing; for poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
   possessing all things." Joy, concord, hope without limit, made
   suffering light, and inaugurated that delicious reign of "the God of
   love and peace" that Jesus had announced. Above a thousand meannesses,
   the spirit of Jesus shines in these groups of saints with infinite
   brightness and sweetness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] This is the latter part of the 2d Epistle to the Corinthians,
   freely rendered. No literal translation gives the sense.--Trans.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVII.

  CONTINUATION OF THE THIRD MISSION--SECOND STAY OF PAUL AT CORINTH--THE EPISTLE
  TO THE ROMANS.

   Paul, according to our calculation, set out from Macedonia, and came to
   Greece at the end of November or the beginning of December 57. He had
   with him the delegates chosen by the Churches of Macedonia to accompany
   him to Jerusalem, and to carry himself and the alms of the faithful,
   amongst others Sopater or Sosipater, son of Pyrrhus of Beræa, a certain
   Lucius, a certain Tertius, Aristarchus, and Secundus of Thessalonica.
   Jason of Thessalonica, his host since his first voyage, accompanied him
   also, it seems. Perhaps, finally, the deputies of Asia--Tychicus, and
   Trophimus of Ephesus, Gaius from Derbe, were already with him. Timothy
   about this time did not leave him. All these made a kind of apostolic
   caravan of a very imposing aspect. When they had rejoined Titus and the
   two brothers who had accompanied him, Corinth really possessed all the
   leaders of the new movement. Paul, conformably to his former plan,
   which he had several times modified, but which he finished by carrying
   out in its essential lines, passed in this town three months of the
   winter 57-58 (December 57, January and February 58). The Church of
   Athens was so small that Paul, according to all appearance, did not
   visit it, or at least hardly stopped there.

   The Apostle, not having any longer at his disposal the kindly
   hospitality of Aquila and Priscilla, lodged this time at the house of
   Caius, whose house served for the meetings of the whale Church, and to
   whom he was attached by a bond then held very sacred. Stephanas was
   perhaps dead or absent. Paul always observed at Corinth much reserve,
   for he did not feel himself to be on very firm ground. Seeing the
   danger that association with the world offered in a town so corrupted,
   he reverted always to broad principles, and advised avoiding all
   relations with the Pagans. The welfare of the souls at such a time was
   his only rule, the only end which he proposed to himself.

   It is probable that the presence of Paul at Corinth calmed altogether
   the dissentients, who, for several months, gave him much anxiety. A
   bitter allusion which he made about this time to "those who vaunt
   themselves of works that Christ has not done by them," and of others,
   "who build upon another man's foundations," shows, however, that a
   vivid impression of the evil works of his adversaries remained with
   him. The business of the subscription had gone forward as he
   desired--Macedonia and Achaia had contributed a large sum. The Apostle
   had at last an interval of repose; he utilised it by writing, always
   under the form of an epistle, a kind of summing up of his theological
   doctrine.

   As this great document interested all Christianity equally, Paul
   addressed it chiefly to the Churches which he had founded, and with
   which he could communicate at this time. The Churches favoured with
   such an address were four in number at the least. One was the Church of
   Ephesus; a copy was also sent into Macedonia; Paul even had an idea of
   addressing this piece to the Church of Rome. In all his copies the body
   of the epistle was nearly the same; the moral recommendations and the
   salutations varied. In the copy destined for the Romans, in particular,
   Paul introduced some varied readings suited to the taste of this
   Church, which he knew was very much attached to Judaism. It is the copy
   addressed to the Church of Rome which served as the basis of the
   constitution of the text when the collection of the epistles of St Paul
   was made. Hence the name that the epistle in question bears to-day. The
   publishers (if we may be permitted so to call them) only copied at one
   time the parts common to all; however, as they would themselves be
   scrupulous not to lose anything which came from the pen of the Apostle,
   they gathered together at the end of the copy princeps, the parts which
   varied in the different copies, or which they themselves found in more
   than one of them.

   This precious writing, the foundation of all Christian theology, is
   mainly that in which the ideas of Paul are exposed in better order.
   There appears in full daylight the great idea of the Apostle: there the
   law is put on one side; works are of no value; salvation comes only
   from Jesus, Son of God, raised from the dead. Jesus, who, in the eyes
   of the Judæo-Christian school, is a great prophet, come to fulfil the
   law, is, in the eyes of Paul, a divine apparition, rendering useless
   all that has preceded him, even the Law. Jesus and the Law are for Paul
   two opposite things. He who accords to the Law excellence and efficacy
   is a traitor to Jesus. To overthrow the Law, is to exalt Jesus. Greeks,
   Jews, Barbarians, all are equal; the Jews are first called, then the
   Greeks: all are saved only by faith in Jesus.

   What can man do, indeed, if he be left to himself? One thing only--he
   can sin. And at first, in that which concerns Pagans, the spectacle of
   the visible world and the natural law written in their hearts would
   suffice to reveal to them the true God and their duties. By a voluntary
   and inexcusable blindness, they have not worshipped the God whom they
   knew well; they have lost themselves in their vain thoughts; their
   pretended philosophy has only been idle speculation. To punish them,
   God has abandoned them to the most shameful vices, to sins against
   nature. The Jews are no more innocent; they have received the Law, but
   they have not observed it. Circumcision does not make the true Jew; the
   Pagan who observes the natural law well is worth much more than the Jew
   who does not observe the Law of God. Have not the Jews then some
   prerogative? Without doubt, they have one: it is to them that the
   promises have been made; the unbelief of many among them does not
   prevent these promises from being fulfilled. But the Law by itself
   cannot bring about the reign of justice; it has served merely to create
   the offence and to put it in evidence. In other words, the Jews, like
   the Gentiles, have lived under the dominion of sin.

   Whence then does justification come? From faith in Jesus, without
   distinction of race. All men were sinners; Jesus has been the
   propitiatory victim; His death has been the redemption that God has
   accepted for the sins of the world, the works of the law not having
   been able to justify the world. God is not only the God of the Jews, He
   is also the God of the Gentiles. It was by faith that Abraham was
   justified, since it is written, "He believed, and it was accounted to
   him for righteousness." Justification is free; one has no right to it
   by merit; it is an imputed grace and an all-merciful act of the
   Divinity.

   The fruit of justification is peace with God, hope, and consequently
   patience, which enables us to show our glory and our happiness in
   tribulation, according to the example of Christ, who has died for
   sinners, and by whose blood we have been justified. If God has so loved
   men that He has given His son to die for them when we were sinners,
   what will He not do now that they are reconciled?

   Sin and death were brought into the world by one man, Adam, in whom all
   have sinned. Grace and salvation were brought into the world by one
   Man, Christ, in whom all are justified. Two typical men have existed,
   "the first Adam," or the earthly Adam, the origin of all disobedience;
   "the second Adam," or the heavenly Adam, the origin of all justice.
   Humanity divides itself between these two leaders of the human race,
   some following the earthly Adam, others the spiritual Adam. The Law has
   served only to multiply offences, and to make sinners conscious of
   them. It is grace which, superabounding where offence has abounded, has
   effaced all, so that one may almost say that, thanks to Jesus, sin has
   been happiness, and has only served to bring to light the mercy of God.

   But, it will be said, let us sin then that grace may abound; let us do
   evil, that good may come. That, says Paul, is what they assert of me,
   thus falsifying my doctrine. Nothing is further from my thoughts. Those
   who have been baptised in Christ are dead to sin, buried with Christ,
   to rise again and live with Him--that is to say, lead a new life. Our
   "old man," that is to say, the man that we were before baptism, has
   been crucified with Christ. Because the Christian is not under the Law,
   it does not follow that he may sin. From the slavery of sin, he has
   passed to the service of righteousness; from the way of sin unto death,
   to the way of life. The Christian, moreover, is dead to the Law; for
   the Law created sin. In itself, it was good and holy, but it made sin
   known; it aggravated it, so that the commandment which should have
   created life, created death. A woman is an adultress if, whilst living
   with her husband, she fails to keep her marriage vow; but after the
   death of her husband, adultery is no longer possible. Christ, in
   breaking down the letter of the Law, has taken us from under the Law,
   and won us to himself. Dead to the flesh, which was in sin, being dead
   to the Law, he who cast off sin, the Christian has only to serve God
   "in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter." The Law
   was spiritual, but man is carnal. There are two parts in man--one which
   loves and wishes to do well, the other which does evil, without that
   other man wishing to do it. Does it not often happen that we do not
   that we would, while the evil that we would not, that we do? Is it that
   sin, innate in man, acts in him without his wishing it. "The inner
   man," that is to say, reason, would obey the law of God; but
   concupiscence is ever at war with reason and the law of God. "O
   wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this
   death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord."

   The true Christian, being delivered from the Law and from
   concupiscence, is then safe from damnation, by the mercy of God, who
   has sent His only Son to take upon Him a body of sinful flesh like our
   own, to destroy sin. But this deliverance does not take place if he
   destroy not his life according to the flesh, and live according to the
   Spirit. The wisdom of the flesh is the great enemy of God; it is even
   death. The Spirit, on the contrary, is life. By Him we have been made
   the adopted sons of God, whereby we cry Abba, that is to say, "Father."
   But, if we are the sons of God, we are also His heirs, and joint heirs
   with Christ. After having partaken of His sufferings, we shall also
   partake of His glory. What are all the sufferings of this present time
   compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us? The whole
   creation waits for this great revelation of the sons of God. It hopes,
   I say, to be delivered from the bondage under which it groans, subject
   as it is to infirmity and corruption, and to pass into the glorious
   liberty of the sons of God. We also, who have received the first-fruits
   of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for
   the moment in which our elevation to the position of the sons of God
   shall be complete, and when our body shall be delivered from its
   frailty. It is hope which saves us; but we do not hope for that which
   we see. Let us persevere patiently in this hope for the invisible, with
   the help of the Spirit. We know not what we should pray for; but the
   Spirit makes up for our weakness, and makes intercession for us with
   God with groanings which cannot be uttered. God, who seeth the heart,
   knoweth how to divine the desires of the Spirit, and to separate its
   indistinct and inarticulate sighs.

   What a motive of assurance, moreover! It is by a direct act of God that
   we are destined for the metamorphosis which will make us like His Son,
   and who will make of all living a body of brethren of whom Jesus will
   be the first born. By His foreknowledge, God knows His elect
   beforehand; those whom He knows, He predestinates; those whom He
   predestinates, He calls; those whom He calls, He justifies; those whom
   He justifies, He glorifies. Let us be tranquil: if for us God has not
   spared His only Son, but has delivered Him to death, what can He refuse
   us? Who will be in the day of judgment the accuser of the elect? God,
   who has justified them? Who will condemn them? Christ, who has died and
   risen again, who is seated at the right hand of God, who intercedes for
   us? Impossible! "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
   tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
   peril, or sword? For I," adds Paul, "am persuaded that neither death,
   nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
   present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
   creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
   in Christ Jesus our Lord."

   We see to what a complete rupture with Judaism Christianity has reached
   in the hands of Paul. Jesus has not been so far off assuredly. Jesus
   has boldly proclaimed that the reign of the Law is ended, that the
   worship in spirit and in truth of God the Father only remains. But,
   with Jesus, poetry, sentiment, imagery, and style are essentially
   Jewish. He continues in a direct line Isaiah, the psalmists, the
   prophets of the time of the captivity, the author of the Song of Songs,
   and sometimes the author of Ecclesiastes. Paul only continues Jesus,
   not as he was by the side of the lake of Gennesareth, but Jesus such as
   he conceives him, such as he has seen him in his inner vision. For his
   old co-religionists he has only pity. The "perfect" Christian, the
   "enlightened" Christian, is in his eyes the one who knows the vanity of
   the Law, its uselessness, the frivolity of its pious practices. Paul
   would wish to be anathema for his brothers in Israel; it is for him a
   great sadness, a continual heartache to dream of this noble race,
   raised so high in glory, which had the privilege of adoption, of
   alliance, of the Law, of the true worship, of the promises,--which has
   had patriarchs out of whom Christ has come in the flesh. But God will
   not fail in His promises. Even though one is of the seed of Israel, he
   is not necessarily a true Israelite; he is heir to the promises by the
   choice and calling of God, not by the accident of birth. There is no
   injustice in that. Salvation is the result, not of human efforts, but
   of the mercy of God. God is free to have mercy on whom He will, and to
   deal hardly with whom he will. Who will dare to ask of God the reason
   for His choice? Can the vessel of clay say to the potter: Why hast thou
   made me thus? Hath not the potter the power, with the same lump, to
   make two vessels, one for honourable uses, the other for dishonourable?
   If it please God to prepare man to show His power by crushing him, as
   He did Pharaoh, He is the master, the rather that thereby He shows
   forth His mercy towards those whom He has prepared and called to glory.
   But He makes this choice, without stopping for any consideration of
   race or of blood.

   If the Jewish people, moreover, see themselves supplanted, it is their
   own fault. They have too much confidence in the works of the Law; they
   believe that they will by these works be justified. The Gentiles,
   disembarrassed of this stone of stumbling, have entered more easily
   into the true doctrine of salvation by faith. Israel has sinned by too
   much zeal for the Law, and by having placed too much reliance upon the
   personal justification which it acquires by works. Thus it has been
   made to forget that justification is from God only,--that it is the
   fruit of grace and not of works; which has made it misunderstand the
   instrument of that justification which is Jesus.

   Has God then cast off his people? No. God, it is true, has found it
   good to blind and to harden the greater part of the Jews. But the
   corner-stone of the elect has been taken out of the breasts of Israel.
   Besides, the perdition of the Hebrew people is not definitive. This
   perdition has had for its only object the salvation of the Gentiles and
   the creation of a salutary emulation between the two branches of the
   elect. It is a happiness for the Gentiles that the Jews had for a time
   failed in their vocation, since it is through their fault, and thanks
   to their weakness, that the Gentiles have been substituted for them.
   But if the falling away of the Jewish people, if a moment of delay on
   its part has been the salvation of the world, what will be its
   introduction in a mass into the Church? This will truly be the
   resurrection. If the first-fruits be holy, the whole mass is holy also;
   if the root be holy, the branches are holy also. Some branches have
   been cut off, and in their place have been grafted branches of the wild
   olive, which have thus become partakers of the root and of the sap of
   the olive tree. Take care, O wild olive! lest thou grow proud at the
   expense of the branches which have been cut off! It is not thou that
   bearest the root; it is the root that bears thee! Yes, thou wilt say,
   but the branches have been cut off so that I may be grafted. Doubtless;
   they have been cut off for want of faith; it is to faith that thou
   owest all; beware lest thou grow proud; tremble. If thou dost not
   persevere, thou also wilt be cut off. If they come to the faith, God is
   perfectly well able to regraft them on their own trunk. Israel has been
   blinded till the crowd of the Gentiles can be received into the Church;
   but after that, Israel will be saved in turn. The gifts of God are
   without repentance. The friendship of Israel and of God has suffered an
   eclipse, so that the Gentiles may in the interval receive the Gospel;
   but the calling of Israel, the promises made to the patriarchs, will
   have their effect none the less. God will use the incredulity of some
   for the salvation of others; then those whom He has rendered faithless,
   He will save in their turn; all which goes to prove that salvation on
   His part is purely an act of mercy, and not a result at which one will
   arrive by right of birth, or by works, or by the free choice of his
   reason. God will not take counsel of any one; He has not any account to
   render to any one. "O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
   knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past
   finding out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been
   His counsellor? . . . For of Him, and through Him, and to Him are all
   things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen."

   The Apostle, according to his habit, ends by moral applications. The
   worship of the Christian is the worship of reason, without other
   sacrifice than that of himself. Each must present to God a pure
   sacrifice, and worthy of being favourably accepted. The spirit of the
   Church must be modesty, concord, mutual responsibility; all the gifts,
   all the duties are intimately associated with it. The body has many
   members; all the members have not the same office, but all have need of
   each other. Prophets, deacons, doctors, preachers, benefactors,
   superiors, delegates, for works of mercy are equally necessary,
   provided that they exhibit in the discharge of their functions the
   simplicity, zeal, and cheerfulness that these functions require.
   Charity without hypocrisy, brotherly kindness, politeness and kind
   attentions, activity, fervour, joy, hope, patience, amiability,
   concord, humility, pardon for injuries, love of our neighbours,
   eagerness to assist the needs of the saints; to bless those who
   persecute you, to rejoice with those who rejoice, to weep with those
   who weep, to conquer evil, not by evil, but by good: such is the moral,
   in part inculcated in the ancient Hebrew books, that Paul preached
   after Jesus. It would seem that at the period in which Paul wrote this
   epistle, various Churches, above all the Church of Rome, reckoned
   amongst their number certain disciples of Judah the Gaulonite, who
   denied the legitimacy of the Roman tribute, and who preached revolt
   against the Roman authority; possibly also the Ebionites, who
   absolutely opposed the reign of Satan and the reign of the Messiah to
   each other, and who identified the present world with the empire of the
   devil. Paul replied to them, as a true disciple of Jesus:

   "Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no
   power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever
   therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they
   that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. For rulers are not a
   terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of
   the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the
   same: for he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do
   that which is evil, be afraid: for he beareth not the sword in vain:
   for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him
   that doeth evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for
   wrath, but also for conscience' sake. For, for this cause pay ye
   tribute also: for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon
   this very thing. Render therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom
   tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to
   whom honour."

   This was written in the fourth year of Nero. This prince had not yet
   afforded a reason for every subject to curse him. His government had
   been the best since the death of Augustus. At the moment when Paul,
   with much good sense, took up the defence of the tax against the Jewish
   theocracy, Nero softened its rigour, and even sought to apply to it the
   most radical reforms. The Christians at this date had not themselves
   complained of him, and it may readily be believed that at a time when
   the Roman authority served his plan rather than made an obstacle to it,
   Paul had sought to prevent tumultuous movements which might lose all,
   but to which the Jews of Rome were much inclined. These seditions, the
   arrests, and the punishments which were its consequences, threw the new
   sect into the greatest disfavour, and made the adepts confound them
   with thieves and the disturbers of public order. Paul had too much tact
   to be a rioter: he wished that credit should be given to the name of
   Christian, that a Christian should be a man of order, in good odour
   with the police, of good reputation in the eyes of Pagans. This was
   what made him write that page, equally singular in the eyes of a Jew
   and of a Christian. Yet in it may be seen, however, with a rare
   simplicity, that there was in the very essence of this nascent
   Christianity some-thing politically dangerous. The theory of the divine
   right of all the powers that be is candidly laid down. Nero has been
   proclaimed by St Paul a minister, an officer of God, a representative
   of Divine authority. The Christian, whilst he is allowed to practise
   his religion openly, will be a subject, by no means a citizen. I do not
   intend to utter any censure here; but no one can do two things at once;
   policy is not everything, and the true glory of Christianity is to have
   created a whole world out of itself. But see to what we expose
   ourselves with these absolute theories! "The minister of God," of whom
   all honest men must seek approbation, whose sword is only terrible to
   the wicked, will become in a few years the Beast of the Apocalypse, the
   Anti-Christ, the persecutor of the saints.

   The strange situation of the spirits, the persuasion which they held
   that the end of the world was close at hand, explain for the remainder
   this haughty indifference.

   "And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
   sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. The night
   is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works
   of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light. Let us walk
   honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
   clambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. But put ye on the
   Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the
   lusts thereof."

   The contest of Paul against his adversaries, who were more or less
   Ebionites, can be traced in part in his letter relating to the
   abstinence from meats, and to the observance of new moons, of Sabbaths,
   and of days. Ebionism, which at this period had its principal centre at
   Rome, held greatly to these external practices, which were in truth
   only a continuation of the practices of the Essenes. They were
   scrupulous, ascetic persons, who not only practised the legal
   ordinances with regard to meats, but who obliged themselves to eat only
   vegetables and to drink no wine. It is necessary to remember that
   Christianity recruited itself among very pious persons, and, as such,
   much given to devotional practices. In becoming Christians, these
   persons remained faithful to their ancient habits; or rather, the
   adoption of Christianity was for them only an act of devotion (religio)
   the more. Paul, in this new epistle, remained faithful to the excellent
   rules of conduct which he had already traced among the Corinthians. In
   themselves, these practices are perfectly vain. But what is of the
   greatest importance, is not to offend these feeble consciences, not to
   trouble them, not to argue with them. He whose conscience is
   enlightened must not despise him whose conscience is feeble. The
   timorous conscience must not be permitted to judge the large
   conscience. Let each follow his own judgment, the right thing is what
   one believes to be right before God. How shall one dare to judge his
   brother? It is Christ who will judge us all; each will only have to
   answer for him-self. The distinction of meats rests upon nothing; all
   things are pure. But what is of importance is that no one should cause
   scandal to his brother. If, in eating the permitted meats, you aggrieve
   your brother, take care; for the sake of the question of meats, do not
   lose a soul for whom Christ died. The kingdom of heaven has nothing to
   do with eating and drinking; it sums itself up in justice, peace, joy,
   edification.

   The disciples of Paul were occupied for several days in copying this
   manifesto, addressed to different Churches. The epistle to the Churches
   of Macedonia was written by Tertius. The Macedonians who accompanied
   Paul, and the Corinthians who had relations with the Churches of the
   north of Greece, profited by the occasion to salute their brethren. The
   Epistle to the Ephesians contained the nominal salutation of Paul to
   nearly all the Christians of this great Church. As there was little
   communication between Corinth and Macedonia on the one hand, and
   Ephesus on the other, the Apostle does not speak to the Ephesians of
   the world which surrounds him; but he vigorously recommends to them
   Phoebe, who probably carried the letter to them. This poor woman set
   out on a painful voyage in winter across the archipelago, without any
   other resource than the recommendation of Paul. The Church of Ephesus
   was begged to receive her in a manner worthy of the saints, and to
   provide for all her needs. Paul had probably some anxieties about the
   intrigues of the Judæo-Christian party at Ephesus; for, at the end of
   the letter, he added in his own handwriting:--

   "Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
   offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid
   them. For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
   own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of
   the simple. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I am glad,
   therefore, on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that
   which is good and simple concerning evil. And the God of peace shall
   bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus
   Christ be with you. Amen."

   We have seen that St Paul in writing this most important epistle had
   intended to send it to the Church of Rome. This Church had reformed
   itself since the Edict of Claudius, and much that was good had been
   said of it. It was not very numerous, and was chiefly composed of
   Ebionites and Judæo-Christians; it also contained in its ranks
   Proselytes and converted Pagans. The idea of addressing a dogmatic
   writing to a Church which he had not founded, was bold, and altogether
   contrary to the habit of Paul. He much feared lest they should see in
   his attempt something indiscreet; he forbade himself all that might
   recall the tone of a master speaking with authority; he made no
   personal salutations. With these precautions, he thought that his
   title, henceforth recognised as the Apostle of the Gentiles, gave him
   the right to address a Church which he had never seen. The importance
   of Rome as capital of the Empire pre-occupied him: for several years he
   nourished the project of betaking himself thither. Not being able to
   execute his design as yet, he wished to give a mark of sympathy to this
   illustrious Church, which contained a class of the faithful of whom he
   considered himself the pastor, and announced to it the good news of his
   future arrival.

   The composition and despatch of the epistle written "to the Romans"
   occupied the greatest part of the three months of the winter, which
   Paul passed this year at Corinth. They were, in a sense, the best
   employed weeks of his life. This epistle became, later on, the summing
   up of dogmatic Christianity, the declaration of war by theology against
   philosophy, the chief inducement to a class of eager spirits to embrace
   Christianity as a means of setting reason at defiance, whilst
   proclaiming the sublimity and credibility of the absurd. It is the
   application of the merits of Christ which justifies; it is God who
   works in us to will and to do of His good pleasure. Here is the
   overthrow of reason, which, essentially Pelagian, has for its
   fundamental dogma, liberty, and the personality of merit. Very well,
   then, the doctrine of Paul, opposed to all merely human sense, has been
   really liberty and salvation. It has separated Christianity from
   Judaism; it has separated Protestantism from Catholicism. Pious
   observances, persuading the devotee that by them he is justified, have
   a double disadvantage: in the first place, they kill morality by making
   the devotee believe that there is a sure and easy way of entering
   Paradise in despite of God. The hardest-hearted Jew--a selfish and
   malicious usurer, let us say--imagined that by observing the Law he
   would force God to save him. The Catholic of the time of Louis XI.
   imagined that with masses he took proceedings against God as by a
   bailiff's summons, so that, rogue though he might be, he had the game
   in his own hands, he could compel Almighty God to admit him into His
   company. To this impiety, in which Judaism was upset by Talmudism, in
   which Christianity was upset by the Catholicism of the Middle Ages,
   Saint Paul has adminstered the most efficient antidote. According to
   him, we are justified, not by works, but by faith; it is faith in Jesus
   which saves. That is why this doctrine, apparently so paltry, has been
   that of all the reformers--the lever by means of which Wycliff, John
   Huss, Luther, Calvin, St Cyran, have overthrown the ancient tradition
   of blind confidence in the priest, and in a kind of exterior justice,
   which has nothing to do with a change of heart.

   The other practical inconvenience is the multiplication of scruples.
   Practices, supposed to have a value by themselves, ex opere operato,
   independently of the state of the soul, open the door to all the
   subtleties of a meticulous casuist. Legal work becomes a prescription,
   the success of which depends upon its punctual execution. Here again
   Talmudism and Catholicism are agreed. The despair of the Jewish
   devotees of the time of Jesus and of St Paul was the fear of not
   observing the whole Law--the apprehension of not being in order. It was
   believed that the holiest man sins,--that it is impossible not to
   prevaricate. They almost regretted that God had given the Law, since it
   only served to bring about transgressions; they confessed to the
   singular idea, that God had laid down all these laws with the sole
   purpose of creating sin, and making all the world sinful. Jesus, in the
   opinion of his disciples, had made easy the entrance to this kingdom of
   God which the Pharisees had made so difficult, to enlarge the door of
   that Judaism which they had narrowed so much. Paul, at least, does not
   imagine any other way of sup-pressing sin than by suppressing the Law.
   His reasoning has something of that of the Probabilists: to multiply
   obligations is to multiply offences; to relax rules, to render them as
   broad as possible, is to prevent offences, since we do not violate
   precepts by which we do not consider ourselves bound.

   The great torment of delicate souls is scrupulousness: he who eases
   them of it is all-powerful over them. One of the most common customs of
   devotion amongst the pious sects in England, is to think of Jesus as of
   him who disemburdens the conscience, reassures the guilty, calms the
   sinning soul, delivers it from the thought of evil. Overwhelmed by the
   consciousness of sin and of condemnation, Paul in the same way finds
   peace in Jesus only. All are sinners, even to the last, by reason of
   their descent from Adam. Judaism, by its sacrifices for sin, had
   established the idea of accounts as it were opened between man and
   God,--of remission and of debts; a false enough idea, for sin does not
   remit itself,--it carries its punishment with it; a crime committed
   will last until the end of time, only the conscience which has
   committed it can atone for it and produce altogether contrary acts. The
   power of remitting sins was one of those that they believed to have
   been conferred by Jesus on his disciples. The Church had nothing more
   precious than it. To have committed a crime, to have a tormented
   conscience, was a motive to make oneself a Christian. "Here is a law
   which delivers you from sin, from which you could not be delivered by
   the Law of Moses." What could be more tempting to the Jews? One of the
   reasons which confirmed Constantine in Christianity was, it is said,
   the belief that Christians alone could absolve the soul of a father who
   had killed his son. The merciful Jesus, pardoning all, according even a
   kind of preference for those who have sinned, appeared in this troubled
   world as the great comforter of souls. They took it upon themselves to
   say that it was well to have sinned, that all remission was gratuitous,
   that faith alone justified.

   One peculiarity of the Semitic tongues explains such a
   misunderstanding, and excuses this morally incomplete psychology. The
   form hiphil signifies at the same time the effective and the
   declarative, so that hasdik can say equally "to render justice," and
   "to declare justice," to remit a sin which has been committed, and to
   declare that he has not committed it. "Justice" is, according to this
   idiom, not only that he who is absolved from a sin, but that he who is
   calmed in his own eyes, need no more trouble himself with the sins
   which he may have committed, or with precepts which he may have
   violated unknown to himself.

   When Paul despatched this terrible epistle, he had early fixed the day
   of his departure. The gravest anxieties assailed him: he had a
   presentiment of grave accidents, and he applied to himself often the
   verse of the psalm, "Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long;
   we are counted as sheep for the slaughter." Some very precise accounts,
   which were only too certain, represented to him the dangers he was
   likely to meet with from the Jews of Judæa. He was not even confident
   as to the disposition of the Church of Jerusalem. He had found this
   Church so many times ruled by mean prejudices, that he feared a cold
   reception, which, seeing the number of half-confirmed believers who
   accompanied him, would produce a disastrous effect. He constantly asked
   for the prayers of the faithful, that God would cause his offering to
   be favourably received by the saints. To place timid provincial
   neophytes thus in immediate contact with the aristocracy of the
   capital, was an idea of supreme temerity. Guided by his admirable
   integrity, Paul none the less persisted in his project. He believed
   himself bound by an order of the Spirit. He said with emphasis that he
   was going to Jerusalem to serve the saints; he represented himself as
   the deacon of the poor of Jerusalem. His principal disciples and the
   deputies, each bearing the offering of his Church, were around him,
   ready to set out. They were, we shall remember, Sopater of Beræa,
   Aristarchus and Secundus of Thessalonica, Gaius of Derbe, Tychicus and
   Trophimus of Ephesus, and finally Timothy.

   At the moment when Paul was going to embark for Syria, the
   reasonableness of his fears became visible. A plot formed by the Jews
   was discovered to carry him off or kill him during the journey. In
   order to disconcert this project, Paul privately changed his route, and
   decided to return by Macedonia. The departure took place about the
   month of April of the year 58.

   Thus ended this third mission, which, in the opinion of Paul, finished
   the first part of his apostolic projects. All the oriental provinces of
   the Roman Empire, from its extreme limit towards the east near to
   Illyria, Egypt always excepted, had heard the Gospel. Not once had the
   Apostle departed from his rule of preaching only in the countries where
   Christ had not yet been named, that is to say, where other Apostles had
   not passed; all his work had been original and belonged to him alone.
   The third mission had had for its field the same countries as the
   second; Paul turned a little in the same circle, and began to find
   himself in the right. He now delayed the accomplishment of the second
   part of his projects, that is to say, of proclaiming the name of Jesus
   in the western world, for we may say that the mystery hidden from
   eternity was known to all nations.

   At Rome he had been anticipated, and, moreover, those of the
   circumcision formed the majority in the Church. It was as universal
   pastor of the Churches of the Gentiles, and to confirm the converted
   Pagans, and not as founder, that he wished to appear in the capital of
   the empire. He only wished to go thither that he might enjoy for a time
   the company of the faithful, and rest and edify himself among them,
   after which he would take, according to custom, new companions who
   should follow him in the latter part of his journey. Beyond, it was to
   Spain that he carried his eyes. Spain had not yet received Israelitish
   emigrants; the Apostle wished, this time, to abandon the rule which he
   had observed, until now, of following the track of the synagogues and
   of the earlier Jewish establishments. But Spain was considered as the
   western boundary of the world; so that as Paul believed himself
   authorised to conclude that since he had been in Achaia and in
   Macedonia, and that he had reached Illyria in the same way, when he
   will have been into Spain he would be able to say with truth that the
   name of Jesus has been preached in all the ends of the earth, and that
   the preaching of the Gospel was fully accomplished.

   We shall see that circumstances independent of his will prevented Paul
   from realising the second part of the grand plan that he had proposed
   to himself. He was from forty-five to forty-eight years of age; he had
   certainly still found time and strength to found in this Latin world
   one or two of those missions that he had conducted in the Greek world
   with so much success; but the fatal journey to Jerusalem upset all his
   designs. Paul felt the perils of this journey: everybody around him
   felt them. He could not, nevertheless, renounce a project to which he
   attached much . importance. Jerusalem must lose Paul. It was one of the
   most unfavourable of conditions for nascent Christianity to have its
   capital in a home of such exalted fanaticism. The incident which, ten
   years later, completely destroyed the Church of Jerusalem, rendered to
   Christianity the greatest services that it has ever received in the
   course of its long history. The life-or-death question was to know if
   the growing sect would or would not disengage itself from Judaism. Now
   if the saints of Jerusalem, grouped around the temple, might always
   remain the aristocracy, and, so to speak, "the Court of Rome" of
   Christianity, this great rupture would not have occurred; the sect of
   Jesus, like that of John, would have died out obscurely, and Christians
   would have been lost amongst the sectarian Jews of the first and second
   century.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVIII.

  RETURN OF PAUL TO JERUSALEM.

   Paul and the deputies of the Churches set out then from Cenchrea,
   having with them the contributions of the faithful for the poor of
   Jerusalem, and took their way towards Macedonia This was in some sort
   the first pilgrimage to the Holy Land, the first journey of a troop of
   converted pious people to the cradle of their faith. It seems that the
   ship, during a part of the voyage, was chartered at their expense, and
   that it obeyed their orders; but it must have been a simple decked
   boat. They made fifteen or twenty leagues a day; each evening they
   stopped to pass the night amongst the islands or the ports which
   bestrew the coast, and slept in the taverns near the shore. There were
   often many people there, and amongst the number good men who were not
   far from the kingdom of God. The barque, meanwhile, with its elevated
   poop and prow, was drawn upon the sand or anchored under some shelter.

   We do not know if the Apostle touched at Thessalonica this time; but it
   is not probable that he did, since it would have been far out of his
   way. At Neapolis Paul wished to visit the Church of Philippi, which was
   a very short distance from it. He went forward with his companions, and
   asked them to wait for him at Troas. As for himself, he went to
   Philippi, celebrated Easter there, and rested with the persons whom he
   loved the most in the world, during the seven days in which they ate
   unleavened bread. At Philippi Paul again found the disciple who, at the
   time of his second mission, had directed his first steps in Macedonia,
   and who, most probably, was none other than St Luke. He took him with
   him again, and thus added to the journey a chronicler who has
   transmitted to us impressions of it with infinity of charm and of
   truth.

   When the days of unleavened bread were finished, Paul and Luke
   re-embarked at Neapolis. They had evidently contrary winds, for they
   took five days to go from Neapolis to Troas. In this last town, all the
   apostolic company was complete. There was, as we have already said, a
   Church at Troas; the Apostle passed seven days with it, and consoled it
   much. An incident added to the general emotion. The morning of
   departure was a Sunday; in the evening the disciples met together
   according to custom, to break bread. The room in which they were was
   one of those lofty chambers which are so agreeable in the East,
   especially in the seaports. The meeting was numerous and solemn. Paul
   saw everywhere signs of his future trials. In his sermon he spoke much
   of his approaching end, and declared to those present that he bade them
   an eternal farewell. This was in the month of May; the window was open,
   and numerous lamps lighted the room. Paul spoke all the evening with an
   indefatigable enthusiasm; at midnight he was still speaking, and they
   had not broken bread, when suddenly a cry of horror was raised. A young
   man named Eutychus, seated upon the ledge of the window, had allowed
   himself to fall into a profound sleep, and dropped from the third floor
   upon the ground. They raised him, and they believed him to be dead.
   Paul, convinced of his miraculous powers, did not hesitate to do what
   Elisha is said to have done: he stretched himself upon the fainting
   man, he put his chest upon his chest, his arms upon his arms, and soon
   announced in an assured tone that he for whom they wept was still
   alive. The young man, in truth, had only been bruised by the fall; he
   did not take long to come to himself again. The joy was great, and all
   believed it a miracle. They remounted into the upper room, broke bread,
   and Paul continued their conversation until sunrise.

   Some hours afterwards the ship set sail. The deputies and the disciples
   only were on board, Paul preferring to travel on foot, or at least by
   land, from Troas to Assos (about eight leagues). Assos was to be their
   meeting-place. From this time forth, Paul and his companions never
   separated. On the first day, they went from Assos to Mitylene, where
   they put in; on the second, they followed the Straits between Chios and
   the Peninsula of Clazomenes; on the third they touched at Samos; but,
   for a reason which we do not know, Paul and his companions preferred to
   pass the night at the anchorage of Trogyle, under the promontory of the
   neighbouring Cape, at the foot of Mount Mycala. They had thus passed
   before Ephesus without landing there. It was the Apostle who had wished
   it: he feared lest the friendship of the faithful of Ephesus might
   hinder him, and that he could not tear himself away from a town which
   was very dear to him; but he much wished to celebrate Pentecost at
   Jerusalem, and twenty-three or twenty-four days having elapsed since
   Easter, there was no time to be lost. On the morrow, a short sail
   brought the faithful company from Trogyle to one of the ports of
   Miletus. There Paul felt deep misgiving as to the propriety of having
   passed without giving any sign of his existence to his beloved
   community of Ephesus. He sent one of his companions to inform it that
   he was some leagues from it, and to invite the elders or wardens to
   come to him. They came with eagerness, and when they were re-united,
   Paul addressed to them a touching discourse, which was a summary, and
   the last words of his apostolic life.

   "Since the day when I first came into Asia, you know what I have been
   for you. You have seen me serve God in humility, in tears, in
   temptations, and using all my strength to preach unto the Jews and
   Gentiles the return to God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And now,
   behold I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem. I know not what awaits
   me; I only know that, from town to town, the spirit announces to me
   that bonds and afflictions wait upon me. But it matters little to me; I
   am going to sacrifice my life voluntarily, provided that I finish my
   course, and that I accomplish the mission that I have received of the
   Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Oh, you to all
   of whom I have preached the Kingdom of God, I know that you will no
   more see my face; I protest then from this day, that I am innocent of
   the loss of those who will perish; for I have never neglected to make
   known to you the will of God. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and
   to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers; be
   true pastors of the Church that the Lord has purchased with his own
   blood; for I know that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter
   in, not sparing the flock. And from the midst of you shall men arise,
   speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore
   watch, and remember that by the space of three years I ceased not to
   warn everyone night and day with tears. And now, I recommend you to the
   grace of God, who is able to give you a place among the heavenly
   bodies. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel. You know
   that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and unto those of
   my companions. I have shown you how by work one can still support the
   weak, and to justify the words of the Lord Jesus: It is more blessed to
   give than to receive.'"

   All then fell on their knees and prayed. Only stifled sobs were heard.
   The words of Paul, "You will see my face no more," had pierced them to
   the heart. The elders of Ephesus in turn approached the Apostle, bent
   their heads on his neck, and embraced him. They then conducted him to
   the port, and only left the shore when the ship set sail, taking the
   Apostle far from that Ægean sea which had been the scene of his
   contests, and the theatre of his prodigious activity.

   A good wind abaft carried the apostolic company from the port of
   Miletus to Cos. On the morrow they reached Rhodes, and on the third day
   Patara, upon the coast of Lycia. There they found a ship loading for
   Tyre. The little coasting that they had done along the coast of Asia
   had much delayed them, and their journey would have been indefinitely
   protracted if they were to continue along the coasts of Pamphylia,
   Cilicia, Syria, and Phoenicia. They therefore preferred to take the
   shorter route, and, leaving their first ship there, they embarked on
   that which was about to sail for Phoenicia. The western coast of Cyprus
   was directly in their way. Paul could see from afar that Neo-Paphos,
   which he had visited thirteen years before, at the beginning of his
   apostolic career. He left it upon his left, and after a voyage of
   probably six or seven days, he arrived at Tyre.

   Tyre had a church, dating from the first missions which followed the
   death of Stephen. Although Paul had had nothing to do with its
   foundation, he was known and loved there. In the quarrel which divided
   the rising sect, in that great rent between Judaism and the strange
   child to which Judaism had given birth, the Church of Tyre was
   decidedly of the party of the future. Paul was very well received, and
   passed seven days there. All the faithful of the place dissuaded him
   strongly from going to Jerusalem, and asserted that they had
   manifestations of the Spirit absolutely contrary to the plan. But Paul
   persisted, and chartered a ship for Ptolemais. On the day of his
   departure, all the faithful, with their wives and children, conducted
   him out of the town to the shore. The pious company knelt down on the
   sand and prayed. Paul bade them farewell; the Apostle and his
   companions re-embarked, and the people of Tyre returned sadly to their
   homes.

   They reached Ptolemais the same day. There also were some brethren; he
   saluted them and stayed for a day with them. Then the Apostle left the
   sea. Going round Carmel, he reached in one day Cæsarea in Palestine.
   They stayed at the house of Philip, one of the seven primitive deacons,
   who for many years had been settled at Cæsarea. Philip had not taken,
   like Paul, the title of Apostle, although in reality he had exercised
   the functions of one. He contented himself with the name of
   "Evangelist," which designated apostles of the second rank, with the
   much more coveted title of "one of the seven."

   Paul found here much sympathy, and remained several days at Philip's
   house. Whilst there, the prophet Agabus arrived from Judæa. Paul and he
   had known each other at Antioch fourteen years before. Agabus imitated
   the manners of the ancient prophets, and affected to act in a
   symbolical fashion. He entered in a mysterious manner, approached Paul,
   and took from him his girdle. They followed his movements with
   curiosity and terror. With the girdle of the Apostle that he had taken,
   Agabus bound his own legs and hands. Then suddenly breaking the
   silence, he said, in an inspired tone,--"Thus saith the Holy Ghost, so
   shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and
   shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles." The emotion was of
   the liveliest kind. The companions of Paul and the faithful of Cæsarea
   with one voice begged the Apostle to give up his journey. Paul was
   inflexible, and declared that chains could not frighten him, since he
   was ready to die at Jerusalem for the name of Jesus. His disciples saw
   plainly that he would not yield, and finished by saying,--"The will of
   the Lord be done." Then they began their preparations for departing.
   Many of the faithful of Cæsarea joined themselves to the caravans.
   Mnason, of Cyprus, a very old disciple, who had a house at Jerusalem,
   but who at this moment was at Cæsarea, was of the number. The Apostle
   and his following should lodge at his house. They mistrusted the
   welcome they would receive from the Church: there was much trouble and
   apprehension in all the company.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIX.

  LAST STAY OF PAUL AT JERUSALEM--HIS APPREHENSION.

   Paul entered into that fatal town of Jerusalem for the last time, some
   days, it seems, after the feast of Pentecost (July 58). His company,
   formed of delegates from the Churches of Greece, of Macedonia, and of
   Asia, of his disciples, and of the faithful of Ceesarea who had wished
   to accompany him, were sufficient to give a warning to the Jews. Paul
   began to be well known. His arrival had been waited for by the
   fanatics, some had probably received from Corinth and Ephesus notice of
   his return. Jews and Judæo-Christians appeared to have agreed to
   slander him. They everywhere represented him as an apostate, as the
   desperate enemy of Judaism, as a man who ran all over the world to
   destroy the law of Moses and the biblical traditions. His doctrine upon
   meats sacrificed to idols everywhere excited angry passions. They
   maintained that he disobeyed the decrees of the Council of Jerusalem as
   to the observances connected with meats and marriage. They represented
   him as a second Balaam, sowing scandal before the sons of Israel,
   teaching them to practise idolatry, and to cohabit with Pagans. His
   doctrine of justification by faith and not by works was energetically
   repudiated. Whilst they admitted that converted Pagans were not obliged
   under the Law in its entirety, they maintained that nothing could
   exempt a Jew from the duties inherited by him. But Paul thought nothing
   of this view; he gave himself the same liberties as his converts; he
   was no longer a Jew in any degree.

   The first brethren that the new arrivals met on the day of their
   arrival had welcomed them cordially. But it is already very remarkable
   that neither the apostles nor the elders came to meet the one man, who,
   accomplishing the boldest oracles of the prophets, had brought the
   nations and the far-off isles tributaries to Jerusalem. They waited for
   his visit with a coldness more politic than Christian, and Paul had to
   pass alone, with some humble brethren, the first evening of his last
   stay at Jerusalem.

   St James the Great was, as we have already seen, the sole and absolute
   head of the Church of Jerusalem. Peter was certainly absent, and very
   probably established at Antioch; it is probable that John, according to
   his custom, had accompanied him. The Judæo-Christian party reigned thus
   without any counterbalances at Jerusalem. James, blinded by the respect
   of every one who surrounded him, proud, moreover, of the bond of
   relationship which united him to Jesus, represented a conservative
   principle of weighty solemnity, a kind of obstinate papacy in his
   narrow mind. Around him, a numerous party, more Pharisaical than
   Christian, carried the taste for the observances of the Law to nearly
   the same degree as the zealots, and imagined that the new movement had
   for its essence a redoubling of devotion. These exalted ones gave
   themselves the name of "the poor," Ebionim, ptochdi, and gloried in it.
   There were many rich people in this community, but they were unpopular;
   they were considered to be as proud and tyrannical as the Sadducees.
   Fortunes, in the East, scarcely ever have an honest origin; of every
   rich man it may be said, without much chance of mistake, that he or one
   of his ancestors has been a conqueror, or a thief, a usurer, or a
   rogue. The association of ideas which, especially amongst the English
   everywhere collocates honesty with richness, has never been found in
   the East. Judæa, at least, thought of things in the opposite sense. For
   the saints of Jerusalem "rich" was synonymous with "enemy" and
   "evil-doer." The ideal of impiety was in their eyes the opulent
   Sadducee, who persecuted them, dragged them before the tribunals.
   Passing their life around the temple, they were like good little
   brotherhoods, occupied in praying for the people. They were, in every
   case, pronounced Jews and certainly Jesus would have been surprised if
   he could have seen what his doctrine had become in the hands of those
   who boasted kinship with him both in the Spirit and in the Flesh.

   Paul, accompanied by the deputies of the Churches, went to see James on
   the morning after his arrival, All the elders were assembled in the
   house of St James. They gave each other the kiss of peace. Paul
   presented the deputies to James: they gave the money which they had
   brought. Then he recounted the great things that God had done in the
   Pagan world by his ministry; the elders gave thanks to God for them.
   Was the reception, however what they had a right to expect? We may
   doubt if it were. The author of the Acts has so completely modified, in
   view of his system of conciliation, the recital of the assembly of
   Jerusalem in 51, that one must believe that he has in like manner
   greatly modified in his recital the events which he himself took part
   in. In the first place, his inaccuracy is shown by comparing his
   accounts with the Epistle to the Galatians. In the second, there are
   grave reasons for supposing that he has in like manner sacrificed truth
   to the necessities of policy. At first, the apprehensions that Paul
   showed beforehand as to the temper with which the saints of Jerusalem
   would receive his offering could not have been without some foundation.
   In the second place, the account of the author of the Acts contains
   more than one suspicious feature. The Judæo-Christians are there
   represented as the enemies of Paul, almost as much so as the pure Jews.
   These Judæo-Christians have the worst opinion of him; the elders did
   not conceal the fact that the report of his arrival was annoying to
   them, and might provoke a manifestation on their part. The elders do
   not say that they share in these prejudices; but they excuse them, and
   in every case it is easy to see from their words that a great
   proportion of the Christians of Jerusalem, so far from being ready to
   welcome the Apostle, needed to be calmed and reconciled to him. It is
   remarkable, also, that the author of the Acts speaks only of the
   collection after a time and in the most indirect fashion. If the
   offering had been welcomed as it should have been, why does he not say
   so, when Paul in three of his epistles devotes entire pages to this
   object? It is hardly to be denied that Simon Magus, in the majority of
   the cases in which Christian tradition refers to him, may be the
   pseudonym of the Apostle Paul. The story according to which this
   impostor wished to buy apostolic powers with money, may very possibly
   be a translation of the ungracions reception accorded by the Apostles
   of Jerusalem to the collection of Paul. It would perhaps be dangerous
   to affirm so much, but it is quite conceivable that an assembly of
   ill-disposed elders may have represented the generous act of one who
   was not of their opinion as an attempt at corruption.

   If the elders of Jerusalem had not been narrow-minded in the extreme,
   how is the strange discourse which the author of the Acts attributes to
   them, and which betrays all their embarrassment, to be explained? The
   presentation, in fact, was scarcely complete, when they said to
   Paul,--"Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which
   believe; and they are all zealous of the Law: and they are informed of
   thee that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to
   forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise their children,
   neither to walk after the customs. What is it therefore? From all sides
   they come to learn of thy arrival. Do therefore this that we say to
   thee: We have four men which have a vow on them; them take, and purify
   thyself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave
   their heads: and all may know that those things whereof they were
   informed concerning thee are nothing, but that thou thyself also
   walkest orderly, and keepest the Law."

   Thus to him who brought to them the homage of a world, these narrow
   souls replied only by a mark of defiance. Paul ought to expiate by a
   mummery his prodigious conquests. It was necessary that he should give
   some satisfaction to this littleness of mind. He must do this in
   company with four mendicants, too poor to afford to have their heads
   shaven at their own expense. They were under a vow, and, according to
   the superstition, he must recognise them as his companions. Such is the
   strange condition of humanity, that no one need be astonished at such a
   spectacle. Men are too numerous for it to be possible to establish
   anything in this world, without making concessions to mediocrity. To
   conquer the scruples of the weak, one must be either utterly
   disinterested, or very powerful. Those whose position obliges them to
   reckon with the crowd are led to demand of great men independent of
   singular inconsequences. Every thought vigorously avowed is in the
   government of the world an embarrassment. Apology, proselytism
   themselves, when they imply a little genius, are, for conservative
   folk, suspected things. See those eloquent laymen who in our days have
   attempted to enlarge Catholicism and to reconcile it with the
   sympathies of a part of society which was until then closed to
   Christian feeling; what have they obtained from the Church to which
   they have brought crowds of new adherents? A disavowal. The successors
   of St James the Great have found it prudent to condemn them, even
   whilst profiting by their success. They have accepted their offering
   without thanks; they have said to them as to Paul, "Brethren, ye see
   these thousands of old believers who hold to things that you pass by in
   silence: when you speak to men of the world, take care, leave the
   novelties which scandalise them, and sanctify yourselves with us."

   What was Paul to do, placed thus between his great principle of the
   inutility of works, and the immense interest he had in not breaking
   with the Church of Jerusalem? His position was cruel. To submit himself
   to customs that he held to be useless and almost an insult to
   Jesus--since if he had allowed it to be believed that salvation is
   obtainable by anything other than the merits of Christ, he would have
   to put himself in flagrant contradiction with the doctrine which he had
   everywhere preached, and which in his great general epistle especially
   he had developed with an unparalleled force. Why, besides, did they ask
   him to put in force a disused rite, one devoid of all efficacy, and
   nearly an absolute negation of the new dogma? To show that he is really
   a Jew,--to refute in a peremptory fashion the rumour spread abroad that
   he has ceased to be a Jew, that he no more holds by the Law and
   traditions? Now, assuredly, he admits them no more. Was not connivance
   at this misunderstanding unfaithfulness to Christ? All that must have
   caused Paul to hesitate, and agitated him profoundly. But a higher
   principle, which dominated his life, made him conquer his repugnance.
   Above his opinions and private sentiments, Paul placed charity. Christ
   has delivered us from the Law; but if in profiting by the liberty that
   Christ has given us, we offend our brother, it is much better to
   renounce this liberty and to return to slavery. It is in virtue of this
   principle that Paul, as he says, makes himself all things to all
   men,--a Jew with the Jews, a Gentile with the Gentiles. In accepting
   the proposition of James and of the elders, he applies his favourite
   principle; he submits himself then. Never, perhaps, in the life of the
   Apostle, did he make a more considerable sacrifice to his work. The
   heroes of practical life have other duties than those of contemplative
   life. The first duty of the latter is to sacrifice action to ideas, to
   say what they think, or do not think, in the exact measure in which
   they think it; the first duty of the others is frequently to sacrifice
   their ideas, sometimes even their most definite principles, for the
   good of the cause the triumph of which they have at heart.

   What they asked Paul, besides, was less to shave his head and become a
   Nazarite himself, than to pay the expenses of four Nazarites, who had
   nothing wherewith to pay for the sacrifices offered on occasions of
   this kind. This was a work much esteemed among the Jews. There were
   around the temple troops of poor men who had made vows, and who
   expected some rich man to pay for them. "To shave a Nazarite" was an
   act of piety, and occasions are cited in which powerful personages, as
   an expressing of thankfulness for a blessing from heaven, made
   thousands of them shave; much the same as in the Middle Ages it was
   meritorious to pay men to make pilgrimages and to enter into monastic
   life. Paul, in the midst of the poverty which reigned in the Church of
   Jerusalem, passed for a rich man. He was asked as a rich devotee, and
   to prove publicly that he remained faithful to the practices of his
   country. James, much inclined towards exterior observances, was
   probably the inspirer of this grotesque idea. They urged, furthermore,
   that such observances had nothing to do with converted Pagans. His only
   motive in complying was that they should not allow it to be believed
   that the frightful scandal of a Jew not practising the Law of Moses was
   possible. So great was the fanaticism inspired by the Law, that such a
   phenomenon appeared more extraordinary than the overturning of the
   world and the total overthrow of creation.

   Paul then placed himself in the company of the four poor men. Those who
   accomplished such vows began by purifying themselves, afterwards they
   entered into the temple, remained shut up there for a certain number of
   days, according to the vow that they had made--a period of from seven
   to thirty days--abstained from wine, and cut off their hair. When the
   term of days was reached, they offered sacrifices that were paid for at
   a sufficiently high price. Paul submitted himself to all. On the morrow
   of his visit to James's house, he betook himself to the temple, and got
   his name inscribed for seven days; and then fulfilled all the customary
   rites, greater during these days of humiliation, in which, by a
   voluntary weakness, he accomplished with men in rags an obsolete action
   of devotion, which when at Corinth or at Thessalonica he had denounced
   with all the force and independence of his genius.

   Paul was already at the fifth day of his vow, when an incident which
   was only too easy to foresee decided the remainder of his career, and
   engaged him in a series of troubles, which he ended only with his
   death.

   During the seven days which had elapsed since his arrival at Jerusalem,
   the hate of the Jews against him was terribly exasperated; they had
   seen him walk in the town with Trophimus of Ephesus, who was one of the
   uncircumcised. Some Jews of Asia, who recognised Trophimus, spread the
   rumour that Paul had introduced him into the temple. That was assuredly
   false, besides to have done so would have exposed him to certain death.
   Paul had undoubtedly not for a moment thought of making his Christians
   share in the religious practices of the temple. These practices were
   for him absolutely barren: their continuation was almost an insult to
   the merits of Christ. But religious hate needs little stimulus when a
   pretext is wanted for acts of violence. The populace of Jerusalem were
   soon persuaded that Paul had committed a crime which could only be
   washed out in blood. Like all the great revolutionists, Paul discerned
   the impossibility of living. The enmities that he had raised began to
   league themselves: the chasm was deepening around him. His companions
   were strangers at Jerusalem; the Christians of that city held him for
   an enemy, and opposed themselves to him nearly as bitterly as did the
   fanatical Jews. In analysing carefully certain features of the account
   as given in the Acts, in taking notice of the reiterated warnings
   which, during all his return voyage, exposed to Paul the snares
   prepared against him at Jerusalem, we ask ourselves if these
   Judæo-Christians, whose malevolent temper was asserted by the elders,
   and from whom they feared a hostile demonstration, did not contribute
   to increase the storm which was about to burst upon the Apostle.
   Clemens Romanus attributes the loss of the Apostle "to envy." It is
   frightful to think so, but it agrees well with the iron law which will
   rule human affairs until the day of the final triumph of God. I perhaps
   deceive myself, but when I read the twenty-first chapter of the Acts,
   an invincible suspicion rises within me; something, I do not know what,
   tells me that Paul was lost by these "false brethren" who overran the
   world in his footsteps, to oppose his work, and to represent him as
   another Balaam.

   Be that as it may, the signal of the riot came from the Jews of Asia
   who had seen him with Trophimus. They recognised him in the temple
   whilst he accomplished the proscribed rite with the Nazarites. "Help,
   help! children of Israel!" cried they. "Here is the man who preaches
   everywhere against the Jewish people, against the Law, against this
   holy place. Here is the profaner of the temple--he who has introduced
   Pagans into the sanctuary." The whole town was soon in an uproar. A
   great crowd assembled. The fanatics seized Paul; their resolute
   intention was to kill him. But to shed blood in the interior of the
   temple would have been a pollution of the holy place. They dragged Paul
   then outside the temple, and had scarcely got there when the Levites
   closed the doors behind him. They took it to be their duty to beat him.
   Such indeed would have been his fate if the Roman authority, who alone
   maintained any shadow of order in this chaos, had not intervened to
   tear him from the hands of the madmen.

   The procurator of Judæa, ever since the death of Agrippa the First,
   resided habitually at Cæsarea, a Roman town, ornamented with statues,
   an enemy of the Jews, and opposed in all ways to Jerusalem. The Roman
   power at Jerusalem was, in the absence of the procurator, represented
   by the tribune of the cohort, who resided with all his armed force in
   the tower of Antonia, at the north-west angle of the temple. The
   tribune, at this time, was a certain Lysias, Greek or Syrian by birth,
   who, by protections bought with money, had obtained from Claudius the
   title of Roman citizen, and had since then added to his name that of
   Claudius. At the news of the tumult, he ran with some centurions and a
   detachment, by one of the staircases which placed the tower in
   communication with the outer courts. The fanatics then ceased to strike
   Paul. The tribune seized and bound him with two chains, asked him who
   he was, and what he had done; but the tumult prevented a word being
   heard. The Jewish riot was something frightful. Those strong irritated
   figures, those large eyes starting from their sockets, those gnashings
   of teeth, those vociferations, those men flinging dust into the air,
   tearing their clothes, or throwing themselves about convulsively, gave
   the looker-on the idea of demons. Although the crowd was unarmed, the
   Romans were not altogether free from a certain fear of such madmen.
   Claudius Lysias gave the order to lead Paul to the tower. The excited
   crowd followed them, uttering cries of death. At the foot of the
   staircase, the press was such that the soldiers were obliged to take
   Paul in their arms and to carry him. Claudius Lysias tried in vain to
   calm the tumult. He somewhat hastily concluded, or it was perhaps
   suggested by ill-informed persons, that the man whom he had arrested
   was the Jew of Egypt who, a short time before, had led out with him
   into the desert some thousands of zealots, announcing to them that he
   would immediately realise the kingdom of God. They did not know what
   had become of this impostor, and at any riot they fancied they might
   see him re-appear among the agitators.

   When they had reached the door of the tower, Paul spoke in Greek to the
   tribune, and begged him to let him speak to the people. The latter,
   surprised that the prisoner knew Greek, and recognising at least that
   he was not the Egyptian false prophet, granted his request. Paul then,
   standing upon the staircase, made a sign with his hand that he wished
   to speak. Silence was obtained, and, when they heard him speak Hebrew
   (that is to say, Syro-Chaldean), they redoubled their attention. Paul
   recounted, in the form which was habitual to him, the history of his
   conversion and of his calling. They soon interrupted him; the cries,
   "Kill him! kill him!" began again; the anger was at its height.

   The tribune commanded the prisoner to enter the citadel. He understood
   nothing of this affair; though a brutal and mean soldier, he thought to
   explain it by torturing him as being the cause of all the trouble. They
   seized Paul, and had already tied him upon the post to receive the
   blows of the scourge, when he declared to the centurion who presided at
   the torture that he was a Roman citizen. The effect of this word was
   always very great. The executioners receded; the centurion referred to
   the tribune; the tribune was very much surprised. Paul had the
   appearance of a poor Jew. "Is it true that thou art a Roman citizen?"
   Claudius asked him. "Yes." "But I paid a large sum to obtain that
   title." "But I was free born," replied Paul. The stupid Claudius began
   to be afraid; his poor brain tortured itself to find any meaning in
   this business. Outrages against the rights of Roman citizens were
   punished very severely. The very fact of having tied Paul to the post
   with the view of flagellation was an offence,--an act of violence which
   would have remained unknown if it had been done by an obscure man,
   might now become a very grievous matter. Finally Claudius hit upon the
   idea of convoking for the morrow the high priest and the Sanhedrim, in
   order to know what complaint they made against Paul, because he himself
   could find none.

   The high priest was Ananias, son of Nébédés, who by a rare exception
   had filled this high office for ten years. He was a man very much
   respected, in spite of his gluttonous habits, which were proverbial
   among the Jews. Independently of his office, he was one of the first
   men of the nation; he belonged to that family of Hanan, which one is
   sure to find upon the judicial bench whenever it is a case of
   condemning the Christians, the popular saints, the innovators of all
   kinds. Ananias presided over the assembly. Claudius Lysias ordered Paul
   to be released from his chains, and caused him to be brought in: he
   himself looking on. The discussion was extremely tumultuous. Ananias
   flew into a passion, and, for a word which appeared to him blasphemous,
   ordered his assessors to smite Paul upon the mouth. "God shall smite
   thee, thou whited wall," replied Paul, "for sittest thou to judge me
   after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?"
   "What! revilest thou God's high priest?" said the assistants. Paul,
   changing his mind, said, "I wist not, brethren, that he was the high
   priest, for if I had known I should not have spoken thus; for it is
   written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.'" This
   moderation was skilfully calculated. Paul had remarked, indeed, that
   the assembly was divided into two parties, animated by very diverse
   sentiments towards him: the high Sadducee clergy were absolutely
   hostile to him; but he could make himself understood to a certain point
   by the Pharisee middle-class. "Brethren," cried he, "I am a Pharisee,
   the son of a Pharisee. Do you know why they accuse me? For my hope in
   the resurrection of the dead." It was putting the finger upon an open
   sore. The Sadducees denied the resurrection, the existence of angels
   and of spirits; the Pharisees admitted all. The stratagem of Paul
   succeeded marvellously; war was soon in the assembly. Pharisees and
   Sadducees were more eager to fight amongst themselves than to destroy
   their common enemy. Many Pharisees even took up the defence of Paul,
   and affected to find the recital of his vision probable. "Finally,"
   said they, "what complaint have you against this man? Who knows if a
   spirit or an angel has not spoken to him?"

   Claudius Lysias assisted open-mouthed at this debate, utterly unmeaning
   as it was for him. He saw the moment when, as on the night before, Paul
   was about to be torn to pieces. He therefore gave orders to a squadron
   of soldiers to descend into the hall, to rescue Paul from the hands of
   those present, and to reconduct him to the tower. Lysias was much
   embarrassed. Paul, however, rejoiced in the glorious witness that he
   had just borne to Christ. The following night he had a vision. Jesus
   appeared to him and said, "Be of good cheer: for as thou hast testified
   of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness to me also at Rome."

   The hate of the fanatics, during this time, did not remain inactive. A
   certain number of these zealots or hired murderers, always ready to
   draw the dagger in defence of the Law, conspired to kill Paul. They
   bound themselves by a vow, under the most terrible anathemas, neither
   to eat nor to drink whilst Paul remained alive. The conspirators were
   more than forty in number; they took their oath on the morning of the
   day which followed the assembly of the Sanhedrim. To gain their ends,
   they went to the priests, explained to them the plan which they had
   formed, agreed with them to intervene with the Sanhedrim to ask the
   tribune for a new appearance of Paul on the morrow. The conspirators
   proposed to seize their opportunity and kill Paul on the way. But the
   secret of the plot was ill kept; it came to the knowledge of a nephew
   of Paul, who lived in Jerusalem. He ran to the barrack and revealed all
   to Paul; Paul had him led to Claudius Lysias by a centurion. The
   tribune took the young messenger by the hand, led him aside, obtained
   from him all the details of the plot, and sent him away, commanding him
   to keep silence.

   From this time Claudius Lysias no longer hesitated. He resolved to send
   Paul to Cæsarea; on the one hand, to do away with all pretext for
   disturbances in Jerusalem, and, on the other, to extricate himself by
   transferring this difficult affair to the procurator. Two centurions
   received orders to form an escort capable of resisting any attempts at
   carrying Paul off. It was composed of two hundred soldiers, of seventy
   cavalry, and of two hundred of those policemen who served at what were
   called the custodia militaris, that is to say, men who guarded
   prisoners, fastened to them by means of a chain going from the right
   hand of the captive to the left hand of his guardian. Horses were also
   ordered for Paul, and the whole were to be ready by the third hour of
   the night (nine o' clock in the evening). Claudius Lysias wrote at the
   same time to the procurator Felix an elogium, that is to say, a letter,
   to explain the affair to him, declaring that, for his part, he only saw
   in all that some trifling questions of religion, without anything that
   deserved death or imprisonment; that, moreover, he had announced to the
   accusers that they were also to present themselves before the
   procurator.

   These orders were promptly executed. A forced march was made in the
   night, and in the morning the troop reached Antipatris, which is more
   than half-way from Jerusalem to Cæsarea. There, all danger of surprise
   having disappeared, the escort divided itself: the four hundred
   infantry, after a halt, returned to Jerusalem; the detachment of
   cavalry alone accompanied Paul to Cæsarea. The Apostle thus re-entered
   as a prisoner (beginning of August 58) the town which he had left
   twelve years before, in spite of sinister forebodings that his habitual
   courage prevented him from listening to. His disciples rejoined him
   after a little time.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XX.

  CAPTIVITY OF PAUL AT CÆSAREA OF PALESTINE.

   Felix then governed Judæa with the powers of a king and the soul of a
   slave. He was the freedman of Claudius, and brother of that Pallas who
   had made the fortune of Agrippina, and of Nero. He had all the
   immorality of his brother, but not his administrative talents. Named,
   by the influence of Pallas, procurator of Judæa, in 52, he there showed
   himself cruel, debauched, greedy. Nothing was above his ambition. He
   was successively married to three queens, and kinsman by marriage of
   the Emperor Claudius. At the period at which we are, his wife was
   Drusilla, sister of Herod Agrippa II., whom he had carried off by
   infamous practices from her first husband, Aziz, King of Emesus. There
   was no crime of which he was not considered capable; people even went
   as far as accusing him of practising brigandage on his own account, and
   of using the dagger of the assassin to gratify his hatreds. Such were
   the men upon whom the highest functions had devolved since Claudius
   gave up everything to the freedmen. They were no longer Roman knights,
   grave functionaries like Pilate, or Coponius; they were covetous
   lackeys, proud, dissolute, profiting by the political abasement of that
   poor old Oriental world to gorge themselves at their ease, and to
   wallow in the mud. Never since has anything so horrible and so shameful
   been seen.

   The chief of the squadron who had led Paul away, delivered up to Felix,
   on his arrival, the elogium and the prisoner. Paul appeared for an
   instant before the procurator, who asked him of what country he was.
   The elogium, assigned to the accused a privileged situation. Felix said
   that he would hear the cause when the accusers should have arrived.
   Whilst waiting, he commanded that Paul should be guarded, not in the
   prison, but in the ancient palace of Herod the Great, which had now
   become the residence of the procurators. At this moment, doubtless,
   Paul was trusted to a soldier (frumentarius), who was placed over him
   to guard him and to present him whenever required.

   At the end of three days, the Jewish accusers arrived. The high priest
   Ananias had come in person, accompanied by some elders. Hardly knowing
   how to speak Greek and Latin, and full of confidence in the official
   rhetoric of the time, they had taken as an assistant a certain
   Tertullus, an advocate. The hearing took place immediately. Tertullus,
   according to the rules of his profession, began by the captatio
   benevolentiæ. He impudently praised the government of Felix, spoke of
   the happiness that they enjoyed under his administration, of the public
   gratitude, and he begged him to listen with his habitual kindness. Then
   he approached his subject, treated of Paul as a pest, as a disturber of
   Judaism, as the chief of the heresy of the Nazarenes, as a busybody,
   ever occupied in exciting sedition amongst his co-religionists
   throughout the world. He insisted upon the alleged violation of the
   temple, which constituted a capital crime, and maintained that in
   seeking to take possession of Paul, they had only wished to judge him
   according to the Law.

   Upon a sign from Felix, Paul then began to speak. He argued that his
   conduct in the temple had been that of the most peaceful Jew,--that he
   had not disputed there or brought the mob together,--that he had not
   preached once at Jerusalem,--that he was, indeed, heretical if it be
   heretical to believe all that is written in the Law and the Prophets,
   and to hope for the resurrection of the dead; at bottom, the only crime
   of which they accused him was believing in the resurrection; "but,"
   added he, "the Jews themselves believe in that. . . ." With regard to
   the Jews, it was a skilful apology, clever rather than sincere, since,
   avoiding the real difficulty, it sought to make out that there was an
   understanding when there was nothing of the kind, thus evading the
   question at issue in a fashion which has since been often imitated by
   Christian apologists. Felix, who interested himself very little about
   the dogma of the resurrection, remained indifferent. He abruptly broke
   up the sitting, declaring that he would not decide anything until he
   had been better informed, and had seen Claudius Lysias. In the
   meantime, he ordered the centurion to treat Paul with gentleness, that
   is to say, to leave him unchained, in the state of custodia libera, and
   to permit his disciples as well as his friends to approach him and to
   serve him.

   Some days after, Felix and Paul again met. Drusilla, who was a Jewess,
   desired, it is said, to hear the Apostle expound the Christian faith.
   Paul spoke of justice, of temperance, of judgment to come. The subjects
   were not altogether agreeable to these new catechumens. Felix, himself,
   appears to have been afraid: "That is enough for the moment," said he
   to Paul; "I will make you come to me at the proper time." Having
   learned that Paul had brought with him a considerable sum of money, he
   hoped to obtain from him or his friends a heavy bribe for his release.
   It appears that he saw him several times, and he sought to suggest this
   idea to him. But the Apostle not lending himself to it, Felix wished at
   least to gather some profit, for his popularity was much shaken. The
   greatest pleasure that one could do for the Jews was to persecute those
   whom they regarded as their enemies. He therefore kept Paul in prison,
   and even put him in chains. Paul passed two years in this way.

   The prison, even with the augmentation of the chain and of the soldier
   (frumentarius), was far from being then what it is to-day, a total
   privation of liberty. Every one who had pecuniary resources could
   arrange with his gaoler, and might attend to his business. In any case,
   he saw his friends, he was not rigorously confined; in short, he might
   do pretty much as he pleased. There is no doubt, consequently, that
   Paul, although a prisoner, continued his apostleship at Cæsarea. Never
   had he had with him such disciples. Timothy, Luke, Aristarchus of
   Thessalonica, Tychicus, and Trophimus, carried his orders in all
   directions, and helped with the correspondence that he kept up with his
   Churches. In particular, he charged Tychicus and Trophimus with a
   mission for Ephesus. Trophimus, it appears, fell ill at Miletus.

   As a consequence of the stay that they thus made in Palestine, the most
   intelligent members of the Churches of Macedonia and of Asia found
   themselves in prolonged relations with the Churches of Judæa. Luke, in
   particular, who until then had not left Macedonia, was initiated into
   the traditions of Jerusalem. He was without doubt vividly impressed by
   the majesty of Jerusalem, and he imagined the possibility of a
   reconciliation between the principles maintained on the one side by
   Paul, on the other by the elders of Jerusalem. He thought that the best
   thing was to forget reciprocal injuries, to prudently veil these
   wrongs, and to speak no more of them. The fundamental ideas which must
   preside at the editing of his great manuscript probably then developed
   themselves in his mind. By these various contacts, a uniform tradition
   was established. The Gospels were elaborated by the intimate
   communication of all the parties which constituted the Church. Jesus
   had created the Church; the Church created him in its turn. That grand
   ideal which was to dominate humanity for centuries, truly went out from
   the bowels of humanity by a kind of secret agreement amongst all those
   to whom Jesus had bequeathed His Spirit.

   Felix finally succumbed, not under the indignation that his crimes must
   have produced, but before the difficulties of a situation against which
   not even a procurator could make head. The life of a Roman governor at
   Cæsarea had become insupportable; the Jews and the Syrians or Greeks
   fought incessantly; the most honest man could hardly hold the balance
   between such ferocious hatreds. The Jews, according to their custom,
   complained at Rome. They there exercised a sufficiently strong
   influence, especially with Poppæa, and, thanks to the intrigues which
   Herod Agrippa II. directed, Pallas had lost much of his credit, above
   all since the year 55. He could not prevent the disgrace of his
   brother: he only succeeded in saving him from death. They gave as a
   successor to Felix a firm and just man, Porcius Festus, who arrived in
   the month of August of the year 60 at Cæsarea.

   Three days after his disembarkation, he betook himself to Jerusalem.
   The high priest Ismael, son of Phabi, and all the party of the
   Sadducees (that is to say, the high priesthood), surrounded him, and
   one of the first demands that they addressed to him was relative to
   Paul. They wished him to be brought back to Jerusalem, and they had
   arranged for an ambuscade to kill him on the way. Festus replied that
   he was about shortly to set out for Cæsarea, that it was consequently
   better that Paul should remain there, but that, as the Romans never
   pronounced a sentence without the accused being confronted with his
   accusers, it would be necessary that those of the notables who wished
   to charge Paul should come with him. At the end of eight or ten days he
   returned to Cæsarea, and, on. the morrow, he caused Paul and his
   adversaries to appear before his court. After a confused debate, Paul
   maintaining that he had done nothing against the Law, or against the
   temple, or against the Emperor, Festus proposed to him that he should
   re-conduct him to Jerusalem, where he could, under his surveillance and
   his high jurisdiction, defend himself before a Jewish court. Festus
   undoubtedly did not know of the project of the conspirators; he hoped,
   by this dismissal, to disembarrass himself of a tedious cause, and to
   do an agreeable thing for the Jews, who asked from him so urgently for
   the transfer of the prisoner.

   But Paul carefully guarded himself from accepting. He was possessed by
   the desire of seeing Rome. The capital of the world had for him a
   powerful and mysterious charm. He maintained his right to be judged by
   a Roman tribunal, protested that no one had any right to deliver him to
   the Jews, and pronounced the solemn words:--"I appeal unto Cæsar."
   These words pronounced by a Roman citizen, did away with all provincial
   jurisdictions. The citizen, in whatever part of the world he was, had
   the right of being taken to Rome to be judged. The governors of
   provinces, moreover, often referred to the Emperor and his council the
   causes of religious law. Festus, surprised at first by this appeal,
   conversed for a moment with his assessors, then replied by the
   formula:--"Hast thou appealed unto Cæsar? unto Cæsar shalt thou go."

   The sending of Paul to Rome was from this time decided, and they only
   waited for an opportunity for him to set out. A singular incident
   occurred in the interval. Some days after the return of Festus to
   Cæsarea, Herod Agrippa II. and his sister Bernice, who lived with him,
   not without a suspicion of infamy, came to salute the new procurator.
   They remained for several days at Cæsarea. In the course of the
   conversations that they had with the Roman functionary, the latter
   spoke to him of the prisoner whom Felix had left him. "His accusers,"
   said he, "have not charged against him any of the crimes that I was
   waiting to see established. There is nothing in all this business but
   subtleties relative to their superstitions, and of a certain Jesus who
   is dead, and whom Paul affirms to be living." "Truly," said Agrippa, "I
   have for a long time wished to hear this man speak." "Thou shalt hear
   him to-morrow," replied Festus.

   On the morrow, then, Agrippa and Bernice came to the tribunal with a
   brilliant suite. All the officers of the army, and the chief people of
   the town, were present. No official procedure could take place after
   the appeal to the Emperor, but Festus declared that, according to his
   principles, the sending of a prisoner to Rome must be accompanied by a
   report. He pretended to wish for fuller information for the report that
   he had to make in this case; he alleged his ignorance of Jewish
   affairs, and declared that he wished to follow in this matter the
   advice of King Agrippa, Agrippa invited Paul to speak. Paul then made,
   with a certain oratorical complacency, one of those discourses that he
   had repeated a hundred times. He esteemed himself happy in having to
   plead his cause before a judge as well instructed in Jewish questions
   as was Agrippa. He intrenched himself more strongly than ever in his
   ordinary system of defence, asserted that he said nothing that was not
   in the Law and the Prophets,--maintained that he was persecuted only
   because of his belief in the resurrection, the faith which is that of
   all the Israelites, which gives a moving motive for their piety, a
   foundation for their hopes. He explained, by quotations from the
   Scriptures, his favourite propositions--the knowledge that Christ must
   suffer, that he must be the first to rise from the dead. Festus, a
   stranger to all these speculations, took Paul for a dreamer, a clever
   man in his way, but wandering and chimerical. "Paul, thou art beside
   thyself; much learning doth make thee mad." Paul invoked the witness of
   Agrippa, who was more versed in Jewish theology, knowing the prophets,
   and whom he supposed instructed in the facts relative to Jesus. Agrippa
   replied evasively. A grain of pleasantry mixed itself, it seems, in the
   conversation. "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian," said
   Agrippa. Paul, with his usual wit, took the tone of the court, and
   finished by wishing that they all resembled him. "Except these bonds,"
   replied he, with a gentle irony.

   The effect of this courteous sitting, so different from the audiences
   in which the Jews figured as prosecutors, was finally favourable to
   Paul. Festus, with his Roman good sense, declared that this man had
   done nothing wrong. Agrippa was of opinion that, if he had not appealed
   to the Emperor about it, they might have released him. Paul, who wished
   to go to Rome conducted by the Romans themselves, did not withdraw his
   appeal. They then put him, with some other prisoners, in the guard of a
   centurion of the cohort prima Augusta Italica, named Julius, who must
   have been an Italian. Timothy, Luke, and Aristarchus of Thessalonica
   were the only disciples who travelled with Paul.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXI.

  PAUL' S VOYAGE AS A PRISONER.

   The party embarked upon a ship of Adramyttium in Mysia, which was
   returning thither. At one of the intermediate ports, Julius counted on
   finding a ship about to sail for Italy, and on taking passage in it. It
   was about the time of the autumnal equinox, so that they had a rough
   voyage in prospect.

   On the second day they arrived at Sidon. Julius, who treated Paul very
   kindly, allowed him to go down into the town, to visit his friends and
   to receive their attentions. The route had been to take the open sea
   and to gain the south-west point of Asia Minor; but the winds were
   contrary. It was necessary to run to the north, sailing close to
   Phoenicia, then to go to the coast of Cyprus, leaving it on the port
   hand. They followed the channel between Cyprus and Cilicia, traversed
   the gulf of Pamphylia, and arrived at the port of Myra in Lycia. There
   they left the Adramyttium ship. Julius having found one of Alexandria
   which was about to sail for Italy, made a bargain with the captain, and
   transported his prisoners thither. The ship was very full: there were
   on board 276 persons.

   Navigation from this time was most difficult. After several days they
   had only reached Cnidus. The captain wished to enter the port, but the
   north-east wind did not allow him, and it was necessary to allow
   himself to be carried under the isle of Crete. They soon recognised
   Cape Salmone, which is the eastern point of the island. The island of
   Crete forms an immense barrier, making of the portion of the
   Mediterranean that it covers at the south a kind of large port,
   sheltered from the tempest coming from the archipelago. The captain had
   the very natural idea of profiting by this advantage. He still followed
   the eastern side of the island, not without great perils; then, getting
   the island on the windward side, he entered the calm waters of the
   south. There was a little port there very deep, shut in by an islet,
   and bordered by two sandy beaches between which a point of rocks juts
   out, so that it seems divided into two parts. It is what is called
   Kali-Limenes (the Fair Havens); near to it was a town named Lasæa or
   Alassa They took shelter here; the crew and passengers were excessively
   fatigued, so that they made a rather pro-longed stay in this little
   port.

   When it was a question of setting out again, the season was far
   advanced. The great fast of the Atonement (Kippour), in the month of
   Pisri (October), had passed; this fast marked for the Jews the limit
   after which maritime journeys were not safe. Paul, who had acquired
   much authority upon the ship, and who, moreover, had had long
   experience of the sea, gave his opinion. He predicted great dangers and
   disasters if they re-embarked.

   "Nevertheless the centurion" (we cannot be as much surprised by the
   fact as the narrator of the Acts) "believed the master and the owner of
   the ship, more than those things which were spoken by Paul." The port
   of Kali-Limenes was not a good one to winter in. The general opinion
   was that they must try, in order to pass the winter months there, to
   gain the port of Phoenice, situated upon the southern coast of the
   island, where the men who knew those regions promised good anchorage. A
   day when there was a breeze from the south they believed to be the
   favourable one; they weighed anchor, and tacked along the side of the
   island, as far as Cape Littinos; then they sailed with a fair wind
   towards Phoenice.

   The crew and the passengers believed themselves at the end of their
   troubles, when suddenly one of those sudden hurricanes from the east,
   that the sailors of the Mediterranean call Euroclydon, smote the
   island. The ship was soon unable to keep her head to the wind: the
   seamen had to run before it. They passed near a little isle named
   Clauda; they put themselves for a moment under the shelter of this
   isle, and profited by the short respite to hoist up with great
   difficulty the boat, which every moment ran the risk of breaking up.
   They then took precautions, in view of that shipwreck which all held to
   be inevitable. They bound the hull of the ship with cables, they struck
   the yards, and abandoned themselves to the wind. The second day, the
   tempest was quite as great; wishing to lighten the ship, they threw the
   cargo overboard. On the third day, they disencumbered themselves of the
   furniture and utensils that were not necessary for working the ship.
   The following days were frightful, they did not see the sun for a
   moment, or a single star; they did not know where they were going.
   Besides being strewn with islands, the Mediterranean presents between
   Sicily and Malta, to the west, Pelponnesus and Crete; to the east,
   southern Italy and Epiræus; to the north, the coast of Africa; to the
   south, a large square of open sea, where the wind meets with no
   obstacle, and rolls the sea into enormous waves. It was that place that
   the ancients often called the Adriatic. The general opinion of the men
   on board was that the ship was running upon the Syrtes of Africa, where
   loss of life and goods was certain. All hope seemed gone; no one dreamt
   of taking any food; it was, moreover, impossible to prepare it. Paul
   alone remained confident. He was convinced that he should see Rome, and
   that he would appear before the tribunal of the Emperor. He encouraged
   the crew and passengers; he even said, it appears, that a vision had
   revealed to him that not a person should perish, God having granted to
   him the life of all, in spite of the mistake that they had made in
   leaving the Fair Havens against his advice.

   On the fourteenth night, indeed, after leaving this port, towards the
   middle of the night, the sailors believed that they recognised the
   land. They cast the lead, and found twenty fathoms; a short time after
   it was fifteen fathoms. They believed that they were about to run upon
   the rocks; at once four anchors were thrown from the poop; they lashed
   the rudders, that is to say, the two large paddles which projected from
   the two sides of the quarter-deck; the ship stopped; they waited
   anxiously for the day. The sailors then, profiting by their skill in
   the work, wished to save themselves at the expense of the passengers.
   Under the pretext of throwing the anchors from the bow, they launched
   the boat, and tried to get on shore. But the centurion and the
   soldiers, warned, it is said by Paul, of this disloyal conduct, opposed
   themselves. The soldiers cut the cables which held the sloop, and let
   it go adrift. Paul, however, spoke consolingly to all, and assured them
   that no one would suffer in his body. During these crises of maritime
   life, existence is as it were suspended; when they are ended, we
   perceive that we are dirty and hungry. For fourteen days scarcely any
   one had taken any nourishment; it might have been from emotion; it
   might have been from sea-sickness. Paul, in waiting for the day,
   advised all to eat, in order to give them-selves strength, in view of
   the work which remained to be done. He set the example himself, and,
   like a pious Jew, broke bread, according to custom, after a prayer of
   thanksgiving, which he offered in the presence of all. The passengers
   imitated him, and took heart again. They still lightened the ship,
   throwing into the sea all the corn which remained.

   Day at last appeared, and they saw the land. It was deserted: no one
   could make out where he was. They had before them a bay, having at its
   extremity a sandy beach. They resolved to run aground upon the sand.
   The wind was in their favour. They then cut the cables of the anchors,
   and allowed them to get lost in the sea; they loosed the ropes which
   bound the rudders. hoisted the foresail, and steered towards the shore.
   The ship fell upon a neck of land beaten on two sides by the sea, and
   there remained. The prow sank into the sand and remained immovable; the
   poop, on the contrary, beaten by the waves, bumped and dislocated
   itself at each blow from the sea. Safety under these conditions is easy
   enough upon the shores of the Mediterranean, the ebb and flow of the
   tide being inconsiderable. The grounded ship made a shelter, and it was
   easy to establish communication with the land. But the presence of
   prisoners where there were so many passengers aggravated the situation.
   They might save themselves by swimming, and escape their guardians; the
   soldiers, therefore, proposed to kill them. The honest Julius rejected
   this barbarous notion. He ordered those who knew how to swim to cast
   themselves into the sea and to gain the land, in order to aid the
   escape of the others. Those who did not know how to swim escaped upon
   planks and wreckage of every kind; nobody was lost.

   They soon learnt that they were at Malta. The island, having submitted
   to the Romans for a long time, and already much Latinised, was rich and
   prosperous. The inhabitants showed themselves humane, and lighted a
   large fire for the unfortunate castaways. The latter, indeed, were
   shivering with cold, and the rain continued to fall in torrents. A very
   simple incident, exaggerated by the disciples of Paul, then took place.
   In taking a bundle of sticks to throw into the fire, Paul at the same
   time took up a viper. They believed that it had bitten his hand. The
   idea got into their heads that this man was a murderer, followed by
   Nemesis, who not having been able to overtake him by means of the
   tempest, had pursued him on land. The men of the country, as it
   appears, waited to see him any moment swell and fall dead. As nothing
   happened, they decided, it is said, to look upon him as a god.

   Near the bay in which the ship had got wrecked were the lands of a
   certain Publius, princeps of the municipality that the island formed
   with Gaul. This man came to find that the castaways, or at least a
   party of them, of whom were Paul and his companions, had gathered in
   his homestead, and he treated them during three days with much
   hospitality. Here soon happened one of those miracles that the
   disciples of Paul believed they saw at every instant. The Apostle
   cured, they say, the father of Publius by the imposition of hands, he
   suffering from fever and dysentery. His reputation of wonder-worker
   spread in the island, and they brought to him sick people from all
   sides. It is not said, however, that he founded a Church there. These
   low African populations could not raise themselves above their
   sensuality and gross superstition.

   The ancient coasting trade of the Mediterranean came to a standstill
   during the winter. The frightful voyage that they had just made offered
   no encouragement to take to the sea again. They remained for three
   months at Malta, from the 15th of November 60 to the 15th of February
   61 or thereabouts. Then Julius negotiated for the passage of his
   prisoners and of his soldiers upon another Alexandrian ship, the Castor
   and Pollux, which had wintered in the port of the island. They reached
   Syracuse, where they remained for three days; then sailed with a fair
   wind towards the straits, and touched at Rhegium. On the morrow, a good
   wind blew from the south, and bore the ship in two days to Puteoli.

   Puteoli, as we have already said, was the port of Italy most frequented
   by the Jews. It was there also that ships from Alexandria discharged
   their cargoes. There had been formed there, at the same time as at
   Rome, a little Christian society. The Apostle was very warmly welcomed
   by it, and entreated him to stay for seven days, which, thanks to the
   kindness of the good centurion Julius, who was much attached to him,
   was possible. They subsequently set out for Rome. The rumour of Paul's
   arrival was spread amongst the faithful of that city, to some of whom
   he was already, since the sending of his epistle, a known and respected
   master. At the relay, at the stage called Appii Forum, forty-three
   miles from Rome, upon the Appian Way, the first deputation reached him.
   Ten miles further on, to set out from the Pontine Marshes, near a spot
   called "The Three Taverns," on account of the hostelries which were
   established there, a new group came to join. The joy of the Apostle
   declared itself by lively expressions of thanks. The holy flock
   traversed not without emotion the eleven or twelve leagues which
   separated "The Three Taverns" from Port Capena, and always following
   the Appian Way, by Aricia and Albania, the prisoner Paul entered Rome
   in the month of March in the year 64, in the seventh year of the reign
   of Nero, under the consulship of Cæsennius Pætus and Petronius
   Tarpilien.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXII.

  A GLANCE OVER THE WORK OF PAUL.

   Paul had still three years to live, and those three years were not the
   least busy of his laborious existence. We shall even see that his
   apostolic career had in all probability an extension. But these new
   journeys he made in the west, not in the countries which he had already
   visited. These journeys, if they really took place, were, besides,
   without appreciable results for the propagation of Christianity. At
   this point we can therefore estimate the work of Paul. Thanks to him, a
   part of Asia Minor had received the seed of Christianity. In Europe,
   Macedonia has been very deeply penetrated, Greece breaks upon its
   borders. If we add to that Italy, from Puteoli to Rome, already
   furrowed by Christians, we shall have the picture of the conquests
   effected by Christianity in the sixteen years that this book embraces.
   Syria, we have seen, had previously received the word of Jesus, and
   possessed organised Churches. The progress of the new faith had been
   really marvellous, and although the world at large occupied itself very
   little with it, the followers of Jesus were already important to those
   without. We shall see them, towards the middle of the year 64, occupy
   the attention of the world, and play a very important part in its
   history.

   In all this history, nevertheless, it is important to avoid a mistake
   which the reading of the Epistles of Paul, and the Acts of the
   Apostles, almost necessarily produces. One would be tempted from such a
   reading to imagine conversions en masse of numerous Churches of entire
   countries adopting the new religion. Paul, who often speaks to us of
   rebellious Jews, never speaks of the immense majority of Pagans who had
   no knowledge of the faith. In reading the journeys of Benjamin of
   Tudela, one would also believe that the world of his time was peopled
   only with Jews. Sects are subject to these optical illusions; for them,
   nothing exists besides themselves; the events which happen amongst them
   appear to them to be the only events interesting to the universe.
   Persons who have had relations with ancient St Simonians are struck
   with the facility with which they consider themselves the centre of
   humanity. The first Christians lived so shut up in their own (little)
   circle, that they knew scarcely anything of the profane world. A
   country was accounted evangelised when the name of Jesus had been
   pronounced there, and when a tenth of the people were converted. A
   Church often did not number more than twelve or fifteen persons.
   Perhaps all the converts of St Paul in Asia Minor, in Macedonia, and
   Greece, did not much exceed a thousand. That small number, that spirit
   of secret companionship, of a little spiritual family, was truly what
   constituted the indestructible strength of those Churches, and made of
   them so many fertile germs for the future.

   One man contributed more than any other to the rapid extension of
   Christianity. That man has torn up the swaddling clothes so narrow and
   so prodigiously dangerous by which he was surrounded from his birth; he
   has proclaimed that Christianity was not a simple reform of Judaism,
   but that it was a complete religion, existing by itself. To say that he
   deserves to be placed in a very elevated rank in history, is to say
   what is self-evident; but it is not necessary to call him a founder.
   Paul well said that he was the least of the Apostles. He had not seen
   Jesus, he had not heard His voice. The divine logic, the parables, he
   scarcely knew. The Christ who personally revealed himself to him is his
   own ghost; he listens to himself, thinking that he hears Jesus.

   Even to speak only of his exterior character, Paul must have been in
   his lifetime less important than we think him. His Churches were either
   not very solid, or else they denied him altogether. The Churches of
   Macedonia and of Galatia, which are truly his own work, were not very
   important in the second and third century. The Churches of Corinth and
   of Ephesus, which were not so exclusively his, went over to his
   enemies, or are not founded canonically enough if they have been
   founded only by him. After his disappearance from the scene of his
   Apostolic contests, we shall see him almost forgotten. His death was
   probably held by his enemies as the death of a firebrand. The second
   century hardly speaks of him, and seems systematically to seek to
   efface his memory. His epistles are read little, and are only
   considered authoritative by a much reduced group of Churches. His
   partisans themselves greatly weaken his pretensions. He left no
   celebrated disciples; Titus, Timothy, and those others who made for him
   a kind of court, disappear without any noise. To tell the truth, Paul
   had too energetic a personality to form an original school. He always
   crushed his disciples; they only played around him the part of
   secretaries, of servants, of couriers. Their respect for their master
   was such that they never dared to teach freely. When Paul was with his
   flock, he existed alone; all others were crushed or seen only through
   him.

   In the third, fourth, and fifth centuries Paul will grow singularly: He
   will become the doctor in an eminent degree, the founder of Christian
   theology The true president of those great Greek Councils, which made
   of Jesus the keystone of metaphysics, was the Apostle Paul.

   But in the Middle Ages, everywhere in the west, his fortune will
   undergo a strange eclipse. Paul will scarcely say anything to the heart
   of the barbarians; out of Rome, he will not be remembered. Latin
   Christianity will scarcely pronounce his name, except as coupled with
   that of his rival. St Paul, in the Middle Ages, is in some sort lost in
   the glory of St Peter. Whilst St Peter moved the world and made it
   tremble and obey, the obscure St Pou plays a secondary part in the
   grand Christian poesy which fills cathedrals and inspires popular
   chants. Scarcely anybody before the sixteenth century utters his name;
   he scarcely appears in monumental inscriptions; he has no devotees,
   they build hardly any churches to him, they burn no wax-tapers to him.
   His associates Titus, Timothy, Pheebe, Lydia, have little place in
   public worship, especially in that of the Latins. They have no legend
   which is worth anything. To have a legend, it is necessary to have
   spoken to the heart of the people--to have struck their imagination.
   Now, what does salvation by faith say, or justification by the blood of
   Christ? Paul was too little sympathetic with the popular conscience,
   and also perhaps too well known in history for a halo of fables to form
   around his head. Talk to me of Peter, who bends the necks of kings,
   breaks empires, walks upon the asp and the basilisk, treads under foot
   the lion and the dragon, holds the keys of heaven!

   The Reformation opens for St Paul a new era of glory and authority.
   Catholicism itself returns, by studies more extended than those of the
   Middle Ages, to juster views upon the Apostle of the Gentiles. From the
   sixteenth century, the name of Paul is everywhere. But the Reformation,
   which has rendered so many services to science and reason, has not been
   known to create a legend. Rome, throwing an obliging veil upon the
   rudenesses of the Epistle to the Galatians, elevates Paul upon a
   pedestal nearly equal to that of Peter. Paul nevertheless does not
   become the saint of the people. What place will criticism give to him?
   What rank will be assigned to him in the hierarchy of those who serve
   the ideal.

   The ideal is served by doing good, by discovering the true, by
   realising the beautiful. At the head of the sacred procession of
   humanity walks the good man, the virtuous man; the second rank belongs
   to the man of truth, knowledge, philosophy; then comes the man of
   beauty, the artist, the poet. Jesus appears to us, under his celestial
   halo, as an ideal of goodness and beauty. Peter loved Jesus, understood
   him, and was, it seems, in spite of some failings, an excellent man.
   What was Paul? He was not a saint. The dominating feature of his
   character is not goodness. He was proud, unbending, unsociable; he
   defends himself; self-assertive (as we say to-day); he uses harsh
   words; he believes himself right; he holds to his opinions; he quarrels
   with various people. He was not a scholar; one can even say that he has
   injured science by his paradoxical contempt of reason, by his eulogy of
   apparent folly, by his apotheosis of transcendental absurdity. Neither
   was he a poet. His writings; works of the highest originality, are
   without charm: the form is harsh and almost devoid of grace. What was
   he then?

   He was eminently a man of action, a strong soul--invading,
   enthusiastic, conquering--a missionary, a propagator, all the more
   ardent because he had at first displayed his fanaticism on the opposite
   side. Now, the man of action, noble as he is when he acts for a noble
   aim, is less near to God than one who has lived for the pure love of
   truth, of the good and the beautiful. The Apostle is naturally rather
   narrow-minded; he wished to succeed, he made sacrifices for that end.
   Contact with reality always soils one a little. The first places in the
   kingdom of heaven are reserved to those whom a ray of grace has
   touched, to those who have only adored the ideal. The man of action is
   always- a feeble artist, for he has not for his only aim that of
   reflecting the splendour of the universe. He could not be a scholar,
   for he regulates his opinions on grounds of political utility; he is
   not even a very virtuous man, for he is never irreproachable, the folly
   and wickedness of men forcing him to make a compact with them. Above
   all things, he is not amiable; the most charming of virtues, reserve,
   is forbidden to him. The world favours the daring, those who help
   themselves Paul, so great, so honest, is obliged to bestow on himself
   the title of Apostle. He is strong in action through his faults; he is
   weak through his virtues. In short, the historical personage who has
   most analogy with St Paul is Luther. Both alike were violent in
   language, both displayed the same passion, the same energy, the same
   noble independence, the same frantic attachment to a proposition once
   embraced, as infallible truth.

   I still persist in maintaining, that in the creation of Christianity
   the part of Paul ought to be treated as much inferior to that of Jesus.
   It is necessary even, according to my idea, to put Paul on a lower
   plane than Francis of Assisi, and the author of the "Imitation," who
   both saw Jesus very nearly. The Son of God is unique. To appear for a
   moment to make a sweet and profound impression, to die very young, that
   is the life of a god. To wrestle, to dispute, to conquer, that is the
   life of a man. After having been for three hundred years the Christian
   doctor in an eminent degree, thanks to orthodox Protestantism, Paul
   seems in our days near the end of his reign: Jesus, on the contrary, is
   more living than ever. It is no more the Epistle to the Romans which is
   the recapitulation of Christianity, it is the Sermon on the Mount. True
   Christianity which will last eternally comes from the Gospels, not from
   the Epistles of Paul. The writings of Paul have been a danger and a
   stumbling-block, the cause of the chief faults of Christian theology.
   Paul is the father of the subtle Augustine, of the arid Thomas Aquinas,
   of the sombre Calvinist, of the bitter Jansenist, of the ferocious
   theology which condemns and predestinates to damnation. Jesus is the
   father of all those who seek in dreams of the ideal the repose of their
   souls. That which gives life to Christianity, is the little that we
   know of the word and of the person of Jesus. The man devoted to the
   ideal, the divine poet, the great artist, defies alone time and
   revolution. Alone he is seated at the right hand of God the Father for
   eternity.

   Humanity, thou art sometimes just, and certain of thy judgments are
   good!

    THE END.

   COLSTON AND COMPANY, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Acts

   [1]13:46   [2]14:27-28   [3]17:22-31   [4]19:8   [5]19:10   [6]19:21
   [7]19:22   [8]20:1   [9]20:1   [10]20:3   [11]20:4   [12]20:16
   [13]20:25   [14]20:29   [15]20:31   [16]24:27

   Romans

   [17]1:7   [18]1:15   [19]12:1-21   [20]14:1-2   [21]14:1-23
   [22]14:3-16   [23]14:3-16   [24]14:3-20   [25]14:17-20   [26]14:21-24
   [27]14:24   [28]15:1-3   [29]15:1-3   [30]15:1-13   [31]15:1-13
   [32]15:8   [33]15:14-33   [34]15:19   [35]15:33   [36]15:33
   [37]15:33   [38]16:1-2   [39]16:2   [40]16:3   [41]16:3-20   [42]16:5
   [43]16:20   [44]16:21-24   [45]16:24   [46]16:24   [47]16:25-27
   [48]16:25-27   [49]16:27   [50]16:40

   1 Corinthians

   [51]2:1   [52]2:16   [53]8:6   [54]16:4   [55]16:7

   2 Corinthians

   [56]1:1   [57]2:1   [58]6:14   [59]8:1   [60]8:1   [61]11:23-27
   [62]12:14   [63]12:21

   Galatians

   [64]2:6

   Ephesians

   [65]6:21

   Colossians

   [66]4:16   [67]5:10   [68]5:14

   2 Thessalonians

   [69]3:10-12

   1 Timothy

   [70]1:3   [71]1:3   [72]1:3   [73]1:3   [74]1:3   [75]1:3   [76]1:3
   [77]1:3   [78]1:20   [79]3:14   [80]3:14   [81]3:16   [82]4:13
   [83]6:13

   2 Timothy

   [84]1:8   [85]1:12   [86]1:15   [87]1:15-18   [88]1:16   [89]1:16-18
   [90]1:16-18   [91]1:17   [92]2:9-10   [93]2:17   [94]2:17
   [95]3:10-11   [96]4:6-8   [97]4:9   [98]4:9-22   [99]4:10   [100]4:10
   [101]4:10   [102]4:10-11   [103]4:11   [104]4:11   [105]4:12
   [106]4:12   [107]4:13   [108]4:13   [109]4:14-15   [110]4:14-15
   [111]4:16   [112]4:17   [113]4:17-18   [114]4:19   [115]4:19-21
   [116]4:19-21   [117]4:20   [118]4:20   [119]4:20   [120]4:21
   [121]4:21   [122]17   [123]18

   Titus

   [124]1:5   [125]1:5   [126]1:5-6   [127]1:6   [128]1:10
   [129]1:12-13   [130]1:12-13   [131]3:12   [132]3:13

   Philemon

   [133]1:24

   Hebrews

   [134]2:3   [135]5:12   [136]10:32   [137]13:7   [138]13:7   [139]13:7
   [140]13:13
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * AGEOSTOIThEOI: [141]1
     * Parachalo: [142]1
     * Parthenichos: [143]1
     * Pros Ebraious: [144]1
     * Pros Ephesious: [145]1
     * Schole Turannou: [146]1
     * Tou gar chai genos esmen: [147]1
     * ChRESTIANOS: [148]1
     * ChRISTIANOS: [149]1
     * dachouos Peritoges: [150]1
     * ousin: [151]1 [152]2
     * parachalo: [153]1
     * ptochdi: [154]1
     * sumbios: [155]1
     * tois agiois tois ousin, chai pistois: [156]1
     * tois ousin: [157]1
     * archiereis: [158]1
     * en Epheso: [159]1 [160]2
     * ergasiai, sunergasai, sumbioseis: [161]1
     * eph'umin kairo: [162]1
     * ho chatechou: [163]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Christus vincit, Christus regit, Christus imperat: [164]1
     * Dominus Vobiscum.: [165]1
     * Emporium: [166]1
     * Oremus: [167]1
     * Schola Tyranni: [168]1
     * Sursum Corda!: [169]1
     * Taberna: [170]1
     * captatio benevolentiæ: [171]1
     * convictum atque confessum id se amore Pauli fecisse.: [172]1
     * custodia libera: [173]1
     * custodia militaris: [174]1
     * dulcis Gallio: [175]1
     * ecclesia: [176]1
     * editio princeps: [177]1
     * elogium: [178]1 [179]2 [180]3
     * episcopi: [181]1
     * ex opere operato: [182]1
     * frumentarius: [183]1 [184]2
     * græculus esuriens: [185]1
     * in Asia Minori, Aquilæ et Priscillæ uxoris ejus.: [186]1
     * in medias res: [187]1
     * indulgere genio: [188]1
     * jus italicum: [189]1
     * ministerium: [190]1
     * paganus: [191]1
     * presbyteri: [192]1
     * prima Augusta Italica: [193]1
     * princeps: [194]1 [195]2
     * propter styli sermonis que distantiam: [196]1
     * proseuchæ: [197]1
     * qui claudit: [198]1
     * religio: [199]1
     * scholæ: [200]1 [201]2
     * seriatim: [202]1
     * unus multorum: [203]1
     * vicus: [204]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * amour propre: [205]1
     * au courant: [206]1 [207]2
     * au fond de nous: [208]1
     * blasé: [209]1
     * chef-d'oeuvre: [210]1
     * compagnon de voyage: [211]1
     * en famille: [212]1
     * en fête: [213]1
     * en rapport: [214]1 [215]2
     * en se passant: [216]1
     * esprit de famille: [217]1
     * et suivi: [218]1
     * fêtes: [219]1 [220]2
     * jeunesse dorée: [221]1
     * le moine hibernais: [222]1
     * personnel: [223]1
     * point d'appui: [224]1
     * protégé: [225]1
     * que suit: [226]1
     * raison d'être: [227]1 [228]2 [229]3
     * spirituelle: [230]1
     * suivi: [231]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [232]vii  [233]iv  [234]vii  [235]viii  [236]ix  [237]x  [238]xi
   [239]xii  [240]xiii  [241]xiv  [242]xv  [243]xvi  [244]xvii
   [245]xviii  [246]xix  [247]xx  [248]xxi  [249]xxii  [250]xxiii
   [251]xxiv  [252]xxv  [253]xxvi  [254]xxvii  [255]xxviii  [256]xxix
   [257]xxx  [258]xxxi  [259]1  [260]2  [261]3  [262]4  [263]5  [264]6
   [265]7  [266]8  [267]9  [268]10  [269]11  [270]12  [271]13  [272]14
   [273]15  [274]16  [275]17  [276]18  [277]19  [278]20  [279]21  [280]22
   [281]23  [282]24  [283]25  [284]26  [285]27  [286]28  [287]29  [288]30
   [289]31  [290]32  [291]33  [292]34  [293]35  [294]36  [295]37  [296]38
   [297]39  [298]40  [299]41  [300]42  [301]43  [302]44  [303]45  [304]46
   [305]47  [306]48  [307]49  [308]50  [309]51  [310]52  [311]53  [312]54
   [313]55  [314]56  [315]57  [316]58  [317]59  [318]60  [319]61  [320]62
   [321]63  [322]64  [323]65  [324]66  [325]67  [326]68  [327]69  [328]70
   [329]71  [330]72  [331]73  [332]74  [333]75  [334]76  [335]77  [336]78
   [337]79  [338]80  [339]81  [340]82  [341]83  [342]84  [343]85  [344]86
   [345]87  [346]88  [347]89  [348]90  [349]91  [350]92  [351]93  [352]94
   [353]95  [354]96  [355]97  [356]98  [357]99  [358]100  [359]101
   [360]102  [361]103  [362]104  [363]105  [364]106  [365]107  [366]108
   [367]109  [368]110  [369]111  [370]112  [371]113  [372]114  [373]115
   [374]116  [375]117  [376]118  [377]119  [378]120  [379]121  [380]122
   [381]123  [382]124  [383]125  [384]126  [385]127  [386]128  [387]129
   [388]130  [389]131  [390]132  [391]133  [392]134  [393]135  [394]136
   [395]137  [396]138  [397]139  [398]140  [399]141  [400]142  [401]143
   [402]144  [403]145  [404]146  [405]147  [406]148  [407]149  [408]150
   [409]151  [410]152  [411]153  [412]154  [413]155  [414]156  [415]157
   [416]158  [417]159  [418]160  [419]161  [420]162  [421]163  [422]164
   [423]165  [424]166  [425]167  [426]168  [427]169  [428]170  [429]171
   [430]172  [431]173  [432]174  [433]175  [434]176  [435]177  [436]178
   [437]179  [438]180  [439]181  [440]182  [441]183  [442]184  [443]185
   [444]186  [445]187  [446]188  [447]189  [448]190  [449]191  [450]192
   [451]193  [452]194  [453]195  [454]196  [455]197  [456]198  [457]199
   [458]200  [459]201  [460]202  [461]203  [462]204  [463]205  [464]206
   [465]207  [466]208  [467]209  [468]210  [469]211  [470]212  [471]213
   [472]214  [473]215  [474]216  [475]217  [476]218  [477]219  [478]220
   [479]221  [480]222  [481]223  [482]224  [483]225  [484]226  [485]227
   [486]228  [487]229  [488]230  [489]231  [490]232  [491]233  [492]234
   [493]235  [494]236  [495]237  [496]238  [497]239  [498]240  [499]241
   [500]242  [501]243  [502]244  [503]245  [504]246  [505]247  [506]248
   [507]249  [508]250  [509]251  [510]252  [511]253  [512]254  [513]255
   [514]256  [515]257  [516]258  [517]259  [518]260  [519]261  [520]262
   [521]263  [522]264  [523]265  [524]266  [525]267  [526]268  [527]269
   [528]270  [529]271  [530]272  [531]273  [532]274  [533]275  [534]276
   [535]277  [536]278  [537]279  [538]280  [539]281  [540]282  [541]283
   [542]284  [543]285  [544]286  [545]287  [546]288  [547]289  [548]290
   [549]291  [550]292  [551]293  [552]294  [553]295  [554]296  [555]297
   [556]298  [557]299  [558]300  [559]301  [560]302  [561]303
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v-p9.1
   2. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=27#vi-p1.3
   3. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=22#x-p22.2
   4. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iii-p32.1
   5. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii-p32.1
   6. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=21#iii-p22.7
   7. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=22#iii-p22.2
   8. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iii-p22.1
   9. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iii-p22.8
  10. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=3#iii-p22.8
  11. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=4#iii-p25.1
  12. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=16#iii-p22.8
  13. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=25#iii-p35.4
  14. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iii-p25.3
  15. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=31#iii-p32.2
  16. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=27#iii-p25.2
  17. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii-p53.1
  18. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii-p53.1
  19. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii-p45.1
  20. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii-p49.9
  21. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii-p45.2
  22. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iii-p49.1
  23. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iii-p49.6
  24. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iii-p49.8
  25. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iii-p49.2
  26. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii-p50.1
  27. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=24#iii-p50.2
  28. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii-p45.6
  29. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii-p52.5
  30. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii-p45.5
  31. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii-p52.6
  32. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iii-p45.7
  33. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii-p46.1
  34. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii-p31.5
  35. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=33#iii-p47.1
  36. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=33#iii-p51.2
  37. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=33#iii-p52.1
  38. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iii-p47.2
  39. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iii-p49.10
  40. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=3#iii-p47.3
  41. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=3#iii-p49.7
  42. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=5#iii-p48.2
  43. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#iii-p51.3
  44. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iii-p50.3
  45. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=24#iii-p51.4
  46. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=24#iii-p52.3
  47. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iii-p45.4
  48. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iii-p51.1
  49. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=27#iii-p52.4
  50. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=40#iii-p52.2
  51. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii-p22.10
  52. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii-p22.10
  53. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#xii-p35.1
  54. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iii-p22.9
  55. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=7#iii-p31.1
  56. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p22.3
  57. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii-p31.2
  58. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii-p44.1
  59. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii-p31.4
  60. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii-p44.2
  61. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#iv-p4.1
  62. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iii-p31.3
  63. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=21#iii-p31.3
  64. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi-p18.1
  65. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=21#iii-p17.1
  66. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii-p19.1
  67. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii-p25.5
  68. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii-p25.5
  69. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv-p5.1
  70. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p21.1
  71. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p22.4
  72. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p23.1
  73. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p23.2
  74. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p23.3
  75. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p32.3
  76. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p32.4
  77. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p33.1
  78. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii-p21.2
  79. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii-p21.3
  80. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii-p22.5
  81. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p21.3
  82. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii-p22.6
  83. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii-p21.4
  84. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii-p24.1
  85. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii-p24.1
  86. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii-p24.10
  87. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii-p38.1
  88. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii-p24.1
  89. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii-p24.3
  90. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii-p24.11
  91. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii-p24.1
  92. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii-p24.2
  93. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii-p24.4
  94. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii-p24.6
  95. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii-p25.8
  96. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii-p24.12
  97. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii-p24.21
  98. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii-p35.1
  99. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii-p24.13
 100. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii-p24.14
 101. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii-p24.15
 102. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii-p25.4
 103. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii-p24.17
 104. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii-p24.22
 105. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii-p24.16
 106. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii-p25.7
 107. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii-p24.8
 108. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii-p24.23
 109. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii-p24.5
 110. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii-p24.18
 111. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii-p24.19
 112. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii-p24.20
 113. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii-p35.2
 114. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii-p24.5
 115. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii-p38.3
 116. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii-p38.4
 117. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iii-p24.7
 118. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iii-p24.9
 119. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iii-p35.3
 120. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=21#iii-p24.21
 121. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=21#iii-p24.24
 122. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iii-p38.2
 123. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii-p38.2
 124. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p26.1
 125. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p28.1
 126. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p27.4
 127. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii-p26.5
 128. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii-p27.2
 129. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii-p26.2
 130. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii-p27.1
 131. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iii-p26.6
 132. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii-p26.7
 133. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii-p25.6
 134. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii-p42.2
 135. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii-p43.2
 136. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iii-p43.4
 137. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii-p43.1
 138. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii-p43.6
 139. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii-p43.7
 140. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iii-p43.3
 141. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p8.1
 142. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p46.2
 143. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p13.2
 144. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p40.1
 145. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.4
 146. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-p13.1
 147. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p10.1
 148. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-p8.1
 149. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-p8.2
 150. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p45.8
 151. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.5
 152. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.7
 153. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p49.3
 154. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-p3.1
 155. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p13.1
 156. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.6
 157. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.3
 158. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-p3.1
 159. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.1
 160. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p16.8
 161. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-p3.1
 162. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p49.5
 163. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p23.2
 164. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-p8.1
 165. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p25.3
 166. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-p6.1
 167. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p25.1
 168. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-p13.4
 169. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p25.2
 170. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-p6.2
 171. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p3.1
 172. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p38.5
 173. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p4.1
 174. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-p19.1
 175. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-p10.1
 176. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-p9.2
 177. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p41.1
 178. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-p19.2
 179. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p2.1
 180. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p2.2
 181. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p26.4
 182. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-p26.1
 183. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p2.3
 184. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p6.1
 185. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p30.2
 186. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p48.1
 187. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p3.2
 188. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p29.1
 189. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-p4.1
 190. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p29.1
 191. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-p9.1
 192. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p26.3
 193. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-p13.1
 194. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-p4.1
 195. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-p10.1
 196. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p42.1
 197. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-p6.1
 198. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p23.1
 199. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-p21.1
 200. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-p13.2
 201. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-p13.3
 202. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p2.1
 203. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-p5.1
 204. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-p8.1
 205. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-p2.1
 206. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p17.2
 207. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-p12.1
 208. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p30.1
 209. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p21.1
 210. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p6.1
 211. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-p10.1
 212. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p49.4
 213. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-p1.2
 214. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p21.2
 215. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-p8.1
 216. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p30.3
 217. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-p1.2
 218. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p27.3
 219. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-p6.1
 220. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-p2.1
 221. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p16.1
 222. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-p12.1
 223. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p36.1
 224. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p19.1
 225. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p13.1
 226. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p45.3
 227. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-p11.1
 228. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-p11.2
 229. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-p28.1
 230. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-p17.1
 231. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-p43.5
 232. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#i-Page_vii
 233. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#i-Page_iv
 234. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_vii
 235. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_viii
 236. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_ix
 237. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_x
 238. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xi
 239. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xii
 240. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xiii
 241. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xiv
 242. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xv
 243. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xvi
 244. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xvii
 245. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xviii
 246. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xix
 247. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xx
 248. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxi
 249. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxii
 250. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxiii
 251. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxiv
 252. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxv
 253. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxvi
 254. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxvii
 255. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxviii
 256. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxix
 257. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxx
 258. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iii-Page_xxxi
 259. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_1
 260. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_2
 261. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_3
 262. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_4
 263. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_5
 264. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_6
 265. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_7
 266. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_8
 267. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_9
 268. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_10
 269. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_11
 270. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#iv-Page_12
 271. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_13
 272. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_14
 273. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_15
 274. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_16
 275. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_17
 276. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_18
 277. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_19
 278. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_20
 279. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_21
 280. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_22
 281. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_23
 282. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_24
 283. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_25
 284. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_26
 285. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_27
 286. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#v-Page_28
 287. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_29
 288. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_30
 289. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_31
 290. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_32
 291. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_33
 292. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_34
 293. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_35
 294. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_36
 295. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_37
 296. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_38
 297. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_39
 298. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_40
 299. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_41
 300. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_42
 301. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_43
 302. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_44
 303. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_45
 304. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_46
 305. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_47
 306. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_48
 307. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_49
 308. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vi-Page_50
 309. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_51
 310. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_52
 311. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_53
 312. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_54
 313. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_55
 314. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_56
 315. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_57
 316. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_58
 317. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#vii-Page_59
 318. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_60
 319. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_61
 320. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_62
 321. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_63
 322. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_64
 323. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_65
 324. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_66
 325. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_67
 326. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_68
 327. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#viii-Page_69
 328. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_70
 329. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_71
 330. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_72
 331. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_73
 332. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_74
 333. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_75
 334. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_76
 335. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_77
 336. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_78
 337. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_79
 338. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_80
 339. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_81
 340. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_82
 341. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_83
 342. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_84
 343. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_85
 344. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#ix-Page_86
 345. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_87
 346. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_88
 347. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_89
 348. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_90
 349. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_91
 350. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_92
 351. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_93
 352. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_94
 353. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_95
 354. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_96
 355. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_97
 356. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_98
 357. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_99
 358. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_100
 359. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_101
 360. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_102
 361. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_103
 362. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_104
 363. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_105
 364. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_106
 365. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_107
 366. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_108
 367. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_109
 368. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#x-Page_110
 369. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_111
 370. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_112
 371. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_113
 372. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_114
 373. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_115
 374. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_116
 375. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_117
 376. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_118
 377. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xi-Page_119
 378. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_120
 379. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_121
 380. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_122
 381. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_123
 382. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_124
 383. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_125
 384. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_126
 385. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_127
 386. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_128
 387. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_129
 388. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_130
 389. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_131
 390. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_132
 391. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_133
 392. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_134
 393. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_135
 394. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_136
 395. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_137
 396. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_138
 397. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_139
 398. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_140
 399. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_141
 400. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_142
 401. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_143
 402. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xii-Page_144
 403. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_145
 404. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_146
 405. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_147
 406. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_148
 407. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_149
 408. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_150
 409. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_151
 410. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_152
 411. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_153
 412. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_154
 413. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_155
 414. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_156
 415. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_157
 416. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_158
 417. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_159
 418. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_160
 419. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiii-Page_161
 420. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_162
 421. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_163
 422. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_164
 423. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_165
 424. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_166
 425. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_167
 426. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_168
 427. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_169
 428. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_170
 429. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_171
 430. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xiv-Page_172
 431. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_173
 432. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_174
 433. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_175
 434. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_176
 435. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_177
 436. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_178
 437. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_179
 438. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_180
 439. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_181
 440. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xv-Page_182
 441. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_183
 442. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_184
 443. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_185
 444. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_186
 445. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_187
 446. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_188
 447. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_189
 448. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_190
 449. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvi-Page_191
 450. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_192
 451. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_193
 452. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_194
 453. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_195
 454. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_196
 455. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_197
 456. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_198
 457. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_199
 458. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_200
 459. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_201
 460. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_202
 461. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_203
 462. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_204
 463. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_205
 464. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_206
 465. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_207
 466. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_208
 467. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_209
 468. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_210
 469. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_211
 470. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_212
 471. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_213
 472. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_214
 473. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_215
 474. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_216
 475. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_217
 476. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_218
 477. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xvii-Page_219
 478. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_220
 479. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_221
 480. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_222
 481. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_223
 482. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_224
 483. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_225
 484. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_226
 485. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_227
 486. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_228
 487. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xviii-Page_229
 488. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_230
 489. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_231
 490. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_232
 491. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_233
 492. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_234
 493. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_235
 494. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_236
 495. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_237
 496. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_238
 497. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_239
 498. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xix-Page_240
 499. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_241
 500. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_242
 501. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_243
 502. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_244
 503. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_245
 504. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_246
 505. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_247
 506. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_248
 507. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_249
 508. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_250
 509. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_251
 510. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_252
 511. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_253
 512. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_254
 513. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_255
 514. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_256
 515. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_257
 516. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_258
 517. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_259
 518. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_260
 519. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xx-Page_261
 520. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxi-Page_262
 521. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxi-Page_263
 522. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxi-Page_264
 523. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxi-Page_265
 524. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxi-Page_266
 525. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxi-Page_267
 526. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_268
 527. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_269
 528. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_270
 529. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_271
 530. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_272
 531. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_273
 532. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_274
 533. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_275
 534. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_276
 535. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_277
 536. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_278
 537. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_279
 538. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_280
 539. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_281
 540. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxii-Page_282
 541. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_283
 542. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_284
 543. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_285
 544. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_286
 545. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_287
 546. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_288
 547. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_289
 548. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiii-Page_290
 549. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-Page_291
 550. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-Page_292
 551. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-Page_293
 552. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-Page_294
 553. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-Page_295
 554. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxiv-Page_296
 555. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_297
 556. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_298
 557. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_299
 558. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_300
 559. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_301
 560. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_302
 561. file:///ccel/r/renan/saintpaul/cache/saintpaul.html3#xxv-Page_303
