     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life
      Creator(s): Law, William (1686-1761)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Classic; Christian Life; Proofed
      LC Call no: BV4500
     LC Subjects:

                  Practical theology

                  Practical religion. The Christian life
     __________________________________________________________________

A SERIOUS CALL TO

A DEVOUT AND HOLY LIFE



   Adapted to the State and Condition of

   All Orders of Christians




   By WILLIAM LAW, A.M.




   He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

   St. LUKE viii. 8.


   And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me.

   REV. xxii. 12.




   LONDON:


   Printed for WILLIAM INNYS,

   at the West End of St. Paul's.


   MDCCXXIX.
     __________________________________________________________________

A SERIOUS CALL TO

A DEVOUT AND HOLY LIFE


  CHAPTER I


   Concerning the nature and extent of Christian devotion.


   DEVOTION is neither private nor public prayer; but prayers, whether
   private or public, are particular parts or instances of devotion.
   Devotion signifies a life given, or devoted, to God.

   He, therefore, is the devout man, who lives no longer to his own will,
   or the way and spirit of the world, but to the sole will of God, who
   considers God in everything, who serves God in everything, who makes
   all the parts of his common life parts of piety, by doing everything in
   the Name of God, and under such rules as are conformable to His glory.

   We readily acknowledge, that God alone is to be the rule and measure of
   our prayers; that in them we are to look wholly unto Him, and act
   wholly for Him; that we are only to pray in such a manner, for such
   things, and such ends, as are suitable to His glory.

   Now let any one but find out the reason why he is to be thus strictly
   pious in his prayers, and he will find the same as strong a reason to
   be as strictly pious in all the other parts of his life. For there is
   not the least shadow of a reason why we should make God the rule and
   measure of our prayers; why we should then look wholly unto Him, and
   pray according to His will; but what equally proves it necessary for us
   to look wholly unto God, and make Him the rule and measure of all the
   other actions of our life. For any ways of life, any employment of our
   talents, whether of our parts, our time, or money, that is not strictly
   according to the will of God, that is not for such ends as are suitable
   to His glory, are as great absurdities and failings, as prayers that
   are not according to the will of God. For there is no other reason why
   our prayers should be according to the will of God, why they should
   have nothing in them but what is wise, and holy, and heavenly; there is
   no other reason for this, but that our lives may be of the same nature,
   full of the same wisdom, holiness, and heavenly tempers, that we may
   live unto God in the same spirit that we pray unto Him. Were it not our
   strict duty to live by reason, to devote all the actions of our lives
   to God, were it not absolutely necessary to walk before Him in wisdom
   and holiness and all heavenly conversation, doing everything in His
   Name, and for His glory, there would be no excellency or wisdom in the
   most heavenly prayers. Nay, such prayers would be absurdities; they
   would be like prayers for wings, when it was no part of our duty to
   fly.

   As sure, therefore, as there is any wisdom in praying for the Spirit of
   God, so sure is it, that we are to make that Spirit the rule of all our
   actions; as sure as it is our duty to look wholly unto God in our
   prayers, so sure is it that it is our duty to live wholly unto God in
   our lives. But we can no more be said to live unto God, unless we live
   unto Him in all the ordinary actions of our life, unless He be the rule
   and measure of all our ways, than we can be said to pray unto God,
   unless our prayers look wholly unto Him. So that unreasonable and
   absurd ways of life, whether in labour or diversion, whether they
   consume our time, or our money, are like unreasonable and absurd
   prayers, and are as truly an offence unto God.

   It is for want of knowing, or at least considering this, that we see
   such a mixture of ridicule in the lives of many people. You see them
   strict as to some times and places of devotion, but when the service of
   the Church is over, they are but like those that seldom or never come
   there. In their way of life, their manner of spending their time and
   money, in their cares and fears, in their pleasures and indulgences, in
   their labour and diversions, they are like the rest of the world. This
   makes the loose part of the world generally make a jest of those that
   are devout, because they see their devotion goes no farther than their
   prayers, and that when they are over, they live no more unto God, till
   the time of prayer returns again; but live by the same humour and
   fancy, and in as full an enjoyment of all the follies of life as other
   people. This is the reason why they are the jest and scorn of careless
   and worldly people; not because they are really devoted to God, but
   because they appear to have no other devotion but that of occasional
   prayers.

   Julius [1] is very fearful of missing prayers; all the parish supposes
   Julius to be sick, if he is not at Church. But if you were to ask him
   why he spends the rest of his time by humour or chance? why he is a
   companion of the silliest people in their most silly pleasures? why he
   is ready for every impertinent [2] entertainment and diversion? If you
   were to ask him why there is no amusement too trifling to please him?
   why he is busy at all balls and assemblies? why he gives himself up to
   an idle, gossiping conversation? why he lives in foolish friendships
   and fondness for particular persons, that neither want nor deserve any
   particular kindness? why he allows himself in foolish hatreds and
   resentments against particular persons without considering that he is
   to love everybody as himself? If you ask him why he never puts his
   conversation, his time, and fortune, under the rules of religion?
   Julius has no more to say for himself than the most disorderly person.
   For the whole tenor of Scripture lies as directly against such a life,
   as against debauchery and intemperance: he that lives such a course of
   idleness and folly, lives no more according to the religion of Jesus
   Christ, than he that lives in gluttony and intemperance.

   If a man was to tell Julius that there was no occasion for so much
   constancy at prayers, and that he might, without any harm to himself,
   neglect the service of the Church, as the generality of people do,
   Julius would think such a one to be no Christian, and that he ought to
   avoid his company. But if a person only tells him, that he may live as
   the generality of the world does, that he may enjoy himself as others
   do, that he may spend his time and money as people of fashion do, that
   he may conform to the follies and frailties of the generality, and
   gratify his tempers and passions as most people do, Julius never
   suspects that man to want a Christian spirit, or that he is doing the
   devil's work. And if Julius was to read all the New Testament from the
   beginning to the end, he would find his course of life condemned in
   every page of it.

   And indeed there cannot anything be imagined more absurd in itself,
   than wise, and sublime, and heavenly prayers, added to a life of vanity
   and folly, where neither labour nor diversions, neither time nor money,
   are under the direction of the wisdom and heavenly tempers of our
   prayers. If we were to see a man pretending to act wholly with regard
   to God in everything that he did, that would neither spend time nor
   money, nor take any labour or diversion, but so far as he could act
   according to strict principles of reason and piety, and yet at the same
   time neglect all prayer, whether public or private, should we not be
   amazed at such a man, and wonder how he could have so much folly along
   with so much religion?

   Yet this is as reasonable as for any person to pretend to strictness in
   devotion, to be careful of observing times and places of prayer, and
   yet letting the rest of his life, his time and labour, his talents and
   money, be disposed of without any regard to strict rules of piety and
   devotion. For it is as great an absurdity to suppose holy prayers, and
   Divine petitions, without a holiness of life suitable to them, as to
   suppose a holy and Divine life without prayers.

   Let any one therefore think how easily he could confute a man that
   pretended to great strictness of life without prayer, and the same
   arguments will as plainly confute another, that pretends to strictness
   of prayer, without carrying the same strictness into every other part
   of life. For to be weak and foolish in spending our time and fortune,
   is no greater a mistake, than to be weak and foolish in relation to our
   prayers. And to allow ourselves in any ways of life that neither are,
   nor can be offered to God, is the same irreligion, as to neglect our
   prayers, or use them in such a manner as make them an offering unworthy
   of God.

   The short of the matter is this; either reason and religion prescribe
   rules and ends to all the ordinary actions of our life, or they do not:
   if they do, then it is as necessary to govern all our actions by those
   rules, as it is necessary to worship God. For if religion teaches us
   anything concerning eating and drinking, or spending our time and
   money; if it teaches us how we are to use and contemn the world; if it
   tells us what tempers we are to have in common life, how we are to be
   disposed towards all people; how we are to behave towards the sick, the
   poor, the old, the destitute; if it tells us whom we are to treat with
   a particular love, whom we are to regard with a particular esteem; if
   it tells us how we are to treat our enemies, and how we are to mortify
   and deny ourselves; he must be very weak that can think these parts of
   religion are not to be observed with as much exactness, as any
   doctrines that relate to prayers.

   It is very observable, that there is not one command in all the Gospel
   for public worship; and perhaps it is a duty that is least insisted
   upon in Scripture of any other. The frequent attendance at it is never
   so much as mentioned in all the New Testament. Whereas that religion or
   devotion which is to govern the ordinary actions of our life is to be
   found in almost every verse of Scripture. Our blessed Saviour and His
   Apostles are wholly taken up in doctrines that relate to common life.
   They call us to renounce the world, and differ in every temper and way
   of life, from the spirit and the way of the world: to renounce all its
   goods, to fear none of its evils, to reject its joys, and have no value
   for its happiness: to be as new-born babes, that are born into a new
   state of things: to live as pilgrims in spiritual watching, in holy
   fear, and heavenly aspiring after another life: to take up our daily
   cross, to deny ourselves, to profess the blessedness of mourning, to
   seek the blessedness of poverty of spirit: to forsake the pride and
   vanity of riches, to take no thought for the morrow, to live in the
   profoundest state of humility, to rejoice in worldly sufferings: to
   reject the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
   life: to bear injuries, to forgive and bless our enemies, and to love
   mankind as God loveth them: to give up our whole hearts and affections
   to God, and strive to enter through the strait gate into a life of
   eternal glory.

   This is the common devotion which our blessed Saviour taught, in order
   to make it the common life of all Christians. Is it not therefore
   exceeding strange that people should place so much piety in the
   attendance upon public worship, concerning which there is not one
   precept of our Lord's to be found, and yet neglect these common duties
   of our ordinary life, which are commanded in every page of the Gospel?
   I call these duties the devotion of our common life, because if they
   are to be practised, they must be made parts of our common life; they
   can have no place anywhere else.

   If contempt of the world and heavenly affection is a necessary temper
   of Christians, it is necessary that this temper appear in the whole
   course of their lives, in their manner of using the world, because it
   can have no place anywhere else. If self-denial be a condition of
   salvation, all that would be saved must make it a part of their
   ordinary life. If humility be a Christian duty, then the common life of
   a Christian is to be a constant course of humility in all its kinds. If
   poverty of spirit be necessary, it must be the spirit and temper of
   every day of our lives. If we are to relieve the naked, the sick, and
   the prisoner, it must be the common charity of our lives, as far as we
   can render ourselves able to perform it. If we are to love our enemies,
   we must make our common life a visible exercise and demonstration of
   that love. If content and thankfulness, if the patient bearing of evil
   be duties to God, they are the duties of every day, and in every
   circumstance of our life. If we are to be wise and holy as the new-born
   sons of God, we can no otherwise be so, but by renouncing everything
   that is foolish and vain in every part of our common life. If we are to
   be in Christ new creatures, we must show that we are so, by having new
   ways of living in the world. If we are to follow Christ, it must be in
   our common way of spending every day.

   Thus it is in all the virtues and holy tempers of Christianity; they
   are not ours unless they be the virtues and tempers of our ordinary
   life. So that Christianity is so far from leaving us to live in the
   common ways of life, conforming to the folly of customs, and gratifying
   the passions and tempers which the spirit of the world delights in, it
   is so far from indulging us in any of these things, that all its
   virtues which it makes necessary to salvation are only so many ways of
   living above and contrary to the world, in all the common actions of
   our life. If our common life is not a common course of humility,
   self-denial, renunciation of the world, poverty of spirit, and heavenly
   affection, we do not live the lives of Christians.

   But yet though it is thus plain that this, and this alone, is
   Christianity, a uniform, open, and visible practice of all these
   virtues, yet it is as plain, that there is little or nothing of this to
   be found, even amongst the better sort of people. You see them often at
   Church, and pleased with fine preachers: but look into their lives, and
   you see them just the same sort of people as others are, that make no
   pretences to devotion. The difference that you find betwixt them, is
   only the difference of their natural tempers. They have the same taste
   of the world, the same worldly cares, and fears, and joys; they have
   the same turn of mind, equally vain in their desires. You see the same
   fondness for state and equipage, the same pride and vanity of dress,
   the same self-love and indulgence, the same foolish friendships, and
   groundless hatreds, the same levity of mind, and trifling spirit, the
   same fondness for diversions, the same idle dispositions, and vain ways
   of spending their time in visiting and conversation, as the rest of the
   world, that make no pretences to devotion.

   I do not mean this comparison, betwixt people seemingly good and
   professed rakes, but betwixt people of sober lives. Let us take an
   instance in two modest women: let it be supposed that one of them is
   careful of times of devotion, and observes them through a sense of
   duty, and that the other has no hearty concern about it, but is at
   Church seldom or often, just as it happens. Now it is a very easy thing
   to see this difference betwixt these persons. But when you have seen
   this, can you find any farther difference betwixt them? Can you find
   that their common life is of a different kind? Are not the tempers, and
   customs, and manners of the one, of the same kind as of the other? Do
   they live as if they belonged to different worlds, had different views
   in their heads, and different rules and measures of all their actions?
   Have they not the same goods and evils? Are they not pleased and
   displeased in the same manner, and for the same things? Do they not
   live in the same course of life? does one seem to be of this world,
   looking at the things that are temporal, and the other to be of another
   world, looking wholly at the things that are eternal? Does the one live
   in pleasure, delighting herself in show or dress, and the other live in
   self-denial and mortification, renouncing everything that looks like
   vanity, either of person, dress, or carriage? Does the one follow
   public diversions, and trifle away her time in idle visits, and corrupt
   conversation, and does the other study all the arts of improving her
   time, living in prayer and watching, and such good works as may make
   all her time turn to her advantage, and be placed to her account at the
   last day? Is the one careless of expense, and glad to be able to adorn
   herself with every costly ornament of dress, and does the other
   consider her fortune as a talent given her by God, which is to be
   improved religiously, and no more to be spent on vain and needless
   ornaments than it is to be buried in the earth? Where must you look, to
   find one person of religion differing in this manner, from another that
   has none? And yet if they do not differ in these things which are here
   related, can it with any sense be said, the one is a good Christian,
   and the other not?

   Take another instance amongst the men? Leo [3] has a great deal of good
   nature, has kept what they call good company, hates everything that is
   false and base, is very generous and brave to his friends; but has
   concerned himself so little with religion that he hardly knows the
   difference betwixt a Jew and a Christian.

   Eusebius, [4] on the other hand, has had early impressions of religion,
   and buys books of devotion. He can talk of all the feasts and fasts of
   the Church, and knows the names of most men that have been eminent for
   piety. You never hear him swear, or make a loose jest; and when he
   talks of religion, he talks of it as of a matter of the last concern.

   Here you see, that one person has religion enough, according to the way
   of the world, to be reckoned a pious Christian, and the other is so far
   from all appearance of religion, that he may fairly be reckoned a
   heathen; and yet if you look into their common life; if you examine
   their chief and ruling tempers in the greatest articles of life, or the
   greatest doctrines of Christianity, you will not find the least
   difference imaginable.

   Consider them with regard to the use of the world, because that is what
   everybody can see.

   Now to have right notions and tempers with relation to this world, is
   as essential to religion as it have right notions of God. And it is as
   possible for a man to worship a crocodile, and yet be a pious man, as
   to have his affections set upon this world, and yet be a good
   Christian.

   But now if you consider Leo and Eusebius in this respect, you will find
   them exactly alike, seeking, using, and enjoying, all that can be got
   in this world in the same manner, and for the same ends. You will find
   that riches, prosperity, pleasures, indulgences, state equipages, and
   honour, are just as much the happiness of Eusebius as they are of Leo.
   And yet if Christianity has not changed a man's mind and temper with
   relation to these things, what can we say that it has done for him? For
   if the doctrines of Christianity were practised, they would make a man
   as different from other people, as to all worldly tempers, sensual
   pleasures, and the pride of life, as a wise man is different from a
   natural [5] ; it would be as easy a thing to know a Christian by his
   outward course of life, as it is now difficult to find anybody that
   lives it. For it is notorious that Christians are now not only like
   other men in their frailties and infirmities, this might be in some
   degree excusable, but the complaint is, they are like heathens in all
   the main and chief articles of their lives. They enjoy the world, and
   live every day in the same tempers, and the same designs, and the same
   indulgences, as they did who knew not God, nor of any happiness in
   another life. Everybody that is capable of any reflection, must have
   observed, that this is generally the state even of devout people,
   whether men or women. You may see them different from other people, so
   far as to times and places of prayer, but generally like the rest of
   the world in all the other parts of their lives: that is, adding
   Christian devotion to a heathen life. I have the authority of our
   blessed Saviour for this remark, where He says, "Take no thought,
   saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal
   shall we be clothed? For after all these things do the Gentiles seek."
   [Matt. vi. 31, 32] But if to be thus affected even with the necessary
   things of this life, shows that we are not yet of a Christian spirit,
   but are like the heathens, surely to enjoy the vanity and folly of the
   world as they did, to be like them in the main chief tempers of our
   lives, in self-love and indulgence, in sensual pleasures and
   diversions, in the vanity of dress, the love of show and greatness, or
   any other gaudy distinctions of fortune, is a much greater sign of an
   heathen temper. And, consequently, they who add devotion to such a
   life, must be said to pray as Christians, but live as heathens.


     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Julius: the suggestion is, that Caesar is the worldly power as
   opposed to God.

   [2] impertinent=unsuitable, incongruous, uncongenial.

   [3] Leo, the lion probably suggesting the favourite of Society.

   [4] Eusebius, pious in the Ecclesiastical sense, as the name of the
   first Church historian, but without reference to that historian's
   character. cf. Eusebia.

   [5] a natural, i.e. an idiot.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER II


   An inquiry into the reason, why the generality of Christians fall so
   far short of the holiness and devotion of Christianity.


   IT MAY now be reasonably inquired, how it comes to pass, that the lives
   even of the better sort of people are thus strangely contrary to the
   principles of Christianity?

   But before I give a direct answer to this, I desire it may also be
   inquired, how it comes to pass that swearing is so common a vice among
   Christians? It is indeed not yet so common among women, as it is among
   men. But among men this sin is so common that perhaps there are more
   than two in three that are guilty of it through the whole course of
   their lives, swearing more or less, just as it happens, some
   constantly, others only now and then as it were by chance.

   Now I ask, how comes it, that two in three of the men are guilty of so
   gross and profane a sin as this is? There is neither ignorance nor
   human infirmity to plead for it; it is against an express commandment,
   and the most plain doctrines of our blessed Saviour.

   Do but now find the reason why the generality of men live in this
   notorious vice, and then you will have found the reason why the
   generality even of the better sort of people live so contrary to
   Christianity.

   Now the reason of common swearing is this; it is because men have not
   so much as the intention to please God in all their actions. For let a
   man but have so much piety as to intend to please God in all the
   actions of his life, as the happiest and best thing in the world, and
   then he will never swear more. It will be as impossible for him to
   swear, whilst he feels this intention within himself, as it is
   impossible for a man that intends to please his prince, to go up and
   abuse him to his face.

   It seems but a small and necessary part of piety to have such a sincere
   intention as this; and that he has no reason to look upon himself as a
   disciple of Christ who is not thus far advanced in piety. And yet it is
   purely for want of this degree of piety that you see such a mixture of
   sin and folly in the lives even of the better sort of people. It is for
   want of this intention that you see men that profess religion, yet live
   in swearing and sensuality; that you see clergymen given to pride, and
   covetousness, and worldly enjoyments. It is for want of this intention,
   that you see women that profess devotion, yet living in all the folly
   and vanity of dress, wasting their time in idleness and pleasures, and
   in all such instances of state and equipage as their estates will
   reach. For let but a woman feel her heart full of this intention, and
   she will find it as impossible to patch or paint, as to curse or swear;
   she will no more desire to shine at balls or assemblies, or make a
   figure amongst those that are most finely dressed, than she will desire
   to dance upon a rope to please spectators: she will know, that the one
   is as far from the wisdom and excellency of the Christian spirit as the
   other.

   It was this general intention that made the primitive Christians such
   eminent instances of piety, and made the goodly fellowship of the
   saints, and all the glorious army of martyrs and confessors. And if you
   will here stop, and ask yourselves, why you are not as pious as the
   primitive Christians were, your own heart will tell you, that it is
   neither through ignorance nor inability, but purely because you never
   thoroughly intended it. You observe the same Sunday worship that they
   did; and you are strict in it, because it is your full intention to be
   so. And when you as fully intend to be like them in their ordinary
   common life, when you intend to please God in all your actions, you
   will find it as possible, as to be strictly exact in the service of the
   Church. And when you have this intention to please God in all your
   actions, as the happiest and best thing in the world, you will find in
   you as great an aversion to everything that is vain and impertinent in
   common life, whether of business or pleasure, as you now have to
   anything that is profane. You will be as fearful of living in any
   foolish way, either of spending your time, or your fortune, as you are
   now fearful of neglecting the public worship.

   Now, who that wants this general sincere intention, can be reckoned a
   Christian? And yet if it was among Christians, it would change the
   whole face of the world: true piety, and exemplary holiness, would be
   as common and visible, as buying and selling, or any trade in life.

   Let a clergyman be but thus pious, and he will converse as if he had
   been brought up by an Apostle; he will no more think and talk of noble
   preferment, than of noble eating, or a glorious chariot. He will no
   more complain of the frowns of the world, or a small cure, or the want
   of a patron, than he will complain of the want of a laced coat, or a
   running horse. Let him but intend to please God in all his actions, as
   the happiest and best thing in the world, and then he will know, that
   there is nothing noble in a clergyman, but a burning zeal for the
   salvation of souls; nor anything poor in his profession, but idleness
   and a worldly spirit.

   Again, let a tradesman but have this intention, and it will make him a
   saint in his shop; his every-day business will be a course of wise and
   reasonable actions, made holy to God, by being done in obedience to His
   will and pleasure. He will buy and sell, and labour and travel, because
   by so doing he can do some good to himself and others. But then, as
   nothing can please God but what is wise, and reasonable, and holy, so
   he will neither buy nor sell, nor labour in any other manner, nor to
   any other end, but such as may be shown to be wise, and reasonable, and
   holy. He will therefore consider, not what arts, or methods, or
   application, will soonest make him richer and greater than his
   brethren, or remove him from a shop to a life of state and pleasure;
   but he will consider what arts, what methods, what application can make
   worldly business most acceptable to God, and make a life of trade a
   life of holiness, devotion, and piety. This will be the temper and
   spirit of every tradesman; he cannot stop short of these degrees of
   piety, whenever it is his intention to please God in all his actions,
   as the best and happiest thing in the world. And on the other hand,
   whoever is not of this spirit and temper in his trade and profession,
   and does not carry it on only so far as is best subservient to a wise,
   and holy, and heavenly life, it is certain that he has not this
   intention; and yet without it, who can be shown to be a follower of
   Jesus Christ?

   Again, let the gentleman of birth and fortune but have this intention,
   and you will see how it will carry him from every appearance of evil,
   to every instance of piety and goodness. He cannot live by chance, or
   as humour and fancy carry him, because he knows that nothing can please
   God but a wise and regular course of life. He cannot live in idleness
   and indulgence, in sports and gaming, in pleasures and intemperance, in
   vain expenses and high living, because these things cannot be turned
   into means of piety and holiness, or made so many parts of a wise and
   religious life. As he thus removes from all appearance of evil, so he
   hastens and aspires after every instance of goodness. He does not ask
   what is allowable and pardonable, but what is commendable and
   praiseworthy. He does not ask whether God will forgive the folly of our
   lives, the madness of our pleasures, the vanity of our expenses, the
   richness of our equipage, and the careless consumption of our time; but
   he asks whether God is pleased with these things, or whether these are
   the appointed ways of gaining His favour? He does not inquire, whether
   it be pardonable to hoard up money, to adorn ourselves with diamonds,
   and gild our chariots, whilst the widow and the orphan, the sick and
   the prisoner, want to be relieved; but he asks, whether God has
   required these things at our hands, whether we shall be called to
   account at the last day for the neglect of them; because it is not his
   intent to live in such ways as, for aught we know, God may perhaps
   pardon; but to be diligent in such ways, as we know that God will
   infallibly reward.

   He will not therefore look at the lives of Christians, to learn how he
   ought to spend his estate, but he will look into the Scriptures, and
   make every doctrine, parable, precept, or instruction, that relates to
   rich men, a law to himself in the use of his estate.

   He will have nothing to do with costly apparel, because the rich man in
   the Gospel was clothed with purple and fine linen. He denies himself
   the pleasures and indulgences which his estate could procure, because
   our blessed Saviour saith, "Woe unto you that are rich! for ye have
   received your consolation." [Luke vi. 24] He will have but one rule for
   charity, and that will be, to spend all that he can that way, because
   the Judge of quick and dead hath said, that all that is so given, is
   given to Him.

   He will have no hospitable table for the rich and wealthy to come and
   feast with him, in good eating and drinking; because our blessed Lord
   saith, "When thou makest a dinner, call not thy friends, nor thy
   brethren, neither thy kinsman, nor thy rich neighbours, lest they also
   bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a
   feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shalt
   be blessed: for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be
   recompensed at the resurrection of the just." [Luke xiv. 12, 13, 14]

   He will waste no money in gilded roofs, or costly furniture: he will
   not be carried from pleasure to pleasure in expensive state and
   equipage, because an inspired Apostle hath said, that "all that is in
   the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
   of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world." [1 John ii. 16]

   Let not any one look upon this as an imaginary description of charity,
   that looks fine in the notion, but cannot be put in practice. For it is
   so far from being an imaginary, impracticable form of life, that it has
   been practised by great numbers of Christians in former ages, who were
   glad to turn their whole estates into a constant course of charity. And
   it is so far from being impossible now, that if we can find any
   Christians that sincerely intend to please God in all their actions, as
   the best and happiest thing in the world, whether they be young or old,
   single or married, men or women, if they have but this intention, it
   will be impossible for them to do otherwise. This one principle will
   infallibly carry them to this height of charity, and they will find
   themselves unable to stop short of it.

   For how is it possible for a man that intends to please God in the use
   of his money, and intends it because he judges it to be his greatest
   happiness; how is it possible for such a one, in such a state of mind,
   to bury his money in needless, impertinent finery, in covering himself
   or his horses with gold, whilst there are any works of piety and
   charity to be done with it, or any ways of spending it well?

   This is as strictly impossible, as for a man that intends to please God
   in his words, to go into company on purpose to swear and lie. For as
   all waste and unreasonable expense is done designedly, and with
   deliberation, so no one can be guilty of it, whose constant intention
   is to please God in the use of his money.

   I have chosen to explain this matter, by appealing to this intention,
   because it makes the case so plain, and because every one that has a
   mind may see it in the clearest light, and feel it in the strongest
   manner, only by looking into his own heart. For it is as easy for every
   person to know whether he intends to please God in all his actions, as
   for any servant to know whether this be his intention towards his
   master. Every one also can as easily tell how he lays out his money,
   and whether he considers how to please God in it, as he can tell where
   his estate is, and whether it be in money or land. So that here is no
   plea left for ignorance or frailty as to this matter; everybody is in
   the light, and everybody has power. And no one can fail, but he that is
   not so much a Christian, as to intend to please God in the use of his
   estate.

   You see two persons: one is regular in public and private prayer, the
   other is not. Now the reason of this difference is not this, that one
   has strength and power to observe prayer, and the other has not; but
   the reason is this, that one intends to please God in the duties of
   devotion, and the other has no intention about it. Now the case is the
   same, in the right or wrong use of our time and money. You see one
   person throwing away his time in sleep and idleness, in visiting and
   diversions, and his money in the most vain and unreasonable expenses.
   You see another careful of every day, dividing his hours by rules of
   reason and religion, and spending all his money in works of charity:
   now the difference is not owing to this, that one has strength and
   power to do thus, and the other has not; but it is owing to this, that
   one intends to please God in the right use of all his time, and all his
   money, and the other has no intention about it.

   Here, therefore, let us judge ourselves sincerely; let us not vainly
   content ourselves with the common disorders of our lives, the vanity of
   our expenses, the folly of our diversions, the pride of our habits, the
   idleness of our lives, and the wasting of our time, fancying that these
   are such imperfections as we fall into through the unavoidable weakness
   and frailty of our natures; but let us be assured, that these disorders
   of our common life are owing to this, that we have not so much
   Christianity as to intend to please God in all the actions of our life,
   as the best and happiest thing in the world. So that we must not look
   upon ourselves in a state of common and pardonable imperfection, but in
   such a state as wants the first and most fundamental principle of
   Christianity, viz., an intention to please God in all our actions.

   And if any one was to ask himself, how it comes to pass, that there are
   any degrees of sobriety which he neglects, any practices of humility
   which he wants, any method of charity which he does not follow, any
   rules of redeeming time which he does not observe, his own heart will
   tell him, that it is because he never intended to be so exact in those
   duties. For whenever we fully intend it, it is as possible to conform
   to all this regularity of life, as it is possible for a man to observe
   times of prayer.

   So that the fault does not lie here, that we desire to be good and
   perfect, but through the weakness of our nature fall short of it; but
   it is, because we have not piety enough to intend to be as good as we
   can, or to please God in all the actions of our life. This we see is
   plainly the case of him that spends his time in sports when he should
   be at Church; it is not his want of power, but his want of intention or
   desire to be there.

   And the case is plainly the same in every other folly of human life.
   She that spends her time and money in the unreasonable ways and
   fashions of the world, does not do so because she wants power to be
   wise and religious in the management of her time and money, but because
   she has no intention or desire of being so. When she feels this
   intention, she will find it as possible to act up to it, as to be
   strictly sober and chaste, because it is her care and desire to be so.

   This doctrine does not suppose that we have no need of Divine grace, or
   that it is in our own power to make ourselves perfect. It only
   supposes, that through the want of a sincere intention of pleasing God
   in all our actions we fall into such irregularities of life as by the
   ordinary means of grace we should have power to avoid; and that we have
   not that perfection, which our present state of grace makes us capable
   of, because we do not so much as intend to have it. It only teaches us
   that the reason why you see no real mortification or self-denial, no
   eminent charity, no profound humility, no heavenly affection, no true
   contempt of the world, no Christian meekness, no sincere zeal, no
   eminent piety in the common lives of Christians, is this, because they
   do not so much as intend to be exact and exemplary in these virtues.


     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER III


   Of the great danger and folly, of not intending to be as eminent and
   exemplary as we can, in the practice of all Christian virtues.


   ALTHOUGH the goodness of God, and His rich mercies in Christ Jesus, are
   a sufficient assurance to us, that He will be merciful to our
   unavoidable weakness and infirmities, that is, to such failings as are
   the effects of ignorance or surprise; yet we have no reason to expect
   the same mercy towards those sins which we have lived in, through a
   want of intention to avoid them.

   For instance; the case of a common swearer, who dies in that guilt,
   seems to have no title to the Divine mercy; for this reason, because he
   can no more plead any weakness or infirmity in his excuse, than the man
   that hid his talent in the earth could plead his want of strength to
   keep it out of the earth.

   But now, if this be right reasoning in the case of a common swearer,
   that his sin is not to be reckoned a pardonable frailty, because he has
   no weakness to plead in its excuse, why then do we not carry this way
   of reasoning to its true extent? why do not we as much condemn every
   other error of life, that has no more weakness to plead in its excuse
   than common swearing?

   For if this be so bad a thing, because it might be avoided, if we did
   but sincerely intend it, must not then all other erroneous ways of life
   be very guilty, if we live in them, not through weakness and inability,
   but because we never sincerely intended to avoid them?

   For instance; you perhaps have made no progress in the most important
   Christian virtues, you have scarce gone half way in humility and
   charity; now if your failure in these duties is purely owing to your
   want of intention of performing them in any true degree, have you not
   then as little to plead for yourself, and are you not as much without
   all excuse, as the common swearer?

   Why, therefore, do you not press these things home upon your
   conscience? Why do you not think it as dangerous for you to live in
   such defects, as are in your power to amend, as it is dangerous for a
   common swearer to live in the breach of that duty, which it is in his
   power to observe? Is not negligence, and a want of sincere intention,
   as blameable in one case as in another?

   You, it may be, are as far from Christian perfection, as the common
   swearer is from keeping the third commandment; are you not therefore as
   much condemned by the doctrines of the Gospel, as the swearer is by the
   third commandment?

   You perhaps will say, that all people fall short of the perfection of
   the Gospel, and therefore you are content with your failings. But this
   is saying nothing to the purpose. For the question is not whether
   Gospel perfection can be fully attained, but whether you come as near
   it as a sincere intention and careful diligence can carry you. Whether
   you are not in a much lower state than you might be, if you sincerely
   intended, and carefully laboured, to advance yourself in all Christian
   virtues?

   If you are as forward in the Christian life as your best endeavours can
   make you, then you may justly hope that your imperfections will not be
   laid to your charge: but if your defects in piety, humility, and
   charity, are owing to your negligence, and want of sincere intention to
   be as eminent as you can in these virtues, then you leave yourself as
   much without excuse as he that lives in the sin of swearing, through
   the want of a sincere intention to depart from it.

   The salvation of our souls is set forth in Scripture as a thing of
   difficulty, that requires all our diligence, that is to be worked out
   with fear and trembling. [Phil. ii. 12]

   We are told, that "strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that
   leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." [Matt. vii. 14] That
   "many are called, but few are chosen." [Matt. xxii. 14] And that many
   will miss of their salvation, who seem to have taken some pains to
   obtain it: as in these words, "Strive to enter in at the strait gate:
   for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be
   able." [Luke xiii. 24]

   Here our blessed Lord commands us to strive to enter in, because many
   will fail, who only seek to enter. By which we are plainly taught, that
   religion is a state of labour and striving, and that many will fail of
   their salvation; not because they took no pains or care about it, but
   because they did not take pains and care enough; they only sought, but
   did not strive to enter in.

   Every Christian, therefore, should as well examine his life by these
   doctrines as by the commandments. For these doctrines are as plain
   marks of our condition, as the commandments are plain marks of our
   duty.

   For if salvation is only given to those who strive for it, then it is
   as reasonable for me to consider whether my course of life be a course
   of striving to obtain it, as to consider whether I am keeping any of
   the commandments.

   If my religion is only a formal compliance with those modes of worship
   that are in fashion where I live; if it costs me no pains or trouble;
   if it lays me under no rules and restraints; if I have no careful
   thoughts and sober reflections about it, is it not great weakness to
   think that I am striving to enter in at the strait gate?

   If I am seeking everything that can delight my senses, and regale my
   appetites; spending my time and fortune in pleasures, in diversions,
   and worldly enjoyments; a stranger to watchings, fastings, prayers, and
   mortification; how can it be said that I am working out my salvation
   with fear and trembling?

   If there is nothing in my life and conversation that shows me to be
   different from Jews and heathens; if I use the world, and worldly
   enjoyments, as the generality of people now do, and in all ages have
   done; why should I think that I am amongst those few who are walking in
   the narrow way to Heaven?

   And yet if the way is narrow, if none can walk in it but those that
   strive, is it not as necessary for me to consider, whether the way I am
   in be narrow enough, or the labour I take be a sufficient striving, as
   to consider whether I sufficiently observe the second or third
   commandment?

   The sum of this matter is this: From the abovementioned, and many other
   passages of Scripture, it seems plain, that our salvation depends upon
   the sincerity and perfection of our endeavours to obtain it.

   Weak and imperfect men shall, notwithstanding their frailties and
   defects, be received, as having pleased God, if they have done their
   utmost to please Him.

   The rewards of charity, piety, and humility, will be given to those,
   whose lives have been a careful labour to exercise these virtues in as
   high a degree as they could.

   We cannot offer to God the service of Angels; we cannot obey Him as man
   in a state of perfection could; but fallen men can do their best, and
   this is the perfection that is required of us; it is only the
   perfection of our best endeavours, a careful labour to be as perfect as
   we can.

   But if we stop short of this, for aught we know, we stop short of the
   mercy of God, and leave ourselves nothing to plead from the terms of
   the Gospel. For God has there made no promises of mercy to the slothful
   and negligent. His mercy is only offered to our frail and imperfect,
   but best endeavours, to practise all manner of righteousness.

   As the law to Angels is angelical righteousness, as the law to perfect
   beings is strict perfection, so the law to our imperfect natures is,
   the best obedience that our frail nature is able to perform.

   The measure of our love to God, seems in justice to be the measure of
   our love of every virtue. We are to love and practise it with all our
   heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, and with all our strength.
   And when we cease to live with this regard to virtue, we live below our
   nature, and, instead of being able to plead our infirmities, we stand
   chargeable with negligence.

   It is for this reason that we are exhorted to work out our salvation
   with fear and trembling; because unless our heart and passions are
   eagerly bent upon the work of our salvation; unless holy fears animate
   our endeavours, and keep our consciences strict and tender about every
   part of our duty, constantly examining how we live, and how fit we are
   to die; we shall in all probability fall into a state of negligence,
   and sit down in such a course of life, as will never carry us to the
   rewards of Heaven.

   And he that considers, that a just God can only make such allowances as
   are suitable to His justice, that our works are all to be examined by
   fire, will find that fear and trembling are proper tempers for those
   that are drawing near so great a trial.

   And indeed there is no probability, that any one should do all the duty
   that is expected from him, or make that progress in piety, which the
   holiness and justice of God requires of him, but he that is constantly
   afraid of falling short of it.

   Now this is not intended to possess people's minds with a scrupulous
   anxiety, and discontent in the service of God, but to fill them with a
   just fear of living in sloth and idleness, and in the neglect of such
   virtues as they will want at the day of Judgment. It is to excite them
   to an earnest examination of their lives, to such zeal, and care, and
   concern after Christian perfection, as they use in any matter that has
   gained their heart and affections. It is only desiring them to be so
   apprehensive of their state, so humble in the opinion of themselves, so
   earnest after higher degrees of piety, and so fearful of falling short
   of happiness, as the great Apostle St. Paul was, when he thus wrote to
   the Philippians: "Not as though I had already attained, either were
   already perfect: . . . but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
   which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
   before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of
   God in Christ Jesus." And then he adds, "Let us therefore, as many as
   are perfect, be thus minded." [Phil. iii. 12-15]

   But now, if the Apostle thought it necessary for those, who were in his
   state of perfection, to be "thus minded," that is, thus labouring,
   pressing, and aspiring after some degree of holiness, to which they
   were not then arrived, surely it is much more necessary for us, who are
   born in the dregs of time, and labouring under great imperfections, to
   be "thus minded," that is, thus earnest and striving after such degrees
   of a holy and Divine life, as we have not yet attained.

   The best way for any one to know how much he ought to aspire after
   holiness, is to consider, not how much will make his present life easy,
   but to ask himself, how much he thinks will make him easy at the hour
   of death.

   Now any man that dares be so serious, as to put this question to
   himself, will be forced to answer, that at death, every one will wish
   that he had been as perfect as human nature can be.

   Is not this therefore sufficient to put us not only upon wishing, but
   labouring after all that perfection, which we shall then lament the
   want of? Is it not excessive folly to be content with such a course of
   piety as we already know cannot content us, at a time when we shall so
   want it, as to have nothing else to comfort us? How can we carry a
   severer condemnation against ourselves, than to believe, that, at the
   hour of death, we shall want the virtues of the Saints, and wish that
   we had been amongst the first servants of God, and yet take no methods
   of arriving at their height of piety, whilst we are alive?

   Though this is an absurdity that we can easily pass over at present,
   whilst the health of our bodies, the passions of our minds, the noise,
   and hurry, and pleasures, and business of the world, lead us on with
   eyes that see not, and ears that hear not; yet, at death, it will set
   itself before us in a dreadful magnitude, it will haunt us like a
   dismal ghost, and our conscience will never let us take our eyes from
   it.

   We see in worldly matters, what a torment self-condemnation is, and how
   hardly a man is able to forgive himself, when he has brought himself
   into any calamity or disgrace, purely by his own folly. The affliction
   is made doubly tormenting, because he is forced to charge it all upon
   himself, as his own act and deed, against the nature and reason of
   things, and contrary to the advice of all his friends.

   Now by this we may in some degree guess how terrible the pain of that
   self-condemnation will be, when a man shall find himself in the
   miseries of death under the severity of a self-condemning conscience,
   charging all his distress upon his own folly and madness, against the
   sense and reason of his own mind, against all the doctrines and
   precepts of religion, and contrary to all the instructions, calls, and
   warnings, both of God and man.

   Penitens [6] was a busy, notable tradesman, and very prosperous in his
   dealings, but died in the thirty-fifth year of his age.

   A little before his death, when the doctors had given him over, some of
   his neighbours came one evening to see him, at which time he spake thus
   to them:--

   I see, my friends, the tender concern you have for me, by the grief
   that appears in your countenances, and I know the thoughts that you
   have now about me. You think how melancholy a case it is, to see so
   young a man, and in such flourishing business, delivered up to death.
   And perhaps, had I visited any of you in my condition, I should have
   had the same thoughts of you.

   But now, my friends, my thoughts are no more like your thoughts than my
   condition is like yours.

   It is no trouble to me now to think, that I am to die young, or before
   I have raised an estate.

   These things are now sunk into such mere nothings, that I have no name
   little enough to call them by. For if in a few days or hours, I am to
   leave this carcass to be buried in the earth, and to find myself either
   forever happy in the favour of God, or eternally separated from all
   light and peace, can any words sufficiently express the littleness of
   everything else?

   Is there any dream like the dream of life, which amuses [7] us with the
   neglect and disregard of these things? Is there any folly like the
   folly of our manly state, which is too wise and busy, to be at leisure
   for these reflections?

   When we consider death as a misery, we only think of it as a miserable
   separation from the enjoyments of this life. We seldom mourn over an
   old man that dies rich, but we lament the young, that are taken away in
   the progress of their fortune. You yourselves look upon me with pity,
   not that I am going unprepared to meet the Judge of quick and dead, but
   that I am to leave a prosperous trade in the flower of my life.

   This is the wisdom of our manly thoughts. And yet what folly of the
   silliest children is so great as this?

   For what is there miserable, or dreadful in death, but the consequences
   of it? When a man is dead, what does anything signify to him, but the
   state he is then in?

   Our poor friend Lepidus [8] died, you know, as he was dressing himself
   for a feast: do you think it is now part of his trouble, that he did
   not live till that entertainment was over? Feasts, and business, and
   pleasures, and enjoyments, seem great things to us, whilst we think of
   nothing else; but as soon as we add death to them, they all sink into
   an equal littleness; and the soul that is separated from the body no
   more laments the loss of business, than the losing of a feast.

   If I am now going into the joys of God, could there be any reason to
   grieve, that this happened to me before I was forty years of age? Could
   it be a sad thing to go to Heaven, before I had made a few more
   bargains, or stood a little longer behind a counter?

   And if I am to go amongst lost spirits, could there be any reason to be
   content, that this did not happen to me till I was old, and full of
   riches?

   If good Angels were ready to receive my soul, could it be any grief to
   me, that I was dying upon a poor bed in a garret?

   And if God has delivered me up to evil spirits, to be dragged by them
   to places of torments, could it be any comfort to me, that they found
   me upon a bed of state?

   When you are as near death as I am, you will know that all the
   different states of life, whether of youth or age, riches or poverty,
   greatness or meanness, signify no more to you, than whether you die in
   a poor or stately apartment.

   The greatness of those things which follow death makes all that goes
   before it sink into nothing.

   Now that judgment is the next thing that I look for, and everlasting
   happiness or misery is come so near me, all the enjoyments and
   prosperities of life seem as vain and insignificant, and to have no
   more to do with my happiness, than the clothes that I wore before I
   could speak.

   But, my friends, how am I surprised that I have not always had these
   thoughts? for what is there in the terrors of death, in the vanities of
   life, or the necessities of piety, but what I might have as easily and
   fully seen in any part of my life?

   What a strange thing is it, that a little health, or the poor business
   of a shop, should keep us so senseless of these great things, that are
   coming so fast upon us!

   Just as you came in my chamber, I was thinking with myself, what
   numbers of souls there are now in the world, in my condition at this
   very time, surprised with a summons to the other world; some taken from
   their shops and farms, others from their sports and pleasures, these at
   suits of law, those at gaming tables, some on the road, others at their
   own firesides, and all seized at an hour when they thought nothing of
   it; frightened at the approach of death, confounded at the vanity of
   all their labours, designs, and projects, astonished at the folly of
   their past lives, and not knowing which way to turn their thoughts, to
   find any comfort. Their consciences flying in their faces, bringing all
   their sins to their remembrance, tormenting them with deepest
   convictions of their own folly, presenting them with the sight of the
   angry Judge, the worm that never dies, the fire that is never quenched,
   the gates of hell, the powers of darkness, and the bitter pains of
   eternal death.

   Oh, my friends! bless God that you are not of this number, that you
   have time and strength to employ yourselves in such works of piety, as
   may bring you peace at the last.

   And take this along with you, that there is nothing but a life of great
   piety, or a death of great stupidity, that can keep off these
   apprehensions.

   Had I now a thousand worlds, I would give them all for one year more,
   that I might present unto God one year of such devotion and good works,
   as I never before so much as intended.

   You, perhaps, when you consider that I have lived free from scandal and
   debauchery, and in the communion of the Church, wonder to see me so
   full of remorse and self-condemnation at the approach of death.

   But, alas! what a poor thing is it, to have lived only free from
   murder, theft, and adultery, which is all that I can say of myself.

   You know, indeed, that I have never been reckoned a sot, but you are,
   at the same time, witnesses, and have been frequent companions of my
   intemperance, sensuality, and great indulgence. And if I am now going
   to a judgment, where nothing will be rewarded but good works, I may
   well be concerned, that though I am no sot, yet I have no Christian
   sobriety to plead for me.

   It is true, I have lived in the communion of the Church, and generally
   frequented its worship and service on Sundays, when I was neither too
   idle, or not otherwise disposed of by my business and pleasures. But,
   then, my conformity to the public worship has been rather a thing of
   course, than any real intention of doing that which the service of the
   Church supposes: had it not been so, I had been oftener at Church, more
   devout when there, and more fearful of ever neglecting it.

   But the thing that now surprises me above all wonders is this, that I
   never had so much as a general intention of living up to the piety of
   the Gospel. This never so much as entered into my head or my heart. I
   never once in my life considered whether I was living as the laws of
   religion direct, or whether my way of life was such, as would procure
   me the mercy of God at this hour.

   And can it be thought that I have kept the Gospel terms of salvation,
   without ever so much as intending, in any serious and deliberate
   manner, either to know them, or keep them? Can it be thought that I
   have pleased God with such a life as He requires, though I have lived
   without ever considering what He requires, or how much I have
   performed? How easy a thing would salvation be, if it could fall into
   my careless hands, who have never had so much serious thought about it,
   as about any one common bargain that I have made?

   In the business of life I have used prudence and reflection. I have
   done everything by rules and methods. I have been glad to converse with
   men of experience and judgment, to find out the reasons why some fail
   and others succeed in any business. I have taken no step in trade but
   with great care and caution, considering every advantage or danger that
   attended it. I have always had my eye upon the main end of business,
   and have studied all the ways and means of being a gainer by all that I
   undertook.

   But what is the reason that I have brought none of these tempers to
   religion? What is the reason that I, who have so often talked of the
   necessity of rules, and methods, and diligence, in worldly business,
   have all this while never once thought of any rules, or methods, or
   managements, to carry me on in a life of piety?

   Do you think anything can astonish and confound a dying man like this?
   What pain do you think a man must feel, when his conscience lays all
   this folly to his charge, when it shall show him how regular, exact,
   and wise he has been in small matters, that are passed away like a
   dream, and how stupid and senseless he has lived, without any
   reflection, without any rules, in things of such eternal moment, as no
   heart can sufficiently conceive them?

   Had I only my frailties and imperfections to lament at this time, I
   should lie here humbly trusting in the mercies of God. But, alas! how
   can I call a general disregard, and a thorough neglect of all religious
   improvement, a frailty or imperfection, when it was as much in my power
   to have been exact, and careful, and diligent in a course of piety, as
   in the business of my trade?

   I could have called in as many helps, have practised as many rules, and
   been taught as many certain methods of holy living, as of thriving in
   my shop, had I but so intended, and desired it.

   Oh, my friends! a careless life, unconcerned and unattentive to the
   duties of religion, is so without all excuse, so unworthy of the mercy
   of God, such a shame to the sense and reason of our minds, that I can
   hardly conceive a greater punishment, than for a man to be thrown into
   the state that I am in, to reflect upon it.

   Penitens was here going on, but had his mouth stopped by a convulsion,
   which never suffered him to speak any more. He lay convulsed about
   twelve hours, and then gave up the ghost.

   Now if every reader would imagine this Penitens to have been some
   particular acquaintance or relation of his, and fancy that he saw and
   heard all that is here described; that he stood by his bedside when his
   poor friend lay in such distress and agony, lamenting the folly of his
   past life, it would, in all probability, teach him such wisdom as never
   entered into his heart before. If to this he should consider how often
   he himself might have been surprised in the same state of negligence,
   and made an example to the rest of the world, this double reflection,
   both upon the distress of his friend, and the goodness of that God, who
   had preserved him from it, would in all likelihood soften his heart
   into holy tempers, and make him turn the remainder of his life into a
   regular course of piety.

   This therefore being so useful a meditation, I shall here leave the
   reader, as I hope, seriously engaged in it.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [6] Penitens, penitent almost in the sense of remorseful.

   [7] Amuses = occupies the attention (cf. Watts in 1789, We are so
   amused and engrossed with the things of sense that we forget our
   Maker).

   [8] Lepidus = elegant.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER IV


   We can please God in no state or employment of life, but by intending
   and devoting it all to His honour and glory.


   HAVING in the first chapter stated the general nature of devotion, and
   shown that it implies not any form of prayer, but a certain form of
   life, that is offered to God, not at any particular times or places,
   but everywhere and in everything; I shall now descend to some
   particulars, and show how we are to devote our labour and employment,
   our time and fortunes, unto God.

   As a good Christian should consider every place as holy, because God is
   there, so he should look upon every part of his life as a matter of
   holiness, because it is to be offered unto God.

   The profession of a clergyman is an holy profession, because it is a
   ministration in holy things, an attendance at the altar. But worldly
   business is to be made holy unto the Lord, by being done as a service
   to Him, and in conformity to His Divine will.

   For as all men, and all things in the world, as truly belong unto God,
   as any places, things, or persons, that are devoted to Divine service,
   so all things are to be used, and all persons are to act in their
   several states and employments, for the glory of God.

   Men of worldly business, therefore, must not look upon themselves as at
   liberty to live to themselves, to sacrifice to their own humours and
   tempers, because their employment is of a worldly nature. But they must
   consider, that, as the world and all worldly professions as truly
   belong to God, as persons and things that are devoted to the altar, so
   it is as much the duty of men in worldly business to live wholly unto
   God, as it is the duty of those who are devoted to Divine service.

   As the whole world is God's, so the whole world is to act for God. As
   all men have the same relation to God, as all men have all their powers
   and faculties from God, so all men are obliged to act for God, with all
   their powers and faculties.

   As all things are God's, so all things are to be used and regarded as
   the things of God. For men to abuse things on earth, and live to
   themselves, is the same rebellion against God, as for angels to abuse
   things in Heaven; because God is just the same Lord of all on earth, as
   He is the Lord of all in Heaven.

   Things may, and must differ in their use, but yet they are all to be
   used according to the will of God.

   Men may, and must differ in their employments, but yet they must all
   act for the same ends, as dutiful servants of God, in the right and
   pious performance of their several callings.

   Clergymen must live wholly unto God in one particular way, that is, in
   the exercise of holy offices, in the ministration of prayers and
   Sacraments, and a zealous distribution of spiritual goods.

   But men of other employments are, in their particular ways, as much
   obliged to act as the servants of God, and live wholly unto Him in
   their several callings. This is the only difference between clergymen
   and people of other callings.

   When it can be shown, that men might be vain, covetous, sensual,
   worldly-minded, or proud in the exercise of their worldly business,
   then it will be allowable for clergymen to indulge the same tempers in
   their sacred profession. For though these tempers are most odious and
   most criminal in clergymen, who besides their baptismal vow, have a
   second time devoted themselves to God, to be His servants, not in the
   common offices of human life, but in the spiritual service of the most
   holy sacred things, and who are therefore to keep themselves as
   separate and different from the common life of other men, as a church
   or an altar is to be kept separate from houses and tables of common
   use; yet as all Christians are by their Baptism devoted to God, and
   made professors of holiness, so are they all in their several callings
   to live as holy and heavenly persons; doing everything in their common
   life only in such a manner, as it may be received by God, as a service
   done to Him. For things spiritual and temporal, sacred and common,
   must, like men and angels, like Heaven and earth, all conspire in the
   glory of God.

   As there is but one God and Father of us all, whose glory gives light
   and life to everything that lives, whose presence fills all places,
   whose power supports all beings, whose providence ruleth all events; so
   everything that lives, whether in Heaven or earth, whether they be
   thrones or principalities, men or angels, they must all, with one
   spirit, live wholly to the praise and glory of this one God and Father
   of them all. Angels as angels, in their heavenly ministrations; but men
   as men, women as women, bishops as bishops, priests as priests, and
   deacons as deacons; some with things spiritual, and some with things
   temporal, offering to God the daily sacrifice of a reasonable life,
   wise actions, purity of heart, and heavenly affections.

   This is the common business of all persons in this world. It is not
   left to any women in the world to trifle away their time in the follies
   and impertinences of a fashionable life, nor to any men to resign
   themselves up to worldly cares and concerns; it is not left to the rich
   to gratify their passions in the indulgences and pride of life, nor to
   the poor, to vex and torment their hearts with the poverty of their
   state; but men and women, rich and poor, must, with bishops and
   priests, walk before God in the same wise and holy spirit, in the same
   denial of all vain tempers, and in the same discipline and care of
   their souls; not only because they have all the same rational nature,
   and are servants of the same God, but because they all want the same
   holiness, to make them fit for the same happiness, to which they are
   all called. It is therefore absolutely necessary for all Christians,
   whether men or women, to consider themselves as persons that are
   devoted to holiness, and so order their common ways of life, by such
   rules of reason and piety, as may turn it into continual service unto
   Almighty God.

   Now to make our labour, or employment, an acceptable service unto God,
   we must carry it on with the same spirit and temper, that is required
   in giving of alms, or any work of piety. For, if "whether we eat or
   drink, or whatsoever we do," we must "do all to the glory of God"; [1
   Cor. x. 31] if "we are to use this world as if we used it not"; if we
   are to "present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to
   God"; [Rom. xii. 1] if "we are to live by faith, and not by sight," and
   to "have our conversation in heaven"; [2 Cor. v. 7; Phil. iii. 20] then
   it is necessary that the common way of our life, in every state, be
   made to glorify God by such tempers as make our prayers and adorations
   acceptable to Him. For if we are worldly or earthly-minded in our
   employments, if they are carried on with vain desires, and covetous
   tempers, only to satisfy ourselves, we can no more be said to live to
   the glory of God, than gluttons and drunkards can be said to eat and
   drink to the glory of God.

   As the glory of God is one and the same thing, so whatever we do
   suitable to it must be done with one and the same spirit. That same
   state and temper of mind which makes our alms and devotions acceptable,
   must also make our labour, or employment, a proper offering unto God.
   If a man labours to be rich, and pursues his business, that he may
   raise himself to a state of figure and glory in the world, he is no
   longer serving God in his employment; he is acting under other masters,
   and has no more title to a reward from God, than he that gives alms,
   that he may be seen, or prays, that he may be heard of men. For vain
   and earthly desires are no more allowable in our employments, than in
   our alms and devotions. For these tempers of worldly pride, and
   vain-glory, are not only evil, when they mix with our good works, but
   they have the same evil nature, and make us odious to God, when they
   enter into the common business of our employment. If it were allowable
   to indulge covetous or vain passions in our worldly employments, it
   would then be allowable to be vain-glorious in our devotions. But as
   our alms and devotions are not an acceptable service, but when they
   proceed from a heart truly devoted to God, so our common employment
   cannot be reckoned a service to Him, but when it is performed with the
   same temper and piety of heart.

   Most of the employments of life are in their own nature lawful; and all
   those that are so may be made a substantial part of our duty to God, if
   we engage in them only so far, and for such ends, as are suitable to
   beings that are to live above the world, all the time that they live in
   the world. This is the only measure of our application to any worldly
   business, let it be what it will, where it will; it must have no more
   of our hands, our hearts, or our time, than is consistent with a
   hearty, daily, careful preparation of ourselves for another life. For
   as all Christians, as such have renounced this world, to prepare
   themselves by daily devotion, and universal holiness, for an eternal
   state of quite another nature, they must look upon worldly employments,
   as upon worldly wants, and bodily infirmities; things not to be desired
   but only to be endured and suffered, till death and the resurrection
   have carried us to an eternal state of real happiness.

   Now he that does not look at the things of this life in this degree of
   littleness, cannot be said either to feel or believe the greatest
   truths of Christianity. For if he thinks anything great or important in
   human business, can he be said to feel or believe those Scriptures,
   which represent this life, and the greatest things of life, as bubbles,
   vapours, dreams, and shadows?

   If he thinks figure, and show, and worldly glory, to be any proper
   happiness of a Christian, how can he be said to feel or believe this
   doctrine, "Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall
   separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out
   your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake"? [Luke vi. 22] For
   surely, if there was any real happiness in figure, and show, and
   worldly glory; if these things deserved our thoughts and care; it could
   not be matter of the highest joy, when we are torn from them by
   persecutions and sufferings. If, therefore, a man will so live, as to
   show that he feels and believes the most fundamental doctrines of
   Christianity, he must live above the world; this is the temper that
   must enable him to do the business of life, and yet live wholly unto
   God, and to go through some worldly employment with a heavenly mind.
   And it is as necessary that people live in their employments with this
   temper, as it is necessary that their employment itself be lawful.

   The husbandman that tilleth the ground is employed in an honest
   business, that is necessary in life and very capable of being made an
   acceptable service unto God. But if he labours and toils, not to serve
   any reasonable ends of life, but in order to have his plough made of
   silver, and to have his horses harnessed in gold, the honesty of his
   employment is lost as to him, and his labour becomes his folly.

   A tradesman may justly think that it is agreeable to the will of God,
   for him to sell such things as are innocent and useful in life, such as
   help both himself, and others, to a reasonable support, and enable them
   to assist those that want to be assisted. But if, instead of this, he
   trades only with regard to himself, without any other rule than that of
   his own temper; if it be his chief end in it to grow rich, that he may
   live in figure and indulgence, and to be able to retire from business
   to idleness and luxury; his trade, as to him, loses all its innocency,
   and is so far from being an acceptable service to God that it is only a
   more plausible course of covetousness, self-love, and ambition. For
   such a one turns the necessities of employment into pride and
   covetousness, just as the sot and epicure turn the necessities of
   eating and drinking into gluttony and drunkenness. Now he that is up
   early and late, that sweats and labours for these ends, that he may be
   some time or other rich, and live in pleasure and indulgence, lives no
   more to the glory of God, than he that plays and games for the same
   ends. For though there is a great difference between trading and
   gaming, yet most of that difference is lost, when men once trade with
   the same desires and tempers, and for the same ends, that others game.
   Charity, and fine dressing, are things very different; but if men give
   alms for the same reasons that others dress fine, only to be seen and
   admired, charity is then but like the vanity of fine clothes. In like
   manner, if the same motives make some people painful [9] and
   industrious in their trades, which make others constant at gaming, such
   pains are but like the pains of gaming.

   Calidus [10] has traded above thirty years in the greatest city of the
   kingdom; he has been so many years constantly increasing his trade and
   his fortune. Every hour of the day is with him an hour of business; and
   though he eats and drinks very heartily, yet every meal seems to be in
   a hurry, and he would say grace if he had time. Calidus ends every day
   at the tavern, but has not leisure to be there till near nine o'clock.
   He is always forced to drink a good hearty glass, to drive thoughts of
   business out of his head, and make his spirits drowsy enough for sleep.
   He does business all the time that he is rising, and has settled
   several matters before he can get to his counting-room. His prayers are
   a short ejaculation or two, which he never misses in stormy,
   tempestuous weather, because he has always something or other at sea.
   Calidus will tell you, with great pleasure, that he has been in this
   hurry for so many years, and that it must have killed him long ago, but
   that it has been a rule with him to get out of the town every Saturday,
   and make the Sunday a day of quiet, and good refreshment in the
   country.

   He is now so rich, that he would leave off his business, and amuse his
   old age with building, and furnishing a fine house in the country, but
   that he is afraid he should grow melancholy if he was to quit his
   business. He will tell you, with great gravity, that it is a dangerous
   thing for a man that has been used to get money, ever to leave it off.
   If thoughts of religion happen at any time to steal into his head,
   Calidus contents himself with thinking, that he never was a friend to
   heretics, and infidels, that he has always been civil to the minister
   of his parish, and very often given something to the charity schools.

   Now this way of life is at such a distance from all the doctrine and
   discipline of Christianity, that no one can live in it through
   ignorance or frailty. Calidus can no more imagine that he is "born
   again of the Spirit"; [St. John iii] that he is "in Christ a new
   creature"; that he lives here as a stranger and a pilgrim, [1 Pet. ii.
   11] setting his affections on things above, and laying up treasures in
   heaven, [Col. iii. 1] -- he can no more imagine this, than he can think
   that he has been all his life an Apostle working miracles, and
   preaching the Gospel.

   It must also be owned, that the generality of trading people,
   especially in great towns, are too much like Calidus. You see them all
   the week buried in business, unable to think of anything else; and then
   spending the Sunday in idleness and refreshment, in wandering into the
   country, in such visits and jovial meetings, as make it often the worst
   day of the week.

   Now they do not live thus, because they cannot support themselves with
   less care and application to business; but they live thus because they
   want to grow rich in their trades, and to maintain their families in
   some such figure and degree of finery, as a reasonable Christian life
   has no occasion for. Take away but this temper, and then people of all
   trades will find themselves at leisure to live every day like
   Christians, to be careful of every duty of the Gospel, to live in a
   visible course of religion, and be every day strict observers both of
   private and public prayer.

   Now the only way to do this, is for people to consider their trade as
   something that they are obliged to devote to the glory of God,
   something that they are to do only in such a manner as that they may
   make it a duty to Him. Nothing can be right in business, that is not
   under these rules. -- The Apostle commands servants to be obedient to
   their masters "in singleness of heart, as unto Christ. Not with
   eye-service, as men-pleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the
   will of God from the heart; with good will doing service, as unto the
   Lord, and not to men." [Eph. vi. 5; Col. iii. 22, 23]

   This passage sufficiently shows, that all Christians are to live wholly
   unto God in every state and condition, doing the work of their common
   calling in such a manner, and for such ends, as to make it a part of
   their devotion or service to God. For certainly if poor slaves are not
   to comply with their business as men-pleasers, if they are to look
   wholly unto God in all their actions, and serve in singleness of heart,
   as unto the Lord, surely men of other employments and conditions must
   be as much obliged to go through their business with the same
   singleness of heart; not as pleasing the vanity of their own minds, not
   as gratifying their own selfish worldly passions, but as the servants
   of God in all that they have to do. For surely no one will say, that a
   slave is to devote his state of life unto God, and make the will of God
   the sole rule and end of his service, but that a tradesman need not act
   with the same spirit of devotion in his business. For this is as
   absurd, as to make it necessary for one man to be more just or faithful
   than another.

   It is therefore absolutely certain that no Christian is to enter any
   farther into business, nor for any other ends, than such as he can in
   singleness of heart offer unto God, as a reasonable service. For the
   Son of God has redeemed us for this only end, that we should, by a life
   of reason and piety, live to the glory of God; this is the only rule
   and measure for every order and state of life. Without this rule, the
   most lawful employment becomes a sinful state of life.

   Take away this from the life of a clergyman, and his holy profession
   serves only to expose him to a greater damnation. Take away this from
   tradesmen, and shops are but so many houses of greediness and filthy
   lucre. Take away this from gentlemen, and the course of their life
   becomes a course of sensuality, pride, and wantonness. Take away this
   rule from our tables, and all falls into gluttony and drunkenness. Take
   away this measure from our dress and habits, and all is turned into
   such paint, and glitter, and ridiculous ornaments, as are a real shame
   to the wearer. Take away this from the use of our fortunes, and you
   will find people sparing in nothing but charity. Take away this from
   our diversions, and you will find no sports too silly, nor any
   entertainments too vain and corrupt, to be the pleasure of Christians.
   If, therefore, we desire to live unto God, it is necessary to bring our
   whole life under this law, to make His glory the sole rule and measure
   of our acting in every employment of life. For there is no other true
   devotion, but this of living devoted to God in the common business of
   our lives.

   So that men must not content themselves with the lawfulness of their
   employments, but must consider whether they use them, as they are to
   use everything as strangers and pilgrims, that are baptized into the
   resurrection of Jesus Christ, that are to follow Him in a wise and
   heavenly course of life, in the mortification of all worldly desires,
   and in purifying and preparing their souls for the blessed enjoyment of
   God. [Col. iii. 1; 1 Pet. i. 15, 16; Eph. v. 26, 27]

   For to be vain, or proud, or covetous, or ambitious, in the common
   course of our business, is as contrary to these holy tempers of
   Christianity, as cheating and dishonesty.

   If a glutton was to say, in excuse of his gluttony, that he only eats
   such things as it is lawful to eat, he would make as good an excuse for
   himself, as the greedy, covetous, ambitious tradesman, that should say,
   he only deals in lawful business. For as a Christian is not only
   required to be honest, but to be of a Christian spirit, and make his
   life an exercise of humility, repentance, and heavenly affection, so
   all tempers that are contrary to these are as contrary to Christianity,
   as cheating is contrary to honesty.

   So that the matter plainly comes to this; all irregular tempers in
   trade and business are but like irregular tempers in eating and
   drinking.

   Proud views, and vain desires, in our worldly employments, are as truly
   vices and corruptions, as hypocrisy in prayer, or vanity in alms. And
   there can be no reason given, why vanity in our alms should make us
   odious to God, but what will prove any other kind of pride to be
   equally odious. He that labours and toils in a calling, that he may
   make a figure in the world and draw the eyes of people upon the
   splendour of his condition, is as far from the pious humility of a
   Christian, as he that gives alms that he may be seen of men. For the
   reason why pride and vanity in our prayers and alms renders them an
   unacceptable service to God, is not because there is anything
   particular in prayers and alms, that cannot allow of pride, but because
   pride is in no respect, nor in anything, made for man; it destroys the
   piety of our prayers and alms, because it destroys the piety of
   everything that it touches, and renders every action that it governs
   incapable of being offered unto God.

   So that if we could so divide ourselves, as to be humble in some
   respects, and proud in others, such humility would be of no service to
   us, because God requires us as truly to be humble in all our actions
   and designs, as to be true and honest in all our actions and designs.

   And as a man is not honest and true, because he is so to a great many
   people, or upon several occasions, but because truth and honesty is the
   measure of all his dealings with everybody; so the case is the same in
   humility, or any other temper; it must be the general ruling habit of
   our minds, and extend itself to all our actions and designs, before it
   can be imputed to us.

   We indeed sometimes talk, as if a man might be humble in some things,
   and proud in others; humble in his dress, but proud of his learning;
   humble in his person, but proud in his views and designs. But though
   this may pass in common discourse, where few things are said according
   to strict truth, it cannot be allowed, when we examine into the nature
   of our actions.

   It is very possible for a man that lives by cheating, to be very
   punctual in paying for what he buys; but then every one is assured,
   that he does not do so out of any principle of true honesty.

   In like manner it is very possible for a man that is proud of his
   estate, ambitious in his views, or vain of his learning, to disregard
   his dress and person in such a manner as a truly humble man would do;
   but to suppose that he does so out of a true principle of religious
   humility, is full as absurd as to suppose that a cheat pays for what he
   buys out of a principle of religious honesty.

   As, therefore, all kinds of dishonesty destroy our pretences to an
   honest principle of mind, so all kinds of pride destroy our pretences
   to an humble spirit.

   No one wonders that those prayers and alms, which proceed from pride
   and ostentation, are odious to God; but yet it is as easy to show, that
   pride is as pardonable there as anywhere else.

   If we could suppose that God rejects pride in our prayers and alms, but
   bears with pride in our dress, our persons, or estates, it would be the
   same thing as to suppose, that God condemns falsehood in some actions,
   but allows it in others. For pride, in one thing, differs from pride in
   another thing, as the robbing of one man differs from the robbing of
   another.

   Again, if pride and ostentation is so odious that it destroys the merit
   and worth of the most reasonable actions, surely it must be equally
   odious in those actions which are only founded in the weakness and
   infirmity of our nature. As thus, alms are commanded by God, as
   excellent in themselves, as true instances of a divine temper, but
   clothes are only allowed to cover our shame; surely, therefore, it must
   at least be as odious a degree of pride, to be vain in our clothes, as
   to be vain in our alms.

   Again, we are commanded to "pray without ceasing," [1 Thess. v. 17] as
   a means of rendering our souls more exalted and divine, but we are
   forbidden to lay up treasures upon earth; [Matt. vi. 19] and can we
   think that it is not as bad to be vain of those treasures which we are
   forbidden to lay up, as to be vain of those prayers which we are
   commanded to make?

   Women are required to have their heads covered, and to adorn themselves
   with shamefacedness: [1 Cor. xi. 13; 1 Tim. ii. 9] if, therefore, they
   are vain in those things which are expressly forbidden, if they patch
   and paint that part, which can only be adorned by shamefacedness,
   surely they have as much to repent of for such a pride, as they have,
   whose pride is the motive to their prayers and charity. This must be
   granted; unless we will say, that it is more pardonable to glory in our
   shame, than to glory in our virtue.

   All these instances are only to show us the great necessity of such a
   regular and uniform piety, as extends itself to all the actions of our
   common life.

   That we must eat and drink, and dress and discourse, according to the
   sobriety of the Christian spirit, engage in no employments but such as
   we can truly devote unto God, nor pursue them any farther than so far
   as conduces to the reasonable ends of a holy, devout life. -- That we
   must be honest, not only on particular occasions, and in such instances
   as are applauded in the world, easy to be performed, and free from
   danger, or loss, but from such a living principle of justice, as makes
   us love truth and integrity in all its instances, follow it through all
   dangers, and against all opposition; as knowing that the more we pay
   for any truth, the better is our bargain, and that then our integrity
   becomes a pearl, when we have parted with all to keep it. -- That we
   must be humble, not only in such instances as are expected in the
   world, or suitable to our tempers, or confined to particular occasions;
   but in such a humility of spirit, as renders us meek and lowly in the
   whole course of our lives, as shows itself in our dress, our person,
   our conversation, our enjoyment of the world, the tranquillity of our
   minds, patience under injuries, submission to superiors, and
   condescensions to those that are below us, and in all the outward
   actions of our lives. -- That we must devote, not only times and places
   to prayer, but be everywhere in the spirit of devotion; with hearts
   always set towards Heaven, looking up to God in all our actions, and
   doing everything as His servants; living in the world as in a holy
   temple of God, and always worshipping Him, though not with our lips,
   yet with the thankfulness of our hearts, the holiness of our actions,
   and the pious and charitable use of all His gifts. -- That we must not
   only send up petitions and thoughts to Heaven, but must go through all
   our worldly business with a heavenly spirit, as members of Christ's
   mystical body; that, with new hearts and new minds, we may turn an
   earthly life into a preparation for a life of greatness and glory in
   the kingdom of Heaven. Now the only way to arrive at this piety of
   spirit, is to bring all your actions to the same rule as your devotions
   and alms. You very well know what it is, that makes the piety of your
   alms or devotions; now the same rules, the same regard to God, must
   render everything else that you do, a fit and acceptable service unto
   God.

   Enough, I hope, has been said, to show you the necessity of thus
   introducing religion into all the actions of your common life, and of
   living and acting with the same regard to God, in all that you do, as
   in your prayers and alms.

   Eating is one of the lowest actions of our lives; it is common to us
   with mere animals; yet we see that the piety of all ages of the world
   has turned this ordinary action of an animal life into a piety to God,
   by making every meal to begin and end with devotion.

   We see yet some remains of this custom in most Christian families, some
   such little formality as shows you, that people used to call upon God
   at the beginning and end of their meals. But, indeed, it is now
   generally performed, as to look more like a mockery upon devotion, than
   any solemn application of the mind unto God. In one house you may
   perhaps see the head of the family just pulling off his hat; in
   another, half getting up from his seat; another shall, it may be,
   proceed so far as to make as if he said something; but, however, [11]
   these little attempts are the remains of some devotion that was
   formerly used at such times, and are proofs that religion has formerly
   belonged to this part of common life.

   But to such a pass are we now come, that though the custom is yet
   preserved, yet we can hardly bear with him that seems to perform it,
   with any degree of seriousness, and look upon it as a sign of a
   fanatical temper, if a man has not done as soon as he begins.

   I would not be thought to plead for the necessity of long prayers at
   these times; but thus much I think may be said, that if prayer is
   proper at these times, we ought to oblige ourselves to use such a form
   of words, as should show that we solemnly appeal to God for such graces
   and blessings as are then proper to the occasion. Otherwise the mock
   ceremony, instead of blessing our victuals, does but accustom us to
   trifle with devotion, and give us a habit of being unaffected [12] with
   our prayers.

   If every head of a family was, at the return of every meal, to oblige
   himself to make a solemn adoration of God, in such a decent manner as
   becomes a devout mind, it would be very likely to teach him that
   swearing, sensuality, gluttony, and loose discourse, were very improper
   at those meals, which were to begin and end with devotion.

   And if in these days of general corruption, this part of devotion is
   fallen into a mock ceremony, it must be imputed to this cause, that
   sensuality and intemperance have got too great a power over us, to
   suffer us to add any devotion to our meals. But thus much must be said,
   that when we are as pious as Jews and heathens of all ages have been,
   we shall think it proper to pray at the beginning and end of our meals.

   I have appealed to this pious custom of all ages of the world, as a
   proof of the reasonableness of the doctrine of this and the foregoing
   chapters; that is, as a proof that religion is to be the rule and
   measure of all the actions of ordinary life. For surely, if we are not
   to eat, but under such rules of devotion, it must plainly appear, that
   whatever else we do, must, in its proper way, be done with the same
   regard to the glory of God, and agreeably to the principles of a devout
   and pious mind.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [9] painful = taking pains.

   [10] Calidus = hot, i.e. fervent in business.

   [11] however, in the old sense of "at any rate."

   [12] unaffected = insensible.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER V


   Persons that are free from the necessity of labour and employments, are
   to consider themselves as devoted to God in a higher degree.


   A GREAT part of the world are free from the necessities of labour and
   employments, and have their time and fortunes in their own disposal.

   But as no one is to live in his employment according to his own humour,
   or for such ends as please his own fancy, but is to do all his business
   in such a manner as to make it a service unto God; so those who have no
   particular employment are so far from being left at greater liberty to
   live to themselves, to pursue their own humours, and spend their time
   and fortunes as they please, that they are under greater obligations of
   living wholly unto God in all their actions.

   The freedom of their state lays them under a greater necessity of
   always choosing, and doing, the best things.

   They are those, of whom much will be required, because much is given
   unto them.

   A slave can only live unto God in one particular way, that is, by
   religious patience and submission in his state of slavery.

   But all ways of holy living, all instances, and all kinds of virtue,
   lie open to those who are masters of themselves, their time, and their
   fortune.

   It is as much the duty, therefore, of such persons, to make a wise use
   of their liberty, to devote themselves to all kinds of virtue, to
   aspire after everything that is holy and pious, to endeavour to be
   eminent in all good works, and to please God in the highest and most
   perfect manner; it is as much their duty to be thus wise in the conduct
   of themselves, and thus extensive in their endeavours after holiness,
   as it is the duty of a slave to be resigned unto God in his state of
   slavery.

   You are no labourer, or tradesman, you are neither merchant nor
   soldier; consider yourself, therefore, as placed in a state in some
   degree like that of good Angels who are sent into the world as
   ministering spirits, for the general good of mankind, to assist,
   protect, and minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation.

   For the more you are free from the common necessities of men, the more
   you are to imitate the higher perfections of Angels.

   Had you, Serena, [13] been obliged, by the necessities of life, to wash
   clothes for your maintenance, or to wait upon some mistress that
   demanded all your labour, it would then be your duty to serve and
   glorify God, by such humility, obedience, and faithfulness, as might
   adorn that state of life. It would then be recommended to your care, to
   improve that one talent to its greatest height. That when the time
   came, that mankind were to be rewarded for their labours by the great
   Judge of quick and dead, you might be received with a "Well done, good
   and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." [Matt. xxv.
   21]

   But as God has given you five talents, as He has placed you above the
   necessities of life, as He has left you in the hands of yourself, in
   the happy liberty of choosing the most exalted ways of virtue; as He
   has enriched you with many gifts of fortune, and left you nothing to
   do, but to make the best use of a variety of blessings, to make the
   most of a short life, to study your own perfection, the honour of God,
   and the good of your neighbour; so it is now your duty to imitate the
   greatest servants of God, to inquire how the most eminent saints have
   lived, to study all the arts and methods of perfection, and to set no
   bounds to your love and gratitude to the bountiful Author of so many
   blessings.

   It is now your duty to turn your five talents into five more, and to
   consider how your time, and leisure, and health, and fortune, may be
   made so many happy means of purifying your own soul, improving your
   fellow-creatures in the ways of virtue, and of carrying you at last to
   the greatest heights of eternal glory.

   As you have no mistress to serve, so let your own soul be the object of
   your daily care and attendance. Be sorry for its impurities, its spots,
   and imperfections, and study all the holy arts of restoring it to its
   natural and primitive purity.

   Delight in its service, and beg of God to adorn it with every grace and
   perfection.

   Nourish it with good works, give it peace in solitude, get it strength
   in prayer, make it wise with reading, enlighten it by meditation, make
   it tender with love, sweeten it with humility, humble it with penance,
   enliven it with psalms and hymns, and comfort it with frequent
   reflections upon future glory. Keep it in the presence of God, and
   teach it to imitate those guardian Angels, which, though they attend on
   human affairs, and the lowest of mankind, yet "always behold the face
   of our Father which is in heaven." [Matt. xviii. 10]

   This, Serena, is your profession. For as sure as God is one God, so
   sure it is, that He has but one command to all mankind, whether they be
   bond or free, rich or poor; and that is, to act up to the excellency of
   that nature which He has given them, to live by reason, to walk in the
   light of religion, to use everything as wisdom directs, to glorify God
   in all His gifts, and dedicate every condition of life to His service.

   This is the one common command of God to all mankind. If you have an
   employment, you are to be thus reasonable, and pious, and holy, in the
   exercise of it; if you have time and a fortune in your own power, you
   are obliged to be thus reasonable, and holy, and pious, in the use of
   all your time, and all your fortune.

   The right religious use of everything and every talent, is the
   indispensable duty of every being that is capable of knowing right and
   wrong.

   For the reason why we are to do anything as unto God, and with regard
   to our duty, and relation to Him, is the same reason why we are to do
   everything as unto God, and with regard to our duty, and relation to
   Him.

   That which is a reason for our being wise and holy in the discharge of
   all our business, is the same reason for our being wise and holy in the
   use of all our money.

   As we have always the same natures, and are everywhere the servants of
   the same God, as every place is equally full of His presence, and
   everything is equally His gift, so we must always act according to the
   reason of our nature; we must do everything as the servants of God; we
   must live in every place, as in His presence; we must use everything,
   as that ought to be used which belongs to God.

   Either this piety, and wisdom, and devotion is to go through every way
   of life, and to extend to the use of everything, or it is to go through
   no part of life.

   If we might forget ourselves, or forget God, if we might disregard our
   reason, and live by humour and fancy, in anything, or at any time, or
   in any place, it would be as lawful to do the same in everything, at
   fancy, at every time, and every place.

   If therefore some people fancy that they must be grave and solemn at
   Church, but may be silly and frantic at home; that they must live by
   some rule on the Sunday, but may spend other days by chance; that they
   must have some times of prayer, but may waste the rest of their time as
   they please; that they must give some money in charity, but may
   squander away the rest as they have a mind; such people have not enough
   considered the nature of religion, or the true reasons of piety. For he
   that upon principles of reason can tell why it is good to be wise and
   heavenly-minded at Church, can tell that it is always desirable to have
   the same tempers in all other places. He that truly knows why he should
   spend any time well, knows that it is never allowable to throw any time
   away. He that rightly understands the reasonableness and excellency of
   charity, will know that it can never be excusable to waste any of our
   money in pride and folly, or in any needless expenses.

   For every argument that shows the wisdom and excellency of charity,
   proves the wisdom of spending all our fortune well. Every argument that
   proves the wisdom and reasonableness of having times of prayer, shows
   the wisdom and reasonableness of losing none of our time.

   If any one could show that we need not always act as in the Divine
   presence, that we need not consider and use everything as the gift of
   God, that we need not always live by reason, and make religion the rule
   of all our actions; the same arguments would show that we need never
   act as in the presence of God, nor make religion and reason the measure
   of any of our actions. If, therefore, we are to live unto God at any
   time, or in any place, we are to live unto Him at all times, and in all
   places. If we are to use anything as the gift of God, we are to use
   everything as His gift. If we are to do anything by strict rules of
   reason and piety, we are to do everything in the same manner. Because
   reason, and wisdom, and piety, are as much the best things at all
   times, and in all places, as they are the best things at any time or in
   any place.

   If it is our glory and happiness to have a rational nature, that is
   endued with wisdom and reason, that is capable of imitating the Divine
   nature, then it must be our glory and happiness to improve our reason
   and wisdom, to act up to the excellency of our rational nature, and to
   imitate God in all our actions, to the utmost of our power. They
   therefore who confine religion to times and places, and some little
   rules of retirement, who think that it is being too strict and rigid to
   introduce religion into common life, and make it give laws to all their
   actions and ways of living, they who think thus, not only mistake, but
   they mistake the whole nature of religion. For surely they mistake the
   whole nature of religion, who can think any part of their life is made
   more easy, for being free from it. They may well be said to mistake the
   whole nature of wisdom, who do not think it desirable to be always
   wise. He has not learnt the nature of piety, who thinks it too much to
   be pious in all his actions. He does not sufficiently understand what
   reason is, who does not earnestly desire to live in everything
   according to it.

   If we had a religion that consisted in absurd superstitions, that had
   no regard to the perfection of our nature, people might well be glad to
   have some part of their life excused from it. But as the religion of
   the Gospel is only the refinement and exaltation of our best faculties,
   as it only requires a life of the highest reason, as it only requires
   us to use this world as in reason it ought to be used, to live in such
   tempers as are the glory of intelligent beings, to walk in such wisdom
   as exalts our nature, and to practise such piety as will raise us to
   God; who can think it grievous to live always in the spirit of such a
   religion, to have every part of his life full of it, but he that would
   think it much more grievous to be as the Angels of God in Heaven?

   Farther, as God is one and the same Being, always acting like Himself,
   and suitably to His own nature, so it is the duty of every being that
   He has created, to live according to the nature that He has given it,
   and always to act like itself.

   It is therefore an immutable law of God, that all rational beings
   should act reasonably in all their actions; not at this time, or in
   that place, or upon this occasion, or in the use of some particular
   thing, but at all times, in all places, on all occasions, and in the
   use of all things. This is a law that is as unchangeable as God, and
   can no more cease to be, than God can cease to be a God of wisdom and
   order.

   When, therefore, any being that is endued with reason does an
   unreasonable thing at any time, or in any place, or in the use of
   anything, it sins against the great law of its nature, abuses itself,
   and sins against God, the Author of that nature.

   They, therefore, who plead for indulgences and vanities, for any
   foolish fashions, customs, and humours of the world, for the misuse of
   our time or money, plead for a rebellion against our nature, for a
   rebellion against God, who has given us reason for no other end than to
   make it the rule and measure of all our ways of life.

   When, therefore, you are guilty of any folly, or extravagance, or
   indulge any vain temper, do not consider it as a small matter, because
   it may seem so if compared to some other sins; but consider it, as it
   is acting contrary to your nature, and then you will see that there is
   nothing small that is unreasonable; because all unreasonable ways are
   contrary to the nature of all rational beings, whether men or Angels:
   neither of which can be any longer agreeable to God, than so far as
   they act according to the reason and excellence of their nature.

   The infirmities of human life make such food and raiment necessary for
   us, as Angels do not want; but then it is no more allowable for us to
   turn these necessities into follies, and indulge ourselves in the
   luxury of food, or the vanities of dress, than it is allowable for
   Angels to act below the dignity of their proper state. For a reasonable
   life, and a wise use of our proper condition, is as much the duty of
   all men, as it is the duty of all Angels and intelligent beings. These
   are not speculative flights, or imaginary notions, but are plain and
   undeniable laws, that are founded in the nature of rational beings, who
   as such are obliged to live by reason, and glorify God by a continual
   right use of their several talents and faculties. So that though men
   are not Angels, yet they may know for what ends, and by what rules, men
   are to live and act, by considering the state and perfection of Angels.
   Our blessed Saviour has plainly turned our thoughts this way, by making
   this petition a constant part of all our prayers, "Thy will be done on
   earth, as it is in Heaven." A plain proof, that the obedience of men is
   to imitate the obedience of Angels, and that rational beings on earth
   are to live unto God, as rational beings in Heaven live unto Him.

   When, therefore, you would represent to your mind, how Christians ought
   to live unto God, and in what degrees of wisdom and holiness they ought
   to use the things of this life, you must not look at the world, but you
   must look up to God, and the society of Angels, and think what wisdom
   and holiness is fit to prepare you for such a state of glory. You must
   look to all the highest precepts of the Gospel, you must examine
   yourself by the spirit of Christ, you must think how the wisest men in
   the world have lived, you must think how departed souls would live if
   they were again to act the short part of human life; you must think
   what degrees of wisdom and holiness you will wish for, when you are
   leaving the world.

   Now this is not over-straining the matter, or proposing to ourselves
   any needless perfection. It is but barely complying with the Apostle's
   advice, where he says, "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true,
   whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
   things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any
   praise, think on these things." [Phil. iv. 8] For no one can come near
   the doctrine of this passage, but he that proposes to himself to do
   everything in this life as the servant of God, to live by reason in
   everything that he does, and to make the wisdom and holiness of the
   Gospel the rule and measure of his desiring and using every gift of
   God.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [13] Serena = untroubled.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER VI


   Containing the great obligations, and the great advantages of making a
   wise and religious use of our estates and fortunes.


   AS THE HOLINESS of Christianity consecrates all states and employments
   of life unto God, as it requires us to aspire after an universal
   obedience, doing and using everything as the servants of God, so are we
   more specially obliged to observe this religious exactness in the use
   of our estates and fortunes.

   The reason of this would appear very plain, if we were only to
   consider, that our estate is as much the gift of God, as our eyes or
   our hands, and is no more to be buried or thrown away at pleasure, than
   we are to put out our eyes, or throw away our limbs as we please.

   But, besides this consideration, there are several other great and
   important reasons why we should be religiously exact in the use of our
   estates.

   First, Because the manner of using our money or spending our estate
   enters so far into the business of every day, and makes so great a part
   of our common life, that our common life must be much of the same
   nature as our common way of spending our estate. If reason and religion
   govern us in this, then reason and religion have got great hold of us;
   but if humour, pride, and fancy, are the measures of our spending our
   estate, then humour, pride, and fancy, will have the direction of the
   greatest part of our life.

   Secondly, Another great reason for devoting all our estate to right
   uses, is this: because it is capable of being used to the most
   excellent purposes, and is so great a means of doing good. If we waste
   it we do not waste a trifle, that signifies little, but we waste that
   which might be made as eyes to the blind, as a husband to the widow, as
   a father to the orphan; we waste that which not only enables us to
   minister worldly comforts to those that are in distress, but that which
   might purchase for ourselves everlasting treasures in Heaven. So that
   if we part with our money in foolish ways, we part with a great power
   of comforting our fellow-creatures, and of making ourselves forever
   blessed.

   If there be nothing so glorious as doing good, if there is nothing that
   makes us so like to God, then nothing can be so glorious in the use of
   our money, as to use it all in works of love and goodness, making
   ourselves friends, and fathers, and benefactors, to all our
   fellow-creatures, imitating the Divine love, and turning all our power
   into acts of generosity, care, and kindness to such as are in need of
   it.

   If a man had eyes, and hands, and feet, that he could give to those
   that wanted them; if he should either lock them up in a chest, or
   please himself with some needless or ridiculous use of them, instead of
   giving them to his brethren that were blind and lame, should we not
   justly reckon him an inhuman wretch? If he should rather choose to
   amuse himself with furnishing his house with those things, than to
   entitle himself to an eternal reward, by giving them to those that
   wanted eyes and hands, might we not justly reckon him mad?

   Now money has very much the nature of eyes and feet; if we either lock
   it up in chests, or waste it in needless and ridiculous expenses upon
   ourselves, whilst the poor and the distressed want it for their
   necessary uses; if we consume it in the ridiculous ornaments of
   apparel, whilst others are starving in nakedness; we are not far from
   the cruelty of him, that chooses rather to adorn his house with the
   hands and eyes than to give them to those that want them. If we choose
   to indulge ourselves in such expensive enjoyments as have no real use
   in them, such as satisfy no real want, rather than to entitle ourselves
   to an eternal reward, by disposing of our money well, we are guilty of
   his madness, that rather chooses to lock up eyes and hands, than to
   make himself forever blessed, by giving them to those that want them.
   For after we have satisfied our own sober and reasonable wants, all the
   rest of our money is but like spare eyes or hands; it is something that
   we cannot keep to ourselves without being foolish in the use of it,
   something that can only be used well, by giving it to those that want
   it.

   Thirdly, If we waste our money, we are not only guilty of wasting a
   talent which God has given us, we are not only guilty of making that
   useless, which is so powerful a means of doing good, but we do
   ourselves this further harm, that we turn this useful talent into a
   powerful means of corrupting ourselves; because so far as it is spent
   wrong, so far it is spent in support of some wrong temper, in
   gratifying some vain and unreasonable desires, in conforming to those
   fashions, and pride of the world, which, as Christians and reasonable
   men, we are obliged to renounce.

   As wit and fine parts cannot be trifled away, and only lost, but will
   expose those that have them into [14] greater follies, if they are not
   strictly devoted to piety; so money, if it is not used strictly
   according to reason and religion, can not only be trifled away, but it
   will betray people into greater follies, and make them live a more
   silly and extravagant life, than they could have done without it. If,
   therefore, you do not spend your money in doing good to others, you
   must spend it to the hurt of yourself. You will act like a man, that
   should refuse to give that as a cordial to a sick friend, though he
   could not drink it himself without inflaming his blood. For this is the
   case of superfluous money; if you give it to those that want it, it is
   a cordial; if you spend it upon yourself in something that you do not
   want, it only inflames and disorders your mind, and makes you worse
   than you would be without it.

   Consider again the forementioned comparison; if the man that would not
   make a right use of spare eyes and hands, should, by continually trying
   to use them himself, spoil his own eyes and hands, we might justly
   accuse him of still greater madness.

   Now this is truly the case of riches spent upon ourselves in vain and
   needless expenses; in trying to use them where they have no real use,
   nor we any real want, we only use them to our great hurt, in creating
   unreasonable desires, in nourishing ill tempers, in indulging our
   passions, and supporting a worldly, vain turn of mind. For high eating
   and drinking, fine clothes, and fine houses, state and equipage, gay
   pleasures, and diversions, do all of them naturally hurt and disorder
   our hearts; they are the food and nourishment of all the folly and
   weakness of our nature, and are certain means to make us vain and
   worldly in our tempers. They are all of them the support of something,
   that ought not to be supported; they are contrary to that sobriety and
   piety of heart which relishes Divine things; they are like so many
   weights upon our minds, that make us less able, and less inclined, to
   raise up our thoughts and affections to the things that are above.

   So that money thus spent is not merely wasted or lost, but it is spent
   to bad purposes, and miserable effects, to the corruption and disorder
   of our hearts, and to the making us less able to live up to the sublime
   doctrines of the Gospel. It is but like keeping money from the poor, to
   buy poison for ourselves.

   For so much as is spent in the vanity of dress, may be reckoned so much
   laid out to fix vanity in our minds. So much as is laid out for
   idleness and indulgence, may be reckoned so much given to render our
   hearts dull and sensual. So much as is spent in state and equipage, may
   be reckoned so much spent to dazzle your own eyes, and render you the
   idol of your own imagination. And so in everything, when you go from
   reasonable wants, you only support some unreasonable temper, some turn
   of mind, which every good Christian is called upon to renounce.

   So that on all accounts, whether we consider our fortune as a talent,
   and trust from God, or the great good that it enables us to do, or the
   great harm that it does to ourselves, if idly spent; on all these great
   accounts it appears, that it is absolutely necessary to make reason and
   religion the strict rule of using all our fortune.

   Every exhortation in Scripture to be wise and reasonable, satisfying
   only such wants as God would have satisfied; every exhortation to be
   spiritual and heavenly, pressing after a glorious change of our nature;
   every exhortation to love our neighbour as ourselves, to love all
   mankind as God has loved them, is a command to be strictly religious in
   the use of our money. For none of these tempers can be complied with,
   unless we be wise and reasonable, spiritual and heavenly, exercising a
   brotherly love, a godlike charity, in the use of all our fortune. These
   tempers, and this use of our worldly goods, is so much the doctrine of
   all the New Testament, that you cannot read a chapter without being
   taught something of it. I shall only produce one remarkable passage of
   Scripture, which is sufficient to justify all that I have said
   concerning this religious use of all our fortune.

   "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels
   with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before
   him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from
   another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he shall
   set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall
   the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my
   Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
   world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and
   ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye
   clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came
   unto me . . . Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from
   me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
   angels: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty,
   and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in:
   naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me
   not. These shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous
   into life eternal." [Matt. xxv. 31-64]

   I have quoted this passage at length, because if one looks at the way
   of the world, one would hardly think that Christians had ever read this
   part of Scripture. For what is there in the lives of Christians, that
   looks as if their salvation depended upon these good works? And yet the
   necessity of them is here asserted in the highest manner, and pressed
   upon us by a lively description of the glory and terrors of the day of
   judgment.

   Some people, even of those who may be reckoned virtuous Christians,
   look upon this text only as a general recommendation of occasional
   works of charity; whereas it shows the necessity not only of occasional
   charities now and then, but the necessity of such an entire charitable
   life, as is a continual exercise of all such works of charity, as we
   are able to perform.

   You own, that you have no title to salvation, if you have neglected
   these good works; because such persons as have neglected them are, at
   the last day, to be placed on the left hand, and banished with a
   "Depart, ye cursed." There is, therefore, no salvation but in the
   performance of these good works. Who is it, therefore, that may be said
   to have performed these good works? Is it he that has some time
   assisted a prisoner, or relieved the poor or sick? This would be as
   absurd as to say, that he had performed the duties of devotion, who had
   some time said his prayers. Is it, therefore, he that has several times
   done these works of charity? This can no more be said, than he can be
   said to be the truly just man, who had done acts of justice several
   times. What is the rule, therefore, or measure of performing these good
   works? How shall a man trust that he performs them as he ought?

   Now the rule is very plain and easy, and such as is common to every
   other virtue, or good temper, as well as to charity. Who is the humble,
   or meek, or devout, or just, or faithful man? Is it he that has several
   times done acts of humility, meekness, devotion, justice, or fidelity?
   No; but it is he that lives in the habitual exercise of these virtues.
   In like manner, he only can be said to have performed these works of
   charity, who lives in the habitual exercise of them to the utmost of
   his power. He only has performed the duty of Divine love, who loves God
   with all his heart, and with all his mind, and with all his strength.
   And he only has performed the duty of these good works, who has done
   them with all his heart, and with all his mind, and with all his
   strength. For there is no other measure of our doing good, than our
   power of doing it.

   The Apostle St. Peter puts this question to our blessed Saviour: "Lord,
   how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven
   times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times,
   but, Until seventy times seven." [Matt. xviii. 21, 22] Not as if after
   this number of offences a man might then cease to forgive; but the
   expression of seventy times seven, is to show us, that we are not to
   bound our forgiveness by any number of offences, but are to continue
   forgiving the most repeated offences against us. Thus our Saviour saith
   in another place, "If he trespass against thee seven times in a day,
   and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou
   shalt forgive him." [Luke xvii. 4] If, therefore, a man ceases to
   forgive his brother, because he has forgiven him often already; if he
   excuses himself from forgiving this man, because he has forgiven
   several others; such a one breaks this law of Christ, concerning the
   forgiving one's brother.

   Now the rule of forgiving is also the rule of giving; you are not to
   give, or do good to seven, but to seventy times seven. You are not to
   cease from giving, because you have given often to the same person, or
   to other persons; but must look upon yourself as [15] much obliged to
   continue relieving those that continue in want, as you were obliged to
   relieve them once or twice. Had it not been in your power, you had been
   excused from relieving any person once; but if it is in your power to
   relieve people often, it is as much your duty to do it often, as it is
   the duty of others to do it but seldom, because they are but seldom
   able. He that is not ready to forgive every brother, as often as he
   wants to be forgiven, does not forgive like a disciple of Christ. And
   he that is not ready to give to every brother that wants to have
   something given him, does not give like a disciple of Christ. For it is
   as necessary to give to seventy times seven, to live in the continual
   exercise of all good works to the utmost of our power, as it is
   necessary to forgive until seventy times seven, and live in the
   habitual exercise of this forgiving temper, towards all that want it.

   And the reason of all this is very plain, because there is the same
   goodness, the same excellency, and the same necessity of being thus
   charitable at one time as at another. It is as much the best use of our
   money, to be always doing good with it, as it is the best use of it at
   any particular time; so that that which is a reason for a charitable
   action, is as good a reason for a charitable life. That which is a
   reason for forgiving one offence, is the same reason for forgiving all
   offences. For such charity has nothing to recommend it to-day, but what
   will be the same recommendation of it to-morrow; and you cannot neglect
   it at one time, without being guilty of the same sin, as if you
   neglected it at another time.

   As sure, therefore, as these works of charity are necessary to
   salvation, so sure is it that we are to do them to the utmost of our
   power; not to-day, or to-morrow, but through the whole course of our
   life. If, therefore, it be our duty at any time to deny ourselves any
   needless expenses, to be moderate and frugal, that we may have to give
   to those that want, it is as much our duty to do so at all times, that
   we may be further able to do more good. For if it is at any time a sin
   to prefer needless vain expense to works of charity, it is so at all
   times; because charity as much excels all needless and vain expenses at
   one time as at another. So that if it is ever necessary to our
   salvation, to take care of these works of charity, and to see that we
   make ourselves in some degree capable of doing them, it is as necessary
   to our salvation, to take care to make ourselves as capable as we can
   be, of performing them in all the parts of our life.

   Either, therefore, you must so far renounce your Christianity, as to
   say that you need never perform any of these good works; or you must
   own that you are to perform them all your life in as high a degree as
   you are able. There is no middle way to be taken, any more than there
   is a middle way betwixt pride and humility, or temperance and
   intemperance. If you do not strive to fulfil all charitable works, if
   you neglect any of them that are in your power, and deny assistance to
   those that want what you can give, let it be when it will, or where it
   will, you number yourself amongst those that want Christian charity.
   Because it is as much your duty to do good with all that you have, and
   to live in the continual exercise of good works, as it is your duty to
   be temperate in all that you eat and drink.

   Hence also appears the necessity of renouncing all those foolish and
   unreasonable expenses, which the pride and folly of mankind have made
   so common and fashionable in the world. For if it is necessary to do
   good works, as far as you are able, it must be as necessary to renounce
   those needless ways of spending money which render you unable to do
   works of charity.

   You must therefore no more conform to these ways of the world than you
   must conform to the vices of the world; you must no more spend with
   those that idly waste their money as their own humour leads them, than
   you must drink with the drunken, or indulge yourself with the epicure:
   because a course of such expenses is no more consistent with a life of
   charity than excess in drinking is consistent with a life of sobriety.
   When, therefore, any one tells you of the lawfulness of expensive
   apparel, or the innocence of pleasing yourself with costly
   satisfactions, only imagine that the same person was to tell you, that
   you need not do works of charity; that Christ does not require you to
   do good unto your poor brethren, as unto Him; and then you will see the
   wickedness of such advice. For to tell you that you may live in such
   expenses, as make it impossible for you to live in the exercise of good
   works, is the same thing as telling you that you need not have any care
   about such good works themselves.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [14] "exposed into the ayre" is a usage of the sixteenth-century
   writers.

   [15] A second "as" is needed to be quite correct.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER VII


   How the imprudent use of an estate corrupts all the tempers of the
   mind, and fills the heart with poor and ridiculous passions, through
   the whole course of life; represented in the character of Flavia.


   IT HAS ALREADY been observed, that a prudent and religious care is to
   be used in the manner of spending our money or estate, because the
   manner of spending our estate makes so great a part of our common life,
   and is so much the business of every day, that according as we are
   wise, or imprudent, in this respect, the whole course of our lives will
   be rendered either very wise or very full of folly.

   Persons that are well affected to religion, that receive instructions
   of piety with pleasure and satisfaction, often wonder how it comes to
   pass that they make no greater progress in that religion which they so
   much admire.

   Now the reason of it is this: it is because religion lives only in
   their head, but something else has possession of their heart; and
   therefore they continue from year to year mere admirers and praisers of
   piety, without ever coming up to the reality and perfection of its
   precepts.

   If it be asked why religion does not get possession of their hearts,
   the reason is this; it is not because they live in gross sins, or
   debaucheries, for their regard to religion preserves them from such
   disorders; but it is because their hearts are constantly employed,
   perverted, and kept in a wrong state by the indiscreet use of such
   things as are lawful to be used.

   The use and enjoyment of their estate is lawful, and therefore it never
   comes into their heads to imagine any great danger from that quarter.
   They never reflect, that there is a vain and imprudent use of their
   estate, which, though it does not destroy like gross sins, yet so
   disorders the heart, and supports it in such sensuality and dulness,
   such pride and vanity, as makes it incapable of receiving the life and
   spirit of piety.

   For our souls may receive an infinite hurt, and be rendered incapable
   of all virtue, merely by the use of innocent and lawful things.

   What is more innocent than rest and retirement? And yet what more
   dangerous than sloth and idleness? What is more lawful than eating and
   drinking? And yet what more destructive of all virtue, what more
   fruitful of all vice, than sensuality and indulgence?

   How lawful and praiseworthy is the care of a family! And yet how
   certainly are many people rendered incapable of all virtue, by a
   worldly and solicitous temper!

   Now it is for want of religious exactness in the use of these innocent
   and lawful things, that religion cannot get possession of our hearts.
   And it is in the right and prudent management of ourselves, as to these
   things, that all the art of holy living chiefly consists.

   Gross sins are plainly seen and easily avoided by persons that profess
   religion. But the indiscreet and dangerous use of innocent and lawful
   things, as it does not shock and offend our consciences, so it is
   difficult to make people at all sensible of the danger of it.

   A gentleman that expends all his estate in sports, and a woman that
   lays out all her fortune upon herself, can hardly be persuaded that the
   spirit of religion cannot subsist in such a way of life.

   These persons, as has been observed, may live free from debaucheries,
   they may be friends of religion, so far as to praise and speak well of
   it, and admire it in their imaginations; but it cannot govern their
   hearts, and be the spirit of their actions, till they change their way
   of life, and let religion give laws to the use and spending of their
   estate.

   For a woman that loves dress, that thinks no expense too great to
   bestow upon the adorning of her person, cannot stop there. For that
   temper draws a thousand other follies along with it, and will render
   the whole course of her life, her business, her conversation, her
   hopes, her fears, her tastes, her pleasures, and diversions, all
   suitable to it.

   Flavia and Miranda [16] are two maiden sisters, that have each of them
   two hundred pounds a year. They buried their parents twenty years ago,
   and have since that time spent their estate as they pleased.

   Flavia has been the wonder of all her friends, for her excellent
   management, in making so surprising a figure on so moderate a fortune.
   Several ladies that have twice her fortune are not able to be always so
   genteel, and so constant at all places of pleasure and expense. She has
   everything that is in the fashion, and is in every place where there is
   any diversion. Flavia is very orthodox, she talks warmly against
   heretics and schismatics, is generally at Church, and often at the
   Sacrament. She once commended a sermon that was against the pride and
   vanity of dress, and thought it was very just against Lucinda, whom she
   takes to be a great deal finer than she need to be. If any one asks
   Flavia to do something in charity, if she likes the person who makes
   the proposal, or happens to be in a right temper, she will toss him
   half-a-crown, or a crown, and tell him if he knew what a long
   milliner's bill she had just received, he would think it a great deal
   for her to give. A quarter of a year after this, she hears a sermon
   upon the necessity of charity; she thinks the man preaches well, that
   it is a very proper subject, that people want much to be put in mind of
   it; but she applies nothing to herself, because she remembers that she
   gave a crown some time ago, when she could so ill spare it.

   As for poor people themselves, she will admit of no complaints from
   them; she is very positive they are all cheats and liars, and will say
   anything to get relief; and therefore it must be a sin to encourage
   them in their evil ways.

   You would think Flavia had the tenderest conscience in the world, if
   you were to see how scrupulous and apprehensive she is of the guilt and
   danger of giving amiss.

   She buys all books of wit and humour, and has made an expensive
   collection of all our English poets. For she says, one cannot have a
   true taste of any of them without being very conversant with them all.

   She will sometimes read a book of piety, if it is a short one, if it is
   much commended for style and language, and she can tell where to borrow
   it.

   Flavia is very idle, and yet very fond of fine work; this makes her
   often sit working in bed until noon, and be told many a long story
   before she is up; so that I need not tell you, that her morning
   devotions are not always rightly performed.

   Flavia would be a miracle of piety, if she was but half so careful of
   her soul as she is of her body. The rising of a pimple in her face, the
   sting of a gnat, will make her keep her room two or three days, and she
   thinks they are very rash people that do not take care of things in
   time. This makes her so over-careful of her health, that she never
   thinks she is well enough; and so over-indulgent, that she never can be
   really well. So that it costs her a great deal in sleeping draughts and
   waking draughts, in spirits for the head, in drops for the nerves, in
   cordials for the stomach, and in saffron for her tea.

   If you visit Flavia on the Sunday, you will always meet good company,
   you will know what is doing in the world, you will hear the last
   lampoon, be told who wrote it, and who is meant by every name that is
   in it. You will hear what plays were acted that week, which is the
   finest song in the opera, who was intolerable at the last assembly, and
   what games are most in fashion. Flavia thinks they are atheists that
   play at cards on the Sunday, but she will tell you the nicety of all
   the games, what cards she held, how she played them, and the history of
   all that happened at play, as soon as she comes from Church. If you
   would know who is rude and ill-natured, who is vain and foppish, who
   lives too high, and who is in debt; if you would know what is the
   quarrel at a certain house, or who are in love; if you would know how
   late Belinda comes home at night, what clothes she has bought, how she
   loves compliments, and what a long story she told at such a place; if
   you would know how cross Lucius is to his wife, what ill-natured things
   he says to her when nobody hears him; if you would know how they hate
   one another in their hearts, though they appear so kind in public; you
   must visit Flavia on the Sunday. But still she has so great a regard
   for the holiness of the Sunday, that she has turned a poor old widow
   out of her house, as a profane wretch, for having been found once
   mending her clothes on the Sunday night.

   Thus lives Flavia; and if she lives ten years longer, she will have
   spent about fifteen hundred and sixty Sundays after this manner. She
   will have worn about two hundred different suits of clothes. Out of
   these thirty years of her life, fifteen will have been disposed of in
   bed; and, of the remaining fifteen, about fourteen will have been
   consumed in eating, drinking, dressing, visiting, conversation, reading
   and hearing plays and romances, at operas, assemblies, balls and
   diversions. For you may reckon all the time that she is up, thus spent,
   except about an hour and a half, that is disposed of at Church, most
   Sundays in the year. With great management, and under mighty rules of
   economy, she will have spent sixty hundred pounds upon herself, bating
   only some shillings, crowns, or half-crowns, that have gone from her in
   accidental charities.

   I shall not take upon me to say, that it is impossible for Flavia to be
   saved; but thus much must be said, that she has no grounds from
   Scripture to think she is in the way of salvation. For her whole life
   is in direct opposition to all those tempers and practices which the
   Gospel has made necessary to salvation.

   If you were to hear her say, that she had lived all her life like Anna
   the prophetess, who "departed not from the temple, but served God with
   fastings and prayers night and day," [Luke ii. 36, 37] you would look
   upon her as very extravagant; and yet this would be no greater an
   extravagance, than for her to say that she had been "striving to enter
   in at the strait gate," [Luke xiii. 24] or making any one doctrine of
   the Gospel a rule of her life.

   She may as well say, that she lived with our Saviour when He was upon
   earth, as that she has lived in imitation of Him, or made it any part
   of her care to live in such tempers as He required of all those that
   would be His disciples. She may as truly say, that she has every day
   washed the saints' feet, as that she has lived in Christian humility
   and poverty of spirit; and as reasonably think, that she has taught a
   charity school, as that she has lived in works of charity. She has as
   much reason to think that she has been a sentinel in an army, as that
   she has lived in watching and self-denial. And it may as fairly be
   said, that she lived by the labour of her hands, as that she had given
   all diligence to make her calling and election sure.

   And here it is to be well observed, that the poor, vain turn of mind,
   the irreligion, the folly, and vanity of this whole life of Flavia, is
   all owing to the manner of using her estate. It is this that has formed
   her spirit, that has given life to every idle temper, that has
   supported every trifling passion, and kept her from all thoughts of a
   prudent, useful, and devout life.

   When her parents died, she had no thought about her two hundred pounds
   a year, but that she had so much money to do what she would with, to
   spend upon herself, and purchase the pleasures and gratifications of
   all her passions.

   And it is this setting out, this false judgment and indiscreet use of
   her fortune, that has filled her whole life with the same indiscretion,
   and kept her from thinking of what is right, and wise, and pious, in
   everything else.

   If you have seen her delighted in plays and romances, in scandal and
   backbiting, easily flattered, and soon affronted; if you have seen her
   devoted to pleasures and diversions, a slave to every passion in its
   turn, nice in everything that concerned her body or dress, careless of
   everything that might benefit her soul, always wanting some new
   entertainment, and ready for every happy invention in show or dress, it
   was because she had purchased all these tempers with the yearly revenue
   of her fortune.

   She might have been humble, serious, devout, a lover of good books, an
   admirer of prayer and retirement, careful of her time, diligent in good
   works, full of charity and the love of God, but that the imprudent use
   of her estate forced all the contrary tempers upon her.

   And it was no wonder that she should turn her time, her mind, her
   health, and strength, to the same uses that she turned her fortune. It
   is owing to her being wrong in so great an article of life, that you
   can see nothing wise, or reasonable, or pious, in any other part of it.

   Now, though the irregular trifling spirit of this character belongs, I
   hope, but to few people, yet many may here learn some instruction from
   it, and perhaps see something of their own spirit in it.

   For as Flavia seems to be undone by the unreasonable use of her
   fortune, so the lowness of most people's virtue, the imperfections of
   their piety, and the disorders of their passions, are generally owing
   to their imprudent use and enjoyment of lawful and innocent things.

   More people are kept from a true sense and taste of religion, by a
   regular kind of sensuality and indulgence, than by gross drunkenness.
   More men live regardless of the great duties of piety, through too
   great a concern for worldly goods, than through direct injustice.

   This man would perhaps be devout, if he was not so great a virtuoso.
   Another is deaf to all the motives of piety, by indulging an idle,
   slothful temper. Could you cure this man of his great curiosity and
   inquisitive temper, or that of his false satisfaction and thirst after
   learning, you need do no more to make them both become men of great
   piety.

   If this woman would make fewer visits, or that not be always talking,
   they would neither of them find it half so hard to be affected with
   religion.

   For all these things are only little, when they are compared to great
   sins; and though they are little in that respect, yet they are great,
   as they are impediments and hindrances to a pious spirit.

   For as consideration is the only eye of the soul, as the truths of
   religion can be seen by nothing else, so whatever raises a levity of
   mind, a trifling spirit, renders the soul incapable of seeing,
   apprehending, and relishing the doctrines of piety.

   Would we therefore make a real progress in religion, we must not only
   abhor gross and notorious sins, but we must regulate the innocent and
   lawful parts of our behaviour, and put the most common and allowed
   actions of life under the rules of discretion and piety.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [16] Flavia. The Gens Flavia was the noble family from which the
   Vespasian, Titus and Domitian came. It stands therefore for worldly
   pomp, half innocent, half vicious. Mirand = admirable, supposed to be a
   portrait of Miss Hester Gibbon. Lucinda = resplendent. Belinda and
   Lucius are names at random.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER VIII


   How the wise and pious use of an estate naturally carrieth us to great
   perfection in all the virtues of the Christian life; represented in the
   character of Miranda.


   ANY one pious regularity of any one part of our life, is of great
   advantage, not only on its own account, but as it uses us to live by
   rule, and think of the government of ourselves.

   A man of business, that has brought one part of his affairs under
   certain rules, is in a fair way to take the same care of the rest.

   So he that has brought any one part of his life under the rules of
   religion, may thence be taught to extend the same order and regularity
   into other parts of his life.

   If any one is so wise as to think his time too precious to be disposed
   of by chance, and left to be devoured by anything that happens in his
   way; if he lays himself under a necessity of observing how every day
   goes through his hands, and obliges himself to a certain order of time
   in his business, his retirements, and devotions; it is hardly to be
   imagined how soon such a conduct would reform, improve, and perfect the
   whole course of his life.

   He that once thus knows the value, and reaps the advantage of a
   well-ordered time, will not long be a stranger to the value of anything
   else that is of any real concern to him.

   A rule that relates even to the smallest part of our life, is of great
   benefit to us, merely as it is a rule.

   For, as the Proverb saith, "He that has begun well, has half done": so
   he that has begun to live by rule, has gone a great way towards the
   perfection of his life.

   By rule, must here be constantly understood, a religious rule observed
   upon a principle of duty to God.

   For if a man should oblige himself to be moderate in his meals, only in
   regard to his stomach; or abstain from drinking, only to avoid the
   headache; or be moderate in his sleep, through fear of a lethargy; he
   might be exact in these rules, without being at all the better man for
   them.

   But when he is moderate and regular in any of these things, out of a
   sense of Christian sobriety and self-denial, that he may offer unto God
   a more reasonable and holy life, then it is, that the smallest rule of
   this kind is naturally the beginning of great piety.

   For the smallest rule in these matters is of great benefit, as it
   teaches us some part of the government of ourselves, as it keeps up a
   tenderness of mind, as it presents God often to our thoughts, and
   brings a sense of religion into the ordinary actions of our common
   life.

   If a man, whenever he was in company, where any one swore, talked
   lewdly, or spoke evil of his neighbour, should make it a rule to
   himself, either gently to reprove him, or, if that was not proper, then
   to leave the company as decently as he could, he would find that this
   little rule, like a little leaven hid in a great quantity of meal,
   would spread and extend itself through the whole form of his life.

   If another should oblige himself to abstain on the Lord's day from any
   innocent and lawful things, as travelling, visiting, common
   conversation, and discoursing upon worldly matters, as trade, news, and
   the like; if he should devote the day, besides the public worship, to
   greater retirement, reading, devotion, instruction, and works of
   charity; though it may seem but a small thing or a needless nicety, to
   require a man to abstain from such things as may be done without sin,
   yet whoever would try the benefit of so little a rule, would perhaps
   thereby find such a change made in his spirit, and such a taste of
   piety raised in his mind, as he was an entire stranger to before.

   It would be easy to show, in many other instances, how little and small
   matters are the first steps and natural beginnings of great perfection.

   But the two things which, of all others, most want to be under a strict
   rule, and which are the greatest blessings both to ourselves and
   others, when they are rightly used, are our time and our money. These
   talents are continual means and opportunities of doing good.

   He that is piously strict, and exact in the wise management of either
   of these, cannot be long ignorant of the right use of the other. And he
   that is happy in the religious care and disposal of them both, is
   already ascended several steps upon the ladder of Christian perfection.

   Miranda (the sister of Flavia) is a sober, reasonable Christian: as
   soon as she was mistress of her time and fortune, it was her first
   thought how she might best fulfil everything that God required of her
   in the use of them, and how she might make the best and happiest use of
   this short life. She depends upon the truth of what our blessed Lord
   hath said, that there is but "One thing needful," [Luke xi. 42] and
   therefore makes her whole life but one continual labour after it. She
   has but one reason for doing or not doing, for liking or not liking
   anything, and that is, the will of God. She is not so weak as to
   pretend to add what is called the fine lady to the true Christian;
   Miranda thinks too well to be taken with the sound of such silly words;
   she has renounced the world to follow Christ in the exercise of
   humility, charity, devotion, abstinence, and heavenly affections; and
   that is Miranda's fine breeding.

   While she was under her mother, she was forced to be genteel, to live
   in ceremony, to sit up late at nights, to be in the folly of every
   fashion, and always visiting on Sundays; to go patched, and loaded with
   a burden of finery, to the Holy Sacrament; to be in every polite
   conversation; to hear profaneness at the playhouse, and wanton songs
   and love intrigues at the opera; to dance at public places, that fops
   and rakes might admire the fineness of her shape, and the beauty of her
   motions. The remembrance of this way of life makes her exceeding
   careful to atone for it by a contrary behaviour.

   Miranda does not divide her duty between God, her neighbour, and
   herself; but she considers all as due to God, and so does everything in
   His Name, and for His Sake. This makes her consider her fortune as the
   gift of God, that is to be used, as everything is that belongs to God,
   for the wise and reasonable ends of a Christian and holy life. Her
   fortune therefore is divided betwixt herself and several other poor
   people, and she has only her part of relief from it. She thinks it the
   same folly to indulge herself in needless, vain expenses, as to give to
   other people to spend in the same way. Therefore as she will not give a
   poor man money to go see a puppet-show, neither will she allow herself
   any to spend in the same manner; thinking it very proper to be as wise
   herself as she expects poor men should be. For it is a folly and a
   crime in a poor man, says Miranda, to waste what is given him in
   foolish trifles, whilst he wants meat, drink, and clothes. And is it
   less folly, or a less crime in me, to spend that money in silly
   diversions, which might be so much better spent in imitation of the
   Divine goodness, in works of kindness and charity towards my
   fellow-creatures and fellow-Christians? If a poor man's own necessities
   are a reason why he should not waste any of his money idly, surely the
   necessities of the poor, the excellency of charity, which is received
   as done to Christ Himself, is a much greater reason why no one should
   ever waste any of his money. For if he does so, he does not only do
   like the poor man, only waste that which he wants himself, but he
   wastes that which is wanted for the most noble use, and which Christ
   Himself is ready to receive at his hands. And if we are angry at a poor
   man, and look upon him as a wretch, when he throws away that which
   should buy his own bread; how must we appear in the sight of God, if we
   make a wanton idle use of that which should buy bread and clothes for
   the hungry and naked brethren, who are as near and dear to God as we
   are, and fellow-heirs of the same state of future glory? This is the
   spirit of Miranda, and thus she uses the gifts of God; she is only one
   of a certain number of poor people, that are relieved out of her
   fortune, and she only differs from them in the blessedness of giving.

   Excepting her victuals, she never spent near ten pounds a year upon
   herself. If you were to see her, you would wonder what poor body it
   was, that was so surprisingly neat and clean. She has but one rule that
   she observes in her dress, to be always clean and in the cheapest
   things. Everything about her resembles the purity of her soul, and she
   is always clean without, because she is always pure within.

   Every morning sees her early at her prayers; she rejoices in the
   beginning of every day, because it begins all her pious rules of holy
   living, and brings the fresh pleasure of repeating them. She seems to
   be as a guardian angel to those that dwell about her, with her
   watchings and prayers, blessing the place where she dwells, and making
   intercession with God for those that are asleep.

   Her devotions have had some intervals, and God has heard several of her
   private prayers, before the light is suffered to enter into her
   sister's room. Miranda does not know what it is to have a dull
   half-day; the returns of her hours of prayer, and her religious
   exercises, come too often to let any considerable part of it lie heavy
   upon her hands.

   When you see her at work, you see the same wisdom that governs all her
   other actions; she is either doing something that is necessary for
   herself, or necessary for others, who want to be assisted. There is
   scarce a poor family in the neighbourhood, but wears something or other
   that has had the labour of her hands. Her wise and pious mind neither
   wants the amusement, nor can bear with the folly, of idle and
   impertinent work. She can admit of no such folly as this in the day
   because she has to answer for all her actions at night. When there is
   no wisdom to be observed in the employment of her hands, when there is
   no useful or charitable work to be done, Miranda will work no more. At
   her table she lives strictly by this rule of holy Scripture, "Whether
   ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God." [1
   Cor. x. 31] This makes her begin and end every meal, as she begins and
   ends every day, with acts of devotion: she eats and drinks only for the
   sake of living, and with so regular an abstinence, that every meal is
   an exercise of self-denial, and she humbles her body every time that
   she is forced to feed it. If Miranda was to run a race for her life,
   she would submit to a diet that was proper for it. But as the race
   which is set before her is a race of holiness, purity, and heavenly
   affection, which she is to finish in a corrupt, disordered body of
   earthly passions, so her everyday diet has only this one end, to make
   her body fitter for this spiritual race. She does not weigh her meat in
   a pair of scales, but she weighs it in a much better balance; so much
   as gives a proper strength to her body, and renders it able and willing
   to obey the soul, to join in psalms and prayers, and lift up eyes and
   hands towards heaven with greater readiness: so much is Miranda's meal.
   So that Miranda will never have her eyes swell with fatness, or pant
   under a heavy load of flesh, until she has changed her religion.

   The holy Scriptures, especially of the New Testament, are her daily
   study; these she reads with a watchful attention, constantly casting an
   eye upon herself, and trying herself by every doctrine that is there.
   When she has the New Testament in her hand, she supposes herself at the
   feet of our Saviour and His Apostles, and makes everything that she
   learns of them so many laws of her life. She receives their sacred
   words with as much attention and reverence as if she saw their persons,
   and knew that they were just come from Heaven, on purpose to teach her
   the way that leads to it.

   She thinks that the trying of herself every day by the doctrines of
   Scripture, is the only possible way to be ready for her trial at the
   last day. She is sometimes afraid that she lays out too much money in
   books, because she cannot forbear buying all practical books of any
   note, especially such as enter into the heart of religion, and describe
   the inward holiness of the Christian life. But of all human writings,
   the lives of pious persons and eminent saints are her greatest delight.
   In these she searches as for hidden treasure, hoping to find some
   secret of holy living, some uncommon degree of piety, which she may
   make her own. By this means Miranda has her head and her heart so
   stored with all the principles of wisdom and holiness, she is so full
   of the one main business of life, that she finds it difficult to
   converse upon any other subject; and if you are in her company, when
   she thinks it proper to talk, you must be made wiser and better,
   whether you will or no.

   To relate her charity, would be to relate the history of every day for
   twenty years; for so long has all her fortune been spent that way. She
   has set up near twenty poor tradesmen that had failed in their
   business, and saved as many from failing. She has educated several poor
   children, that were picked up in the streets, and put them in a way of
   an honest employment. As soon as any labourer is confined at home with
   sickness, she sends him, till he recovers, twice the value of his
   wages, that he may have one part to give to his family as usual, and
   the other to provide things convenient for his sickness.

   If a family seems too large to be supported by the labour of those that
   can work in it, she pays their rent, and gives them something yearly
   towards their clothing. By this means, there are several poor families
   that live in a comfortable manner, and are from year to year blessing
   her in their prayers.

   If there is any poor man or woman that is more than ordinarily wicked
   and reprobate, Miranda has her eye upon them; she watches their time of
   need and adversity; and if she can discover that they are in any great
   straits, or affliction, she gives them speedy relief. She has this care
   for this sort of people, because she once saved a very profligate
   person from being carried to prison, who immediately became a true
   penitent.

   There is nothing in the character of Miranda more to be admired than
   this temper. For this tenderness of affection towards the most
   abandoned sinners is the highest instance of a Divine and God-like
   soul.

   Miranda once passed by a house, where the man and his wife were cursing
   and swearing at one another in a most dreadful manner, and three
   children crying about them: this sight so much affected her
   compassionate mind, that she went the next day, and bought the three
   children, that they might not be ruined by living with such wicked
   parents; they now live with Miranda, are blessed with her care and
   prayers, and all the good works which she can do for them. They hear
   her talk, they see her live, they join with her in psalms and prayers.
   The eldest of them has already converted his parents from their wicked
   life, and shows a turn of mind so remarkably pious, that Miranda
   intends him for holy orders; that, being thus saved himself, he may be
   zealous in the salvation of souls, and do to other miserable objects as
   she has done to him.

   Miranda is a constant relief to poor people in their misfortunes and
   accidents: there are sometimes little misfortunes that happen to them,
   which of themselves they could never be able to overcome. The death of
   a cow or a horse, or some little robbery, would keep them in distress
   all their lives. She does not suffer them to grieve under such
   accidents as these. She immediately gives them the full value of their
   loss, and makes use of it as a means of raising their minds towards
   God.

   She has a great tenderness for old people that are grown past their
   labour. The parish allowance to such people is very seldom a
   comfortable maintenance: for this reason they are the constant objects
   of her care: she adds so much to their allowance, as somewhat exceeds
   the wages they got when they were young. This she does to comfort the
   infirmities of their age, that, being free from trouble and distress,
   they may serve God in peace and tranquillity of mind. She has generally
   a large number of this kind, who, by her charities and exhortations to
   holiness, spend their last days in great piety and devotion.

   Miranda never wants compassion, even to common beggars; especially
   towards those that are old or sick, or full of sores, that want eyes or
   limbs. She hears their complaints with tenderness, gives them some
   proof of her kindness, and never rejects them with hard or reproachful
   language, for fear of adding affliction to her fellow-creatures.

   If a poor old traveller tells her that he has neither strength, nor
   food, nor money left, she never bids him go to the place from whence he
   came, or tells him that she cannot relieve him, because he may be a
   cheat, or she does not know him; but she relieves him for that reason,
   because he is a stranger and unknown to her. For it is the most noble
   part of charity to be kind and tender to those whom we never saw
   before, and perhaps never may see again in this life. "I was a
   stranger, and ye took me in," [Matt. xxv. 43] saith our blessed
   Saviour: but who can perform this duty, that will not relieve persons
   that are unknown to him?

   Miranda considers that Lazarus was a common beggar, that he was the
   care of Angels, and carried into Abraham's bosom. She considers that
   our blessed Saviour and His Apostles were kind to beggars; that they
   spoke comfortably to them, healed their diseases, and restored eyes and
   limbs to the lame and blind; that Peter said to the beggar that wanted
   an alms from him, "Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have give
   I thee: in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk."
   [Acts iii. 6] Miranda, therefore, never treats beggars with disregard
   and aversion; but she imitates the kindness of our Saviour and His
   Apostles towards them; and though she cannot, like them, work miracles
   for their relief, yet she relieves them with that power that she hath;
   and may say, with the Apostle, "Such as I have give I thee, in the name
   of Jesus Christ."

   It may be, says Miranda, that I may often give to those that do not
   deserve it, or that will make an ill use of my alms. But what then? Is
   not this the very method of Divine goodness? Does not God make "His sun
   to rise on the evil and on the good"? [Matt. v. 45] Is not this the
   very goodness that is recommended to us in Scripture, that, by
   imitating of it, we may be children of our Father which is in Heaven,
   who "sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust"? And shall I withhold
   a little money, or food, from my fellow-creature, for fear he should
   not be good enough to receive it of me? Do I beg of God to deal with
   me, not according to my merit, but according to His own great goodness;
   and shall I be so absurd as to withhold my charity from a poor brother,
   because he may perhaps not deserve it? Shall I use a measure towards
   him, which I pray God never to use towards me?

   Besides, where has the Scripture made merit the rule or measure of
   charity? On the contrary, the Scripture saith, "If thine enemy hunger,
   feed him; if he thirst, give him drink." [Rom. xii. 20]

   Now this plainly teaches us, that the merit of persons is to be no rule
   of our charity; but that we are to do acts of kindness to those that
   least of all deserve it. For if I am to love and do good to my worst
   enemies: if I am to be charitable to them, notwithstanding all their
   spite and malice; surely merit is no measure of charity. If I am not to
   withhold my charity from such bad people, and who are at the same time
   my enemies, surely I am not to deny alms to poor beggars, whom I
   neither know to be bad people, nor any way my enemies.

   You will perhaps say, that by this means I encourage people to be
   beggars. [17] But the same thoughtless objection may be made against
   all kinds of charities, for they may encourage people to depend upon
   them. The same may be said against forgiving our enemies, for it may
   encourage people to do us hurt. The same may be said even against the
   goodness of God, that by pouring His blessings on the evil and on the
   good, on the just and on the unjust, evil and unjust men are encouraged
   in their wicked ways. The same may be said against clothing the naked,
   or giving medicines to the sick; for that may encourage people to
   neglect themselves, and be careless of their health. But when the love
   of God dwelleth in you, when it has enlarged your heart, and filled you
   with bowels of mercy and compassion, you will make no more such
   objections as these.

   When you are at any time turning away the poor, the old, the sick, and
   helpless traveller, the lame, or the blind, ask yourself this question,
   Do I sincerely wish these poor creatures may be as happy as Lazarus,
   that was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom? Do I sincerely desire
   that God would make them fellow-heirs with me in eternal glory? Now if
   you search into your soul, you will find that there is none of these
   motions there; that you are wishing nothing of this. For it is
   impossible for any one heartily to wish a poor creature so great a
   happiness, and yet not have a heart to give him a small alms. For this
   reason, says Miranda, as far as I can, I give to all, because I pray to
   God to forgive all; and I cannot refuse an alms to those whom I pray
   God to bless, whom I wish to be partakers of eternal glory, but am glad
   to show some degree of love to such as, I hope, will be the objects of
   the infinite love of God. And if, as our Saviour has assured us, it be
   more blessed to give than to receive, we ought to look upon those that
   ask our alms, as so many friends and benefactors, that come to do us a
   greater good than they can receive, that come to exalt our virtue, to
   be witnesses of our charity, to be monuments of our love, to be our
   advocates with God, to be to us in Christ's stead, to appear for us in
   the day of judgment, and to help us to a blessedness greater than our
   alms can bestow on them.

   This is the spirit, and this is the life, of the devout Miranda; and if
   she lives ten years longer, she will have spent sixty hundred pounds in
   charity; for that which she allows herself, may fairly be reckoned
   amongst her alms.

   When she dies, she must shine amongst Apostles, and saints, and
   martyrs; she must stand amongst the first servants of God, and be
   glorious amongst those that have fought the good fight, and finished
   their course with joy.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [17] Law acted on these principles himself; and the effect on the poor
   of King's Cliffe was the reverse of satisfactory.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER IX


   Containing some reflections upon the life of Miranda, and showing how
   it may, and ought to be imitated by all her sex.


   NOW this life of Miranda, which I heartily recommend to the imitation
   of her sex, however contrary it may seem to the way and fashion of the
   world, is yet suitable to the true spirit, and founded upon the
   plainest doctrines of Christianity.

   To live as she does, is as truly suitable to the Gospel of Christ, as
   to be baptized, or to receive the Sacrament.

   Her spirit is that which animated the saints of former ages; and it is
   because they lived as she does, that we now celebrate their memories,
   and praise God for their examples.

   There is nothing that is whimsical, trifling, or unreasonable in her
   character, but everything there described is a right and proper
   instance of a solid and real piety.

   It is as easy to show that it is whimsical to go to Church, or to say
   one's prayers, as that it is whimsical to observe any of these rules of
   life. For all Miranda's rules of living unto God, of spending her time
   and fortune, of eating, working, dressing, and conversing, are as
   substantial parts of a reasonable and holy life, as devotion and
   prayer.

   For there is nothing to be said for the wisdom of sobriety, the wisdom
   of devotion, the wisdom of charity, or the wisdom of humility, but what
   is as good an argument for the wise and reasonable use of apparel.

   Neither can anything be said against the folly of luxury, the folly of
   sensuality, the folly of extravagance, the folly of prodigality, the
   folly of ambition, of idleness, or indulgence, but what must be said
   against the folly of dress. For religion is as deeply concerned in the
   one as in the other.

   If you may be vain in one thing, you may be vain in everything; for one
   kind of vanity only differs from another, as one kind of intemperance
   differs from another.

   If you spend your fortune in the needless, vain finery of dress, you
   cannot condemn prodigality, or extravagance, or luxury, without
   condemning yourself.

   If you fancy that it is your only folly, and that therefore there can
   be no great matter in it, you are like those that think they are only
   guilty of the folly of covetousness, or the folly of ambition. Now
   though some people may live so plausible a life, as to appear
   chargeable with no other fault than that of covetousness or ambition;
   yet the case is not as it appears, for covetousness or ambition cannot
   subsist in a heart, in other respects rightly devoted to God.

   In like manner, though some people may spend most that they have in
   needless, expensive ornaments of dress, and yet seem to be in every
   other respect truly pious, yet it is certainly false; for it is as
   impossible for a mind that is in a true state of religion, to be vain
   in the use of clothes, as to be vain in the use of alms or devotions.
   Now to convince you of this from your own reflections, let us suppose
   that some eminent saint, as, for instance, that the holy Virgin Mary
   was sent into the world, to be again in a state of trial for a few
   years, and that you were going to her, to be edified by her great
   piety; would you expect to find her dressed out, and adorned in fine
   and expensive clothes? No. You would know, in your own mind, that it
   was as impossible, as to find her learning to dance. Do but add saint,
   or holy, to any person, either man or woman, and your own mind tells
   you immediately, that such a character cannot admit of the vanity of
   fine apparel. A saint genteelly dressed, is as great nonsense as an
   Apostle in an embroidered suit; every one's own natural sense convinces
   him of the inconsistency of these things.

   Now what is the reason, that, when you think of a saint, or eminent
   servant of God, you cannot admit of the vanity of apparel? Is it not
   because it is inconsistent with such a right state of heart, such true
   and exalted piety? And is not this, therefore, a demonstration, that
   where such vanity is admitted, there a right state of heart, true and
   exalted piety, must needs be wanting? For as certainly as the holy
   Virgin Mary could not indulge herself, or conform to the vanity of the
   world in dress and figure, so certain is it, that none can indulge
   themselves in this vanity, but those who want her piety of heart; and
   consequently it must be owned, that all needless and expensive finery
   of dress is the effect of a disordered heart, that is not governed by
   the true spirit of religion.

   Covetousness is not a crime because there is any harm in gold or
   silver, but because it supposes a foolish and unreasonable state of
   mind, that is fallen from its true good, and sunk into such a poor and
   wretched satisfaction.

   In like manner, the expensive finery of dress is not a crime because
   there is anything good or evil in clothes, but because the expensive
   ornaments of clothing show a foolish and unreasonable state of heart,
   that is fallen from right notions of human nature, that abuses the end
   of clothing, and turns the necessities of life into so many instances
   of pride and folly.

   All the world agrees in condemning remarkable fops. Now what is the
   reason of this? Is it because there is anything sinful in their
   particular dress, or affected manners? No: but it is because all people
   know that it shows the state of a man's mind, and that it is impossible
   for so ridiculous an outside to have anything wise, or reasonable, or
   good within. And, indeed, to suppose a fop of great piety, is as much
   nonsense, as to suppose a coward of great courage. So that all the
   world agrees in owning, that the use and manner of clothes is a mark of
   the state of a man's mind, and, consequently, that it is a thing highly
   essential to religion. But then it should be well considered, [18] that
   as it is not only the sot that is guilty of intemperance, but every one
   that transgresses the right and religious measures of eating and
   drinking; so it should be considered, that it is not only the fop that
   is guilty of the vanity and abuse of dress, but every one that departs
   from the reasonable and religious ends of clothing.

   As, therefore, every argument against sottishness is as good an
   argument against all kinds of intemperance; so every argument against
   the vanity of fops, is as good an argument against all vanity and abuse
   of dress. For they are all of the same kind, and only differ as one
   degree of intemperance may differ from another. She who only paints a
   little, may as justly accuse another because she paints a great deal,
   as she that uses but a common finery of dress, accuse another that is
   excessive in her finery.

   For as, in the matter of temperance, there is no rule but the sobriety
   that is according to the doctrines and spirit of our religion; so, in
   the matter of apparel, there is no rule to be observed, but such a
   right use of clothes as is strictly according to the doctrines and
   spirit of our religion. To pretend to make the way of the world our
   measure in these things, is as weak and absurd as to make the way of
   the world the measure of our sobriety, abstinence, or humility. It is a
   pretence that is exceedingly absurd in the mouths of Christians, who
   are to be so far from conforming to the fashions of this life, that to
   have overcome the world, is made an essential mark of Christianity.

   This therefore is the way that you are to judge of the crime of vain
   apparel: you are to consider it as an offence against the proper use of
   clothes, as covetousness is an offence against the proper use of money;
   you are to consider it as an indulgence of proud and unreasonable
   tempers, as an offence against the humility and sobriety of the
   Christian spirit; you are to consider it as an offence against all
   those doctrines that require you to do all to the glory of God, that
   require you to make a right use of your talents; you are to consider it
   as an offence against all those texts of Scripture that command you to
   love your neighbour as yourself, to feed the hungry, to clothe the
   naked, and do all works of charity that you are able: so that you must
   not deceive yourself with saying, Where can be the harm of clothes? for
   the covetous man might as well say, Where can be the harm of gold or
   silver? but you must consider, that it is a great deal of harm to want
   that wise, and reasonable, and humble state of heart, which is
   according to the spirit of religion, and which no one can have in the
   manner that he ought to have it, who indulges himself either in the
   vanity of dress, or the desire of riches.

   There is therefore nothing right in the use of clothes, or in the use
   of anything else in the world, but the plainness and simplicity of the
   Gospel. Every other use of things (however polite and fashionable in
   the world) distracts and disorders the heart, and is inconsistent with
   that inward state of piety, that purity of heart, that wisdom of mind,
   and regularity of affection, which Christianity requireth.

   If you would be a good Christian, there is but one way you must live
   wholly unto God: and if you would live wholly unto God, you must live
   according to the wisdom that comes from God; you must act according to
   right judgments of the nature and value of things; you must live in the
   exercise of holy and heavenly affections, and use all the gifts of God
   to His praise and glory.

   Some persons, perhaps, who admire the purity and perfection of this
   life of Miranda, may say, How can it be proposed as a common example?
   How can we who are married, or we who are under the direction of our
   parents, imitate such a life?

   It is answered, Just as you may imitate the life of our blessed Saviour
   and His Apostles. The circumstances of our Saviour's life, and the
   state and condition of His Apostles, were more different from yours,
   than those of Miranda's are; and yet their life, the purity and
   perfection of their behaviour, is the common example that is proposed
   to all Christians.

   It is their spirit, therefore, their piety, their love of God, that you
   are to imitate, and not the particular form of their life.

   Act under God as they did, direct your common actions to that end which
   they did, glorify your proper state with such love of God, such charity
   to your neighbour, such humility and self-denial, as they did; and
   then, though you are only teaching your own children, and St. Paul is
   converting whole nations, yet you are following his steps, and acting
   after his example.

   Do not think, therefore, that you cannot, or need not, be like Miranda,
   because you are not in her state of life; for as the same spirit and
   temper would have made Miranda a saint, though she had been forced to
   labour for a maintenance, so if you will but aspire after her spirit
   and temper, every form and condition of life will furnish you with
   sufficient means of employing it.

   Miranda is what she is, because she does everything in the Name of God,
   and with regard to her duty to Him; and when you do the same, you will
   be exactly like her, though you are never so different from her in the
   outward state of your life.

   You are married, you say; therefore you have not your time and fortune
   in your power as she has.

   It is very true; and therefore you cannot spend so much time, nor so
   much money, in the manner that she does.

   But now Miranda's perfection does not consist in this, that she spends
   so much time, or so much money in such a manner, but that she is
   careful to make the best use of all that time, and all that fortune,
   which God has put into her hands. Do you, therefore, make the best use
   of all that time and money which are at your disposal, and then you are
   like Miranda.

   If she has two hundred pounds a year, and you have only two mites, have
   you not the more reason to be exceeding exact in the wisest use of
   them? If she has a great deal of time, and you have but a little, ought
   you not to be the more watchful and circumspect, lest that little
   should be lost?

   You say, if you were to imitate the cleanly plainness and cheapness of
   her dress, you would offend your husbands.

   First, Be very sure that this is true, before you make it an excuse.

   Secondly, If your husbands do really require you to patch your faces,
   to expose your breasts naked, and to be fine and expensive in all your
   apparel, then take these two resolutions:

   First, To forbear from all this, as soon as your husbands will permit
   you.

   Secondly, To use your utmost endeavours to recommend yourselves to
   their affections by such solid virtues, as may correct the vanity of
   their minds, and teach them to love you for such qualities as will make
   you amiable in the sight of God and His holy Angels.

   As to this doctrine concerning the plainness and modesty of dress, it
   may perhaps be thought by some to be sufficiently confuted by asking,
   whether all persons are to be clothed in the same manner?

   These questions are generally put by those who had rather perplex the
   plainest truths, than be obliged to follow them.

   Let it be supposed, that I had recommended an universal plainness of
   diet. Is it not a thing sufficiently reasonable to be universally
   recommended? But would it thence follow, that the nobleman and the
   labourer were to live upon the same food?

   Suppose I had pressed an universal temperance, does not religion enough
   justify such a doctrine? But would it therefore follow, that all people
   were to drink the same liquors, and in the same quantity?

   In like manner, though plainness and sobriety of dress is recommended
   to all, yet it does by no means follow, that all are to be clothed in
   the same manner.

   Now what is the particular rule with regard to temperance? How shall
   particular persons that use different liquors, and in different
   quantities, preserve their temperance?

   Is not this the rule? Are they not to guard against indulgence, to make
   their use of liquors a matter of conscience, and allow of no
   refreshments, but such as are consistent with the strictest rules of
   Christian sobriety?

   Now transfer this rule to the matter of apparel, and all questions
   about it are answered.

   Let every one but guard against the vanity of dress, let them but make
   their use of clothes a matter of conscience, let them but desire to
   make the best use of their money; and then every one has a rule, that
   is sufficient to direct them in every state of life. This rule will no
   more let the great be vain in their dress, than intemperate in their
   liquors; and yet will leave it as lawful to have some difference in
   their apparel, as to have some difference in their drink.

   But now will you say, that you may use the finest, richest wines, when,
   and as you please; that you may be as expensive in them as you have a
   mind, because different liquors are allowed? If not, how can it be
   said, that you may use clothes as you please, and wear the richest
   things you can get, because the bare difference of clothes is lawful?

   For as the lawfulness of different liquors leaves no room, nor any
   excuse, for the smallest degree of intemperance in drinking, so the
   lawfulness of different apparel leaves no room, nor any excuse, for the
   smallest degrees of vanity in dress.

   To ask what is vanity in dress, is no more a puzzling question, than to
   ask, what is intemperance in drinking. And though religion does not
   here state the particular measure for all individuals, yet it gives
   such general rules as are a sufficient direction in every state of
   life.

   He that lets religion teach him that the end of drinking is only so far
   to refresh our spirits, as to keep us in good health, and make soul and
   body fitter for all the offices of a holy and pious life, and that he
   is to desire to glorify God by a right use of this liberty, will always
   know what intemperance is, in his particular state.

   So he that lets religion teach him that the end of clothing is only to
   hide our shame and nakedness, and to secure our bodies from the
   injuries of weather, and that he is to desire to glorify God by a sober
   and wise use of this necessity, will always know what vanity of dress
   is, in his particular state.

   And he that thinks it a needless nicety to talk of the religious use of
   apparel, has as much reason to think it a needless nicety to talk of
   the religious use of liquors. For luxury and indulgence in dress is as
   great an abuse, as luxury and indulgence in eating and drinking. And
   there is no avoiding either of them, but by making religion the strict
   measure of our allowance in both cases. And there is nothing in
   religion to excite a man to this pious exactness in one case, but what
   is as good a motive to the same exactness in the other.

   Farther, as all things that are lawful are not therefore expedient, so
   there are some things lawful in the use of liquors and apparel, which,
   by abstaining from them for pious ends, may be made means of great
   perfection.

   Thus, for instance, if a man should deny himself such use of liquors as
   is lawful; if he should refrain from such expense in his drink as might
   be allowed without sin; if he should do this, not only for the sake of
   a more pious self-denial, but that he might be able to relieve and
   refresh the helpless, poor, and sick: if another should abstain from
   the use of that which is lawful in dress, if he should be more frugal
   and mean in his habit than the necessities of religion absolutely
   require; if he should do this not only as a means of a better humility,
   but that he may be more able to clothe other people; these persons
   might be said to do that which was highly suitable to the true spirit,
   though not absolutely required by the letter, of the law of Christ.

   For if those who give a cup of cold water to a disciple of Christ shall
   not lose their reward, [Matt. x. 42] how dear must they be to Christ,
   who often give themselves water, that they may be able to give wine to
   the sick and languishing members of Christ's body!

   But to return. All that has been here said to married women, may serve
   for the same instruction to such as are still under the direction of
   their parents.

   Now though the obedience which is due to parents does not oblige them
   to carry their virtues no higher than their parents require them; yet
   their obedience requires them to submit to their direction in all
   things not contrary to the laws of God.

   If, therefore, your parents require you to live more in the fashion and
   conversation of the world, or to be more expensive in your dress and
   person, or to dispose of your time otherwise than suits with your
   desires after greater perfection, you must submit, and bear it as your
   cross, till you are at liberty to follow the higher counsels of Christ,
   and have it in your power to choose the best ways of raising your
   virtue to its greatest height.

   Now although, whilst you are in this state, you may be obliged to
   forego some means of improving your virtue, yet there are some others
   to be found in it, that are not to be had in a life of more liberty.

   For if in this state, where obedience is so great a virtue, you comply
   in all things lawful, out of a pious, tender sense of duty, then those
   things which you thus perform are, instead of being hindrances of your
   virtue, turned into means of improving it.

   What you lose by being restrained from such things as you would choose
   to observe, you gain by that excellent virtue of obedience, in humbly
   complying against your temper.

   Now what is here granted, is only in things lawful, and therefore the
   diversion of our English stage is here excepted; being elsewhere
   proved, as I think, to be absolutely unlawful. [19]

   Thus much to show how persons under the direction of others may imitate
   the wise and pious life of Miranda.

   But as for those who are altogether in their own hands, if the liberty
   of their state makes them covet the best gifts, if it carries them to
   choose the most excellent ways, if they, having all in their own power,
   should turn the whole form of their life into a regular exercise of the
   highest virtues, happy are they who have so learned Christ!

   All persons cannot receive this saying. They that are able to receive
   it, let them receive it, and bless that Spirit of God, which has put
   such good motions into their hearts.

   God may be served and glorified in every state of life. But as there
   are some states of life more desirable than others, that more purify
   our natures, that more improve our virtues, and dedicate us unto God in
   a higher manner, so those who are at liberty to choose for themselves
   seem to be called by God to be more eminently devoted to His service.

   Ever since the beginning of Christianity there have been two orders, or
   ranks of people, amongst good Christians.

   The one that feared and served God in the common offices and business
   of a secular worldly life.

   The other, renouncing the common business, and common enjoyments of
   life, as riches, marriage, honours, and pleasures, devoted themselves
   to voluntary poverty, virginity, devotion, and retirement, that by this
   means they might live wholly unto God, in the daily exercise of a
   Divine and heavenly life.

   This testimony I have from the famous ecclesiastical historian
   Eusebius, who lived at the time of the first General Council, when the
   faith of our Nicene Creed was established, when the Church was in its
   greatest glory and purity, when its Bishops were so many holy fathers
   and eminent saints.

   "Therefore," said he, "there hath been instituted in the Church of
   Christ, two ways, or manners, of living. The one, raised above the
   ordinary state of nature, and common ways of living, rejects wedlock,
   possessions, and worldly goods, and, being wholly separate and removed
   from the ordinary conversation of common life, is appropriated and
   devoted solely to the worship and service of God, through an exceeding
   degree of heavenly love.

   "They who are of this order of people seem dead to the life of this
   world, and, having their bodies only upon earth, are in their minds,
   and contemplations dwelling in heaven. From whence, like so many
   heavenly inhabitants, they look down upon human life, making
   intercessions and oblations to Almighty God for the whole race of
   mankind. And this not with the blood of beasts, or the fat, or smoke,
   and burning of bodies, but with the highest exercises of true piety,
   with cleansed and purified hearts, and with a whole form of life
   strictly devoted to virtue. These are their sacrifices, which they
   continually offer unto God, imploring His mercy and favour for
   themselves and their fellow-creatures.

   "Christianity receives this as the perfect manner of life.

   "The other is of a lower form, and, suiting itself more to the
   condition of human nature, admits of chaste wedlock, the care of
   children and family, of trade and business, and goes through all the
   employments of life under a sense of piety, and fear of God.

   "Now they who have chosen this manner of life, have their set times for
   retirement and spiritual exercises, and particular days are set apart
   for their hearing and learning the word of God. And this order of
   people is considered as in the second state of piety." [Euseb. Dem.
   Evan. 1.i.c.8]

   Thus this learned historian. [20]

   If, therefore, persons of either sex, moved with the life of Miranda,
   and desirous of perfection, should unite themselves into little
   societies, professing voluntary poverty, virginity, retirement, and
   devotion, living upon bare necessaries, that some might be relieved by
   their charities, and all be blessed with their prayers, and benefited
   by their example; or if, for want of this, they should practise the
   same manner of life, in as high a degree as they could by themselves;
   such persons would be so far from being chargeable with any
   superstition, or blind devotion, that they might be justly said to
   restore that piety, which was the boast and glory of the Church, when
   its greatest saints were alive.

   Now as this learned historian observes; that it was an exceeding great
   degree of heavenly love, that carried these persons so much above the
   common ways of life to such an eminent state of holiness; so it is not
   to be wondered at, that the religion of Jesus Christ should fill the
   hearts of many Christians with this high degree of love.

   For a religion that opens such a scene of glory, that discovers things
   so infinitely above all the world, that so triumphs over death, that
   assures us of such mansions of bliss, where we shall so soon be as the
   Angels of God in Heaven; what wonder is it, if such a religion, such
   truths and expectations, should, in some holy souls, destroy all
   earthly desires, and make the ardent love of heavenly things, be the
   one continual passion of their hearts?

   If the religion of Christians is founded upon the infinite humiliation,
   the cruel mockings and scourgings, the prodigious sufferings, the poor,
   persecuted life, and painful death, of a crucified Son of God; what
   wonder is it, if many humble adorers of this profound mystery, many
   affectionate lovers of a crucified Lord, should renounce their share of
   worldly pleasures, and give themselves up to a continual course of
   mortification and self-denial, that thus suffering with Christ here,
   they may reign with Him hereafter?

   If truth itself has assured us that there is but one thing needful,
   what wonder is it that there should be some amongst Christians so full
   of faith, as to believe this in the highest sense of the words, and to
   desire such a separation from the world, that their care and attention
   to the one thing needful may not be interrupted?

   If our blessed Lord hath said, "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell
   that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
   heaven: and come and follow me"; [Matt. xix. 21] what wonder is it,
   that there should be amongst Christians some such zealous followers of
   Christ, so intent upon heavenly treasure, so desirous of perfection,
   that they should renounce the enjoyment of their estates, choose a
   voluntary poverty, and relieve all the poor that they are able?

   If the chosen vessel, St. Paul, hath said, "He that is unmarried careth
   for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord":
   and that "there is this difference also between a wife and a virgin;
   the unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be
   holy both in body and spirit"; [1 Cor. vii. 32-34] what wonder is it if
   the purity and perfection of the virgin state hath been the praise and
   glory of the Church in its first and purest ages? that there have
   always been some so desirous of pleasing God, so zealous after every
   degree of purity and perfection, so glad of every means of improving
   their virtue, that they have renounced the comforts and enjoyments of
   wedlock, to trim their lamps, to purify their souls, and wait upon God
   in a state of perpetual virginity?

   And if in these our days we want examples of these several degrees of
   perfection, if neither clergy nor laity are enough of this spirit; if
   we are so far departed from it, that a man seems, like St. Paul at
   Athens, a setter forth of strange doctrines, [Acts xvii. 18] when he
   recommends self-denial, renunciation of the world, regular devotion,
   retirement, virginity, and voluntary poverty, it is because we are
   fallen into an age, where the love not only of many, but of most, is
   waxed cold.

   I have made this little appeal to antiquity, and quoted these few
   passages of Scripture, to support some uncommon practices in the life
   of Miranda; and to show that her highest rules of holy living, her
   devotion, self-denial, renunciation of the world, her charity,
   virginity, voluntary poverty, are founded in the sublimest counsels of
   Christ and His Apostles, suitable to the high expectations of another
   life, proper instances of a heavenly love, and all followed by the
   greatest saints of the best and purest ages of the Church.

   "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." [Matt. xi. 15]

     __________________________________________________________________

   [18] To make the sentence grammatical read, "But as it should be well
   considered that it is not only," etc.

   [19] The abominations of the Restoration Stage still prevailed in 1726.

   [20] This division into a religious and secular life contradicts the
   whole argument.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER X


   Showing how all orders and ranks of men and women, of all ages, are
   obliged to devote themselves unto God.


   I HAVE in the foregoing chapters, gone through the several great
   instances of Christian devotion, and shown that all the parts of our
   common life, our employments, our talents, and gifts of fortune, are
   all to be made holy and acceptable unto God by a wise and religious use
   of everything, and by directing our actions and designs to such ends as
   are suitable to the honour and glory of God.

   I shall now show that this regularity of devotion, this holiness of
   common life, this religious use of everything that we have, is a
   devotion that is the duty of all orders of Christian people.

   Fulvius [21] has had a learned education, and taken his degrees in the
   university; he came from thence, that he might be free from any rules
   of life. He takes no employment upon him, nor enters into any business,
   because he thinks that every employment or business calls people to the
   careful performance and just discharge of its several duties. When he
   is grave, he will tell you that he did not enter into holy orders,
   because he looks upon it to be a state that requires great holiness of
   life, and that it does not suit his temper to be so good. He will tell
   you that he never intends to marry, because he cannot oblige himself to
   that regularity of life and good behaviour, which he takes to be the
   duty of those that are at the head of a family. He refused to be
   godfather to his nephew, because he will have no trust of any kind to
   answer for.

   Fulvius thinks that he is conscientious in this conduct, and is
   therefore content with the most idle, impertinent, and careless life.

   He has no religion, no devotion, no pretences to piety. He lives by no
   rules, and thinks all is very well, because he is neither a priest, nor
   a father, nor a guardian, nor has any employment, or family, to look
   after.

   But Fulvius, you are a rational creature, and, as such, are as much
   obliged to live according to reason and order, as a priest is obliged
   to attend to the altar, or a guardian to be faithful to his trust: if
   you live contrary to reason, you do not commit a small crime, you do
   not break a small trust; but you break the law of your nature, you
   rebel against God who gave you that nature, and put yourself amongst
   those whom the God of reason and order will punish as apostates and
   deserters.

   Though you have no employment, yet, as you are baptized into the
   profession of Christ's religion, you are as much obliged to live
   according to the holiness of the Christian spirit, and perform all the
   promises made at your Baptism, as any man is obliged to be honest and
   faithful in his calling. If you abuse this great calling, you are not
   false in a small matter, but you abuse the precious blood of Christ;
   you crucify the Son of God afresh; you neglect the highest instances of
   Divine goodness; you disgrace the Church of God; you blemish the body
   of Christ; you abuse the means of grace, and the promises of glory; and
   it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment
   than for you.

   It is therefore great folly for any one to think himself at liberty to
   live as he pleases, because he is not in such a state of life as some
   others are: for if there is anything dreadful in the abuse of any
   trust; if there is anything to be feared for the neglect of any
   calling; there is nothing more to be feared than the wrong use of our
   reason, nor anything more to be dreaded than the neglect of our
   Christian calling, which is not to serve the little uses of a short
   life, but to redeem souls unto God, to fill Heaven with saints, and
   finish a kingdom of eternal glory unto God.

   No man, therefore, must think himself excused from the exactness of
   piety and morality, because he has chosen to be idle and independent in
   the world; for the necessities of a reasonable and holy life are not
   founded in the several conditions and employments of this life, but in
   the immutable nature of God, and the nature of man. A man is not to be
   reasonable and holy, because he is a priest, or a father of a family;
   but he is to be a pious priest, and a good father, because piety and
   goodness are the laws of human nature. Could any man please God,
   without living according to reason and order, there would be nothing
   displeasing to God in an idle priest, or a reprobate father. He,
   therefore, that abuses his reason, is like him that abuses the
   priesthood; and he that neglects the holiness of the Christian life, is
   as the man that disregards the most important trust.

   If a man were to choose to put out his eyes, rather than enjoy the
   light, and see the works of God; if he should voluntarily kill himself
   by refusing to eat and drink; every one would own that such a one was a
   rebel against God, that justly deserved His highest indignation. You
   would not say that this was only sinful in a priest, or a master of a
   family, but in every man as such.

   Now wherein does the sinfulness of this behaviour consist? Does it not
   consist in this, that he abuses his nature, and refuses to act that
   part for which God has created him? But if this be true, then all
   persons that abuse their reason, that act a different part from that
   for which God created them, are like this man, rebels against God, and
   on the same account subject to His wrath.

   Let us suppose that this man, instead of putting out his eyes, had only
   employed them in looking at ridiculous things, or shut them up in
   sleep; that instead of starving himself to death, by not eating at all,
   he should turn every meal into a feast, and eat and drink like an
   epicure; could he be said to have lived more to the Glory of God? Could
   he any more be said to act the part for which God had created him, than
   if he had put out his eyes, and starved himself to death?

   Now do but suppose a man acting unreasonably; do but suppose him
   extinguishing his reason, instead of putting out his eyes, and living
   in a course of folly and impertinence, instead of starving himself to
   death; and then you have found out as great a rebel against God.

   For he that puts out his eyes, or murders himself, has only this guilt,
   that he abuses the powers that God has given him; that he refuses to
   act that part for which he was created, and puts himself into a state
   that is contrary to the Divine will. And surely this is the guilt of
   every one that lives an unreasonable, unholy, and foolish life.

   As, therefore, no particular state, or private life, is an excuse for
   the abuse of our bodies, or selfmurder, so no particular state, or
   private life, is an excuse for the abuse of our reason, or the neglect
   of the holiness of the Christian religion. For surely it is as much the
   will of God that we should make the best use of our rational faculties,
   that we should conform to the purity and holiness of Christianity, as
   it is the will of God that we should use our eyes, and eat and drink
   for the preservation of our lives.

   Until, therefore, a man can show that he sincerely endeavours to live
   according to the will of God, to be that which God requires him to be;
   until he can show that he is striving to live according to the holiness
   of the Christian religion; whosoever he be, or wheresoever he be, he
   has all that to answer for, that they have, who refuse to live, who
   abuse the greatest trusts, and neglect the highest calling in the
   world.

   Everybody acknowledges that all orders of men are to be equally and
   exactly honest and faithful; there is no exception to be made in these
   duties, for any private or particular state of life. Now, if we would
   but attend to the reason and nature of things, if we would but consider
   the nature of God, and the nature of man, we should find the same
   necessity for every other right use of our reason, for every grace, or
   religious temper of the Christian life; we should find it as absurd to
   suppose that one man must be exact in piety, and another need not, as
   to suppose that one man must be exact in honesty, but another need not;
   for Christian humility, sobriety, devotion, and piety, are as great and
   necessary parts of a reasonable life, as justice and honesty. And on
   the other hand, pride, sensuality, and covetousness, are as great
   disorders of the soul, are as high an abuse of our reason, and as
   contrary to God, as cheating and dishonesty. Theft and dishonesty seem,
   indeed, to vulgar eyes, to be greater sins, because they are so hurtful
   to civil society, and are so severely punished by human laws. But if we
   consider mankind in a higher view, as God's order or society of
   rational beings, that are to glorify Him by the right use of their
   reason, and by acting conformably to the order of their nature, we
   shall find that every temper that is equally contrary to reason and
   order, that opposes God's ends and designs, and disorders the beauty
   and glory of the rational world, is equally sinful in man, and equally
   odious to God.

   This would show us that the sin of sensuality is like the sin of
   dishonesty, and renders us as great objects of the Divine displeasure.

   Again: if we consider mankind in a farther view, as a redeemed order of
   fallen spirits, that are baptized into a fellowship with the Son of
   God; to be temples of the Holy Ghost; to live according to His holy
   inspirations; to offer to God the reasonable sacrifice of an humble,
   pious, and thankful life; to purify themselves from the disorders of
   their fall; to make a right use of the means of grace, in order to be
   sons of eternal glory; if we look at mankind in this true light, then
   we shall find that all tempers that are contrary to this holy society,
   that are abuses of this infinite mercy, all actions that make us unlike
   to Christ, that disgrace His body, that abuse the means of grace, and
   oppose our hopes of glory, have everything in them that can make us
   forever odious unto God. So that though pride and sensuality, and other
   vices of the like kind, do not hurt civil society as cheating and
   dishonesty do; yet they hurt that society, and oppose those ends, which
   are greater and more glorious in the eyes of God than all the societies
   that relate to this world.

   Nothing, therefore, can be more false than to imagine, that because we
   are private persons, that have taken upon us no charge or employment of
   life, therefore we may live more at large, indulge our appetites, and
   be less careful of the duties of piety and holiness; for it is as good
   an excuse for cheating and dishonesty. Because he that abuses his
   reason, that indulges himself in lust and sensuality, and neglects to
   act the wise and reasonable part of a true Christian, has everything in
   his life to render him hateful to God, that is to be found in cheating
   and dishonesty.

   If, therefore, you rather choose to be an idle epicure than to be
   unfaithful; if you rather choose to live in lust and sensuality, than
   to injure your neighbour in his goods; you have made no better a
   provision for the favour of God, than he that rather chooses to rob a
   house than to rob a church.

   For the abusing of our own nature is as great a disobedience against
   God, as the injuring our neighbour; and he that wants piety towards
   God, has done as much to damn himself, as he that wants honesty towards
   men. Every argument, therefore, that proves it necessary for all men in
   all stations of life to be truly honest, proves it equally necessary
   for all men in all stations of life to be truly holy and pious, and do
   all things in such a manner as is suitable to the glory of God.

   Again: another argument to prove that all orders of men are obliged to
   be thus holy and devout in the common course of their lives, in the use
   of everything that they enjoy, may be taken from our obligation to
   prayer.

   It is granted that prayer is a duty that belongs to all states and
   conditions of men: now if we inquire into the reason of this, why no
   state of life is to be excused from prayer, we shall find it as good a
   reason why every state of life is to be made a state of piety and
   holiness in all its parts.

   For the reason why we are to pray unto God, and glorify Him with hymns,
   and psalms of thanksgiving, is this, because we are to live wholly unto
   God, and glorify Him all possible ways. It is not because the praises
   of words, or forms of thanksgiving, are more particularly parts of
   piety, or more the worship of God than other things; but it is because
   they are possible ways of expressing our dependence, our obedience and
   devotion to God. Now if this be the reason of verbal praises and
   thanksgivings to God, because we are to live unto God all possible
   ways, then it plainly follows, that we are equally obliged to worship
   and glorify God in all other actions that can be turned into acts of
   piety and obedience to Him. And, as actions are of much more
   significance than words, it must be a much more acceptable worship of
   God, to glorify Him in all the actions of our common life, than with
   any little form of words at any particular times.

   Thus, if God is to be worshipped with forms of thanksgivings, he that
   makes it a rule to be content and thankful in every part and accident
   of his life, because it comes from God, praises God in a much higher
   manner than he that has some set time for singing of psalms. He that
   dares not say an illnatured word, or do an unreasonable thing, because
   he considers God as everywhere present, performs a better devotion than
   he that dares not miss the Church. To live in the world as a stranger
   and a pilgrim, using all its enjoyments as if we used them not, making
   all our actions so many steps towards a better life, is offering a
   better sacrifice to God than any forms of holy and heavenly prayers.

   To be humble in all our actions, to avoid every appearance of pride and
   vanity, to be meek and lowly in our words, actions, dress, behaviour,
   and designs, in imitation of our blessed Saviour, is worshipping God in
   a higher manner than they who have only times to fall low on their
   knees in devotions. He that contents himself with necessaries, that he
   may give the remainder to those that want it; that dares not to spend
   any money foolishly, because he considers it as a talent from God which
   must be used according to His will, praises God with something that is
   more glorious than songs of praise.

   He that has appointed times for the use of wise and pious prayers,
   performs a proper instance of devotion; but he that allows himself no
   times, nor any places, nor any actions, but such as are strictly
   conformable to wisdom and holiness, worships the Divine nature with the
   most true and substantial devotion. For who does not know, that it is
   better to be pure and holy, than to talk about purity and holiness?
   Nay, who does not know, that a man is to be reckoned no farther pure,
   or holy, or just, than as he is pure, and holy, and just in the common
   course of his life? But if this be plain, then it is also plain, that
   it is better to be holy, than to have holy prayers.

   Prayers, therefore, are so far from being a sufficient devotion, that
   they are the smallest parts of it. We are to praise God with words and
   prayers, because it is a possible way of glorifying God, who has given
   us such faculties, as may be so used. But then as words are but small
   things in themselves, as times of prayer are but little, if compared
   with the rest of our lives; so that devotion which consists in times
   and forms of prayer is but a very small thing, if compared to that
   devotion which is to appear in every other part and circumstance of our
   lives.

   Again: as it is an easy thing to worship God with forms of words, and
   to observe times of offering them unto Him, so it is the smallest kind
   of piety. And, on the other hand, as it is more difficult to worship
   God with our substance, to honour Him with the right use of our time,
   to offer to Him the continual sacrifice of self-denial and
   mortification; as it requires more piety to eat and drink only for such
   ends as may glorify God, to undertake no labour, nor allow of any
   diversion, but where we can act in the Name of God; as it is more
   difficult to sacrifice all our corrupt tempers, correct all our
   passions, and make piety to God the rule and measure of all the actions
   of our common life; so the devotion of this kind is a much more
   acceptable service unto God, than those words of devotion which we
   offer to Him either in the Church or in our closet.

   Every sober reader will easily perceive that I do not intend to lessen
   the true and great value of prayers, either public or private; but only
   to show him that they are certainly but a very slender part of
   devotion, when compared to a devout life.

   To see this in a yet clearer light, let us suppose a person to have
   appointed times for praising God with psalms and hymns, and to be
   strict in the observation of them; let it be supposed, also, that in
   his common life he is restless and uneasy, full of murmurings and
   complaints at everything, never pleased but by chance, as his temper
   happens to carry him, but murmuring and repining at the very seasons,
   and having something to dislike in everything that happens to him.

   Now, can you conceive anything more absurd and unreasonable than such a
   character as this? Is such a one to be reckoned thankful to God,
   because he has forms of praise which he offers to Him? Nay, is it not
   certain that such forms of praise must be so far from being an
   acceptable devotion to God, that they must be abhorred as an
   abomination? Now the absurdity which you see in this instance, is the
   same in any other part of our life; if our common life hath any
   contrariety to our prayers, it is the same abomination as songs of
   thanksgiving in the mouths of murmurers.

   Bended knees, whilst you are clothed with pride; heavenly petitions,
   whilst you are hoarding up treasures upon earth; holy devotions, whilst
   you live in the follies of the world; prayers of meekness and charity,
   whilst your heart is the seat of pride and resentment; hours of prayer,
   whilst you give up days and years to idle diversions, impertinent
   visits, and foolish pleasures; are as absurd, unacceptable services to
   God, as forms of thanksgiving from a person that lives in repinings and
   discontent.

   So that, unless the common course of our lives be according to the
   common spirit of our prayers, our prayers are so far from being a real
   or sufficient degree of devotion, that they become an empty lip-labour,
   or, what is worse, a notorious hypocrisy.

   Seeing, therefore, we are to make the spirit and temper of our prayers
   the common spirit and temper of our lives, this may serve to convince
   us that all orders of people are to labour and aspire after the same
   utmost perfection of the Christian life. For as all Christians are to
   use the same holy and heavenly devotions, as they are all with the same
   earnestness to pray for the Spirit of God, so is it a sufficient proof
   that all orders of people are, to the utmost of their power, to make
   their life agreeable to that one Spirit, for which they are all to
   pray.

   As certain, therefore, as the same holiness of prayers requires the
   same holiness of life, so certain is it, that all Christians are called
   to the same holiness of life.

   A soldier, or a tradesman, is not called to minister at the altar, or
   preach the Gospel; but every soldier or tradesman is as much obliged to
   be devout, humble, holy, and heavenly-minded, in all the parts of his
   common life, as a clergyman is obliged to be zealous, faithful, and
   laborious, in all parts of his profession.

   And all this for this one plain reason, because all people are to pray
   for the same holiness, wisdom, and Divine tempers, and to make
   themselves as fit as they can for the same Heaven.

   All men, therefore, as men, have one and the same important business,
   to act up to the excellency of their rational nature, and to make
   reason and order the law of all their designs and actions. All
   Christians, as Christians, have one and the same calling, to live
   according to the excellency of the Christian spirit, and to make the
   sublime precepts of the Gospel the rule and measure of all their
   tempers in common life. The one thing needful to one, is the one thing
   needful to all.

   The merchant is no longer to hoard up treasures upon earth; the soldier
   is no longer to fight for glory; the great scholar is no longer to
   pride himself in the depths of science; but they must all with one
   spirit "count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge
   of Christ Jesus." [Phil. iii. 8]

   The fine lady must teach her eyes to weep, and be clothed with
   humility. The polite gentleman must exchange the gay thoughts of wit
   and fancy, for a broken and a contrite heart. The man of quality must
   so far renounce the dignity of his birth, as to think himself miserable
   till he is born again. Servants must consider their service as done
   unto God. Masters must consider their servants as their brethren in
   Christ, that are to be treated as their fellow-members of the mystical
   body of Christ.

   Young ladies must either devote themselves to piety, prayer,
   self-denial, and all good works, in a virgin state of life; or else
   marry, to be holy, sober, and prudent in the care of a family, bringing
   up their children in piety, humility, and devotion, and abounding in
   all other good works, to the utmost of their state and capacity. They
   have no choice of anything else, but must devote themselves to God in
   one of these states. They may choose a married, or a single life; but
   it is not left to their choice, whether they will make either state a
   state of holiness, humility, devotion, and all other duties of the
   Christian life. It is no more left in their power, because they have
   fortunes, or are born of rich parents, to divide themselves betwixt God
   and the world, or take such pleasures as their fortune will afford
   them, than it is allowable for them to be sometimes chaste and modest,
   and sometimes not.

   They are not to consider how much religion may secure them a fair
   character, or how they may add devotion to an impertinent, vain, and
   giddy life; but must look into the spirit and temper of their prayers,
   into the nature and end of Christianity; and then they will find that,
   whether married or unmarried, they have but one business upon their
   hands; to be wise, and pious, and holy, not in little modes and forms
   of worship, but in the whole turn of their minds, in the whole form of
   all their behaviour, and in the daily course of common life.

   Young gentlemen must consider what our blessed Saviour said to the
   young gentleman in the Gospel; he bid him sell all that he had, and
   give to the poor. Now though this text should not oblige all people to
   sell all, yet it certainly obliges all kinds of people to employ all
   their estates in such wise and reasonable and charitable ways, as may
   sufficiently show that all that they have is devoted to God, and that
   no part of it is kept from the poor to be spent in needless, vain, and
   foolish expenses.

   If, therefore, young gentlemen propose to themselves a life of pleasure
   and indulgence, if they spend their estates in high living, in luxury
   and intemperance, in state and equipage, in pleasures and diversions,
   in sports and gaming, and such like wanton gratifications of their
   foolish passions, they have as much reason to look upon themselves to
   be Angels, as to be disciples of Christ.

   Let them be assured, that it is the one only business of a Christian
   gentleman, to distinguish himself by good works, to be eminent in the
   most sublime virtues of the Gospel, to bear with the ignorance and
   weakness of the vulgar, to be a friend and patron to all that dwell
   about him, to live in the utmost heights of wisdom and holiness, and
   show through the whole course of his life a true religious greatness of
   mind. They must aspire after such a gentility, as they might have
   learnt from seeing the blessed Jesus, and show no other spirit of a
   gentleman, but such as they might have got by living with the holy
   Apostles. They must learn to love God with all their heart, with all
   their soul, and with all their strength, and their neighbour as
   themselves; and then they have all the greatness and distinction that
   they can have here, and are fit for an eternal happiness in Heaven
   hereafter.

   Thus in all orders and conditions, either of men or women, this is the
   one common holiness, which is to be the common life of all Christians.

   The merchant is not to leave devotion to the clergyman, nor the
   clergyman to leave humility to the labourer; women of fortune are not
   to leave it to the poor of their sex to be discreet, chaste, keepers at
   home, to adorn themselves in modest apparel, shamefacedness, and
   sobriety; nor poor women leave it to the rich to attend at the worship
   and service of God. Great men must be eminent for true poverty of
   spirit; and people of a low and afflicted state must greatly rejoice in
   God.

   The man of strength and power is to forgive and pray for his enemies,
   and the innocent sufferer, that is chained in prison, must, with Paul
   and Silas, at midnight sing praises to God. For God is to be glorified,
   holiness is to be practised, and the spirit of religion is to be the
   common spirit of every Christian, in every state and condition of life.

   For the Son of God did not come from above to add an external form of
   worship to the several ways of life that are in the world, and so to
   leave people to live as they did before, in such tempers and enjoyments
   as the fashion and spirit of the world approves; but as He came down
   from Heaven altogether Divine and heavenly in His own nature, so it was
   to call mankind to a Divine and heavenly life; to the highest change of
   their own nature and temper; to be born again of the Holy Spirit; to
   walk in the wisdom and light and love of God, and to be like Him to the
   utmost of their power; to renounce all the most plausible ways of the
   world, whether of greatness, business, or pleasure; to a mortification
   of all their most agreeable passions; and to live in such wisdom, and
   purity, and holiness, as might fit them to be glorious in the enjoyment
   of God to all eternity.

   Whatever, therefore, is foolish, ridiculous, vain, or earthly, or
   sensual, in the life of a Christian, is something that ought not to be
   there; it is a spot and a defilement that must be washed away with
   tears of repentance. But if anything of this kind runs through the
   course of our whole life, if we allow ourselves in things that are
   either vain, foolish, or sensual, we renounce our profession.

   For as sure as Jesus Christ was wisdom and holiness, as sure as He came
   to make us like Himself, and to be baptized into His Spirit, so sure is
   it, that none can be said to keep to their Christian profession, but
   they who, to the utmost of their power, live a wise and holy and
   heavenly life. This, and this alone, is Christianity; an universal
   holiness in every part of life, a heavenly wisdom in all our actions,
   not conforming to the spirit and temper of the world, but turning all
   worldly enjoyments into means of piety and devotion to God.

   But now, if this devout state of heart, if these habits of inward
   holiness, be true religion, then true religion is equally the duty and
   happiness of all orders of men; for there is nothing to recommend it to
   one, that is not the same recommendation of it to all states of people.

   If it be the happiness and glory of a bishop to live in this devout
   spirit, full of these holy tempers, doing everything as unto God, it is
   as much the glory and happiness of all men and women, whether young or
   old, to live in the same spirit. And whoever can find any reasons why
   an ancient bishop should be intent upon Divine things, turning all his
   life into the highest exercises of piety, wisdom, and devotion, will
   find them so many reasons why he should, to the utmost of his power, do
   the same himself.

   If you say that a bishop must be an eminent example of Christian
   holiness, because of his high and sacred calling, you say right. But if
   you say that it is more to his advantage to be exemplary, than it is
   yours, you greatly mistake: for there is nothing to make the highest
   degrees of holiness desirable to a bishop, but what makes them equally
   desirable to every young person of every family.

   For an exalted piety, high devotion, and the religious use of
   everything, is as much the glory and happiness of one state of life, as
   it is of another.

   Do but fancy in your mind what a spirit of piety you would have in the
   best bishop in the world, how you would have him love God, how you
   would have him imitate the life of our Saviour and His Apostles, how
   you would have him live above the world, shining in all the instances
   of a heavenly life, and then you have found out that spirit which you
   ought to make the spirit of your own life.

   I desire every reader to dwell awhile upon this reflection, and perhaps
   he will find more conviction from it than he imagines. Every one can
   tell how good and pious he would have some people to be; every one
   knows how wise and reasonable a thing it is in a bishop to be entirely
   above the world, and be an eminent example of Christian perfection; as
   soon as you think of a wise and ancient bishop, you fancy some exalted
   degree of piety, a living example of all those holy tempers which you
   find described in the Gospel.

   Now, if you ask yourself, What is the happiest thing for a young
   clergyman to do? you must be forced to answer, that nothing can be so
   happy and glorious for him, as to be like that excellent holy bishop.

   If you go on and ask, What is the happiest thing for any young
   gentleman or his sisters to do? the answer must be the same; that
   nothing can be so happy or glorious for them as to live in such habits
   of piety, in such exercises of a Divine life, as this good old bishop
   does. For everything that is great and glorious in religion, is as much
   the true glory of every man or woman, as it is the glory of any bishop.
   If high degrees of Divine love, if fervent charity, if spotless purity,
   if heavenly affection, if constant mortification, if frequent devotion,
   be the best and happiest way of life for any Christian, it is so for
   every Christian.

   Consider again: if you were to see a bishop in the whole course of his
   life living below his character, conforming to all the foolish tempers
   of the world, and governed by the same cares and fears which govern
   vain and worldly men, what would you think of him? Would you think that
   he was only guilty of a small mistake? No, you would condemn him as
   erring in that which is not only the most, but the only important
   matter that relates to him. Stay awhile in this consideration, till
   your mind is fully convinced how miserable a mistake it is in a bishop
   to live a careless worldly life.

   Whilst you are thinking in this manner, turn your thoughts towards some
   of your acquaintance, your brother or sister, or any young person. Now,
   if you see the common course of their lives to be not according to the
   doctrines of the Gospel, if you see that their way of life cannot be
   said to be a sincere endeavour to enter in at the strait gate, you see
   something that you are to condemn, in the same degree, and for the same
   reasons. They do not commit a small mistake, but are wrong in that
   which is their all, and mistake their true happiness, as much as that
   bishop does, who neglects the high duties of his calling. Apply this
   reasoning to yourself; if you find yourself living an idle, indulgent,
   vain life, choosing rather to gratify your passions than to live up to
   the doctrines of Christianity, and practise the plain precepts of our
   blessed Lord, you have all that blindness and unreasonableness to
   charge upon yourself, that you can charge upon any irregular bishop.

   For all the virtues of the Christian life, its perfect purity, its
   heavenly tempers, are as much the sole rule of your life, as the sole
   rule of the life of a bishop. If you neglect these holy tempers, if you
   do not eagerly aspire after them, if you do not show yourself a visible
   example of them, you are as much fallen from your true happiness, you
   are as great an enemy to yourself and have made as bad a choice, as
   that bishop, that chooses rather to enrich his family than to be like
   an Apostle. For there is no reason why you should think the highest
   holiness, the most heavenly tempers, to be the duty and happiness of a
   bishop, but what is as good a reason why you should think the same
   tempers to be the duty and happiness of all Christians. And as the
   wisest bishop in the world is he who lives in the greatest heights of
   holiness, who is most exemplary in all the exercises of a Divine life,
   so the wisest youth, the wisest woman, whether married or unmarried, is
   she that lives in the highest degrees of Christian holiness, and all
   the exercises of a Divine and heavenly life.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [21] Fulvius, the name of a great Patrician family in Rome, suggests
   worldly power and pomp.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XI


   Showing how great devotion fills our lives with the greatest peace and
   happiness that can be enjoyed in this world.


   SOME PEOPLE will perhaps object, that all these rules of holy living
   unto God in all that we do, are too great a restraint upon human life;
   that it will be made too anxious a state, by thus introducing a regard
   to God in all our actions; and that by depriving ourselves of so many
   seemingly innocent pleasures, we shall render our lives dull, uneasy,
   and melancholy.

   To which it may be answered,

   First, That these rules are prescribed for, and will certainly procure
   a quite contrary end. That instead of making our lives dull and
   melancholy, they will render them full of content and strong
   satisfactions. That by these rules, we only change the childish
   satisfactions of our vain and sickly passions, for the solid enjoyments
   and real happiness of a sound mind.

   Secondly, That as there is no foundation for comfort in the enjoyments
   of this life, but in the assurance that a wise and good God governeth
   the world, so the more we find out God in everything, the more we apply
   to Him in every place, the more we look up to Him in all our actions,
   the more we conform to His will, the more we act according to His
   wisdom, and imitate His goodness, by so much the more do we enjoy God,
   partake of the Divine nature, and heighten and increase all that is
   happy and comfortable in human life.

   Thirdly, He that is endeavouring to subdue, and root out of his mind,
   all those passions of pride, envy, and ambition, which religion
   opposes, is doing more to make himself happy, even in this life, than
   he that is contriving means to indulge them. For these passions are the
   causes of all the disquiets and vexations of human life: they are the
   dropsies and fevers of our minds, vexing them with false appetites, and
   restless cravings after such things as we do not want, and spoiling our
   taste for those things which are our proper good.

   Do but imagine that you somewhere or other saw a man that proposed
   reason as the rule of all his actions; that had no desires but after
   such things as nature wants, and religion approves; that was as pure
   from all the motions of pride, envy, and covetousness, as from thoughts
   of murder; that, in this freedom from worldly passions, he had a soul
   full of Divine love, wishing and praying that all men may have what
   they want of worldly things, and be partakers of eternal glory in the
   life to come. Do but fancy a man living in this manner, and your own
   conscience will immediately tell you, that he is the happiest man in
   the world, and that it is not in the power of the richest fancy to
   invent any higher happiness in the present state of life.

   And, on the other hand, if you suppose him to be in any degree less
   perfect; if you suppose him but subject to one foolish fondness or vain
   passion, your own conscience will again tell you that he so far lessens
   his own happiness, and robs himself of the true enjoyment of his other
   virtues. So true is it, that the more we live by the rules of religion,
   the more peaceful and happy do we render our lives.

   Again; as it thus appears that real happiness is only to be had from
   the greatest degrees of piety, the greatest denials of our passions,
   and the strictest rules of religion; so the same truth will appear from
   a consideration of human misery. If we look into the world, and view
   the disquiets and troubles of human life, we shall find that they are
   all owing to our violent and irreligious passions.

   Now all trouble and uneasiness is founded in the want of something or
   other: would we, therefore, know the true cause of our troubles and
   disquiets, we must find out the cause of our wants; because that which
   creates and increaseth our wants, does, in the same degree, create and
   increase our troubles and disquiets.

   God Almighty has sent us into the world with very few wants; meat, and
   drink, and clothing, are the only things necessary in life; and as
   these are only our present needs, so the present world is well
   furnished to supply these needs.

   If a man had half the world in his power, he can make no more of it
   than this; as he wants it only to support an animal life, so is it
   unable to do anything else for him, or to afford him any other
   happiness.

   This is the state of man, -- born with few wants, and into a large
   world very capable of supplying them. So that one would reasonably
   suppose that men should pass their lives in content and thankfulness to
   God; at least, that they should be free from violent disquiets and
   vexations, as being placed in a world that has more than enough to
   relieve all their wants.

   But if to all this we add, that this short life, thus furnished with
   all that we want in it, is only a short passage to eternal glory, where
   we shall be clothed with the brightness of Angels, and enter into the
   joys of God, we might still more reasonably expect that human life
   should be a state of peace, and joy, and delight in God. Thus it would
   certainly be, if reason had its full power over us.

   But, alas! though God, and nature, and reason, make human life thus
   free from wants and so full of happiness; yet our passions, in
   rebellion against God, against nature and reason, create a new world of
   evils and fill human life with imaginary wants, and vain disquiets.

   The man of pride has a thousand wants, which only his own pride has
   created; and these render him as full of trouble as if God had created
   him with a thousand appetites, without creating anything that was
   proper to satisfy them. Envy and ambition have also their endless
   wants, which disquiet the souls of men, and by their contradictory
   motions, render them as foolishly miserable, as those that want to fly
   and creep at the same time.

   Let but any complaining, disquieted man, tell you the ground of his
   uneasiness, and you will plainly see that he is the author of his own
   torment; that he is vexing himself at some imaginary evil, which will
   cease to torment him as soon as he is content to be that which God, and
   nature, and reason, require him to be.

   If you should see a man passing his days in disquiet, because he could
   not walk upon the water, or catch birds as they fly by him, you would
   readily confess that such a one might thank himself for such
   uneasiness. But now if you look into all the most tormenting disquiets
   of life, you will find them all thus absurd: where people are only
   tormented by their own folly, and vexing themselves at such things as
   no more concern them, nor are any more their proper good, than walking
   upon the water, or catching birds.

   What can you conceive more silly and extravagant, than to suppose a man
   racking his brains, and studying night and day how to fly? -- wandering
   from his own house and home, wearying himself with climbing upon every
   ascent, cringing and courting everybody he meets to lift him up from
   the ground, bruising himself with continual falls, and at last breaking
   his neck? -- and all this from an imagination that it would be glorious
   to have the eyes of people gazing up at him, and mighty happy to eat,
   and drink, and sleep, at the top of the highest trees in the kingdom:
   would you not readily own that such a one was only disquieted by his
   own folly?

   If you ask, what it signifies to suppose such silly creatures as these,
   as are nowhere to be found in human life?

   It may be answered, that wherever you see an ambitious man, there you
   see this vain and senseless flyer.

   Again: if you should see a man that had a large pond of water, yet
   living in continual thirst, not suffering himself to drink half a
   draught, for fear of lessening his pond; if you should see him wasting
   his time and strength, in fetching more water to his pond; always
   thirsty, yet always carrying a bucket of water in his hand, watching
   early and late to catch the drops of rain, gaping after every cloud,
   and running greedily into every mire and mud, in hopes of water, and
   always studying how to make every ditch empty itself into his pond: if
   you should see him grow grey and old in these anxious labours, and at
   last end a careful, thirsty life, by falling into his own pond; would
   you not say that such a one was not only the author of all his own
   disquiets, but was foolish enough to be reckoned amongst idiots and
   madmen? But yet foolish and absurd as this character is, it does not
   represent half the follies, and absurd disquiets, of the covetous man.

   I could now easily proceed to show the same effects of all our other
   passions, and make it plainly appear that all our miseries, vexations,
   and complaints, are entirely of our own making, and that, in the same
   absurd manner, as in these instances of the covetous and ambitious man.
   Look where you will, you will see all worldly vexations, but like the
   vexation of him that was always in mire and mud in search of water to
   drink, when he had more at home than was sufficient for a hundred
   horses.

   Celia [22] is always telling you how provoked she is, what intolerable,
   shocking things happen to her, what monstrous usage she suffers, and
   what vexations she meets with everywhere. She tells you that her
   patience is quite worn out, and there is no bearing the behaviour of
   people. Every assembly that she is at, sends her home provoked;
   something or other has been said, or done, that no reasonable,
   well-bred person ought to bear. Poor people that want her charity are
   sent away with hasty answers, not because she has not a heart to part
   with any money, but because she is too full of some trouble of her own
   to attend to the complaints of others. Celia has no business upon her
   hands but to receive the income of a plentiful fortune; but yet, by the
   doleful turn of her mind, you would be apt to think that she had
   neither food nor lodging. If you see her look more pale than ordinary,
   if her lips tremble when she speaks to you, it is because she is just
   come from a visit, where Lupus took no notice at all of her, but talked
   all the time to Lucinda, who has not half her fortune. When cross
   accidents have so disordered her spirits, that she is forced to send
   for the doctor, to make her able to eat, she tells him in great anger
   at Providence, that she never was well since she was born, and that she
   envies every beggar that she sees in health.

   This is the disquiet life of Celia, who has nothing to torment her but
   her own spirit.

   If you could inspire her with Christian humility, you need do no more
   to make her as happy as any person in the world. This virtue would make
   her thankful to God for half so much health as she has had, and help
   her to enjoy more for the time to come. This virtue would keep off
   tremblings of the spirits, and loss of appetite, and her blood would
   need nothing else to sweeten it.

   I have just touched upon these absurd characters, for no other end but
   to convince you, in the plainest manner, that the strictest rules of
   religion are so far from rendering a life dull, anxious, and
   uncomfortable (as is above objected), that, on the contrary, all the
   miseries, vexations, and complaints, that are in the world, are owing
   to the want of religion; being directly caused by those absurd passions
   which religion teaches us to deny.

   For all the wants which disturb human life, which make us uneasy to
   ourselves, quarrelsome with others, and unthankful to God; which weary
   us in vain labours and foolish anxieties; which carry us from project
   to project, from place to place, in a poor pursuit of we know not what,
   are the wants which neither God, nor nature, nor reason, hath subjected
   us to, but are solely infused into us by pride, envy, ambition, and
   covetousness.

   So far, therefore, as you reduce your desires to such things as nature
   and reason require; so far as you regulate all the motions of your
   heart by the strict rules of religion, so far you remove yourself from
   that infinity of wants and vexations, which torment every heart that is
   left to itself.

   Most people, indeed, confess that religion preserves us from a great
   many evils, and helps us in many respects to a more happy enjoyment of
   ourselves; but then they imagine that this is only true of such a
   moderate share of religion, as only gently restrains us from the
   excesses of our passions. They suppose that the strict rules and
   restraints of an exalted piety are such contradictions to our nature,
   as must needs make our lives dull and uncomfortable.

   Although the weakness of this objection sufficiently appears from what
   hath been already said, yet I shall add one word more to it.

   This objection supposes that religion, moderately practised, adds much
   to the happiness of life; but that such heights of piety as the
   perfection of religion requireth, have a contrary effect.

   It supposes, therefore, that it is happy to be kept from the excesses
   of envy, but unhappy to be kept from other degrees of envy. That it is
   happy to be delivered from a boundless ambition, but unhappy to be
   without a more moderate ambition. It supposes, also, that the happiness
   of life consists in a mixture of virtue and vice, a mixture of ambition
   and humility, charity and envy, heavenly affection and covetousness.
   All which is as absurd as to suppose that it is happy to be free from
   excessive pains, but unhappy to be without more moderate pains: or that
   the happiness of health consisted in being partly sick and partly well.

   For if humility be the peace and rest of the soul, then no one has so
   much happiness from humility, as he that is the most humble. If
   excessive envy is a torment of the soul, he most perfectly delivers
   himself from torment, that most perfectly extinguishes every spark of
   envy. If there is any peace and joy in doing any action according to
   the will of God, he that brings the most of his actions to this rule,
   does most of all increase the peace and joy of his life.

   And thus it is in every virtue; if you act up to every degree of it,
   the more happiness you have from it. And so of every vice; if you only
   abate its excesses, you do but little for yourself; but if you reject
   it in all degrees, then you feel the true ease and joy of a reformed
   mind.

   As for example: If religion only restrains the excesses of revenge, but
   lets the spirit still live within you in lesser instances, your
   religion may have made your life a little more outwardly decent, but
   not made you at all happier, or easier in yourself. But if you have
   once sacrificed all thoughts of revenge, in obedience to God, and are
   resolved to return good for evil at all times, that you may render
   yourself more like to God, and fitter for His mercy in the kingdom of
   love and glory; this is a height of virtue that will make you feel its
   happiness.

   Secondly, As to those satisfactions and enjoyments, which an exalted
   piety requireth us to deny ourselves, this deprives us of no real
   comfort of life.

   For, first, Piety requires us to renounce no ways of life, where we can
   act reasonably, and offer what we do to the glory of God. All ways of
   life, all satisfactions and enjoyments, that are within these bounds,
   are no way denied us by the strictest rules of piety. Whatever you can
   do, or enjoy, as in the presence of God, as His servant, as His
   rational creature that has received reason and knowledge from Him; all
   that you can perform conformably to a rational nature, and the will of
   God, all this is allowed by the laws of piety. And will you think that
   your life will be uncomfortable unless you may displease God, be a
   fool, and mad, and act contrary to that reason and wisdom which He has
   implanted in you?

   And as for those satisfactions which we dare not offer to a holy God,
   which are only invented by the folly and corruption of the world, which
   inflame our passions, and sink our souls into grossness and sensuality,
   and render us incapable of the Divine favour, either here or hereafter;
   surely it can be no uncomfortable state of life to be rescued by
   religion from such self-murder, and to be rendered capable of eternal
   happiness.

   Let us suppose a person destitute of that knowledge which we have from
   our senses, placed somewhere alone by himself, in the midst of a
   variety of things which he did not know how to use; that he has by him
   bread, wine, water, golden dust, iron chains, gravel, garments, fire,
   etc. Let it be supposed that he has no knowledge of the right use of
   these things, nor any direction from his senses how to quench his
   thirst, or satisfy his hunger, or make any use of the things about him.
   Let it be supposed, that in his drought he puts golden dust into his
   eyes; when his eyes smart, he puts wine into his ears; that in his
   hunger, he puts gravel into his mouth; that in pain, he loads himself
   with the iron chains; that feeling cold, he puts his feet in the water;
   that being frighted at the fire, he runs away from it; that being
   weary, he makes a seat of his bread. Let it be supposed, that through
   his ignorance of the right use of the things that are about him, he
   will vainly torment himself whilst he lives, and at last die, blinded
   with dust, choked with gravel, and loaded with irons. Let it be
   supposed that some good being came to him, and showed him the nature
   and use of all the things that were about him, and gave him such strict
   rules of using them, as would certainly, if observed, make him the
   happier for all that he had, and deliver him from the pains of hunger,
   and thirst, and cold.

   Now could you with any reason affirm, that those strict rules of using
   those things that were about him, had rendered that poor man's life
   dull and uncomfortable?

   Now this is in some measure a representation of the strict rules of
   religion; they only relieve our ignorance, save us from tormenting
   ourselves, and teach us to use everything about us to our proper
   advantage.

   Man is placed in a world full of variety of things; his ignorance makes
   him use many of them as absurdly as the man that put dust in his eyes
   to relieve his thirst, or put on chains to remove pain.

   Religion, therefore, here comes in to his relief, and gives him strict
   rules of using everything that is about him; that by so using them
   suitably to his own nature, and the nature of the things, he may have
   always the pleasure of receiving a right benefit from them. It shows
   him what is strictly right in meat, and drink, and clothes; and that he
   has nothing else to expect from the things of this world, but to
   satisfy such wants of his own; and then to extend his assistance to all
   his brethren, that, as far as he is able, he may help all his
   fellow-creatures to the same benefit from the world that he hath.

   It tells him that this world is incapable of giving him any other
   happiness; and that all endeavours to be happy in heaps of money, or
   acres of land, in fine clothes, rich beds, stately equipage, and show
   and splendour, are only vain endeavours, ignorant attempts after
   impossibilities, these things being no more able to give the least
   degree of happiness, than dust in the eyes can cure thirst, or gravel
   in the mouth satisfy hunger; but, like dust and gravel misapplied, will
   only serve to render him more unhappy by such an ignorant misuse of
   them.

   It tells him that although this world can do no more for him than
   satisfy these wants of the body, yet that there is a much greater good
   prepared for man than eating, drinking, and dressing; that it is yet
   invisible to his eyes, being too glorious for the apprehension of flesh
   and blood; but reserved for him to enter upon, as soon as this short
   life is over; where, in a new body formed to an angelic likeness, he
   shall dwell in the light and glory of God to all eternity.

   It tells him that this state of glory will be given to all those that
   make a right use of the things of this present world, who do not blind
   themselves with golden dust, or eat gravel, or groan under loads of
   iron of their own putting on; but use bread, water, wine, and garments,
   for such ends as are according to nature and reason; and who, with
   faith and thankfulness, worship the kind Giver of all that they enjoy
   here, and hope for hereafter.

   Now can any one say that the strictest rules of such a religion as this
   debar us of any of the comforts of life? Might it not as justly be said
   of those rules that only hinder a man from choking himself with gravel?
   For the strictness of these rules only consists in the exactness of
   their rectitude.

   Who would complain of the severe strictness of a law that, without any
   exception, forbad the putting of dust into our eyes? Who could think it
   too rigid, that there were no abatements? Now this is the strictness of
   religion; it requires nothing of us strictly, or without abatements,
   but where every degree of the thing is wrong, where every indulgence
   does us some hurt.

   If religion forbids all instances of revenge, without any exception, it
   is because all revenge is of the nature of poison; and though we do not
   take so much as to put an end to life, yet if we take any at all, it
   corrupts the whole mass of blood, and makes it difficult to be restored
   to our former health.

   If religion commands an universal charity, to love our neighbour as
   ourselves, to forgive and pray for all our enemies without any reserve;
   it is because all degrees of love are degrees of happiness, that
   strengthen and support the Divine life of the soul, and are as
   necessary to its health and happiness, as proper food is necessary to
   the health and happiness of the body.

   If religion has laws against laying up treasures upon earth, and
   commands us to be content with food and raiment, it is because every
   other use of the world is abusing it to our own vexation, and turning
   all its conveniences into snares and traps to destroy us. It is because
   this plainness and simplicity of life secures us from the cares and
   pains of restless pride and envy, and makes it easier to keep that
   straight road that will carry us to eternal life.

   If religion saith, "Sell that thou hast, and give to the poor," it is
   because there is no other natural or reasonable use of our riches, no
   other way of making ourselves happier for them; it is because it is as
   strictly right to give others that which we do not want ourselves, as
   it is right to use so much as our own wants require. For if a man has
   more food than his own nature requires, how base and unreasonable is it
   to invent foolish ways of wasting it, and make sport for his own full
   belly, rather than let his fellow-creatures have the same comfort from
   food which he hath had. It is so far, therefore, from being a hard law
   of religion, to make this use of our riches, that a reasonable man
   would rejoice in that religion which teaches him to be happier in that
   which he gives away, than in that which he keeps for himself; which
   teaches him to make spare food and raiment be greater blessings to him,
   than that which feeds and clothes his own body.

   If religion requires us sometimes to fast, and deny our natural
   appetites, it is to lessen that struggle and war that is in our nature,
   it is to render our bodies fitter instruments of purity, and more
   obedient to the good motions of Divine grace; it is to dry up the
   springs of our passions that war against the soul, to cool the flame of
   our blood, and render the mind more capable of Divine meditations. So
   that although these abstinences give some pain to the body, yet they so
   lessen the power of bodily appetites and passions and so increase our
   taste of spiritual joys, that even these severities of religion, when
   practised with discretion, add much to the comfortable enjoyment of our
   lives.

   If religion calleth us to a life of watching and prayer it is because
   we live amongst a crowd of enemies, and are always in need of the
   assistance of God. If we are to confess and bewail our sins, it is
   because such confessions relieve the mind, and restore it to ease; as
   burdens and weights taken off the shoulders, relieve the body, and make
   it easier to itself. If we are to be frequent and fervent in holy
   petitions, it is to keep us steady in the sight of our true God, and
   that we may never want the happiness of a lively faith, a joyful hope,
   and well-grounded trust in God. If we are to pray often, it is that we
   may be often happy in such secret joys as only prayer can give; in such
   communications of the Divine Presence, as will fill our minds with all
   the happiness that beings not in Heaven are capable of.

   Was there anything in the world more worth our care, was there any
   exercise of the mind, or any conversation with men, that turned more to
   our advantage than this intercourse with God, we should not be called
   to such a continuance in prayer. But if a man considers what it is that
   he leaves when he retires to devotion, he will find it no small
   happiness to be so often relieved from doing nothing, or nothing to the
   purpose; from dull idleness, unprofitable labour, or vain conversation.
   If he considers that all that is in the world, and all that is doing in
   it, is only for the body, and bodily enjoyments, he will have reason to
   rejoice at those hours of prayer, which carry him to higher
   consolations, which raise him above these poor concerns, which open to
   his mind a scene of greater things, and accustom his soul to the hope
   and expectation of them.

   If religion commands us to live wholly unto God, and to do all to His
   glory, it is because every other way is living wholly against
   ourselves, and will end in our own shame and confusion of face.

   As everything is dark, that God does not enlighten; as everything is
   senseless, that has not its share of knowledge from Him; as nothing
   lives, but by partaking of life from Him; as nothing exists, but
   because He commands it to be; so there is no glory or greatness, but
   what is of the glory and greatness of God.

   We indeed may talk of human glory as we may talk of human life, or
   human knowledge: but as we are sure that human life implies nothing of
   our own but a dependent living in God, or enjoying so much life in God;
   so human glory, whenever we find it, must be only so much glory as we
   enjoy in the glory of God.

   This is the state of all creatures, whether men or Angels; as they make
   not themselves, so they enjoy nothing from themselves: if they are
   great, it must be only as great receivers of the gifts of God; their
   power can only be so much of the Divine power acting in them; their
   wisdom can be only so much of the Divine wisdom shining within them;
   and their light and glory, only so much of the light and glory of God
   shining upon them.

   As they are not men or Angels, because they had a mind to be so
   themselves, but because the will of God formed them to be what they
   are; so they cannot enjoy this or that happiness of men or Angels,
   because they have a mind to it, but because it is the will of God that
   such things be the happiness of men, and such things the happiness of
   Angels. But now if God be thus all in all; if His will is thus the
   measure of all things, and all natures; if nothing can be done, but by
   His power; if nothing can be seen, but by a light from Him; if we have
   nothing to fear, but from His justice; if we have nothing to hope for,
   but from His goodness; if this is the nature of man, thus helpless in
   himself; if this is the state of all creatures, as well those in Heaven
   as those on earth; if they are nothing, can do nothing, can suffer no
   pain, nor feel any happiness, but so far, and in such degrees, as the
   power of God does all this; if this be the state of things, then how
   can we have the least glimpse of joy or comfort, how can we have any
   peaceful enjoyment of ourselves, but by living wholly unto that God,
   using and doing everything conformably to His will? A life thus devoted
   unto God, looking wholly unto Him in all our actions, and doing all
   things suitably to His glory, is so far from being dull and
   uncomfortable, that it creates new comforts in everything that we do.

   On the contrary, would you see how happy they are who live according to
   their own wills, who cannot submit to the dull and melancholy business
   of a life devoted unto God; look at the man in the parable, to whom his
   Lord had given one talent.

   He could not bear the thoughts of using his talent according to the
   will of Him from whom he had it, and therefore he chose to make himself
   happier in a way of his own. "Lord," says he, "I knew thee, that thou
   art an hard man, reaping where thou hadst not sown, and gathering where
   thou hadst not strawed: and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent
   in the earth! lo, there thou hast that is thine."

   His Lord, having convicted him out of his own mouth, despatches him
   with this sentence, "Cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness:
   there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." [Matt. xxv. 24, 25, 30]

   Here you see how happy this man made himself, by not acting wholly
   according to his Lord's will. It was, according to his own account, a
   happiness of murmuring and discontent; I knew thee, says he, that thou
   wast an hard man: it was a happiness of fears and apprehensions; I was,
   says he, afraid: it was a happiness of vain labours and fruitless
   travels; I went, says he, and hid thy talent; and after having been
   awhile the sport of foolish passions, tormenting fears, and fruitless
   labour, he is rewarded with darkness, eternal weeping, and gnashing of
   teeth.

   Now this is the happiness of all those who look upon a strict and
   exalted piety, that is, a right use of their talent, to be a dull and
   melancholy state of life.

   They may live a while free from the restraints and directions of
   religion; but, instead thereof, they must be under the absurd
   government of their passions: they must, like the man in the parable,
   live in murmurings and discontents, in fears and apprehensions. They
   may avoid the labour of doing good, of spending their time devoutly, of
   laying up treasures in Heaven, of clothing the naked, of visiting the
   sick; but then they must, like this man, have labours and pains in
   vain, that tend to no use or advantage, that do no good either to
   themselves or others; they must travel, and labour, and work, and dig,
   to hide their talent in the earth. They must, like him, at their Lord's
   coming, be convicted out of their own mouths, be accused by their own
   hearts, and have everything that they have said and thought of
   religion, be made to show the justice of their condemnation to eternal
   darkness, weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

   This is the purchase that they make, who avoid the strictness and
   perfection of religion, in order to live happily.

   On the other hand, would you see a short description of the happiness
   of a life rightly employed, wholly devoted to God, you must look at the
   man in the parable to whom his Lord had given five talents. "Lord,"
   says he, "thou deliveredst unto me five talents; behold, I have gained
   beside them five talents more. His Lord said unto him, well done, thou
   good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I
   will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy
   Lord."

   Here you see a life that is wholly intent upon the improvement of the
   talents, that is devoted wholly unto God, is a state of happiness,
   prosperous labours, and glorious success. Here are not, as in the
   former case, any uneasy passions, murmurings, vain fears, and fruitless
   labours. The man is not toiling and digging in the earth for no end or
   advantage; but his pious labours prosper in his hands, his happiness
   increases upon him; the blessing of five becomes the blessing of ten
   talents; and he is received with a "Well done, good and faithful
   servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

   Now as the case of these men in the parable left nothing else to their
   choice, but either to be happy in using their gifts to the glory of the
   Lord, or miserable by using them according to their own humours and
   fancies; so the state of Christianity leaves us no other choice.

   All that we have, all that we are, all that we enjoy, are only so many
   talents from God: if we use them to the ends of a pious and holy life,
   our five talents will become ten, and our labours will carry us into
   the joy of our Lord; but if we abuse them to the gratifications of our
   own passions, sacrificing the gifts of God to our own pride and vanity,
   we shall live here in vain labours and foolish anxieties, shunning
   religion as a melancholy thing, accusing our Lord as a hard master, and
   then fall into everlasting misery.

   We may for a while amuse ourselves with names and sounds, and shadows
   of happiness; we may talk of this or that greatness and dignity; but if
   we desire real happiness, we have no other possible way to it but by
   improving our talents, by so holily and piously using the powers and
   faculties of men in this present state, that we may be happy and
   glorious in the powers and faculties of Angels in the world to come.

   How ignorant, therefore, are they of the nature of religion, of the
   nature of man, and the nature of God, who think a life of strict piety
   and devotion to God to be a dull uncomfortable state; when it is so
   plain and certain that there is neither comfort nor joy to be found in
   anything else!

     __________________________________________________________________

   [22] Celia, a name which through its Greek form has a suggestion of
   hollowness. Lupus = Wolf.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XII


   The happiness of a life wholly devoted to God farther proved, from the
   vanity, the sensuality, and the ridiculous poor enjoyments, which they
   are forced to take up with who live according to their own humours.
   This represented in various characters.


   WE MAY STILL see more of the happiness of a life devoted unto God, by
   considering the poor contrivances for happiness, and the contemptible
   ways of life, which they are thrown into, who are not under the
   directions of a strict piety, but seeking after happiness by other
   methods.

   If one looks at their lives, who live by no rule but their own humours
   and fancies; if one sees but what it is which they call joy, and
   greatness, and happiness; if one sees how they rejoice, and repent,
   change and fly from one delusion to another; one shall find great
   reason to rejoice, that God hath appointed a strait and narrow way,
   that leadeth unto life; and that we are not left to the folly of our
   own minds, or forced to take up such shadows of joy and happiness, as
   the weakness and folly of the world has invented. I say invented;
   because those things which make up the joy and happiness of the world
   are mere inventions, which have no foundation in nature and reason, are
   no way the proper good or happiness of man, no way perfect either in
   his body, or his mind, or carry him to his true end.

   As for instance; when a man proposes to be happy in ways of ambition,
   by raising himself to some imaginary heights above other people, this
   is truly an invention of happiness, which has no foundation in nature,
   but is as mere a cheat of our own making, as if a man should intend to
   make himself happy by climbing up a ladder.

   If a woman seeks for happiness from fine colours or spots upon her
   face, from jewels and rich clothes, this is as merely an invention of
   happiness, as contrary to nature and reason, as if she should propose
   to make herself happy by painting a post, and putting the same finery
   upon it. It is in this respect that I call these joys and happiness of
   the world mere inventions of happiness, because neither God, nor
   nature, nor reason, hath appointed them as such; but whatever appears
   joyful, or great, or happy in them, is entirely created or invented by
   the blindness and vanity of our own minds.

   And it is on these inventions of happiness that I desire you to cast
   your eye, that you may thence learn, how great a good religion is,
   which delivers you from such a multitude of follies, and vain pursuits,
   as are the torment and vexation of minds that wander from their true
   happiness in God.

   Look at Flatus, [23] and learn how miserable they are, who are left to
   the folly of their own passions.

   Flatus is rich and in health, yet always uneasy, and always searching
   after happiness. Every time you visit him, you find some new project in
   his head; he is eager upon it as something that is more worth his
   while, and will do more for him than anything that is already past.
   Every new thing so seizes him, that if you were to take him from it, he
   would think himself quite undone. His sanguine temper, and strong
   passions, promise him so much happiness in everything, that he is
   always cheated, and is satisfied with nothing.

   At his first setting out in life, fine clothes were his delight, his
   inquiry was only after the best tailors and peruke-makers, and he had
   no thoughts of excelling in anything but dress. He spared no expense,
   but carried every nicety to its greatest height. But this happiness not
   answering his expectations, he left off his brocades, put on a plain
   coat, railed at fops and beaux, and gave himself up to gaming with
   great eagerness.

   This new pleasure satisfied him for some time: he envied no other way
   of life. But being, by the fate of play, drawn into a duel, where he
   narrowly escaped his death, he left off the dice, and sought for
   happiness no longer amongst the gamesters.

   The next thing that seized his wandering imagination was the diversions
   of the town: and for more than a twelvemonth you heard him talk of
   nothing but ladies, drawing-rooms, birthnights, plays, balls, and
   assemblies. But, growing sick of these, he had recourse to hard
   drinking. Here he had many a merry night, and met with stronger joys
   than any he had felt before. Here he had thoughts of setting up his
   staff, and looking out no farther; but unluckily falling into a fever,
   he grew angry at all strong liquors, and took his leave of the
   happiness of being drunk.

   The next attempt after happiness carried him into the field; for two or
   three years, nothing was so happy as hunting; he entered upon it with
   all his soul, and leaped more hedges and ditches than had ever been
   known in so short a time. You never saw him but in a green coat; he was
   the envy of all that blew the horn, and always spoke to his dogs in
   great propriety of language. If you met him at home, in a bad day, you
   would hear him blow his horn, and be entertained with the surprising
   accidents of the last noble chase. No sooner had Flatus outdone all the
   world in the breed and education of his dogs, built new kennels, new
   stables, and bought a new hunting-seat, but he immediately got sight of
   another happiness, hated the senseless noise and hurry of hunting, gave
   away the dogs, and was, for some time after, deep in the pleasures of
   building.

   Now he invents new kinds of dovecotes, and has such contrivances in his
   barns and stables as were never seen before; he wonders at the dulness
   of the old builders, is wholly bent upon the improvement of
   architecture, and will hardly hang a door in the ordinary way. He tells
   his friends that he never was so delighted in anything in his life;
   that he has more happiness amongst his bricks and mortar than ever he
   had at court; and that he is contriving how to have some little matter
   to do that way as long as he lives.

   The next year he leaves his house unfinished, complains to everybody of
   masons and carpenters, and devotes himself wholly to the happiness of
   riding about. After this, you can never see him but on horseback, and
   so highly delighted with this new way of life, that he would tell you,
   give him but his horse and a clean country to ride in, and you might
   take all the rest to yourself. A variety of new saddles and bridles,
   and a great change of horses, added much to the pleasure of this new
   way of life. But, however, having, after some time, tired both himself
   and his horses, the happiest thing he could think of next, was to go
   abroad and visit foreign countries; and there indeed happiness exceeded
   his imagination, and he was only uneasy that he had begun so fine a
   life no sooner. The next month he returned home, unable to bear any
   longer the impertinence of foreigners.

   After this he was a great student for one whole year; he was up early
   and late at his Italian grammar, that he might have the happiness of
   understanding the opera, whenever he should hear one, and not be like
   those unreasonable people, that are pleased with they know not what.

   Flatus is very ill-natured, or otherwise, just as his affairs happen to
   be when you visit him; if you find him when some project is almost worn
   out, you will find a peevish ill-bred man; but if you had seen him just
   as he entered upon his riding regimen, or began to excel in sounding of
   the horn, you had been saluted with great civility.

   Flatus is now at a full stand, and is doing what he never did in his
   life before, he is reasoning and reflecting with himself. He loses
   several days in considering which of his cast-off ways of life he shall
   try again.

   But here a new project comes in to his relief. He is now living upon
   herbs, and running about the country to get himself into as good wind
   as any running footman in the kingdom.

   I have been thus circumstantial in so many foolish particulars of this
   kind of life, because I hope that every particular folly that you here
   see will naturally turn itself into an argument for the wisdom and
   happiness of a religious life.

   If I could lay before you a particular account of all the circumstances
   of terror and distress, that daily attend a life at sea, the more
   particular I was in the account, the more I should make you feel and
   rejoice in the happiness of living upon the land.

   In like manner, the more I enumerate the follies, anxieties, delusions,
   and restless desires, which go through every part of a life devoted to
   human passions, and worldly enjoyments, the more you must be affected
   with that peace, and rest, and solid content, which religion gives to
   the souls of men.

   If you but just cast your eye upon a madman, or a fool, it perhaps
   signifies little or nothing to you; but if you were to attend them for
   some days, and observe the lamentable madness and stupidity of all
   their actions, this would be an affecting sight, and would make you
   often bless yourself for the enjoyment of your reason and senses.

   Just so, if you are only told in the gross, of the folly and madness of
   a life devoted to the world, it makes little or no impression upon you;
   but if you are shown how such people live every day; if you see the
   continual folly and madness of all their particular actions and
   designs; this would be an affecting sight, and make you bless God for
   having given you a greater happiness to aspire after.

   So that characters of this kind, the more folly and ridicule they have
   in them, provided that they be but natural, are most useful to correct
   our minds; and therefore are nowhere more proper than in books of
   devotion and practical piety. And as, in several cases, we best learn
   the nature of things, by looking at that which is contrary to them; so
   perhaps we best apprehend the excellency of wisdom, by contemplating
   the wild extravagancies of folly.

   I shall therefore continue this method a little farther, and endeavour
   to recommend the happiness of piety to you, by showing you, in some
   other instances, how miserably and poorly they live, who live without
   it.

   But you will perhaps say, that the ridiculous, restless life of Flatus
   is not the common state of those who resign themselves up to live by
   their own humours, and neglect the strict rules of religion; and that
   therefore it is not so great an argument of the happiness of a
   religious life, as I would make it.

   I answer, that I am afraid it is one of the most general characters in
   life; and that few people can read it, without seeing something in it
   that belongs to themselves. For where shall we find that wise and happy
   man, who has not been eagerly pursuing different appearances of
   happiness, sometimes thinking it was here, and sometimes there?

   And if people were to divide their lives into particular stages, and
   ask themselves what they were pursuing, or what it was which they had
   chiefly in view, when they were twenty years old, what at twenty-five,
   what at thirty, what at forty, what at fifty, and so on, till they were
   brought to their last bed; numbers of people would find that they had
   liked, and disliked, and pursued, as many different appearances of
   happiness, as are to be seen in the life of Flatus.

   And thus it must necessarily be, more or less, with all those who
   propose any other happiness, than that which arises from a strict and
   regular piety.

   But, secondly, let it be granted, that the generality of people are not
   of such restless, fickle tempers as Flatus: the difference then is only
   this, Flatus is continually changing and trying something new, but
   others are content with some one state; they do not leave gaming, and
   then fall to hunting. But they have so much steadiness in their
   tempers, that some seek after no other happiness, but that of heaping
   up riches; others grow old in the sports of the field; others are
   content to drink themselves to death, without the least inquiry after
   any other happiness.

   Now is there anything more happy or reasonable in such a life as this,
   than in the life of Flatus? Is it not as great and desirable, as wise
   and happy, to be constantly changing from one thing to another, as to
   be nothing else but a gatherer of money, a hunter, a gamester, or a
   drunkard, all your life?

   Shall religion be looked upon as a burden, as a dull and melancholy
   state, for calling men from such happiness as this, to live according
   to the laws of God, to labour after the perfection of their nature, and
   prepare themselves for an endless state of joy and glory in the
   presence of God?

   But turn your eyes now another way, and let the trifling joys, the
   gewgaw happiness of Feliciana, [24] teach you how wise they are, what
   delusion they escape, whose hearts and hopes are fixed upon a happiness
   in God.

   If you were to live with Feliciana but one half-year, you would see all
   the happiness that she is to have as long as she lives. She has no more
   to come, but the poor repetition of that which could never have pleased
   once, but through a littleness of mind, and want of thought.

   She is to be again dressed fine, and keep her visiting day. She is
   again to change the colour of her clothes, again to have a new
   head-dress, and again put patches on her face. She is again to see who
   acts best at the playhouse, and who sings finest at the opera. She is
   again to make ten visits in a day, and be ten times in a day trying to
   talk artfully, easily, and politely, about nothing.

   She is to be again delighted with some new fashion; and again angry at
   the change of some old one. She is to be again at cards, and gaming at
   midnight, and again in bed at noon. She is to be again pleased with
   hypocritical compliments, and again disturbed at imaginary affronts.
   She is to be again pleased with her good luck at gaming, and again
   tormented with the loss of her money. She is again to prepare herself
   for a birthnight, [25] and again to see the town full of good company.
   She is again to hear the cabals and intrigues of the town; again to
   have a secret intelligence of private amours, and early notices of
   marriages, quarrels, and partings.

   If you see her come out of her chariot more briskly than usual,
   converse with more spirit, and seem fuller of joy than she was last
   week, it is because there is some surprising new dress or new diversion
   just come to town.

   These are all the substantial and regular parts of Feliciana's
   happiness; and she never knew a pleasant day in her life, but it was
   owing to some one, or more, of these things.

   It is for this happiness that she has always been deaf to the
   reasonings of religion, that her heart has been too gay and cheerful to
   consider what is right or wrong in regard to eternity; or to listen to
   the sound of such dull words, as wisdom, piety, and devotion.

   It is for fear of losing some of this happiness, that she dares not
   meditate on the immortality of her soul, consider her relation to God,
   or turn her thoughts towards those joys which make saints and Angels
   infinitely happy in the presence and glory of God.

   But now let it here be observed, that as poor a round of happiness as
   this appears, yet most women that avoid the restraint of religion for a
   gay life, must be content with very small parts of it. As they have not
   Feliciana's fortune and figure in the world, so they must give away the
   comforts of a pious life for a very small part of her happiness.

   And if you look into the world, and observe the lives of those women
   whom no arguments can persuade to live wholly unto God, in a wise and
   pious employment of themselves, you will find most of them to be such
   as lose all the comforts of religion, without gaining the tenth part of
   Feliciana's happiness. They are such as spend their time and fortunes
   only in mimicking the pleasures of richer people; and rather look and
   long after, than enjoy those delusions, which are only to be purchased
   by considerable fortunes.

   But, if a woman of high birth and great fortune, having read the
   Gospel, should rather wish to be an under servant in some pious family,
   where wisdom, piety, and great devotion, directed all the actions of
   every day; if she should rather wish this than to live at the top of
   Feliciana's happiness; I should think her neither mad, nor melancholy;
   but that she judged as rightly of the spirit of the Gospel, as if she
   had rather wished to be poor Lazarus at the gate, than to be the rich
   man clothed in purple and fine linen, and faring sumptuously every day.
   [Luke xvi. 19, etc]

   But to proceed: would you know what a happiness it is to be governed by
   the wisdom of religion, and to be devoted to the joys and hopes of a
   pious life, look at the poor condition of Succus, [26] whose greatest
   happiness is a good night's rest in bed, and a good meal when he is up.
   When he talks of happiness, it is always in such expressions as show
   you that he has only his bed and his dinner in his thoughts.

   This regard to his meals and repose makes Succus order all the rest of
   his time with relation to them. He will undertake no business that may
   hurry his spirits, or break in upon his hours of eating and rest. If he
   reads, it shall only be for half an hour, because that is sufficient to
   amuse the spirits; and he will read something that may make him laugh,
   as rendering the body fitter for its food and rest. Or if he has, at
   any time, a mind to indulge a grave thought, he always has recourse to
   a useful treatise upon the ancient cookery. Succus is an enemy to all
   party-matters, having made it an observation that there is as good
   eating amongst the Whigs as amongst the Tories.

   He talks coolly and moderately upon all subjects, and is as fearful of
   falling into a passion, as of catching cold; being very positive that
   they are both equally injurious to the stomach. If ever you see him
   more hot than ordinary, it is upon some provoking occasion, when the
   dispute about cookery runs very high, or in the defence of some beloved
   dish, which has often made him happy. But he has been so long upon
   these subjects, is so well acquainted with all that can be said on both
   sides, and has so often answered all objections, that he generally
   decides the matter with great gravity.

   Succus is very loyal, and as soon as ever he likes any wine he drinks
   the king's health with all his heart. Nothing could put rebellious
   thoughts into his head, unless he should live to see a proclamation
   against eating of pheasants' eggs.

   All the hours that are not devoted either to repose or nourishment, are
   looked upon by Succus as waste or spare time. For this reason he lodges
   near a coffeehouse and a tavern, that when he rises in the morning, he
   may be near the news, and when he parts at night, he may not have far
   to go to bed. In the morning you always see him in the same place in
   the coffee-room; and if he seems more attentively engaged than
   ordinary, it is because some criminal has broken out of Newgate, or
   some lady was robbed last night, but they cannot tell where. When he
   has learnt all that he can, he goes home to settle the matter with the
   barber's boy that comes to shave him.

   The next waste time that lies upon his hands, is from dinner to supper.
   And if melancholy thoughts ever come into his head, it is at this time,
   when he is often left to himself for an hour or more, and that, after
   the greatest pleasure he knows is just over. He is afraid to sleep,
   because he has heard it is not healthful at that time, so that he is
   forced to refuse so welcome a guest.

   But here he is soon relieved, by a settled method of playing at cards,
   till it is time to think of some little nice matter for supper.

   After this Succus takes his glass, talks on the excellency of the
   English constitution, and praises that minister the most, who keeps the
   best table.

   On a Sunday night you may sometimes hear him condemning the iniquity of
   the town rakes; and the bitterest thing that he says against them, is
   this, that he verily believes some of them are so abandoned, as not to
   have a regular meal, or a sound night's sleep, in a week.

   At eleven, Succus bids all good-night, and parts in great friendship.
   He is presently in bed, and sleeps till it is time to go to the
   coffee-house next morning.

   If you were to live with Succus for a twelvemonth, this is all that you
   would see in his life, except a few curses and oaths that he uses as
   occasion offers.

   And now I cannot help making this reflection:--

   That as I believe the most likely means in the world to inspire a
   person with true piety, is to see the example of some eminent professor
   of religion, so the next thing that is likely to fill one with the same
   zeal, is to see the folly, the baseness, and poor satisfactions, of a
   life destitute of religion. As the one excites us to love and admire
   the wisdom and greatness of religion, so the other may make us fearful
   of living without it.

   For who can help blessing God for the means of grace, and for the hope
   of glory, when he sees what variety of folly they sink into, who live
   without it? Who would not heartily engage in all the labours and
   exercises of a pious life, be "steadfast, unmoveable, and always
   abounding in the work of the Lord," [1 Cor. xv. 58] when he sees what
   dull sensuality, what poor views, what gross enjoyments, they are left
   to, who seek for happiness in other ways?

   So that, whether we consider the greatness of religion, or the
   littleness of all other things, and the meanness of all other
   enjoyments, there is nothing to be found, in the whole nature of
   things, for a thoughtful mind to rest upon, but a happiness in the
   hopes of religion.

   Consider now with yourself, how unreasonably it is pretended that a
   life of strict piety must be a dull and anxious state. For can it, with
   any reason, be said that the duties and restraints of religion must
   render our lives heavy and melancholy, when they only deprive us of
   such happiness, as has been here laid before you?

   Must it be tedious and tiresome to live in the continual exercise of
   charity, devotion, and temperance, to act wisely and virtuously, to do
   good to the utmost of your power, to imitate the Divine perfections,
   and prepare yourself for the enjoyment of God? Must it be dull and
   tiresome to be delivered from blindness and vanity, from false hopes
   and vain fears, to improve in holiness, to feel the comforts of
   conscience in all your actions, to know that God is your Friend, that
   all must work for your good, that neither life nor death, neither men
   nor devils, can do you any harm; but that all your sufferings and
   doings that are offered unto God, all your watchings and prayers, and
   labours of love and charity, all your improvements, are in a short time
   to be rewarded with everlasting glory in the presence of God; must such
   a state as this be dull and tiresome, for want of such happiness as
   Flatus, or Feliciana, enjoys?

   Now if this cannot be said, then there is no happiness or pleasure
   lost, by being strictly pious; nor has the devout man anything to envy
   in any other state of life. For all the art and contrivance in the
   world, without religion, cannot make more of human life, or carry its
   happiness to any greater height, than Flatus and Feliciana have done.

   The finest wit, the greatest genius upon earth, if not governed by
   religion, must be as foolish, and low, and vain in his methods of
   happiness, as the poor Succus.

   If you were to see a man dully endeavouring all his life to satisfy his
   thirst, by holding up one and the same empty cup to his mouth, you
   would certainly despise his ignorance.

   But if you should see others of brighter parts, and finer
   understandings, ridiculing the dull satisfaction of one cup, and
   thinking to satisfy their own thirst by a variety of gilt and golden
   empty cups; would you think that these were ever the wiser, or happier,
   or better employed, for their finer parts?

   Now this is all the difference that you can see in the happiness of
   this life.

   The dull and heavy soul may be content with one empty appearance of
   happiness, and be continually trying to hold one and the same empty cup
   to his mouth all his life. But then let the wit, the great scholar, the
   fine genius, the great statesman, the polite gentleman, lay all their
   heads together, and they can only show you more and various empty
   appearances of happiness; give them all the world into their hands, let
   them cut and carve as they please, they can only make a greater variety
   of empty cups.

   So that if you do not think it hard to be deprived of the pleasures of
   gluttony, for the sake of religion, you have no reason to think it hard
   to be restrained from any other worldly pleasure. For search as deep,
   and look as far as you will, there is nothing here to be found, that is
   nobler, or greater, than high eating and drinking, unless you look for
   it in the wisdom and laws of religion.

   And if all that is in the world, are only so many empty cups, what does
   it signify which you take, or how many you take, or how many you have?

   If you would but use yourself to such meditations as these, to reflect
   upon the vanity of all orders of life without piety, to consider how
   all the ways of the world are only so many different ways of error,
   blindness, and mistake; you would soon find your heart made wiser and
   better by it. These meditations would awaken your soul into a zealous
   desire of that solid happiness, which is only to be found in recourse
   to God.

   Examples of great piety are not now common in the world; it may not be
   your happiness to live within sight of any, or to have your virtue
   inflamed by their light and fervour. But the misery and folly of
   worldly men is what meets your eyes in every place, and you need not
   look far to see how poorly, how vainly, men dream away their lives, for
   want of religious wisdom.

   This is the reason that I have laid before you so many characters of
   the vanity of a worldly life, to teach you to make a benefit of the
   corruption of the age, and that you may be made wise, though not by the
   sight of what piety is, yet by seeing what misery and folly reigns
   where piety is not.

   If you would turn your mind to such reflections as these, your own
   observation would carry this instruction much farther, and all your
   conversation and acquaintance with the world would be a daily
   conviction to you of the necessity of seeking some greater happiness,
   than all the poor enjoyments of this world can give.

   To meditate upon the perfection of the Divine attributes, to
   contemplate the glories of Heaven, to consider the joys of saints and
   angels, living forever in the brightness and glory of the Divine
   Presence; these are the meditations of souls advanced in piety, and not
   so suited to every capacity.

   But to see and consider the emptiness and error of all worldly
   happiness; to see the grossness of sensuality, the poorness of pride,
   the stupidity of covetousness, the vanity of dress, the delusion of
   honour, the blindness of our passions, the uncertainty of our lives,
   and the shortness of all worldly projects; these are meditations that
   are suited to all capacities, fitted to strike all minds; they require
   no depth of thought or sublime speculation, but are forced upon us by
   all our senses, and taught us by almost everything that we see and
   hear.

   This is that wisdom that "crieth and putteth forth her voice" [Prov.
   viii. 1] in the streets, that standeth at all our doors, that appealeth
   to all our senses, teaching us in everything, and everywhere, by all
   that we see, and all that we hear, by births and burials, by sickness
   and health, by life and death, by pains and poverty, by misery and
   vanity, and by all the changes and chances of life, that there is
   nothing else for man to look after, no other end in nature for him to
   drive at, but a happiness which is only to be found in the hopes and
   expectations of religion.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [23] Flatus, i.e. wind and vanity.

   [24] Feliciana, i.e. she who belongs to the family of the Happy
   according to the world.

   [25] Birthnight. "The night annually kept in memory of anyone's birth."
   -- Johnson.

   [26] Succus: the suggestion is of juicy and appetising meat.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XIII


   That not only a life of vanity, or sensuality, but even the most
   regular kind of life, that is not governed by great devotion,
   sufficiently shows its miseries, its wants and emptiness, to the eyes
   of all the world. This represented in various characters.


   IT IS a very remarkable saying of our Lord and Saviour to His
   disciples, in these words: "Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and
   your ears, for they hear." [Matt. xiii. 16] They teach us two things;
   first, that the dulness and heaviness of men's minds, with regard to
   spiritual matters, is so great, that it may justly be compared to the
   want of eyes and ears.

   Secondly, That God has so filled everything and every place, with
   motives and arguments for a godly life, that they who are but so
   blessed, so happy as to use their eyes and their ears, must needs be
   affected with them.

   Now though this was, in a more especial manner, the case of those whose
   senses were witnesses of the life, and miracles, and doctrines, of our
   blessed Lord, yet it is as truly the case of all Christians at this
   time. For the reasons of religion, the calls to piety, are so written
   and engraved upon everything, and present themselves so strongly, and
   so constantly, to all our senses in everything that we meet, that they
   can be disregarded by eyes that see not, and ears that hear not.

   What greater motive to a religious life, than the vanity, the poorness
   of all worldly enjoyments? And yet who can help seeing and feeling this
   every day of his life?

   What greater call to look towards God, than the pains, the sickness,
   the crosses and vexations of this life? And yet whose eyes and ears are
   not daily witnesses of them?

   What miracles could more strongly appeal to our senses, or what message
   from Heaven speak louder to us, than the daily dying and departure of
   our fellow-creatures? So that the one thing needful, or the great end
   of life, is not left to be discovered by fine reasoning and deep
   reflections; but is pressed upon us, in the plainest manner, by the
   experience of all our senses, by everything that we meet with in life.

   Let us but intend to see and hear, and then the whole world becomes a
   book of wisdom and instruction to us; all that is regular in the order
   of nature, all that is accidental in the course of things, all the
   mistakes and disappointments that happen to ourselves, all the miseries
   and errors that we see in other people, become so many plain lessons of
   advice to us; teaching us, with as much assurance as an Angel from
   Heaven, that we can no ways raise ourselves to any true happiness, but
   by turning all our thoughts, our wishes, and endeavours, after the
   happiness of another life.

   It is this right use of the world that I would lead you into, by
   directing you to turn your eyes upon every shape of human folly, that
   you may thence draw fresh arguments and motives of living to the best
   and greatest purposes of your creation.

   And if you would but carry this intention about you, of profiting by
   the follies of the world, and of learning the greatness of religion,
   from the littleness and vanity of every other way of life; if, I say,
   you would but carry this intention in your mind, you would find every
   day, every place, and every person, a fresh proof of their wisdom, who
   choose to live wholly unto God. You would then often return home the
   wiser, the better, and the more strengthened in religion, by everything
   that has fallen in your way.

   Octavius [27] is a learned, ingenious man, well versed in most parts of
   literature, and no stranger to any kingdom in Europe. The other day,
   being just recovered from a lingering fever, he took upon him to talk
   thus to his friends:--

   My glass, says he, is almost run out; and your eyes see how many marks
   of age and death I bear about me: but I plainly feel myself sinking
   away faster than any standers-by imagine. I fully believe that one year
   more will conclude my reckoning.

   The attention of his friends was much raised by such a declaration,
   expecting to hear something truly excellent from so learned a man, who
   had but a year longer to live. When Octavius proceeded in this manner:
   For these reasons, says he, my friends, I have left off all taverns;
   the wine of those places is not good enough for me, in this decay of
   nature. I must now be nice in what I drink; I cannot pretend to do as I
   have done; and therefore am resolved to furnish my own cellar with a
   little of the very best, though it cost me ever so much.

   I must also tell you, my friends, that age forces a man to be wise in
   many other respects, and makes us change many of our opinions and
   practices.

   You know how much I have liked a large acquaintance; I now condemn it
   as an error. Three or four cheerful, diverting companions, are all that
   I now desire; because I find, that in my present infirmities, if I am
   left alone, or to grave company, I am not so easy to myself.

   A few days after Octavius had made this declaration to his friends, he
   relapsed into his former illness, was committed to a nurse, who closed
   his eyes before his fresh parcel of wine came in.

   Young Eugenius, [28] who was present at this discourse, went home a new
   man, with full resolutions of devoting himself wholly unto God.

   I never, says Eugenius, was so deeply affected with the wisdom and
   importance of religion, as when I saw how poorly and meanly the learned
   Octavius was to leave the world, through the want of it.

   How often had I envied his great learning, his skill in languages, his
   knowledge of antiquity, his address, and fine manner of expressing
   himself upon all subjects! But when I saw how poorly it all ended, what
   was to be the last year of such a life, and how foolishly the master of
   all these accomplishments was then forced to talk, for want of being
   acquainted with the joys and expectations of piety, I was thoroughly
   convinced that there was nothing to be envied or desired, but a life of
   true piety; nor anything so poor and comfortless as a death without it.

   Now as the young Eugenius was thus edified and instructed in the
   present case; so if you are so happy as to have anything of his
   thoughtful temper, you will meet with variety of instruction of this
   kind; you will find that arguments for the wisdom and happiness of a
   strict piety offer themselves in all places, and appeal to all your
   senses in the plainest manner.

   You will find that all the world preaches to an attentive mind; and
   that if you have but ears to hear, almost everything you meet teaches
   you some lesson of wisdom.

   But now, if to these admonitions and instructions, which we receive
   from our senses, from an experience of the state of human life; if to
   these we add the lights of religion, those great truths which the Son
   of God has taught us; it will be then as much past all doubt, that
   there is but one happiness for man, as that there is but one God.

   For since religion teaches us that our souls are immortal, that piety
   and devotion will carry them to an eternal enjoyment of God, and that
   carnal, worldly tempers will sink them into an everlasting misery with
   damned spirits, what gross nonsense and stupidity is it, to give the
   name of joy or happiness to anything but that which carries us to this
   joy and happiness in God!

   Was all to die with our bodies, there might be some pretence for those
   different sorts of happiness, that are now so much talked of; but since
   our all begins at the death of our bodies; since all men are to be
   immortal, either in misery or happiness, in a world entirely different
   from this; since they are all hastening hence at all uncertainties, as
   fast as death can cut them down; some in sickness, some in health, some
   sleeping, some waking, some at midnight, others at cock-crowing, and
   all at hours that they know not of; is it not certain that no man can
   exceed another in joy and happiness, but so far as he exceeds him in
   those virtues which fit him for a happy death?

   Cognatus [29] is a sober, regular clergyman, of good repute in the
   world, and well esteemed in his parish. All his parishioners say he is
   an honest man, and very notable at making a bargain. The farmers listen
   to him, with great attention, when he talks of the properest time of
   selling corn.

   He has been, for twenty years, a diligent observer of markets, and has
   raised a considerable fortune by good management.

   Cognatus is very orthodox, and full of esteem for our English Liturgy;
   and if he has not prayers on Wednesdays and Fridays, it is because his
   predecessor had not used the parish to any such custom.

   As he cannot serve both his livings himself, so he makes it matter of
   conscience to keep a sober curate upon one of them, whom he hires to
   take care of all the souls in the parish, at as cheap a rate as a sober
   man can be procured.

   Cognatus has been very prosperous all his time; but still he has had
   the uneasiness and vexations that they have, who are deep in worldly
   business. Taxes, losses, crosses, bad mortgages, bad tenants, and the
   hardness of the times, are frequent subjects of his conversation; and a
   good or bad season has a great effect upon his spirits.

   Cognatus has no other end in growing rich, but that he may leave a
   considerable fortune to a niece, whom he has politely educated in
   expensive finery, by what he has saved out of the tithes of two
   livings.

   The neighbours look upon Cognatus as a happy clergyman, because they
   see him (as they call it) in good circumstances; and some of them
   intend to dedicate their own sons to the Church, because they see how
   well it has succeeded with Cognatus, whose father was but an ordinary
   man.

   But now if Cognatus, when he first entered into holy orders, had
   perceived how absurd a thing it is to grow rich by the Gospel; if he
   had proposed to himself the example of some primitive or other; if he
   had had the piety of the great St. Austin in his eye, who durst not
   enrich any of his relations out of the revenue of the Church; if,
   instead of twenty years' care to lay up treasures upon earth, he had
   distributed the income of every year, in the most Christian acts of
   charity and compassion; if, instead of tempting his niece to be proud,
   and providing her with such ornaments as the Apostle forbids, he had
   clothed, comforted, and assisted numbers of widows, orphans and
   distressed, who were all to appear for him at the last day; if, instead
   of the cares and anxieties of bad bonds, troublesome mortgages, and ill
   bargains, he had had the constant comfort of knowing that his treasure
   was securely laid up, where neither moth corrupteth, nor thieves break
   through and steal; [Matt. vi. 20] could it with any reason be said that
   he had mistaken the spirit and dignity of his order, or lessened any of
   that happiness which is to be found in his sacred employment?

   If, instead of rejoicing in the happiness of a second living, he had
   thought it as unbecoming the office of a clergyman to traffic for gain
   in holy things, as to open a shop; if he had thought it better to
   recommend some honest labour to his niece, than to support her in
   idleness by the labours of a curate; better that she should want fine
   clothes and a rich husband, than that cures of souls should be farmed
   about, and brother clergymen not suffered to live by those altars at
   which they serve; -- if this had been the spirit of Cognatus, could it,
   with any reason, be said, that these rules of religion, this strictness
   of piety, had robbed Cognatus of any real happiness? Could it be said
   that a life thus governed by the spirit of the Gospel, must be dull and
   melancholy, if compared to that of raising a fortune for a niece?

   Now as this cannot be said in the present case, so in every other kind
   of life, if you enter into the particulars of it, you will find, that
   however easy and prosperous it may seem, yet you cannot add piety to
   any part of it without adding so much of a better joy and happiness to
   it.

   Look now at that condition of life, which draws the envy of all eyes.

   Negotius [30] is a temperate, honest man. He served his time under a
   master of great trade, but has, by his own management, made it a more
   considerable business than ever it was before. For thirty years last
   past he has written fifty or sixty letters in a week, and is busy in
   corresponding with all parts of Europe. The general good of trade seems
   to Negotius to be the general good of life; whomsoever he admires,
   whatever he commends or condemns, either in Church or State, is
   admired, commended, or condemned, with some regard to trade.

   As money is continually pouring in upon him, so he often lets it go in
   various kinds of expense and generosity, and sometimes in ways of
   charity.

   Negotius is always ready to join in any public contribution. If a purse
   is making at any place where he happens to be, whether it be to buy a
   plate for a horserace, or to redeem a prisoner out of gaol, you are
   always sure of having something from him.

   He has given a fine ring of bells to a Church in the country: and there
   is much expectation that he will some time or other make a more
   beautiful front to the market-house than has yet been seen in any
   place. For it is the generous spirit of Negotius to do nothing in a
   mean way.

   If you ask what it is that has secured Negotius from all scandalous
   vices, it is the same thing that has kept him from all strictness of
   devotion, -- it is his great business. He has always had too many
   important things in his head, his thoughts have been too much employed,
   to suffer him to fall either into any courses of rakery, or to feel the
   necessity of an inward, solid piety.

   For this reason he hears of the pleasures of debauchery, and the
   pleasures of piety, with the same indifference; and has no more desire
   of living in the one, than in the other, because neither of them
   consists with that turn of mind, and multiplicity of business, which
   are his happiness.

   If Negotius was asked what it is which he drives at in life, he would
   be as much at a loss for an answer, as if he was asked what any other
   person is thinking of. For though he always seems to himself to know
   what he is doing, and has many things in his head, which are the
   motives of his actions; yet he cannot tell you of any one general end
   in life, that he has chosen with deliberation, as being truly worthy of
   all his labour and pains.

   He has several confused notions in his head which have been a long time
   there; such as these, viz., that it is something great to have more
   business than other people; to have more dealings upon his hands than a
   hundred of the same profession; to grow continually richer and richer,
   and to raise an immense fortune before he dies. The thing that seems to
   give Negotius the greatest life and spirit, and to be most in his
   thoughts, is an expectation that he has, that he shall die richer than
   any of his business ever did.

   The generality of people, when they think of happiness, think of
   Negotius, in whose life every instance of happiness is supposed to
   meet; sober, prudent, rich, prosperous, generous, and charitable.

   Let us now, therefore, look at this condition in another, but truer
   light.

   Let it be supposed, that this same Negotius was a painful, laborious
   man, every day deep in variety of affairs; that he neither drank nor
   debauched; but was sober and regular in his business. Let it be
   supposed that he grew old in this course of trading; and that the end
   and design of all this labour, and care, and application to business,
   was only this, that he might die possessed of more than a hundred
   thousand pairs of boots and spurs, and as many greatcoats.

   Let it be supposed that the sober part of the world say of him, when he
   is dead, that he was a great and happy man, a thorough master of
   business, and had acquired a hundred thousand pairs of boots and spurs
   when he died.

   Now if this was really the case, I believe it would be readily granted,
   that a life of such business was as poor and ridiculous as any that can
   be invented. But it would puzzle any one to show that a man that has
   spent all his time and thoughts in business and hurry that he might
   die, as it is said, worth a hundred thousand pounds, is any whit wiser
   than he who has taken the same pains to have as many pairs of boots and
   spurs when he leaves the world.

   For if the temper and state of our souls be our whole state; if the
   only end of life be to die as free from sin, and as exalted in virtue,
   as we can; if naked as we came, so naked are we to return, and to stand
   a trial before Christ and His holy Angels, for everlasting happiness or
   misery; what can it possibly signify what a man had, or had not, in
   this world? What can it signify what you call those things which a man
   has left behind him; whether you call them his or any one's else;
   whether you call them trees or fields, or birds and feathers; whether
   you call them a hundred thousand pounds, or a hundred thousand pairs of
   boots and spurs? I say, call them; for the things signify no more to
   him than the names.

   Now it is easy to see the folly of a life thus spent, to furnish a man
   with such a number of boots and spurs. But yet there needs no better
   faculty of seeing, no finer understanding, to see the folly of a life
   spent in making a man a possessor of ten towns before he dies.

   For if, when he has got all his towns, or all his boots, his soul is to
   go to its own place among separate spirits, and his body be laid by in
   a coffin, till the last trumpet calls him to judgment; where the
   inquiry will be, how humbly, how devoutly, how purely, how meekly, how
   piously, how charitably, how heavenly, we have spoken, thought, and
   acted, whilst we were in the body; how can we say, that he who has worn
   out his life in raising a hundred thousand pounds, has acted wiser for
   himself, than he who has had the same care to procure a hundred
   thousand of anything else?

   But farther: let it now be supposed that Negotius, when he first
   entered into business, happening to read the Gospel with attention, and
   eyes open, found that he had a much greater business upon his hands
   than that to which he had served an apprenticeship; that there were
   things which belong to man, of much more importance than all that our
   eyes can see; so glorious, as to deserve all our thoughts; so
   dangerous, as to need all our care; and so certain, as never to deceive
   the faithful labourer. Let it be supposed, that, from reading this
   book, he had discovered that his soul was more to him than his body;
   that it was better to grow in the virtues of the soul, than to have a
   large body or a full purse; that it was better to be fit for heaven,
   than to have variety of fine houses upon the earth; that it was better
   to secure an everlasting happiness, than to have plenty of things which
   he cannot keep; better to live in habits of humility, piety, devotion,
   charity, and self-denial, than to die unprepared for judgment; better
   to be most like our Saviour, or some eminent saint, than to excel all
   the tradesmen in the world in business and bulk of fortune. Let it be
   supposed that Negotius, believing these things to be true, entirely
   devoted himself to God at his first setting out in the world, resolving
   to pursue his business no farther than was consistent with great
   devotion, humility, and self-denial; and for no other ends, but to
   provide himself with a sober subsistence, and to do all the good that
   he could to the souls and bodies of his fellow-creatures. Let it
   therefore be supposed, that instead of the continual hurry of business,
   he was frequent in his retirements, and a strict observer of all the
   hours of prayer; that, instead of restless desires after more riches,
   his soul has been full of the love of God and heavenly affection,
   constantly watching against worldly tempers, and always aspiring after
   Divine grace; that, instead of worldly cares and contrivances, he was
   busy in fortifying his soul against all approaches of sin; that,
   instead of costly show, and expensive generosity of a splendid life, he
   loved and exercised all instances of humility and lowliness; that,
   instead of great treats and full tables, his house only furnished a
   sober refreshment to those that wanted it. Let it be supposed that his
   contentment kept him free from all kinds of envy; that his piety made
   him thankful to God in all crosses and disappointments; that his
   charity kept him from being rich, by a continual distribution to all
   objects of compassion. Now, had this been the Christian spirit of
   Negotius, can any one say, that he had lost the true joy and happiness
   of life, by thus conforming to the spirit, and living up to the hopes
   of the Gospel? Can it be said, that a life made exemplary by such
   virtues as these, which keep Heaven always in our sight, which both
   delight and exalt the soul here, and prepare it for the presence of God
   hereafter, must be poor and dull, if compared to that of heaping up
   riches, which can neither stay with us, nor we with them?

   It would be endless to multiply examples of this kind, to show you how
   little is lost, and how much is gained, by introducing a strict and
   exact piety into every condition of human life.

   I shall now, therefore, leave it to your own meditation, to carry this
   way of thinking farther, hoping that you are enough directed by what is
   here said, to convince yourself, that a true and exalted piety is so
   far from rendering any life dull and tiresome, that it is the only joy
   and happiness of every condition in the world.

   Imagine to yourself some person in a consumption, or any other
   lingering distemper that was incurable.

   If you were to see such a man wholly intent upon doing everything in
   the spirit of religion, making the wisest use of all his time, fortune,
   and abilities; if he was for carrying every duty of piety to its
   greatest height, and striving to have all the advantage that could be
   had from the remainder of his life; if he avoided all business, but
   such as was necessary; if he was averse to all the follies and vanities
   of the world, had no taste for finery and show, but sought for all his
   comfort in the hopes and expectations of religion; you would certainly
   commend his prudence, you would say that he had taken the right method
   to make himself as joyful and happy as any one can be in a state of
   such infirmity.

   On the other hand, if you should see the same person, with trembling
   hands, short breath, thin jaws, and hollow eyes, wholly intent upon
   business and bargains, as long as he could speak; if you should see him
   pleased with fine clothes, when he could scarce stand to be dressed,
   and laying out his money in horses and dogs, rather than purchase the
   prayers of the poor for his soul, which was so soon to be separated
   from his body you would certainly condemn him as a weak, silly man.

   Now as it is easy to see the reasonableness, the wisdom, and happiness,
   of a religious spirit in a consumptive man, so if you pursue the same
   way of thinking, you will as easily perceive the same wisdom and
   happiness of a pious temper, in every other state of life.

   For how soon will every man that is in health, be in the state of him
   that is in a consumption! How soon will he want all the same comforts
   and satisfactions of religion, which every dying man wants!

   And if it be wise and happy to live piously, because we have not above
   a year to live, is it not being more wise, and making ourselves more
   happy, because we may have more years to come? If one year of piety
   before we die is so desirable, are not more years of piety much more
   desirable?

   If a man had five fixed years to live, he could not possibly think at
   all, without intending to make the best use of them all. When he saw
   his stay so short in this world, he must needs think that this was not
   a world for him; and when he saw how near he was to another world that
   was eternal, he must surely think it very necessary to be very diligent
   in preparing himself for it.

   Now as reasonable as piety appears in such a circumstance of life, it
   is yet more reasonable in every circumstance of life, to every thinking
   man.

   For, who but a madman can reckon that he has five years certain to
   come?

   And if it be reasonable and necessary to deny our worldly tempers, and
   live wholly unto God, because we are certain that we are to die at the
   end of five years; surely it must be much more reasonable and necessary
   for us to live in the same spirit, because we have no certainty that we
   shall live five weeks.

   Again, if we were to add twenty years to the five, which is in all
   probability more than will be added to the lives of many people, who
   are at man's estate; what a poor thing is this! How small a difference
   is there between five and twenty-five years!

   It is said, that a day is with God as a thousand years, and a thousand
   years as one day; because, in regard to His eternity, this difference
   is as nothing.

   Now as we are all created to be eternal, to live in an endless
   succession of ages upon ages, where thousands, and millions of
   thousands of years will have no proportion to our everlasting life in
   God: so with regard to this eternal state, which is our real state,
   twenty-five years is as poor a pittance as twenty-five days.

   Now we can never make any true judgment of time as it relates to us,
   without considering the true state of our duration. If we are temporary
   beings, then a little time may justly be called a great deal in
   relation to us; but if we are eternal beings, then the difference of a
   few years is as nothing.

   If we were to suppose three different sorts of rational beings, all of
   different, but fixed duration, one sort that lived certainly only a
   month, the other a year, and the third a hundred years. Now if these
   beings were to meet together, and talk about time, they must talk in a
   very different language: half an hour to those that were to live but a
   month, must be a very different thing to what it is to those who are to
   live a hundred years.

   As, therefore, time is thus different a thing with regard to the state
   of those who enjoy it, so if we would know what time is with regard to
   ourselves, we must consider our state.

   Now since our eternal state is as certainly ours, as our present state;
   since we are as certainly to live forever, as we now live at all; it is
   plain, that we cannot judge of the value of any particular time, as to
   us, but by comparing it to that eternal duration, for which we are
   created.

   If you would know what five years signify to a being that was to live a
   hundred, you must compare five to a hundred, and see what proportion it
   bears to it; and then you will judge right.

   So if you would know what twenty years signify to a son of Adam, you
   must compare it not to a million of ages, but to an eternal duration,
   to which no number of millions bears any proportion; and then you will
   judge right, by finding it nothing.

   Consider therefore this; how would you condemn the folly of a man, that
   should lose his share of future glory, for the sake of being rich, or
   great, or praised, or delighted in any enjoyment, only one poor day
   before he was to die!

   But if the time will come, when a number of years will seem less to
   every one, than a day does now, what a condemnation must it then be, if
   eternal happiness should appear to be lost for something less than the
   enjoyment of a day!

   Why does a day seem a trifle to us now? It is because we have years to
   set against it. It is the duration of years that makes it appear as
   nothing.

   What a trifle therefore must the years of a man's age appear, when they
   are forced to be set against eternity, when there shall be nothing but
   eternity to compare them with!

   Now this will be the case of every man, as soon as he is out of the
   body; he will be forced to forget the distinctions of days and years,
   and to measure time, not by the course of the sun, but by setting it
   against eternity.

   As the fixed stars, by reason of our being placed at such a distance
   from them, appear but as so many points; so when we, placed in
   eternity, shall look back upon all time, it will all appear but as a
   moment.

   Then, a luxury, an indulgence, a prosperity, a greatness of fifty
   years, will seem to every one that looks back upon it, as the same poor
   short enjoyment as if he had been snatched away in his first sin.

   These few reflections upon time are only to show how poorly they think,
   how miserably they judge, who are less careful of an eternal state,
   because they may be at some years' distance from it, than they would be
   if they knew they were within a few weeks of it.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [27] Octavius: suggested by the name of the Emepror Augustus, who
   askedhis friends to applaud him on his death-bed as a good pantomime
   leaving the stage.

   [28] Eugenius, i.e. noble (Acts xvii. 11).

   [29] Cognatus, i.e. relation, i.e. suggestion of nepotism.

   [30] Negotius = business-man.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XIV


   Concerning that part of devotion which relates to times and hours of
   prayer. Of daily early prayer in the morning. How we are to improve our
   forms of prayer, and how to increase the spirit of devotion.


   HAVING in the foregoing chapters shown the necessity of a devout
   spirit, or habit of mind, in every part of our common life, in the
   discharge of all our business, in the use of all the gifts of God; I
   come now to consider that part of devotion, which relates to times and
   hours of prayer.

   I take it for granted, that every Christian, that is in health, is up
   early in the morning; for it is much more reasonable to suppose a
   person up early, because he is a Christian, than because he is a
   labourer, or a tradesman, or a servant, or has business that wants him.

   We naturally conceive some abhorrence of a man that is in bed when he
   should be at his labour or in his shop. We cannot tell how to think
   anything good of him, who is such a slave to drowsiness as to neglect
   his business for it.

   Let this therefore teach us to conceive how odious we must appear in
   the sight of Heaven, if we are in bed, shut up in sleep and darkness,
   when we should be praising God; and are such slaves to drowsiness, as
   to neglect our devotions for it.

   For if he is to be blamed as a slothful drone, that rather chooses the
   lazy indulgence of sleep, than to perform his proper share of worldly
   business; how much more is he to be reproached, that would rather lie
   folded up in a bed, than be raising up his heart to God in acts of
   praise and adoration!

   Prayer is the nearest approach to God, and the highest enjoyment of
   Him, that we are capable of in this life.

   It is the noblest exercise of the soul, the most exalted use of our
   best faculties, and the highest imitation of the blessed inhabitants of
   Heaven.

   When our hearts are full of God, sending up holy desires to the throne
   of grace, we are then in our highest state, we are upon the utmost
   heights of human greatness; we are not before kings and princes, but in
   the presence and audience of the Lord of all the world, and can be no
   higher, till death is swallowed up in glory.

   On the other hand, sleep is the poorest, dullest refreshment of the
   body, that is so far from being intended as an enjoyment, that we are
   forced to receive it either in a state of insensibility, or in the
   folly of dreams.

   Sleep is such a dull, stupid state of existence, that even amongst mere
   animals, we despise them most which are most drowsy.

   He, therefore, that chooses to enlarge the slothful indulgence of
   sleep, rather than be early at his devotions to God, chooses the
   dullest refreshment of the body, before the highest, noblest employment
   of the soul; he chooses that state which is a reproach to mere animals,
   rather than that exercise which is the glory of Angels.

   You will perhaps say, though you rise late, yet you are always careful
   of your devotions when you are up.

   It may be so. But what then? Is it well done of you to rise late,
   because you pray when you are up?

   Is it pardonable to waste great part of the day in bed, because some
   time after you say your prayers?

   It is as much your duty to rise to pray, as to pray when you are risen.
   And if you are late at your prayers, you offer to God the prayers of an
   idle, slothful worshipper, that rises to prayers as idle servants rise
   to their labour.

   Farther; if you fancy that you are careful of your devotions when you
   are up, though it be your custom to rise late, you deceive yourself;
   for you cannot perform your devotions as you ought. For he that cannot
   deny himself this drowsy indulgence, but must pass away good part of
   the morning in it, is no more prepared for prayer when he is up, than
   he is prepared for fasting, abstinence, or any other self-denial. He
   may indeed more easily read over a form of prayer, than he can perform
   these duties; but he is no more disposed to enter into the true spirit
   of prayer than he is disposed to fasting. For sleep thus indulged gives
   a softness and idleness to all our tempers, and makes us unable to
   relish anything but what suits with an idle state of mind, and
   gratifies our natural tempers, as sleep does. So that a person who is a
   slave to this idleness is in the same temper when he is up; and though
   he is not asleep, yet he is under the effects of it; and everything
   that is idle, indulgent, or sensual, pleases him for the same reason
   that sleep pleases him; and, on the other hand, everything that
   requires care, or trouble, or self-denial, is hateful to him, for the
   same reason that he hates to rise. He that places any happiness in this
   morning indulgence, would be glad to have all the day made happy in the
   same manner; though not with sleep, yet with such enjoyments as gratify
   and indulge the body in the same manner as sleep does; or, at least,
   with such as come as near to it as they can. The remembrance of a warm
   bed is in his mind all the day, and he is glad when he is not one of
   those that sit starving in a church.

   Now you do not imagine that such a one can truly mortify that body
   which he thus indulges: yet you might as well think this, as that he
   can truly perform his devotions; or live in such a drowsy state of
   indulgence, and yet relish the joys of a spiritual life.

   For surely no one will pretend to say that he knows and feels the true
   happiness of prayer, who does not think it worth his while to be early
   at it.

   It is not possible in nature for an epicure to be truly devout: he must
   renounce this habit of sensuality, before he can relish the happiness
   of devotion.

   Now he that turns sleep into an idle indulgence, does as much to
   corrupt and disorder his soul, to make it a slave to bodily appetites,
   and keep it incapable of all devout and heavenly tempers, as he that
   turns the necessities of eating into a course of indulgence.

   A person that eats and drinks too much does not feel such effects from
   it, as those do who live in notorious instances of gluttony and
   intemperance: but yet his course of indulgence, though it be not
   scandalous in the eyes of the world, nor such as torments his own
   conscience, is a great and constant hindrance to his improvement in
   virtue; it gives him eyes that see not, and ears that hear not; it
   creates a sensuality in the soul, increases the power of bodily
   passions, and makes him incapable of entering into the true spirit of
   religion.

   Now this is the case of those who waste their time in sleep; it does
   not disorder their lives, or wound their consciences, as notorious acts
   of intemperance do; but, like any other more moderate course of
   indulgence, it silently, and by smaller degrees, wears away the spirit
   of religion, and sinks the soul into a state of dulness and sensuality.

   If you consider devotion only as a time of so much prayer, you may
   perhaps perform it, though you live in this daily indulgence; but if
   you consider it as a state of the heart, as a lively fervour of the
   soul, that is deeply affected with a sense of its own misery and
   infirmities, and desires the Spirit of God more than all things in the
   world: you will find that the spirit of indulgence, and the spirit of
   prayer, cannot subsist together. Mortification of all kinds is the very
   life and soul of piety; but he that has not so small a degree of it, as
   to be able to be early at his prayers, can have no reason to think that
   he has taken up his cross, and is following Christ.

   What conquest has he got over himself; what right hand has he cut off;
   what trials is he prepared for; what sacrifice is he ready to offer
   unto God, who cannot be so cruel to himself as to rise to prayer at
   such time as the drudging part of the world are content to rise to
   their labour?

   Some people will not scruple to tell you, that they indulge themselves
   in sleep, because they have nothing to do; and that; if they had either
   business or pleasure to rise to, they would not lose so much of their
   time in sleep. But such people must be told that they mistake the
   matter; that they have a great deal of business to do; they have a
   hardened heart to change; they have the whole spirit of religion to
   get. For surely he that thinks devotion to be of less moment than
   business or pleasure; or that he has nothing to do because nothing but
   his prayers want him, may be justly said to have the whole spirit of
   religion to seek.

   You must not therefore consider how small a crime it is to rise late,
   but you must consider how great a misery it is to want the spirit of
   religion, to have a heart not rightly affected with prayer; and to live
   in such softness and idleness, as makes you incapable of the most
   fundamental duties of a truly Christian and spiritual life.

   This is a right way of judging of the crime of wasting great part of
   your time in bed.

   You must not consider the thing barely in itself, but what it proceeds
   from; what virtues it shows to be wanting; what vices it naturally
   strengthens. For every habit of this kind discovers the state of the
   soul, and plainly shows the whole turn of your mind.

   If our blessed Lord used to pray early before day; if He spent whole
   nights in prayer; if the devout Anna was day and night in the temple;
   [Luke ii. 36, 37] if St. Paul and Silas at midnight sang praises unto
   God; [Acts xvi. 35] if the primitive Christians, for several hundred
   years, besides their hours of prayers in the daytime, met publicly in
   the churches at midnight, to join in psalms and prayers; is it not
   certain that these practices showed the state of their heart? Are they
   not so many plain proofs of the whole turn of their minds?

   And if you live in a contrary state, wasting great part of every day in
   sleep, thinking any time soon enough to be at your prayers; is it not
   equally certain, that this practice as much shows the state of your
   heart, and the whole turn of your mind?

   So that if this indulgence is your way of life, you have as much reason
   to believe yourself destitute of the true spirit of devotion, as you
   have to believe the Apostles and saints of the primitive Church were
   truly devout. For as their way of life was a demonstration of their
   devotion, so a contrary way of life is as strong a proof of a want of
   devotion.

   When you read the Scriptures, you see a religion that is all life, and
   spirit, and joy, in God; that supposes our souls risen from earthly
   desires, and bodily indulgences, to prepare for another body, another
   world, and other enjoyments. You see Christians represented as temples
   of the Holy Ghost, as children of the day, as candidates for an eternal
   crown, as watchful virgins, that have their lamps always burning, in
   expectation of the bridegroom. But can he be thought to have this joy
   in God, this care of eternity, this watchful spirit, who has not zeal
   enough to rise to his prayers?

   When you look into the writings and lives of the first Christians, you
   see the same spirit that you see in the Scriptures. All is reality,
   life, and action. Watching and prayers, self-denial and mortification,
   was the common business of their lives.

   From that time to this, there has been no person like them, eminent for
   piety, who has not, like them, been eminent for self-denial and
   mortification. This is the only royal way that leads to a kingdom.

   But how far are you from this way of life, or rather how contrary to
   it, if, instead of imitating their austerity and mortification, you
   cannot so much as renounce so poor an indulgence, as to be able to rise
   to your prayers! If self-denials and bodily sufferings, if watchings
   and fastings, will be marks of glory at the day of judgment, where must
   we hide our heads, that have slumbered away our time in sloth and
   softness?

   You perhaps now find some pretences to excuse yourselves from that
   severity of fasting and self-denial, which the first Christians
   practised. You fancy that human nature is grown weaker, and that the
   difference of climates may make it not possible for you to observe
   their methods of self-denial and austerity in these colder countries.

   But all this is but pretence: for the change is not in the outward
   state of things, but in the inward state of our minds. When there is
   the same spirit in us that there was in the Apostles and primitive
   Christians, when we feel the weight of religion as they did, when we
   have their faith and hope, we shall take up our cross, and deny
   ourselves, and live in such methods of mortification as they did.

   Had St. Paul lived in a cold country, had he had a constitution made
   weak with a sickly stomach, and often infirmities, he would have done
   as he advised Timothy, he would have mixed a little wine with his
   water. But still he would have lived in a state of self-denial and
   mortification. He would have given this same account of himself:-- "I
   therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that
   beateth the air: but I keep under my body, and bring it into
   subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I
   myself should be a castaway." [1 Cor. ix. 26, 27]

   After all, let it now be supposed, that you imagine there is no
   necessity for you to be so sober and vigilant, so fearful of yourself,
   so watchful over your passions, so apprehensive of danger, so careful
   of your salvation, as the Apostles were. Let it be supposed, that you
   imagine that you want less self-denial and mortification, to subdue
   your bodies, and purify your souls, than they wanted; that you need not
   have your loins girt, and your lamps burning, as they had; will you
   therefore live in a quite contrary state? Will you make your life as
   constant a course of softness and indulgence, as theirs was of
   strictness and self-denial?

   If therefore you should think that you have time sufficient, both for
   prayer and other duties, though you rise late; yet let me persuade you
   to rise early, as an instance of self-denial. It is so small a one,
   that, if you cannot comply with it, you have no reason to think
   yourself capable of any other.

   If I were to desire you not to study the gratifications of your palate,
   in the niceties of meats and drinks, I would not insist much upon the
   crime of wasting your money in such a way, though it be a great one;
   but I would desire you to renounce such a way of life, because it
   supports you in such a state of sensuality and indulgence, as renders
   you incapable of relishing the most essential doctrines of religion.

   For the same reason, I do not insist much on the crime of wasting so
   much of your time in sleep, though it be a great one; but I desire you
   to renounce this indulgence, because it gives a softness and idleness
   to your soul, and is so contrary to that lively, zealous, watchful,
   self-denying spirit, which was not only the spirit of Christ and His
   Apostles, the spirit of all the saints and martyrs which have ever been
   amongst men, but must be the spirit of all those who would not sink in
   the common corruption of the world.

   Here, therefore, we must fix our charge against this practice; we must
   blame it, not as having this or that particular evil, but as a general
   habit, that extends itself through our whole spirit, and supports a
   state of mind that is wholly wrong.

   It is contrary to piety; not as accidental slips and mistakes in life
   are contrary to it, but in such a manner, as an ill habit of body is
   contrary to health.

   On the other hand, if you were to rise early every morning, as an
   instance of self-denial, as a method of renouncing indulgence, as a
   means of redeeming your time, and fitting your spirit for prayer, you
   would find mighty advantages from it. This method, though it seems such
   a small circumstance of life, would in all probability be a means of
   great piety. It would keep it constantly in your head, that softness
   and idleness were to be avoided, that self-denial was a part of
   Christianity. It would teach you to exercise power over yourself, and
   make you able by degrees to renounce other pleasures and tempers that
   war against the soul.

   This one rule would teach you to think of others: it would dispose your
   mind to exactness, and would be very likely to bring the remaining part
   of the day under rules of prudence and devotion.

   But above all, one certain benefit from this method you will be sure of
   having, it will best fit and prepare you for the reception of the Holy
   Spirit. When you thus begin the day in the spirit of religion,
   renouncing sleep, because you are to renounce softness, and redeem your
   time; this disposition, as it puts your heart into a good state, so it
   will procure the assistance of the Holy Spirit: what is so planted and
   watered will certainly have an increase from God. You will then speak
   from your heart, your soul will be awake, your prayers will refresh you
   like meat and drink, you will feel what you say, and begin to know what
   saints and holy men have meant, by fervours of devotion.

   He that is thus prepared for prayer, who rises with these dispositions,
   is in a very different state from him who has no rules of this kind;
   who rises by chance, as he happens to be weary of his bed, or is able
   to sleep no longer. If such a one prays only with his mouth, -- if his
   heart feels nothing of that which he says, -- if his prayers are only
   things of course, -- if they are a lifeless form of words, which he
   only repeats because they are soon said, -- there is nothing to be
   wondered at in all this; for such dispositions are the natural effect
   of such a state of life.

   Hoping, therefore, that you are now enough convinced of the necessity
   of rising early to your prayers, I shall proceed to lay before you a
   method of daily prayer.

   I do not take upon me to prescribe to you the use of any particular
   forms of prayer, but only to show you the necessity of praying at such
   times, and in such a manner.

   You will here find some helps, how to furnish yourself with such forms
   of prayer as shall be useful to you. And if you are such a proficient
   in the spirit of devotion, that your heart is always ready to pray in
   its own language, in this case I press no necessity of borrowed forms.

   For though I think a form of prayer very necessary and expedient for
   public worship, yet if any one can find a better way of raising his
   heart unto God in private, than by prepared forms of prayer, I have
   nothing to object against it; my design being only to assist and direct
   such as stand in need of assistance.

   Thus much, I believe, is certain, that the generality of Christians
   ought to use forms of prayer at all the regular times of prayer. It
   seems right for every one to begin with a form of prayer; and if, in
   the midst of his devotions, he finds his heart ready to break forth
   into new and higher strains of devotion, he should leave his form for a
   while, and follow those fervours of his heart, till it again wants the
   assistance of his usual petitions.

   This seems to be the true liberty of private devotion; it should be
   under the direction of some form; but not so tied down to it, but that
   it may be free to take such new expressions, as its present fervours
   happen to furnish it with; which sometimes are more affecting, and
   carry the soul more powerfully to God, than any expressions that were
   ever used before.

   All people that have ever made any reflections upon what passes in
   their own hearts, must know that they are mighty changeable in regard
   to devotion. Sometimes our hearts are so awakened, have such strong
   apprehensions of the Divine Presence, are so full of deep compunction
   for our sins, that we cannot confess them in any language but that of
   tears.

   Sometimes the light of God's countenance shines so bright upon us, we
   see so far into the invisible world, we are so affected with the
   wonders of the love and goodness of God, that our hearts worship and
   adore in a language higher than that of words, and we feel transports
   of devotion, which only can be felt.

   On the other hand, sometimes we are so sunk into our bodies, so dull
   and unaffected with that which concerns our souls, that our hearts are
   as much too low for our prayers; we cannot keep pace with our forms of
   confession, or feel half of that in our hearts which we have in our
   mouths; we thank and praise God with forms of words, but our hearts
   have little or no share in them.

   It is therefore highly necessary to provide against this inconstancy of
   our hearts, by having at hand such forms of prayer as may best suit us
   when our hearts are in their best state, and also be most likely to
   raise and stir them up when they are sunk into dulness. For, as words
   have a power of affecting our hearts on all occasions, as the same
   thing differently expressed has different effects upon our minds, so it
   is reasonable that we should make this advantage of language, and
   provide ourselves with such forms of expression as are most likely to
   move and enliven our souls, and fill them with sentiments suitable to
   them.

   The first thing that you are to do, when you are upon your knees, is to
   shut your eyes, and with a short silence let your soul place itself in
   the presence of God; that is, you are to use this, or some other better
   method, to separate yourself from all common thoughts, and make your
   heart as sensible as you can of the Divine presence.

   Now if this recollection of spirit is necessary, -- as who can say it
   is not? -- then how poorly must they perform their devotions, who are
   always in a hurry; who begin them in haste, and hardly allow themselves
   time to repeat their very form, with any gravity or attention! Theirs
   is properly saying prayers, instead of praying.

   To proceed: if you were to use yourself (as far as you can) to pray
   always in the same place; if you were to reserve that place for
   devotion, and not allow yourself to do anything common in it; if you
   were never to be there yourself, but in times of devotion; if any
   little room, or (if that cannot be) if any particular part of a room
   was thus used, this kind of consecration of it as a place holy unto
   God, would have an effect upon your mind, and dispose you to such
   tempers, as would very much assist your devotion. For by having a place
   thus sacred in your room, it would in some measure resemble a chapel or
   house of God. This would dispose you to be always in the spirit of
   religion, when you were there; and fill you with wise and holy
   thoughts, when you were by yourself. Your own apartment would raise in
   your mind such sentiments as you have when you stand near an altar; and
   you would be afraid of thinking or doing anything that was foolish near
   that place, which is the place of prayer and holy intercourse with God.

   When you begin your petitions, use such various expressions of the
   attributes of God, as may make you most sensible of the greatness and
   power of the Divine Nature.

   Begin, therefore, in words like these: O Being of all beings, Fountain
   of all light and glory, gracious Father of men and Angels, whose
   universal Spirit is everywhere present, giving life, and light, and
   joy, to all Angels in Heaven, and all creatures upon earth, etc.

   For these representations of the Divine attributes, which show us in
   some degree the Majesty and greatness of God, are an excellent means of
   raising our hearts into lively acts of worship and adoration.

   What is the reason that most people are so much affected with this
   petition in the Burial Service of our Church: Yet, O Lord God most
   holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful Saviour, deliver us
   not into the bitter pains of eternal death? It is, because the joining
   together of so many great expressions gives such a description of the
   greatness of the Divine Majesty, as naturally affects every sensible
   mind.

   Although, therefore, prayer does not consist in fine words, or studied
   expressions; yet as words speak to the soul, as they have a certain
   power of raising thoughts in the soul; so those words which speak of
   God in the highest manner, which most fully express the power and
   presence of God, which raise thoughts in the soul most suitable to the
   greatness and providence of God, are the most useful and most edifying
   in our prayers.

   When you direct any of your petitions to our blessed Lord, let it be in
   some expressions of this kind: O Saviour of the world, God of God,
   Light of Light; Thou that art the brightness of Thy Father's glory, and
   the express Image of His Person; Thou that art the Alpha and Omega, the
   Beginning and End of all things; Thou that hast destroyed the power of
   the devil; that hast overcome death; Thou that art entered into the
   Holy of Holies, that sittest at the right hand of the Father, that art
   high above all thrones and principalities, that makest intercession for
   all the world; Thou that art the Judge of the quick and dead; Thou that
   wilt speedily come down in Thy Father's glory, to reward all men
   according to their works, be Thou my Light and my Peace, etc.

   For such representations, which describe so many characters of our
   Saviour's nature and power, are not only proper acts of adoration, but
   will, if they are repeated with any attention, fill our hearts with the
   highest fervours of true devotion.

   Again; if you ask any particular grace of our blessed Lord, let it be
   in some manner like this: O Holy Jesus, Son of the most High God, Thou
   that wast scourged at a pillar, stretched and nailed upon a cross, for
   the sins of the world, unite me to Thy cross, and fill my soul with Thy
   holy, humble, and suffering spirit. O Fountain of mercy, Thou that
   didst save the thief upon the cross, save me from the guilt of a sinful
   life; Thou that didst cast seven devils out of Mary Magdalene, cast out
   of my heart all evil thoughts and wicked tempers. O Giver of life, Thou
   that didst raise Lazarus from the dead, raise up my soul from the death
   and darkness of sin. Thou that didst give to Thy Apostles power over
   unclean spirits, give me power over my own heart. Thou that didst
   appear unto Thy disciples when the doors were shut, do Thou appear unto
   me in the secret apartment of my heart. Thou that didst cleanse the
   lepers, heal the sick, and give sight to the blind, cleanse my heart,
   heal the disorders of my soul, and fill me with heavenly light.

   Now these kind of appeals have a double advantage; first, as they are
   so many proper acts of our faith, whereby we not only show our belief
   of the miracles of Christ, but turn them at the same time into so many
   instances of worship and adoration.

   Secondly, as they strengthen and increase the faith of our prayers, by
   presenting to our minds so many instances of that power and goodness,
   which we call upon for our own assistance.

   For he that appeals to Christ, as casting out devils and raising the
   dead, has then a powerful motive in his mind to pray earnestly, and
   depend faithfully upon His assistance.

   Again: in order to fill your prayers with excellent strains of
   devotion, it may be of use to you to observe this farther rule:

   When at any time, either in reading the Scripture or any book of piety,
   you meet with a passage that more than ordinarily affects your mind,
   and seems, as it were, to give your heart a new motion towards God, you
   should try to turn it into the form of a petition, and then give it a
   place in your prayers. By this means you will be often improving your
   prayers, and storing yourself with proper forms of making the desires
   of your heart known unto God.

   At all the stated hours of prayer, it will be of great benefit to you
   to have something fixed, and something at liberty, in your devotions.

   You should have some fixed subject, which is constantly to be the chief
   matter of your prayer at that particular time; and yet have liberty to
   add such other petitions, as your condition may then require.

   For instance: as the morning is to you the beginning of a new life; as
   God has then given you a new enjoyment of yourself, and a fresh
   entrance into the world; it is highly proper that your first devotions
   should be a praise and thanksgiving to God, as for a new creation; and
   that you should offer and devote body and soul, all that you are, and
   all that you have, to His service and glory.

   Receive, therefore, every day as a resurrection from death, as a new
   enjoyment of life; meet every rising sun with such sentiments of God's
   goodness, as if you had seen it, and all things, new created upon your
   account: and under the sense of so great a blessing, let your joyful
   heart praise and magnify so good and glorious a Creator.

   Let, therefore, praise and thanksgiving, and oblation of yourself unto
   God, be always the fixed and certain subject of your first prayers in
   the morning; and then take the liberty of adding such other devotions,
   as the accidental difference of your state, or the accidental
   difference of your heart, shall then make most needful and expedient
   for you.

   For one of the greatest benefits of private devotion consists in
   rightly adapting our prayers to those two conditions, -- the difference
   of our state, and the difference of our hearts.

   By the difference of our state, is meant the difference of our external
   state or condition, as of sickness, health, pains, losses,
   disappointments, troubles, particular mercies, or judgments, from God;
   all sorts of kindnesses, injuries, or reproaches, from other people.

   Now as these are great parts of our state of life, as they make great
   difference in it by continually changing; so our devotion will be made
   doubly beneficial to us, when it watches to receive and sanctify all
   these changes of our state, and turns them all into so many occasions
   of a more particular application to God of such thanksgiving, such
   resignation, such petitions, as our present state more especially
   requires.

   And he that makes every change in his state a reason of presenting unto
   God some particular petitions suitable to that change, will soon find
   that he has taken an excellent means not only of praying with fervour,
   but of living as he prays.

   The next condition, to which we are always to adapt some part of our
   prayers, is the difference of our hearts; by which is meant the
   different state of the tempers of our hearts, as of love, joy, peace,
   tranquillity, dulness and dryness of spirit, anxiety, discontent,
   motions of envy and ambition, dark and disconsolate thoughts,
   resentments, fretfulness, and peevish tempers.

   Now as these tempers, through the weakness of our nature, will have
   their succession, more or less, even in pious minds; so we should
   constantly make the present state of our heart the reason of some
   particular application to God.

   If we are in the delightful calm of sweet and easy passions, of love
   and joy in God, we should then offer the grateful tribute of
   thanksgiving to God for the possession of so much happiness, thankfully
   owning and acknowledging Him as the bountiful Giver of it all.

   If, on the other hand, we feel ourselves laden with heavy passions,
   with dulness of spirit, anxiety, and uneasiness, we must then look up
   to God in acts of humility, confessing our unworthiness, opening our
   troubles to Him, beseeching Him in His good time to lessen the weight
   of our infirmities, and to deliver us from such passions as oppose the
   purity and perfection of our souls.

   Now by thus watching and attending to the present state of our hearts,
   and suiting some of our petitions exactly to their wants, we shall not
   only be well acquainted with the disorders of our souls, but also be
   well exercised in the method of curing them.

   By this prudent and wise application of our prayers, we shall get all
   the relief from them that is possible: and the very changeableness of
   our hearts will prove a means of exercising a greater variety of holy
   tempers.

   Now, by all that has here been said, you will easily perceive, that
   persons careful of the greatest benefit of prayer ought to have a great
   share in the forming and composing their own devotions.

   As to that part of their prayers which is always fixed to one certain
   subject, in that they may use the help of forms composed by other
   persons; but in that part of their prayers which they are always to
   suit to the present state of their life, and the present state of their
   heart, there they must let the sense of their own condition help them
   to such kinds of petition, thanksgiving, or resignation, as their
   present state more especially requires.

   Happy are they who have this business and employment upon their hands!

   And now, if people of leisure, whether men or women, who are so much at
   a loss how to dispose of their time, who are forced into poor
   contrivances, idle visits, and ridiculous diversions, merely to get rid
   of hours that hang heavily upon their hands; if such were to appoint
   some certain spaces of their time to the study of devotion, searching
   after all the means and helps to attain a devout spirit; if they were
   to collect the best forms of devotion, to use themselves to transcribe
   the finest passages of Scripture-prayers; if they were to collect the
   devotions, confessions, petitions, praises, resignations, and
   thanksgivings, which are scattered up and down in the Psalms, and range
   them under proper heads, as so much proper fuel for the flame of their
   own devotion; if their minds were often thus employed, sometimes
   meditating upon them, sometimes getting them by heart, and making them
   as habitual as their own thoughts, how fervently would they pray, who
   came thus prepared to prayer! And how much better would it be, to make
   this benefit of leisure time, than to be dully and idly lost in the
   poor impertinences of a playing, visiting, wandering life!

   How much better would it be, to be thus furnished with hymns and
   anthems of the saints, and teach their souls to ascend to God, than to
   corrupt, bewilder, and confound their hearts with the wild fancies, the
   lustful thoughts of lewd poets!

   Now though people of leisure seem called more particularly to this
   study of devotion, yet persons of much business or labour must not
   think themselves excused from this, or some better method of improving
   their devotion.

   For the greater their business is, the more need they have of some such
   method as this, to prevent its power over their hearts, to secure them
   from sinking into worldly tempers, and preserve a sense and taste of
   heavenly things in their minds. And a little time regularly and
   constantly employed to any one use or end, will do great things, and
   produce mighty effects.

   And it is for want of considering devotion in this light, as something
   that is to be nursed and cherished with care, as something that is to
   be made part of our business, that is to be improved with care and
   contrivance, by art and method, and a diligent use of the best helps;
   it is for want of considering it in this light that so many people are
   so little benefited by it and live and die strangers to that spirit of
   devotion, which, by a prudent use of proper means, they might have
   enjoyed in a high degree.

   For though the spirit of devotion is the gift of God, and not
   attainable by any mere power of our own, yet it is mostly given to, and
   never withheld from, those who, by a wise and diligent use of proper
   means, prepare themselves for the reception of it.

   And it is amazing to see how eagerly men employ their parts, their
   sagacity, time, study, application, and exercise: how all helps are
   called to their assistance, when anything is intended and desired in
   worldly matters; and how dull, negligent, and unimproved they are; how
   little they use their parts, sagacity, and abilities, to raise and
   increase their devotion!

   Mundanus [31] is a man of excellent parts, and clear apprehension. He
   is well advanced in age, and has made a great figure in business. Every
   part of trade and business that has fallen in his way has had some
   improvement from him; and he is always contriving to carry every method
   of doing anything well to its greatest height. Mundanus aims at the
   greatest perfection in everything. The soundness and strength of his
   mind, and his just way of thinking upon things, make him intent upon
   removing all imperfections.

   He can tell you all the defects and errors in all the common methods,
   whether of trade, building, or improving land or manufactures. The
   clearness and strength of his understanding, which he is constantly
   improving by continual exercise in these matters, by often digesting
   his thoughts in writing, and trying everything every way, has rendered
   him a great master of most concerns in human life.

   Thus has Mundanus gone on, increasing his knowledge and judgment, as
   fast as his years came upon him.

   The one only thing which has not fallen under his improvement, nor
   received any benefit from his judicious mind, is his devotion: this is
   just in the same poor state it was, when he was only six years of age,
   and the old man prays now in that little form of words which his mother
   used to hear him repeat night and morning.

   This Mundanus, that hardly ever saw the poorest utensil, or ever took
   the meanest trifle into his hand, without considering how it might be
   made or used to better advantage, has gone all his life long praying in
   the same manner as when he was a child; without ever considering how
   much better or oftener he might pray; without considering how
   improbable the spirit of devotion is, how many helps a wise and
   reasonable man may call to his assistance, and how necessary it is,
   that our prayers should be enlarged, varied, and suited to the
   particular state and condition of our lives.

   If Mundanus sees a book of devotion, he passes it by, as he does a
   spelling-book, because he remembers that he learned to pray, so many
   years ago, under his mother, when he learned to spell.

   Now how poor and pitiable is the conduct of this man of sense, who has
   so much judgment and understanding in everything, but that which is the
   whole wisdom of man!

   And how miserably do many people, more or less, imitate this conduct!

   All which seems to be owing to a strange, infatuated state of
   negligence, which keeps people from considering what devotion is. For
   if they did but once proceed so far as to reflect about it, or ask
   themselves any questions concerning it, they would soon see that the
   spirit of devotion was like any other sense or understanding, that is
   only to be improved by study, care, application, and the use of such
   means and helps as are necessary to make a man a proficient in any art
   or science.

   Classicus [32] is a man of learning, and well versed in all the best
   authors of antiquity. He has read them so much, that he has entered
   into their spirit, and can very ingeniously imitate the manner of any
   of them. All their thoughts are his thoughts, and he can express
   himself in their language. He is so great a friend to this improvement
   of the mind, that if he lights on a young scholar, he never fails to
   advise him concerning his studies.

   Classicus tells his young man, he must not think that he has done
   enough when he has only learned languages; but that he must be daily
   conversant with the best authors, read them again and again, catch
   their spirit by living with them, and that there is no other way of
   becoming like them, or of making himself a man of taste and judgment.

   How wise might Classicus have been, and how much good might he have
   done in the world, if he had but thought as justly of devotion, as he
   does of learning!

   He never, indeed, says anything shocking or offensive about devotion,
   because he never thinks, or talks, about it. It suffers nothing from
   him but neglect and disregard.

   The two Testaments would not have had so much as a place amongst his
   books, but that they are both to be had in Greek.

   Classicus thinks that he sufficiently shows his regard for the Holy
   Scripture, when he tells you, that he has no other books of piety
   besides them.

   It is very well, Classicus, that you prefer the Bible to all other
   books of piety: he has no judgment, that is not thus far of your
   opinion.

   But if you will have no other book of piety besides the Bible, because
   it is the best, how comes it, Classicus, that you do not content
   yourself with one of the best books amongst the Greeks and Romans? How
   comes it that you are so greedy and eager after all of them? How comes
   it that you think the knowledge of one is a necessary help to the
   knowledge of the other? How comes it that you are so earnest, so
   laborious, so expensive of your time and money, to restore broken
   periods, and scraps of the ancients?

   How comes it that you read so many commentators upon Cicero, Horace,
   and Homer, and not one upon the Gospel? How comes it that you love to
   read a man? How comes it that your love of Cicero and Ovid makes you
   love to read an author that writes like them; and yet your esteem for
   the Gospel gives you no desire, nay, prevents your reading such books
   as breathe the very spirit of the Gospel?

   How comes it that you tell your young scholar, he must not content
   himself with barely understanding his authors, but must be continually
   reading them all, as the only means of entering into their spirit, and
   forming his own judgment according to them?

   Why then must the Bible lie alone in your study? Is not the spirit of
   the saints, the piety of the holy followers of Jesus, as good and
   necessary a means of entering into the spirit and taste of the gospel,
   as the reading of the ancients is of entering into the spirit of
   antiquity?

   Is the spirit of poetry only to be got by much reading of poets and
   orators? And is not the spirit of devotion to be got in the same way,
   by frequently reading the holy thoughts, and pious strains of devout
   men?

   Is your young poet to search after every line that may give new wings
   to his fancy, or direct his imagination? And is it not as reasonable
   for him who desires to improve in the Divine life, that is, in the love
   of heavenly things, to search after every strain of devotion that may
   move, kindle, and inflame the holy ardour of his soul?

   Do you advise your orator to translate the best orations, to commit
   much of them to memory, to be frequently exercising his talent in this
   manner, that habits of thinking and speaking justly may be formed in
   his mind? And is there not the same benefit and advantage to be made by
   books of devotion? Should not a man use them in the same way, that
   habits on devotion, and aspiring to God in holy thoughts, may be well
   formed in his soul?

   Now the reason why Classicus does not think and judge thus reasonably
   of devotion, is owing to his never thinking of it in any other manner
   than as the repeating a form of words. It never in his life entered his
   head, to think of devotion as a state of the heart, as an improvable
   talent of the mind, as a temper that is to grow and increase like our
   reason and judgment, and to be formed in us by such a regular, diligent
   use of proper means, as are necessary to form any other wise habit of
   mind.

   And it is for want of this, that he has been content all his life with
   the bare letter of prayer, and eagerly bent upon entering into the
   spirit of heathen poets and orators.

   And it is much to be lamented, that numbers of scholars are more or
   less chargeable with this excessive folly; so negligent of improving
   their devotion, and so desirous of other poor accomplishments; as if
   they thought it a nobler talent to be able to write an epigram in the
   turn of Martial, than to live, and think, and pray to God, in the
   spirit of St. Austin.

   And yet, to correct this temper, and fill a man with a quite contrary
   spirit, there seems to be no more required, than the bare belief in the
   truth of Christianity.

   And if you were to ask Mundanus and Classicus, or any man of business
   or learning, whether piety is not the highest perfection of man, or
   devotion the greatest attainment in the world, they must both be forced
   to answer in the affirmative, or else give up the truth of the Gospel.

   For to set any accomplishment against devotion, or to think anything,
   or all things in this world, bears any proportion to its excellency, is
   the same absurdity in a Christian, as it would be in a philosopher to
   prefer a meal's meat to the greatest improvement in knowledge.

   For as philosophy professes purely the search and inquiry after
   knowledge, so Christianity supposes, intends, desires, and aims at
   nothing else but the raising fallen man to a Divine life, to such
   habits of holiness, such degrees of devotion, as may fit him to enter
   amongst the holy inhabitants of the kingdom of heaven.

   He that does not believe this of Christianity, may be reckoned an
   infidel; and he that believes thus much has faith enough to give him a
   right judgment of the value of things, to support him in a sound mind,
   and enable him to conquer all the temptations which the world shall lay
   in his way.

   To conclude this chapter. Devotion is nothing else but right
   apprehensions and right affections towards God.

   All practices, therefore, that heighten and improve our true
   apprehensions of God, all ways of life that tend to nourish, raise, and
   fix our affections upon Him, are to be reckoned so many helps and means
   to fill us with devotion.

   As Prayer is the proper fuel of this holy flame, so we must use all our
   care and contrivance to give prayer its full power: as by alms,
   self-denial, frequent retirements, and holy readings, composing forms
   for ourselves, or using the best we can get, adding length of time, and
   observing hours of prayer: changing, improving, and suiting our
   devotions to the condition of our lives, and the state of our hearts.

   Those who have most leisure seem more especially called to a more
   eminent observance of these holy rules of a devout life. And they, who,
   by the necessity of their state, and not through their own choice, have
   but little time to employ thus, must make the best use of that little
   they have. For this is the certain way of making devotion produce a
   devout life.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] Mundanus = worldly-wise-man.

   [32] Classicus, i.e. a classical scholar.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER XV


   Of chanting, or singing of psalms in our private devotions. Of the
   excellency and benefit of this kind of devotion. Of the great effects
   it hath upon our hearts. Of the means of performing it in the best
   manner.


   YOU have seen, in the foregoing chapter, what means and methods you are
   to use, to raise and improve your devotion; how early you are to begin
   your prayers, and what is to be the subject of your first devotions in
   the morning.

   There is one thing still remaining, that you must be required to
   observe, not only as fit and proper to be done, but as such as cannot
   be neglected without great prejudice to your devotions: and that is to
   begin all your prayers with a psalm.

   This is so right, is so beneficial to devotion, has so much effect upon
   our hearts, that it may be insisted upon as a common rule for all
   persons.

   I do not mean, that you should read over a psalm, but that you should
   chant or sing one of those psalms, which we commonly call the reading
   psalms. For singing is as much the proper use of a psalm as devout
   supplication is the proper use of a form of prayer; and a psalm only
   read is very much like a prayer that is only looked over.

   Now the method of chanting a psalm, such as is used in the colleges, in
   the universities, and in some churches, is such as all persons are
   capable of. The change of the voice in thus chanting of a psalm is so
   small and natural, that everybody is able to do it, and yet sufficient
   to raise and keep up the gladness of our hearts.

   You are, therefore, to consider this chanting of a psalm as a necessary
   beginning of your devotions, as something that is to awaken all that is
   good and holy within you, that is to call your spirits to their proper
   duty, to set you in your best posture towards heaven, and tune all the
   powers of your soul to worship and adoration.

   For there is nothing that so clears a way for your prayers, nothing
   that so disperses dulness of heart, nothing that so purifies the soul
   from poor and little passions, nothing that so opens heaven, or carries
   your heart so near it, as these songs of praise.

   They create a sense and delight in God, they awaken holy desires, they
   teach you how to ask, and they prevail with God to give. They kindle a
   holy flame, they turn your heart into an altar, your prayers into
   incense, and carry them as a sweet-smelling savour to the throne of
   grace.

   The difference between singing and reading a psalm will easily be
   understood, if you consider the difference between reading and singing
   a common song that you like. Whilst you only read it, you only like it,
   and that is all; but as soon as you sing it, then you enjoy it, you
   feel the delight of it; it has got hold of you, your passions keep pace
   with it, and you feel the same spirit within you that seems to be in
   the words.

   If you were to tell a person that has such a song, that he need not
   sing it, that it was sufficient to peruse it, he would wonder what you
   meant; and would think you as absurd as if you were to tell him that he
   should only look at his food, to see whether it was good, but need not
   eat it: for a song of praise not sung, is very like any other good
   thing not made use of.

   You will perhaps say, that singing is a particular talent, that belongs
   only to particular people, and that you have neither voice nor ear to
   make any music.

   If you had said that singing is a general talent, and that people
   differ in that as they do in all other things, you had said something
   much truer.

   For how vastly do people differ in the talent of thinking, which is not
   only common to all men, but seems to be the very essence of human
   nature. How readily do some people reason upon everything! and how
   hardly do others reason upon anything! How clearly do some people
   discourse upon the most abstruse matters! and how confusedly do others
   talk upon the plainest subjects!

   Yet no one desires to be excused from thought, or reason, or discourse,
   because he has not these talents, as some people have them. But it is
   full as just for a person to think himself excused from thinking upon
   God, from reasoning about his duty to Him, or discoursing about the
   means of salvation, because he has not these talents in any fine
   degree; this is full as just, as for a person to think himself excused
   from singing the praises of God, because he has not a fine ear, or a
   musical voice.

   For as it is speaking, and not graceful speaking, that is a required
   part of prayer; as it is bowing, and not genteel bowing, that is a
   proper part of adoration; so it is singing, and not artful, fine
   singing, that is a required way of praising God.

   If a person was to forbear praying, because he had an odd tone in his
   voice, he would have as good an excuse as he has, that forbears from
   singing psalms, because he has but little management of his voice. And
   as a man's speaking his prayers, though in an odd tone, may yet
   sufficiently answer all the ends of his own devotion; so a man's
   singing of a psalm, though not in a very musical way, may yet
   sufficiently answer all the ends of rejoicing in, and praising God.

   Secondly, This objection might be of some weight, if you were desired
   to sing to entertain other people; but is not to be admitted in the
   present case, where you are only required to sing the praises of God,
   as a part of your private devotion.

   If a person that has a very ill voice, and a bad way of speaking, was
   desired to be the mouth of a congregation, it would be a very proper
   excuse for him, to say that he had not a voice, or a way of speaking,
   that was proper for prayer. But he would be very absurd, if, for the
   same reason, he should neglect his own private devotions.

   Now this is exactly the case of singing psalms: you may not have the
   talent of singing, so as to be able to entertain other people, and
   therefore it is reasonable to excuse yourself from it; but if for that
   reason you should excuse yourself from this way of praising God, you
   would be guilty of a great absurdity: because singing is no more
   required for the music that is made by it, than prayer is required for
   the fine words that it contains, but as it is the natural and proper
   expression of a heart rejoicing in God.

   Our blessed Saviour and His Apostles sang a hymn: but it may reasonably
   be supposed, that they rather rejoiced in God, than made fine music.

   Do but so live, that your heart may truly rejoice in God, that it may
   feel itself affected with the praises of God; and then you will find
   that this state of your heart will neither want a voice nor ear to find
   a tune for a psalm. Every one, at some time or other, finds himself
   able to sing in some degree; there are some times and occasions of joy,
   that make all people ready to express their sense of it in some sort of
   harmony. The joy that they feel forces them to let their voice have a
   part in it.

   He therefore that saith he wants a voice, or an ear, to sing a psalm,
   mistakes the case: he wants that spirit that really rejoices in God;
   the dulness is in his heart, and not in his ear: and when his heart
   feels a true joy in God, when it has a full relish of what is expressed
   in the Psalms, he will find it very pleasant to make the motions of his
   voice express the motions of his heart.

   Singing, indeed, as it is improved into an art, -- as it signifies the
   running of the voice through such and such a compass of notes, and
   keeping time with a studied variety of changes, is not natural, nor the
   effect of any natural state of the mind; so in this sense, it is not
   common to all people, any more than those antic and invented motions
   which make fine dancing are common to all people.

   But singing, as it signifies a motion of the voice suitable to the
   motions of the heart, and the changing of its tone according to the
   meaning of the words which we utter, is as natural and common to all
   men, as it is to speak high when they threaten in anger, or to speak
   low when they are dejected and ask for a pardon.

   All men therefore are singers, in the same manner as all men think,
   speak, laugh, and lament. For singing is no more an invention, than
   grief or joy are inventions .

   Every state of the heart naturally puts the body into some state that
   is suitable to it, and is proper to show it to other people. If a man
   is angry, or disdainful, no one need instruct him how to express these
   passions by the tone of his voice. The state of his heart disposes him
   to a proper use of his voice.

   If therefore there are but few singers of divine songs, if people want
   to be exhorted to this part of devotion, it is because there are but
   few whose hearts are raised to that height of piety, as to feel any
   motions of joy and delight in the praises of God.

   Imagine to yourself that you had been with Moses when he was led
   through the Red Sea; that you had seen the waters divide themselves,
   and stand on an heap on both sides; that you had seen them held up till
   you had passed through, then let fall upon your enemies; do you think
   that you should then have wanted a voice or an ear to have sung with
   Moses, "The Lord is my strength and my song, and he is become my
   salvation," etc.? [Ex. xv. 2] I know your own heart tells you, that all
   people must have been singers upon such an occasion. Let this therefore
   teach you, that it is the heart that tunes a voice to sing the praises
   of God; and that if you cannot sing the same words now with joy, it is
   because you are not so affected with the salvation of the world by
   Jesus Christ, as the Jews were, or you yourself would have been, with
   their deliverance at the Red Sea.

   That it is the state of the heart that disposes to rejoice in any
   particular kind of singing, may be easily proved from a variety of
   observations upon human nature. An old debauchee may, according to the
   language of the world, have neither voice nor ear, if you only sing a
   psalm, or a song in praise of virtue to him; but yet, if in some easy
   tune you sing something that celebrates his former debauches, he will
   then, though he has no teeth in his head, show you that he has both a
   voice and an ear to join in such music. You then awaken his heart, and
   he as naturally sings to such words, as he laughs when he is pleased.
   And this will be the case in every song that touches the heart: if you
   celebrate the ruling passion of any man's heart, you put his voice in
   tune to join with you.

   Thus if you can find a man, whose ruling temper is devotion, whose
   heart is full of God, his voice will rejoice in those songs of praise,
   which glorify that God, that is the joy of his heart, though he has
   neither voice nor ear for other music. Would you, therefore,
   delightfully perform this part of devotion, it is not so necessary to
   learn a tune, or practise upon notes, as to prepare your heart; for, as
   our blessed Lord saith, "Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
   murders," etc., [Matt. xv. 19] so it is equally true, that out of the
   heart proceed holy joys, thanksgiving, and praise. If you can once say
   with David, "My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed"; it will be
   very easy and natural to add, as he did, "I will sing, and give
   praise," etc. [Ps. lvii. 7]

   Secondly, Let us now consider another reason for this kind of devotion.
   As singing is a natural effect of joy in the heart, so it has also a
   natural power of rendering the heart joyful.

   The soul and body are so united, that they have each of them power over
   one another in their actions. Certain thoughts and sentiments in the
   soul produce such and such motions and actions in the body; and, on the
   other hand, certain motions and actions of the body have the same power
   of raising such and such thoughts and sentiments in the soul. So that,
   as singing is the natural effect of joy in the mind, so it is as truly
   a natural cause of raising joy in the mind.

   As devotion of the heart naturally breaks out into outward acts of
   prayer; so outward acts of prayer are natural means of raising the
   devotion of the heart.

   It is thus in all states and tempers of the mind: as the inward state
   of the mind produces outward actions suitable to it, so those outward
   actions have the like power of raising an inward state of mind suitable
   to them. As anger produces angry words, so angry words increase anger.

   So that if we barely consider human nature, we shall find, that singing
   or chanting the psalms is as proper and necessary to raise our hearts
   to a delight in God, as prayer is proper and necessary to excite in us
   the spirit of devotion. Every reason for one is in all respects as
   strong a reason for the other.

   If, therefore, you would know the reason and necessity of singing
   psalms, you must consider the reason and necessity of praising and
   rejoicing in God; because singing of psalms is as much the true
   exercise and support of the spirit of thanksgiving, as prayer is the
   true exercise and support of the spirit of devotion. And you may as
   well think that you can be devout as you ought, without the use of
   prayer, as that you can rejoice in God as you ought without the
   practice of singing psalms: because this singing is as much the natural
   language of praise and thanksgiving, as prayer is the natural language
   of devotion.

   The union of soul and body is not a mixture of their substances, as we
   see bodies united and mixed together, but consists solely in the mutual
   power that they have of acting upon one another.

   If two persons were in such a state of dependence upon one another,
   that neither of them could act, or move, or think, or feel, or suffer,
   or desire anything, without putting the other into the same condition,
   one might properly say that they were in a state of strict union,
   although their substances were not united together.

   Now this is the union of the soul and body: the substance of the one
   cannot be mixed or united with the other; but they are held together in
   such a state of union, that all the actions and sufferings of the one,
   are at the same time the actions and sufferings of the other. The soul
   has no thought or passion, but the body is concerned in it; the body
   has no action or motion, but what in some degree affects the soul.

   Now as it is the sole will of God that is the reason and cause of all
   the powers and effects which you see in the world; as the sun gives
   light and heat, not because it has any natural power of so doing; as it
   is fixed in a certain place, and other bodies moving about it, not
   because it is in the nature of the sun to stand still, and in the
   nature of other bodies to move about it, but merely because it is the
   will of God that they should be in such a state; as the eye is the
   organ, or instrument of seeing, not because the skins, and coats, and
   humours of the eye have a natural power of giving sight; as the ears
   are the organs, or instruments of hearing, not because the make of the
   ear has any natural power over sounds, but merely because it is the
   will of God that seeing and hearing should be thus received; so, in
   like manner, it is the sole will of God, and not the nature of a human
   soul or body, that is the cause of this union betwixt the soul and the
   body.

   Now if you rightly apprehend this short account of the union of the
   soul and body, you will see a great deal into the reason and necessity
   of all the outward parts of religion.

   This union of our souls and bodies is the reason both why we have so
   little and so much power over ourselves. It is owing to this union that
   we have so little power over our souls; for as we cannot prevent the
   effects of external objects upon our bodies, as we cannot command
   outward causes, so we cannot always command the inward state of our
   minds; because, as outward objects act upon our bodies without our
   leave, so our bodies act upon our minds by the laws of the union of the
   soul and the body; and thus you see it is owing to this union, that we
   have so little power over ourselves.

   On the other hand, it is owing to this union that we have so much power
   over ourselves. For as our souls, in a great measure, depend upon our
   bodies; and as we have great power over our bodies; as we can command
   our outward actions, and oblige ourselves to such habits of life as
   naturally produce habits in the soul; as we can mortify our bodies, and
   remove ourselves from objects that inflame our passions; so we have a
   great power over the inward state of our souls. Again, as we are
   masters of our outward actions; as we can force ourselves to outward
   acts of reading, praying, singing, and the like, and as all these
   bodily actions have an effect upon the soul; as they naturally tend to
   form such and such tempers in our hearts; so by being masters of these
   outward, bodily actions, we have great power over the inward state of
   the heart: and thus it is owing to this union that we have so much
   power over ourselves.

   Now from this you may also see the necessity and benefit of singing
   psalms, and of all the outward acts of religion; for if the body has so
   much power over the soul, it is certain that all such bodily actions as
   affect the soul are of great weight in religion. Not as if there was
   any true worship, or piety, in the actions themselves, but because they
   are proper to raise and support that spirit, which is the true worship
   of God.

   Though therefore the seat of religion is in the heart, yet since our
   bodies have a power over our hearts; since outward actions both proceed
   from, and enter into the heart; it is plain that outward actions have a
   great power over that religion which is seated in the heart.

   We are therefore as well to use outward helps, as inward meditation, in
   order to beget and fix habits of piety in our hearts.

   This doctrine may easily be carried too far; for by calling in too many
   outward means of worship, it may degenerate into superstition; as, on
   the other hand, some have fallen into the contrary extreme. For,
   because religion is justly placed in the heart, some have pursued that
   notion so far as to renounce vocal prayer, and other outward acts of
   worship, and have resolved all religion into a quietism, or mystic
   intercourses with God in silence.

   Now these are two extremes equally prejudicial to true religion; and
   ought not to be objected either against internal or external worship.
   As you ought not to say that I encourage that quietism by placing
   religion in the heart; so neither ought you to say, that I encourage
   superstition, by showing the benefit of outward acts of worship.

   For since we are neither all soul, nor all body; seeing none of our
   actions are either separately of the soul, or separately of the body;
   seeing we have no habits but such as are produced by the actions both
   of our souls and bodies; it is certain that if we would arrive at
   habits of devotion, or delight in God, we must not only meditate and
   exercise our souls, but we must practise and exercise our bodies to all
   such outward actions as are conformable to these inward tempers.

   If we would truly prostrate our souls before God, we must use our
   bodies to postures of lowliness; if we desire true fervours of
   devotion, we must make prayer the frequent labour of our lips. If we
   would banish all pride and passion from our hearts, we must force
   ourselves to all outward actions of patience and meekness. If we would
   feel inward motions of joy and delight in God, we must practise all the
   outward acts of it, and make our voices call upon our hearts.

   Now, therefore, you may plainly see the reason and necessity of singing
   of psalms; it is because outward actions are necessary to support
   inward tempers; and therefore the outward act of joy is necessary to
   raise and support the inward joy of the mind.

   If any people were to leave off prayer, because they seldom find the
   motions of their hearts answering the words which they speak, you would
   charge them with great absurdity. You would think it very reasonable
   that they should continue their prayers, and be strict in observing all
   times of prayer, as the most likely means of removing the dulness and
   indevotion of their hearts.

   Now this is very much the case as to singing of psalms; people often
   sing, without finding any inward joy suitable to the words which they
   speak; therefore they are careless of it, or wholly neglect it; not
   considering that they act as absurdly as he that should neglect prayer,
   because his heart was not enough affected with it. For it is certain
   that this singing is as much the natural means of raising emotions of
   joy in the mind, as prayer is the natural means of raising devotion.

   I have been the longer upon this head, because of its great importance
   to true religion. For there is no state of mind so holy, so excellent,
   and so truly perfect, as that of thankfulness to God; and consequently
   nothing is of more importance in religion than that which exercises and
   improves this habit of mind.

   A dull, uneasy, complaining spirit, which is sometimes the spirit of
   those that seem careful of religion, is yet, of all tempers, the most
   contrary to religion; for it disowns that God whom it pretends to
   adore. For he sufficiently disowns God, who does not adore Him as a
   Being of infinite goodness.

   If a man does not believe that all the world is as God's family, where
   nothing happens by chance, but all is guided and directed by the care
   and providence of a Being that is all love and goodness to all His
   creatures; if a man does not believe this from his heart, he cannot be
   said truly to believe in God. And yet he that has this faith, has faith
   enough to overcome the world, and always be thankful to God. For he
   that believes that everything happens to him for the best, cannot
   possibly complain for the want of something that is better.

   If, therefore, you live in murmurings and complaints, accusing all the
   accidents of life, it is not because you are a weak, infirm creature,
   but it is because you want the first principle of religion, -- a right
   belief in God. For as thankfulness is an express acknowledgment of the
   goodness of God towards you, so repinings and complaints are as plain
   accusations of God's want of goodness towards you.

   On the other hand, would you know who is the greatest saint in the
   world? It is not he who prays most or fasts most; it is not he who
   gives most alms, or is most eminent for temperance, chastity, or
   justice; but it is he who is always thankful to God, who wills
   everything that God willeth, who receives everything as an instance of
   God's goodness, and has a heart always ready to praise God for it.

   All prayer and devotion, fastings and repentance, meditation and
   retirement, all Sacraments and ordinances, are but so many means to
   render the soul thus Divine, and conformable to the will of God, and to
   fill it with thankfulness and praise for everything that comes from
   God. This is the perfection of all virtues; and all virtues that do not
   tend to it, or proceed from it, are but so many false ornaments of a
   soul not converted unto God.

   You need not, therefore, now wonder that I lay so much stress upon
   singing a psalm at all your devotions, since you see it is to form your
   spirit to such joy and thankfulness to God as is the highest perfection
   of a Divine and holy life.

   If any one would tell you the shortest, surest way to all happiness,
   and all perfection, he must tell you to make a rule to yourself, to
   thank and praise God for everything that happens to you. For it is
   certain that whatever seeming calamity happens to you, if you thank and
   praise God for it, you turn it into a blessing. Could you therefore
   work miracles, you could not do more for yourself than by this thankful
   spirit; for it heals with a word speaking, and turns all that it
   touches into happiness.

   If therefore you would be so true to your eternal interest, as to
   propose this thankfulness as the end of all your religion; if you would
   but settle it in your mind that this was the state that you were to aim
   at by all your devotions; you would then have something plain and
   visible to walk by in all your actions; you would then easily see the
   effect of your virtues, and might safely judge of your improvement in
   piety. For so far as you renounce all selfish tempers, and motions of
   your own will, and seek for no other happiness but in the thankful
   reception of everything that happens to you, so far you may be safely
   reckoned to have advanced in piety.

   And although this be the highest temper that you can aim at, though it
   be the noblest sacrifice that the greatest saint can offer unto God,
   yet is it not tied to any time, or place, or great occasion, but is
   always in your power, and may be the exercise of every day. For the
   common events of every day are sufficient to discover and exercise this
   temper, and may plainly show you how far you are governed in all your
   actions by this thankful spirit.

   And for this reason I exhort you to this method in your devotion, that
   every day may be made a day of thanksgiving, and that the spirit of
   murmur and discontent may be unable to enter into the heart which is so
   often employed in singing the praises of God.

   It may, perhaps, after all, be objected, that although the great
   benefit and excellent effects of this practice are very apparent, yet
   it seems not altogether so fit for private devotions; since it can
   hardly be performed without making our devotions public to other
   people, and seems also liable to the charge of sounding a trumpet at
   our prayers.

   It is therefore answered: first, That great numbers of people have it
   in their power to be as private as they please; such persons therefore
   are excluded from this excuse, which, however it may be so to others,
   is none to them. Therefore let us take the benefit of this excellent
   devotion.

   Secondly, Numbers of people are, by the necessity of their state, as
   servants, apprentices, prisoners, and families in small houses, forced
   to be continually in the presence or sight of somebody or other.

   Now, are such persons to neglect their prayers, because they cannot
   pray without being seen? Are they not rather obliged to be more exact
   in them, that others may not be witnesses of their neglect, and so
   corrupted by their example?

   Now what is here said of devotion, may surely be said of this chanting
   a psalm, which is only a part of devotion.

   The rule is this; do not pray that you may be seen of men; but if your
   confinement obliges you to be always in the sight of others, be more
   afraid of being seen to neglect, than of being seen to have recourse to
   prayer.

   Thirdly, The short of the matter is this; either people can use such
   privacy in this practice as to have no hearers, or they cannot. If they
   can, then this objection vanishes as to them: and if they cannot, they
   should consider their confinement, and the necessities of their state,
   as the confinement of a prison; and then they have an excellent pattern
   to follow, -- they may imitate St. Paul and Silas, who sang praises to
   God in prison, though we are expressly told, that the prisoners heard
   them. They therefore did not refrain from this kind of devotion for
   fear of being heard by others. If therefore any one is in the same
   necessity, either in prison, or out of prison, what can he do better
   than follow this example?

   I cannot pass by this place of Scripture, without desiring the pious
   reader to observe how strongly we are here called upon to this use of
   psalms, and what a mighty recommendation of it the practice of these
   two great saints is.

   In this their great distress, in prison, in chains, under the soreness
   of stripes, in the horror of night, the Divinest, holiest thing they
   could do, was to sing praises unto God.

   And shall we, after this, need any exhortation to this holy practice?
   Shall we let the day pass without such thanksgiving as they would not
   neglect in the night? Shall a prison, chains, and darkness furnish them
   with songs of praise, and shall we have no singings in our closets?

   Farther, let it also be observed, that while these two holy men were
   thus employed in the most exalted part of devotion, doing that on
   earth, which Angels do in Heaven, the foundations of the prison were
   shaken, all the doors were opened, and every one's bands were loosed.
   [Acts xvi. 26]

   And shall we now ask for motives to this Divine exercise, when, instead
   of arguments, we have here such miracles to convince us of its mighty
   power with God?

   Could God by a voice from Heaven more expressly call us to these songs
   of praise, than by thus showing us how He hears, delivers, and rewards,
   those that use them?

   But this by the way. I now return to the objection in hand; and answer
   fourthly, That the privacy of our prayers is not destroyed by our
   having, but by our seeking, witnesses of them.

   If therefore nobody hears you but those you cannot separate yourself
   from, you are as much in secret, and your Father who seeth in secret
   will as truly reward your secrecy, as if you were seen by Him only.

   Fifthly, Private prayer, as it is opposed to prayer in public, does not
   suppose that no one is to have any witness of it. For husbands and
   wives, brothers and sisters, parents and children, masters and
   servants, tutors and pupils, are to be witnesses to one another of such
   devotion, as may truly and properly be called private. It is far from
   being a duty to conceal such devotion from such near relations.

   In all these cases, therefore, where such relations sometimes pray
   together in private, and sometimes apart by themselves, the chanting of
   a psalm can have nothing objected against it.

   Our blessed Lord commands us, when we fast, to anoint our heads, and
   wash our faces, that we appear not unto men to fast, but unto our
   Father which is in secret.

   But this only means, that we must not make public ostentation to the
   world of our fasting.

   For if no one was to fast in private, or could be said to fast in
   private, but he that had no witnesses of it, no one could keep a
   private fast, but he that lived by himself -- for every family must
   know who fast in it. Therefore the privacy of fasting does not suppose
   such a privacy as excludes everybody from knowing it, but such a
   privacy as does not seek to be known abroad.

   Cornelius, the devout Centurion, of whom the Scripture saith that he
   gave much, and prayed to God alway, saith unto St. Peter, "Four days
   ago I was fasting until this hour." [Acts x. 2]

   Now that this fasting was sufficiently private and acceptable to God,
   appears from the vision of an Angel, with which the holy man was
   blessed at that time.

   But that it was not so private as to be entirely unknown to others,
   appears, as from the relation of it here, so from what is said in
   another place, that he "called two of his household servants, and a
   devout soldier of them that waited upon him continually." [Ver. 7] So
   that Cornelius' fasting was so far from being unknown to his family,
   that the soldiers and they of his household were made devout
   themselves, by continually waiting upon him, that is, by seeing and
   partaking of his good works.

   The whole of the matter is this. Great part of the world can be as
   private as they please, therefore, let them use this excellent devotion
   between God and themselves.

   As therefore the privacy or excellency of fasting is not destroyed by
   being known to some particular persons, neither would the privacy or
   excellency of your devotions be hurt, though by chanting a psalm you
   should be heard by some of your family.

   Another great part of the world must and ought to have witnesses of
   several of their devotions: let them therefore not neglect the use of a
   psalm at such times, as it ought to be known to those with whom they
   live that they do not neglect their prayers. For surely there can be no
   harm in being known to be singing a psalm at such times as it ought to
   be known that you are at your prayers.

   And if, at other times, you desire to be in such secrecy at your
   devotions, as to have nobody suspect it, and for that reason forbear
   your psalm; I have nothing to object against it; provided that at the
   known hours of prayer, you never omit this practice.

   For who would not be often doing that in the day, which St. Paul and
   Silas would not neglect in the middle of the night? And if, when you
   are thus singing, it should come into your head, how the prison shaked,
   and the doors opened, when St. Paul sang, it would do your devotion no
   harm.

   Lastly, seeing our imaginations have great power over our hearts, and
   can mightily affect us with their representations, it would be of great
   use to you, if, at the beginning of your devotions, you were to imagine
   to yourself some such representations as might heat and warm your heart
   into a temper suitable to those prayers that you are then about to
   offer unto God.

   As thus; before you begin your psalm of praise and rejoicing in God,
   make this use of your imagination.

   Be still, and imagine to yourself that you saw the heavens open, and
   the glorious choirs of cherubims and seraphims about the throne of God.
   Imagine that you hear the music of those angelic voices, that cease not
   day and night to sing the glories of Him that is, and was, and is to
   come.

   Help your imagination with such passages of Scripture as these:--

   "I beheld, and, lo, in heaven a great multitude which no man could
   number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, standing
   before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
   palms in their hands. And they cried with a loud voice, Salvation to
   our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

   "And all the angels stood round about the throne, and fell before the
   throne on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen: blessing, and
   glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and
   strength, be unto God, forever and ever, Amen." [Rev. vii. 9-12]

   Think upon this till your imagination has carried you above the clouds;
   till it has placed you amongst those heavenly beings, and made you long
   to bear a part in their eternal music.

   If you will but use yourself to this method, and let your imagination
   dwell upon such representations as these, you will soon find it to be
   an excellent means of raising the spirit of devotion within you.

   Always therefore begin your psalm, or song of praise, with these
   imaginations; and at every verse of it imagine yourself amongst those
   heavenly companions, that your voice is added to theirs, and that
   angels join with you, and you with them; and that you with a poor and
   low voice are singing that on earth which they are singing in Heaven.

    Again; sometimes imagine that you had been one of those that joined
   with our blessed Saviour when He sang an hymn. Strive to imagine to
   yourself, with what majesty He looked; fancy that you had stood close
   by Him surrounded with His glory. Think how your heart would have been
   inflamed, what ecstasies of joy you would have then felt, when singing
   with the Son of God. Think again and again, with what joy and devotion
   you would then have sung, had this been really your happy state, and
   what a punishment you should have thought it, to have been then silent;
   and let this teach you how to be affected with psalms and hymns of
   thanksgiving.

   Again; sometimes imagine to yourself that you saw holy David with his
   hands upon his harp, and his eyes fixed upon heaven, calling in
   transport upon all the creation, sun and moon, light and darkness, day
   and night, men and angels, to join with his rapturous soul in praising
   the Lord of Heaven.

   Dwell upon this imagination till you think you are singing with this
   Divine musician; and let such a companion teach you to exalt your heart
   unto God in the following psalm; which you may use constantly, first in
   the morning:--

   Psalm cxlv. "I will magnify Thee, O God my King: and I will praise Thy
   Name forever and ever," etc.

   These following psalms, as the 34th, 96th, 103rd, 111th, 146th, 147th,
   are such as wonderfully set forth the glory of God; and therefore you
   may keep to any one of them, at any particular hour, as you like: or
   you may take the finest parts of any psalms, and so adding them
   together, may make them fitter for your own devotion.

     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XVI


   Recommending devotions at nine o'clock in the morning, called in
   Scripture the third hour of the day. The subject of these prayers is
   humility.


   I AM now come to another hour of prayer, which in Scripture is called
   the third hour of the day; but, according to our way of numbering the
   hours, it is called the ninth hour of the morning.

   The devout Christian must at this time look upon himself as called upon
   by God to renew his acts of prayer, and address himself again to the
   throne of grace.

   There is indeed no express command in Scripture to repeat our devotions
   at this hour. But then it is to be considered also, that neither is
   there any express command to begin and end the day with prayer. So that
   if that be looked upon as a reason for neglecting devotion at this
   hour, it may as well be urged as a reason for neglecting devotion both
   at the beginning and end of the day.

   But if the practice of the saints in all ages of the world, if the
   customs of the pious Jews and primitive Christians, be of any force
   with us, we have authority enough to persuade us to make this hour a
   constant season of devotion.

   The Scriptures show us how this hour was consecrated to devotion both
   by Jews and Christians: so that if we desire to number ourselves
   amongst those whose hearts were devoted unto God, we must not let this
   hour pass, without presenting us to Him in some solemnities of
   devotion. And besides this authority for this practice, the
   reasonableness of it is sufficient to invite us to the observance of
   it.

   For if you were up at a good time in the morning, your first devotions
   will have been at a proper distance from this hour; you will have been
   long enough at other business, to make it proper for you to return to
   this greatest of all business -- the raising your soul and affections
   unto God.

   But if you have risen so late, as to be hardly able to begin your first
   devotions at this hour, which is proper for your second, you may thence
   learn that the indulging yourself in the morning sleep is no small
   matter; since it sets you so far back in your devotions, and robs you
   of those graces and blessings which are obtained by frequent prayers.

   For if prayer has power with God, if it looses the bands of sin, if it
   purifies the soul, reforms our hearts, and draws down the aids of
   Divine grace; how can that be reckoned a small matter, which robs us of
   an hour of prayer?

   Imagine yourself somewhere placed in the air, as a spectator of all
   that passes in the world, and that you saw, in one view, the devotions
   which all Christian people offer unto God every day: imagine that you
   saw some piously dividing the day and night, as the primitive
   Christians did, and constant at all hours of devotion, singing psalms,
   and calling upon God, at all those times that saints and martyrs
   received their gifts and graces from God: imagine that you saw others
   living without any rules, as to times and frequency of prayer, and only
   at their devotions sooner or later, as sleep and laziness happen to
   permit them. Now if you were to see this, as God sees it, how do you
   suppose you should be affected with this sight? What judgment do you
   imagine you should pass upon these different sorts of people? Could you
   think that those who were thus exact in their rules of devotion, got
   nothing by their exactness? Could you think that their prayers were
   received just in the same manner, and procured them no more blessings,
   than theirs do, who prefer laziness and indulgence to times and rules
   of devotion?

   Could you take the one to be as true servants of God as the other?
   Could you imagine that those who were thus different in their lives,
   would find no difference in their states, after death? Could you think
   it a matter of indifferency to which of these people you were most
   like?

   If not, let it be now your care to join yourself to that number of
   devout people, to that society of saints, amongst whom you desire to be
   found when you leave the world.

   And although the bare number and repetition of our prayers is of little
   value, yet since prayer, rightly and attentively performed, is the most
   natural means of amending and purifying our hearts; since importunity
   and frequency in prayer is as much pressed upon us by Scripture, as
   prayer itself: we may be sure, that when we are frequent and
   importunate in our prayers, we are taking the best means of obtaining
   the highest benefits of a devout life.

   And, on the other hand, they who through negligence, laziness, or any
   other indulgence, render themselves either unable, or uninclined, to
   observe rules and hours of devotion, we may be sure that they deprive
   themselves of those graces and blessings, which an exact and fervent
   devotion procures from God.

   Now as this frequency of prayer is founded on the doctrines of
   Scripture, and recommended to us by the practice of the true
   worshippers of God; so we ought not to think ourselves excused from it,
   but where we can show that we are spending our time in such business,
   as is more acceptable to God than these returns of prayer.

   Least of all must we imagine that dulness, negligence, indulgence, or
   diversions, can be any pardonable excuses for our not observing an
   exact and frequent method of devotion.

   If you are of a devout spirit, you will rejoice at these returns of
   prayer which keep your soul in a holy enjoyment of God; which change
   your passions into Divine love, and fill your heart with stronger joys
   and consolations than you can possibly meet with in anything else.

   And if you are not of a devout spirit, then you are moreover obliged to
   this frequency of prayer, to train and exercise your heart into a true
   sense and feeling of devotion.

   Now seeing the holy spirit of the Christian religion, and the example
   of the saints of all ages, call upon you thus to divide the day into
   hours of prayer; so it will be highly beneficial to you to make a right
   choice of those matters which are to be the subject of your prayers,
   and to keep every hour of prayer appropriated to some particular
   subject, which you may alter or enlarge, according as the state you are
   in requires.

   By this means you will have an opportunity of being large and
   particular in all the parts of any virtue or grace, which you then make
   the subject of your prayers. And by asking for it in all its parts, and
   making it the substance of a whole prayer once every day, you will soon
   find a mighty change in your heart; and that you cannot thus constantly
   pray for all the parts of any virtue every day of your life, and yet
   live the rest of the day contrary to it.

   If a worldly-minded man was to pray every day against all the instances
   of a worldly temper; if he should make a large description of the
   temptations of covetousness, and desire God to assist him to reject
   them all, and to disappoint him in all his covetous designs; he would
   find his conscience so much awakened, that he would be forced either to
   forsake such prayers, or to forsake a worldly life.

   The same will hold true in any other instance. And if we ask, and have
   not, 'tis because we ask amiss. Because we ask in cold and general
   forms, such as only name the virtues, without describing their
   particular parts, such as are not enough particular to our condition,
   and therefore make no change in our hearts. Whereas, when a man
   enumerates all the parts of any virtue in his prayers, his conscience
   is thereby awakened, and he is frighted at seeing how far short he is
   of it. And this stirs him up to an ardour in devotion, when he sees how
   much he wants of that virtue which he is praying for.

   I have, in the last chapter, laid before you the excellency of praise
   and thanksgiving, and recommended that as the subject of your first
   devotions in the morning.

   And because an humble state of soul is the very state of religion,
   because humility is the life and soul of piety, the foundation and
   support of every virtue and good work, the best guard and security of
   all holy affections; I shall recommend humility to you, as highly
   proper to be made the constant subject of your devotions, at this third
   hour of the day; earnestly desiring you to think no day safe, or likely
   to end well, in which you have not thus early put yourself in this
   posture of humility, and called upon God to carry you through the day,
   in the exercise of a meek and lowly spirit.

   This virtue is so essential to the right state of our souls, that there
   is no pretending to a reasonable or pious life without it. We may as
   well think to see without eyes, or live without breath, as to live in
   the spirit of religion without the spirit of humility.

   And although it is thus the soul and essence of all religious duties,
   yet is it, generally speaking, the least understood, the least
   regarded, the least intended, the least desired and sought after, of
   all other virtues, amongst all sorts of Christians.

   No people have more occasion to be afraid of the approaches of pride,
   than those, who have made some advances in a pious life: for pride can
   grow as well upon our virtues as our vices, and steals upon us on all
   occasions.

   Every good thought that we have, every good action that we do, lays us
   open to pride, and exposes us to the assaults of vanity and
   self-satisfaction.

   It is not only the beauty of our persons, the gifts of fortune, our
   natural talents, and the distinctions of life; but even our devotions
   and alms, our fastings and humiliations, expose us to fresh and strong
   temptations of this evil spirit.

   And it is for this reason that I so earnestly advise every devout
   person to begin every day in this exercise of humility, that he may go
   on in safety under the protection of this good guide, and not fall a
   sacrifice to his own progress in those virtues which are to save
   mankind from destruction.

   Humility does not consist in having a worse opinion of ourselves than
   we deserve, or in abasing ourselves lower than we really are; but as
   all virtue is founded in truth, so humility is founded in a true and
   just sense of our weakness, misery, and sin. He that rightly feels and
   lives in this sense of his condition, lives in humility.

   The weakness of our state appears from our inability to do anything as
   of ourselves. In our natural state we are entirely without any power;
   we are indeed active beings, but can only act by a power that is every
   moment lent us from God.

   We have no more power of our own to move a hand, or stir a foot, than
   to move the sun, or stop the clouds.

   When we speak a word, we feel no more power in ourselves to do it, than
   we feel ourselves able to raise the dead. For we act no more within our
   own power, or by our own strength, when we speak a word, or make a
   sound, than the Apostles acted within their own power, or by their own
   strength, when a word from their mouth cast out devils, and cured
   diseases.

   As it was solely the power of God that enabled them to speak to such
   purposes, so it is solely the power of God that enables us to speak at
   all.

   We indeed find that we can speak, as we find that we are alive; but the
   actual exercise of speaking is no more in our own power, than the
   actual enjoyment of life.

   This is the dependent, helpless poverty of our state; which is a great
   reason for humility. For, since we neither are, nor can do anything of
   ourselves, to be proud of anything that we are, or of anything that we
   can do, and to ascribe glory to ourselves for these things, as our own
   ornaments, has the guilt both of stealing and lying. It has the guilt
   of stealing, as it gives to ourselves those things which only belong to
   God; it has the guilt of lying, as it is the denying the truth of our
   state, and pretending to be something that we are not.

   Secondly, Another argument for humility is founded in the misery of our
   condition.

   Now the misery of our condition appears in this, that we use these
   borrowed powers of our nature to the torment and vexation of ourselves,
   and our fellow creatures.

   God Almighty has entrusted us with the use of reason, and we use it to
   the disorder and corruption of our nature. We reason ourselves into all
   kinds of folly and misery, and make our lives the sport of foolish and
   extravagant passions; seeking after imaginary happiness in all kinds of
   shapes, creating to ourselves a thousand wants, amusing our hearts with
   false hopes and fears, using the world worse than irrational animals,
   envying, vexing, and tormenting one another with restless passions, and
   unreasonable contentions.

   Let any man but look back upon his own life, and see what use he has
   made of his reason, how little he has consulted it, and how less he has
   followed it. What foolish passions, what vain thoughts, what needless
   labours, what extravagant projects, have taken up the greatest part of
   his life! How foolish he has been in his words and conversation; how
   seldom he has done well with judgment, and how often he has been kept
   from doing ill by accident; how seldom he has been able to please
   himself, and how often he has displeased others; how often he has
   changed his counsels, hated what he loved, and loved what he hated; how
   often he has been enraged and transported at trifles, pleased and
   displeased with the very same things, and constantly changing from one
   vanity to another! Let a man but take this view of his own life, and he
   will see reason enough to confess, that pride was not made for man.

   Let him but consider, that if the world knew all that of him, which he
   knows of himself; if they saw what vanity and passions govern his
   inside, and what secret tempers sully and corrupt his best actions; he
   would have no more pretence to be honoured and admired for his goodness
   and wisdom, than a rotten and distempered body to be loved and admired
   for its beauty and comeliness.

   This is so true, and so known to the hearts of almost all people, that
   nothing would appear more dreadful to them, than to have their hearts
   thus fully discovered to the eyes of all beholders.

   And perhaps there are very few people in the world who would not rather
   choose to die, than to have all their secret follies, the errors of
   their judgments, the vanity of their minds, the falseness of their
   pretences, the frequency of their vain and disorderly passions, their
   uneasiness, hatred, envies, and vexations, made known unto the world.

   And shall pride be entertained in a heart thus conscious of its own
   miserable behaviour? Shall a creature in such a condition, that he
   could not support himself under the shame of being known to the world
   in his real state, -- shall such a creature, because his shame is only
   known to God, to holy angels, and his own conscience, -- shall he, in
   the sight of God and holy angels, dare to be vain and proud of himself?

   Thirdly, If to this we add the shame and guilt of sin, we shall find a
   still greater reason for humility.

   No creature that had lived in innocence, would have thereby got any
   pretence for self-honour and esteem; because, as a creature, all that
   it is, or has, or does, is from God, and therefore the honour of all
   that belongs to it is only due to God.

   But if a creature that is a sinner, and under the displeasure of the
   great Governor of all the world, and deserving nothing from Him but
   pains and punishments for the shameful abuse of his powers; if such a
   creature pretends to self-glory for anything that he is or does, he can
   only be said to glory in his shame.

   Now how monstrous and shameful the nature of sin is, is sufficiently
   apparent from that great Atonement, that is necessary to cleanse us
   from the guilt of it.

   Nothing less has been required to take away the guilt of our sins, than
   the sufferings and death of the Son of God. Had He not taken our nature
   upon Him, our nature had been forever separated from God, and incapable
   of ever appearing before Him.

   And is there any room for pride, or self-glory, whilst we are partakers
   of such a nature as this?

   Have our sins rendered us so abominable and odious to Him that made us,
   that He could not so much as receive our prayers, or admit our
   repentance, till the Son of God made Himself man, and became a
   suffering Advocate for our whole race; and can we, in this state,
   pretend to high thoughts of ourselves? Shall we presume to take delight
   in our own worth, who are not worthy so much as to ask pardon for our
   sins, without the mediation and intercession of the Son of God?

   Thus deep is the foundation of humility laid in these deplorable
   circumstances of our condition; which show that it is as great an
   offence against truth, and the reason of things, for a man, in this
   state of things, to lay claim to any degrees of glory, as to pretend to
   the honour of creating himself. If man will boast of anything as his
   own, he must boast of his misery and sin; for there is nothing else but
   this that is his own property.

   Turn your eyes towards Heaven, and fancy that you saw what is doing
   there; that you saw cherubims and seraphims, and all the glorious
   inhabitants of that place, all united in one work; not seeking glory
   from one another, not labouring their own advancement, not
   contemplating their own perfections, not singing their own praises, not
   valuing themselves, and despising others, but all employed in one and
   the same work, all happy in one and the same joy; "casting down their
   crowns before the throne of God"; giving glory, and honour, and power
   to Him alone. [Rev. iv. 10, 11]

   Then turn your eyes to the fallen world, and consider how unreasonable
   and odious it must be, for such poor worms, such miserable sinners, to
   take delight in their own fancied glories, whilst the highest and most
   glorious sons of Heaven seek for no other greatness and honour, but
   that of ascribing all honour, and greatness, and glory, to God alone?

   Pride is only the disorder of the fallen world, it has no place amongst
   other beings; it can only subsist where ignorance and sensuality, lies
   and falsehood, lusts and impurity reign.

   Let a man, when he is most delighted with his own figure, look upon a
   crucifix, and contemplate our Blessed Lord stretched out, and nailed
   upon a Cross; and then let him consider how absurd it must be, for a
   heart full of pride and vanity to pray to God, through the sufferings
   of such a meek and crucified Saviour!

   These are the reflections that you are often to meditate upon, that you
   may thereby be disposed to walk before God and man, in such a spirit of
   humility as becomes the weak, miserable, sinful state of all that are
   descended from fallen Adam.

   When you have by such general reflections as these convinced your mind
   of the reasonableness of humility, you must not content yourself with
   this, as if you were therefore humble, because your mind acknowledges
   the reasonableness of humility, and declares against pride. But you
   must immediately enter yourself into the practice of this virtue, like
   a young beginner, that has all of it to learn, that can learn but
   little at a time, and with great difficulty. You must consider that you
   have not only this virtue to learn, but that you must be content to
   proceed as a learner in it all your time, endeavouring after greater
   degrees of it, and practising every day acts of humility, as you every
   day practise acts of devotion.

   You would not imagine yourself to be devout, because in your judgment
   you approved of prayers, and often declared your mind in favour of
   devotion. Yet how many people imagine themselves humble enough for no
   other reason, but because they often commend humility, and make
   vehement declarations against pride!

   Cecus [33] is a rich man, of good breeding, and very fine parts. He is
   fond of dress, curious in the smallest matters that can add any
   ornament to his person. He is haughty and imperious to all his
   inferiors, is very full of everything that he says, or does, and never
   imagines it possible for such a judgment as his to be mistaken. He can
   bear no contradiction, and discovers the weakness of your understanding
   as soon as ever you oppose him. He changes everything in his house, his
   habit, and his equipage, as often as anything more elegant comes in his
   way. Cecus would have been very religious, but that he always thought
   he was so.

   There is nothing so odious to Cecus as a proud man; and the misfortune
   is, that in this he is so very quicksighted, that he discovers in
   almost everybody some strokes of vanity.

   On the other hand, he is exceeding fond of humble and modest persons.
   Humility, says he, is so amiable a quality, that it forces our esteem
   wherever we meet with it. There is no possibility of despising the
   meanest person that has it, or of esteeming the greatest man that wants
   it.

   Cecus no more suspects himself to be proud, than he suspects his want
   of sense. And the reason of it is, because he always finds himself so
   in love with humility, and so enraged at pride.

   It is very true, Cecus, you speak sincerely, when you say you love
   humility, and abhor pride. You are no hypocrite, you speak the true
   sentiments of your mind: but then take this along with you, Cecus, that
   you only love humility, and hate pride, in other people. You never once
   in your life thought of any other humility, or of any other pride, than
   that which you have seen in other people.

   The case of Cecus is a common case; many people live in all the
   instances of pride, and indulge every vanity that can enter into their
   minds, and yet never suspect themselves to be governed by pride and
   vanity, because they know how much they dislike proud people, and how
   mightily they are pleased with humility and modesty, wherever they find
   them.

   All their speeches in favour of humility, and all their railings
   against pride, are looked upon as so many true exercises and effects of
   their own humble spirit.

   Whereas, in truth, these are so far from being proper acts or proofs of
   humility, that they are great arguments of the want of it.

   For the fuller of pride any one is himself, the more impatient will he
   be at the smallest instances of it in other people. And the less
   humility any one has in his own mind, the more will he demand and be
   delighted with it in other people.

   You must therefore act by a quite contrary measure, and reckon yourself
   only so far humble, as you impose every instance of humility upon
   yourself, and never call for it in other people, so far an enemy to
   pride, as you never spare it in yourself, nor ever censure it in other
   persons.

   Now, in order to do this, you need only consider that pride and
   humility signify nothing to you, but so far as they are your own; that
   they do you neither good nor harm, but as they are the tempers of your
   own heart.

   The loving, therefore, of humility, is of no benefit or advantage to
   you, but so far as you love to see all your own thoughts, words, and
   actions, governed by it. And the hating of pride does you no good, is
   no perfection in you, but so far as you hate to harbour any degree of
   it in your own heart.

   Now in order to begin, and set out well, in the practice of humility,
   you must take it for granted that you are proud, that you have all your
   life been more or less infected with this unreasonable temper.

   You should believe also, that it is your greatest weakness, that your
   heart is most subject to it, that it is so constantly stealing upon
   you, that you have reason to watch and suspect its approaches in all
   your actions.

   For this is what most people, especially new beginners in a pious life,
   may with great truth think of themselves.

   For there is no one vice that is more deeply rooted in our nature, or
   that receives such constant nourishment from almost everything that we
   think or do: there being hardly anything in the world that we want or
   use, or any action or duty of life, but pride finds some means or other
   to take hold of it. So that at what time soever we begin to offer
   ourselves to God, we can hardly be surer of anything, than that we have
   a great deal of pride to repent of.

   If, therefore, you find it disagreeable to your mind to entertain this
   opinion of yourself, and that you cannot put yourself amongst those
   that want to be cured of pride, you may be as sure as if an angel from
   heaven had told you, that you have not only much, but all your humility
   to seek.

   For you can have no greater sign of a more confirmed pride, than when
   you think that you are humble enough. He that thinks he loves God
   enough, shows himself to be an entire stranger to that holy passion; so
   he that thinks he has humility enough, shows that he is not so much as
   a beginner in the practice of true humility.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [33] Cecus, i.e. blind.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XVII


   Showing how difficult the practice of humility is made, by the general
   spirit and temper of the world. How Christianity requireth us to live
   contrary to the world.


   EVERY person, when he first applies himself to the exercise of this
   virtue of humility, must, as I said before, consider himself as a
   learner, that is to learn something that is contrary to former tempers
   and habits of mind, and which can only be got by daily and constant
   practice.

   He has not only as much to do as he that has some new art or science to
   learn, but he has also a great deal to unlearn: he is to forget and lay
   aside his own spirit, which has been a long while fixing and forming
   itself; he must forget and depart from abundance of passions and
   opinions, which the fashion, and vogue, and spirit of the world, has
   made natural to him.

   He must lay aside his own spirit; because as we are born in sin, so in
   pride, which is as natural to us as self-love, and continually springs
   from it. And this is one reason why Christianity is so often
   represented as a new birth, and a new spirit.

   He must lay aside the opinions and passions which he has received from
   the world; because the vogue and fashion of the world, by which we have
   been carried away as in a torrent, before we could pass right judgments
   of the value of things, is, in many respects, contrary to humility; so
   that we must unlearn what the spirit of the world has taught us, before
   we can be governed by the spirit of humility.

   The devil is called in Scripture the prince of this world, because he
   has great power in it, because many of its rules and principles are
   invented by this evil spirit, the father of all lies and falsehoods, to
   separate us from God, and prevent our return to happiness.

   Now, according to the spirit and vogue of this world, whose corrupt air
   we have all breathed, there are many things that pass for great and
   honourable, and most desirable, which yet are so far from being so,
   that the true greatness and honour of our nature consists in the not
   desiring them.

   To abound in wealth, to have fine houses, and rich clothes, to be
   attended with splendour and equipage, to be beautiful in our persons,
   to have titles of dignity, to be above our fellow-creatures, to command
   the bows and obeisance of other people, to be looked on with
   admiration, to overcome our enemies with power, to subdue all that
   oppose us, to set out ourselves in as much splendour as we can, to live
   highly and magnificently, to eat, and drink, and delight ourselves in
   the most costly manner, these are the great, the honourable, the
   desirable things, to which the spirit of the world turns the eyes of
   all people. And many a man is afraid of standing still, and not
   engaging in the pursuit of these things, lest the same world should
   take him for a fool.

   The history of the Gospel is chiefly the history of Christ's conquest
   over the spirit of the world. And the number of true Christians is only
   the number of those who, following the Spirit of Christ, have lived
   contrary to this spirit of the world.

   "If any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." Again,
   "Whatsoever is born of God, overcometh the world." "Set your affection
   on things above, and not on things on the earth; for ye are dead, and
   your life is hid with Christ in God." [Rom. viii. 9.; 1 John v. 4.;
   Col. iii. 2, 3] This is the language of the whole New Testament: this
   is the mark of Christianity: you are to be dead, that is, dead to the
   spirit and temper of the world, and live a new life in the Spirit of
   Jesus Christ.

   But notwithstanding the clearness and plainness of these doctrines
   which thus renounce the world, yet great part of Christians live and
   die slaves to the customs and temper of the world.

   How many people swell with pride and vanity, for such things as they
   would not know how to value at all, but that they are admired in the
   world!

   Would a man take ten years more drudgery in business to add two horses
   more to his coach, but that he knows that the world most of all admires
   a coach and six? How fearful are many people of having their houses
   poorly furnished, or themselves meanly clothed, for this only reason,
   lest the world should make no account of them, and place them amongst
   low and mean people!

   How often would a man have yielded to the haughtiness and ill-nature of
   others, and shown a submissive temper, but that he dares not pass for
   such a poorspirited man in the opinion of the world!

   Many a man would often drop a resentment, and forgive an affront, but
   that he is afraid if he should, the world would not forgive him.

   How many would practise Christian temperance and sobriety, in its
   utmost perfection, were it not for the censure which the world passes
   upon such a life!

   Others have frequent intentions of living up to the rules of Christian
   perfection, which they are frighted from by considering what the world
   would say of them.

   Thus do the impressions which we have received from living in the world
   enslave our minds, that we dare not attempt to be eminent in the sight
   of God and holy angels, for fear of being little in the eyes of the
   world.

   From this quarter arises the greatest difficulty of humility, because
   it cannot subsist in any mind, but so far as it is dead to the world,
   and has parted with all desires of enjoying its greatness and honours.
   So that in order to be truly humble, you must unlearn all those notions
   which you have been all your life learning from this corrupt spirit of
   the world.

   You can make no stand against the assaults of pride, the meek
   affections of humility can have no place in your soul, till you stop
   the power of the world over you, and resolve against a blind obedience
   to its laws.

   And when you are once advanced thus far, as to be able to stand still
   in the torrent of worldly fashions and opinions, and examine the worth
   and value of things which are most admired and valued in the world, you
   have gone a great way in the gaining of your freedom, and have laid a
   good foundation for the amendment of your heart.

   For as great as the power of the world is, it is all built upon a blind
   obedience; and we need only open our eyes to get quit of its power.

   Ask whom you will, learned or unlearned, every one seems to know and
   confess, that the general temper and spirit of the world, is nothing
   else but humour, folly and extravagance.

   Who will not own, that the wisdom of philosophy, the piety of religion,
   was always confined to a small number? and is not this expressly owning
   and confessing, that the common spirit and temper of the world is
   neither according to the wisdom of philosophy nor the piety of
   religion?

   The world, therefore, seems enough condemned even by itself, to make it
   very easy for a thinking man to be of the same judgment.

   And, therefore, I hope you will not think it a hard saying, that in
   order to be humble, you must withdraw your obedience from that vulgar
   spirit, which gives laws to fops and coquets, and form your judgments
   according to the wisdom of philosophy, and the piety of religion. Who
   would be afraid of making such a change as this?

   Again: to lessen your fear and regard to the opinion of the world,
   think how soon the world will disregard you, and have no more thought
   or concern about you, than about the poorest animal that died in a
   ditch.

   Your friends, if they can, may bury you with some distinction, and set
   up a monument, to let posterity see that your dust lies under such a
   stone; and when that is done, all is done. Your place is filled up by
   another, the world is just in the same state it was, you are blotted
   out of its sight, and as much forgotten by the world as if you had
   never belonged to it.

   Think upon the rich, the great, and the learned persons, that have made
   great figures, and been high in the esteem of the world; many of them
   died in your time, and yet they are sunk, and lost, and gone, and as
   much disregarded by the world, as if they had been only so many bubbles
   of water.

   Think, again, how many poor souls see heaven lost, and lie now
   expecting a miserable eternity, for their service and homage to a world
   that thinks itself every whit as well without them, and is just as
   merry as it was when they were in it.

   Is it therefore worth your while to lose the smallest degree of virtue,
   for the sake of pleasing so bad a master, and so false a friend, as the
   world is?

   Is it worth your while to bow the knee to such an idol as this, that so
   soon will have neither eyes, nor ears, nor a heart, to regard you,
   instead of serving that great, and holy, and mighty God, that will make
   all His servants partakers of His own eternity?

   Will you let the fear of a false world, that has no love for you, keep
   you from the fear of that God, who has only created you that He may
   love and bless you to all eternity?

   Lastly, You must consider what behaviour the profession of Christianity
   requireth of you with regard to the world.

   Now this is plainly delivered in these words: "Who gave Himself for our
   sins, that He might deliver us from this present evil world." [Gal. i.
   4] Christianity therefore implieth a deliverance from this world, and
   he that professeth it, professeth to live contrary to everything, and
   every temper, that is peculiar to this evil world.

   St. John declareth this opposition to the world in this manner: "They
   are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world
   heareth them. We are of God." [1 John iv. 5, 6] This is the description
   of the followers of Christ; and it is proof enough, that no people are
   to be reckoned Christians in reality, who in their hearts and tempers
   belong to this world. "We know," saith the same Apostle, "that we are
   of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness." [1 John v. 19]
   Christians, therefore, can no farther know that they are of God, than
   so far as they know they are not of the world; that is, that they do
   not live according to the ways, and the spirit of the world. For all
   the ways, and maxims, and politics, and tempers of the world, lie in
   wickedness. And he is only of God, or born of God in Christ Jesus, who
   has overcome this world, that is, who has chosen to live by faith, and
   govern his actions by the principles of a wisdom revealed from God by
   Christ Jesus.

   St. Paul takes it for a certainty, so well known to Christians, that
   they are no longer to be considered as living in this world, that he
   thus argues from it as from an undeniable principle, concerning the
   abolishing the rites of the Jewish law: "Wherefore if ye be dead with
   Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the
   world, are ye subject to ordinances?" [Col ii. 20]. Here could be no
   argument in this but in the Apostle's taking it for undeniable, that
   Christians knew that their profession required them to have done with
   all the tempers and passions of the world, to live as citizens of the
   new Jerusalem, and to have their conversation in Heaven.

   Our Blessed Lord Himself has fully determined this point in these
   words: "They are not of this world, as I am not of this world." [John
   xvii. 16] This is the state of Christianity with regard to this world.
   If you are not thus out of, and contrary to the world, you want the
   distinguishing mark of Christianity; you do not belong to Christ, but
   by being out of the world as He was out of it.

   We may deceive ourselves, if we please, with vain and softening
   comments upon these words; but they are, and will be, understood in
   their first simplicity and plainness by every one that reads them in
   the same spirit that our Blessed Lord spoke them. And to understand
   them in any lower, less significant meaning, is to let carnal wisdom
   explain away that doctrine by which itself was to be destroyed.

   The Christian's great conquest over the world is all contained in the
   mystery of Christ upon the Cross. It was there, and from thence, that
   He taught all Christians how they were to come out of, and conquer the
   world, and what they were to do in order to be His disciples. And all
   the doctrines, Sacraments, and institutions of the Gospel are only so
   many explications of the meaning, and applications of the benefit, of
   this great mystery.

   And the state of Christianity implieth nothing else, but an entire,
   absolute conformity to that spirit which Christ showed in the
   mysterious Sacrifice of Himself upon the Cross.

   Every man therefore is only so far a Christian, as he partakes of this
   Spirit of Christ. It was this that made St. Paul so passionately
   express himself, "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of
   our Lord Jesus Christ": but why does he glory? Is it because Christ had
   suffered in his stead, and had excused him from suffering? No, by no
   means. But it was because his Christian profession had called him to
   the honour of suffering with Christ, and of dying to the world under
   reproach and contempt, as He had done upon the Cross. For he
   immediately adds, "by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
   the world." [Gal. vi. 14] This, you see, was the reason of his glory in
   the Cross of Christ, because it had called him to a like state of death
   and crucifixion to the world.

   Thus was the Cross of Christ, in St. Paul's days, the glory of
   Christians; not as it signified their not being ashamed to own a Master
   that was crucified, but as it signified their glorying in a religion
   which was nothing else but a doctrine of the Cross, that called them to
   the same suffering spirit, the same sacrifice of themselves, the same
   renunciation of the world, the same humility and meekness, the same
   patient bearing of injuries, reproaches, and contempts, and the same
   dying to all the greatness, honours, and happiness of this world, which
   Christ showed upon the Cross.

   To have a true idea of Christianity, we must not consider our Blessed
   Lord as suffering in our stead, but as our Representative, acting in
   our name, and with such particular merit, as to make our joining with
   Him acceptable unto God.

   He suffered, and was a Sacrifice, to make our sufferings and sacrifice
   of ourselves fit to be received by God. And we are to suffer, to be
   crucified, to die, and rise with Christ; or else His Crucifixion,
   Death, and Resurrection, will profit us nothing.

   The necessity of this conformity to all that Christ did and suffered
   upon our account is very plain from the whole tenor of Scripture.

   First, As to His sufferings: this is the only condition of our being
   saved by them, "if we suffer" with Him, "we shall also reign with Him."
   [2 Tim. ii. 12]

   Secondly, As to His Crucifixion; "knowing this, that our old man is
   crucified with him," [Rom. vi. 6. etc] Here you see Christ is not
   crucified in our stead; but unless our old man be really crucified with
   Him, the Cross of Christ will profit us nothing.

   Thirdly, As to the death of Christ, the condition is this: "If we be
   dead with Christ," we believe that "we shall also live with him." [2
   Tim. ii. 11] If therefore Christ be dead alone, if we are not dead with
   Him, we are as sure, from this Scripture, that we shall not live with
   Him.

   Lastly, As to the Resurrection of Christ, the Scripture showeth us how
   we are to partake of the benefit of it: "If ye be risen with Christ,
   seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right
   hand of God." [Col. iii. 1]

   Thus you see how plainly the Scripture sets forth our Blessed Lord as
   our Representative, acting and suffering in our name, binding and
   obliging us to conform to all that he did and suffered for us.

   It was for this reason that the Holy Jesus said of His disciples, and
   in them of all true believers, "They are not of this world, as I am not
   of this world. [John xvii. 14] Because all true believers, conforming
   to the sufferings, Crucifixion, Death and Resurrection of Christ, live
   no longer after the spirit and temper of this world, but their life is
   hid with Christ in God.

   This is the state of separation from the world, to which all orders of
   Christians are called. They must so far renounce all worldly tempers,
   be so far governed by the things of another life, as to show that they
   are truly and really crucified, dead, and risen, with Christ. And it is
   as necessary for all Christians to conform to this great change of
   spirit, to be thus in Christ new creatures, as it was necessary that
   Christ should suffer, die, and rise again, for our salvation.

   How high the Christian life is placed above the ways of this world, is
   wonderfully described by St. Paul, in these words: "Wherefore
   henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have known
   Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we Him no more. Therefore
   if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed
   away; behold, all things are become new." [2 Cor. v. 16, 17]

   He that feels the force and spirit of these words, can hardly bear any
   human interpretation of them. Henceforth, says he, that is, since the
   Death and Resurrection of Christ, the state of Christianity is become
   so glorious a state, that we do not even consider Christ Himself as in
   the flesh upon earth, but as a God of glory in Heaven; we know and
   consider ourselves not as men in the flesh, but as fellow-members of a
   new society, that are to have all our hearts, our tempers, and
   conversation, in Heaven.

   Thus is it that Christianity has placed us out of and above the world;
   and we fall from our calling, as soon as we fall into the tempers of
   the world.

   Now as it was the spirit of the world that nailed our Blessed Lord to
   the Cross; so every man that has the Spirit of Christ, that opposes the
   world as He did, will certainly be crucified by the world, some way or
   other.

   For Christianity still lives in the same world that Christ did; and
   these two will be utter enemies, till the kingdom of darkness is
   entirely at an end.

   Had you lived with our Saviour as His true disciple, you had then been
   hated as He was; and if you now live in His Spirit, the world will be
   the same enemy to you now, that it was to Him then.

   " If ye were of the world," saith our Blessed Lord, "the world would
   love its own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen
   you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." [John xv. 19]

   We are apt to lose the true meaning of these words, by considering them
   only as an historical description of something that was the state of
   our Saviour and His disciples at that time. But this is reading the
   Scripture as a dead letter; for they as exactly describe the state of
   true Christians at this, and at all other times, to the end of the
   world.

   For as true Christianity is nothing else but the Spirit of Christ, so
   whether that Spirit appear in the person of Christ Himself, or His
   Apostles, or followers in any age, it is the same thing; whoever hath
   His Spirit will be hated, despised, and condemned by the world, as He
   was.

   For the world will always love its own, and none but its own: this is
   as certain and unchangeable, as the contrariety betwixt light and
   darkness.

   When the Holy Jesus saith, "If the world hate you," He does not add by
   way of consolation, that it may some time or other cease its hatred, or
   that it will not always hate them; but He only gives this as a reason
   for their bearing it, "you know that it hated me, before it hated you";
   [John xv. 18] signifying, that it was He, that is, His Spirit, that, by
   reason of its contrariety to the world, was then, and always would be,
   hated by it.

   You will perhaps say, that the world has now become Christian, at least
   that part of it where we live; and therefore the world is not now to be
   considered in that state of opposition to Christianity, as when it was
   heathen.

   It is granted, the world now professeth Christianity. But will any one
   say that this Christian world is of the Spirit of Christ? Are its
   general tempers the tempers of Christ? Are the passions of sensuality,
   self-love, pride, covetousness, ambition, and vain-glory, less contrary
   to the spirit of the Gospel now they are amongst Christians, than when
   they were amongst heathens? Or will you say that the tempers and
   passions of the heathen world are lost and gone?

   Consider, secondly, what you are to mean by the world. Now this is
   fully described to our hands by St. John. "All that is in the world,
   the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life," [1
   John ii. 16] This is an exact and full description of the world. Now
   will you say that this world is become Christian? But if all this still
   subsists, then the same world is now in being, and the same enemy to
   Christianity, that it was in St. John's days.

   It was this world that St. John condemned, as being not of the Father:
   whether therefore it outwardly professeth, or openly persecuteth
   Christianity, it is still in the same state of contrariety to the true
   spirit and holiness of the Gospel.

   And indeed the world, by professing Christianity, is so far from being
   a less dangerous enemy than it was before, that it has by its favours
   destroyed more Christians than ever it did by the most violent
   persecution.

   We must, therefore, be so far from considering the world as in a state
   of less enmity and opposition to Christianity than it was in the first
   times of the Gospel, that we must guard against it as a greater and
   more dangerous enemy now, than it was in those times.

   It is a greater enemy, because it has greater power over Christians by
   its favours, riches, honours, rewards, and protection, than it had by
   the fire and fury of its persecutions.

   It is a more dangerous enemy, by having lost its appearance of enmity.
   Its outward profession of Christianity makes it no longer considered as
   an enemy, and therefore the generality of people are easily persuaded
   to resign themselves up to be governed and directed by it.

   How many consciences are kept at quiet, upon no other foundation, but
   because they sin under the authority of the Christian world!

   How many directions of the Gospel lie by unregarded, and how
   unconcernedly do particular persons read them, for no other reason but
   because they seem unregarded by the Christian world!

   How many compliances do people make to the Christian world, without any
   hesitation or remorse; which, if they had been required of them only by
   heathens, would have been refused, as contrary to the holiness of
   Christianity!

   Who could be content with seeing how contrary his life is to the
   Gospel, but because he sees that he lives as the Christian world doth?

   Who, that reads the Gospel, would want to be persuaded of the necessity
   of great self-denial, humility, and poverty of spirit, but that the
   authority of the world has banished this doctrine of the Cross?

   There is nothing, therefore, that a good Christian ought to be more
   suspicious of, or more constantly guard against, than the authority of
   the Christian world.

   And all the passages of Scripture which represent the world as contrary
   to Christianity, which require our separation from it, as from a Mammon
   of unrighteousness, a monster of iniquity, are all to be taken in the
   same strict sense, in relation to the present world.

   For the change that the world has undergone has only altered its
   methods, but not lessened its power, of destroying religion.

   Christians had nothing to fear from the heathen world but the loss of
   their lives; but the world become a friend, makes it difficult for them
   to save their religion.

   Whilst pride, sensuality, covetousness, and ambition, had only the
   authority of the heathen world, Christians were thereby made more
   intent upon the contrary virtues. But when pride, sensuality,
   covetousness, and ambition, have the authority of the Christian world,
   then private Christians are in the utmost danger, not only of being
   ashamed out of the practice, but of losing the very notion, of the
   piety of the Gospel.

   There is, therefore, hardly any possibility of saving yourself from the
   present world, but by considering it as the same wicked enemy to all
   true holiness, as it is represented in the Scriptures; and by assuring
   yourself, that it is as dangerous to conform to its tempers and
   passions now it is Christian, as when it was heathen.

   For only ask yourself, Is the piety, the humility, the sobriety of the
   Christian world, the piety, the humility, and sobriety of the Christian
   spirit? If not, how can you be more undone by any world, than by
   conforming to that which is Christian?

   Need a man do more to make his soul unfit for the mercy of God, than by
   being greedy and ambitious of honour? Yet how can a man renounce this
   temper, without renouncing the spirit and temper of the world, in which
   you now live?

   How can a man be made more incapable of the Spirit of Christ, than by a
   wrong value for money? and yet, how can he be more wrong in his value
   of it, than by following the authority of the Christian world?

   Nay, in every order and station of life, whether of learning or
   business, either in Church or State, you cannot act up to the spirit of
   religion, without renouncing the most general temper and behaviour of
   those who are of the same order and business as yourself.

   And though human prudence seems to talk mighty wisely about the
   necessity of avoiding particularities, yet he that dares not be so weak
   as to be particular, will be often obliged to avoid the most
   substantial duties of Christian piety.

   These reflections will, I hope, help you to break through those
   difficulties, and resist those temptations, which the authority and
   fashion of the world hath raised against the practice of Christian
   humility.

     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XVIII


   Showing how the education which men generally receive in their youth
   makes the doctrines of humility difficult to be practised. The spirit
   of a better education represented in the character of Paternus.


   ANOTHER difficulty in the practice of humility arises from our
   education. We are all of us, for the most part, corruptly educated, and
   then committed to take our course in a corrupt world; so that it is no
   wonder if examples of great piety are so seldom seen.

   Great part of the world are undone by being born and bred in families
   that have no religion: where they are made vicious and irregular, by
   being like those with whom they first lived.

   But this is not the thing I now mean; the education that I here intend,
   is such as children generally receive from virtuous and sober parents,
   and learned tutors and governors.

   Had we continued perfect, as God created the first man, perhaps the
   perfection of our nature had been a sufficient self-instruction for
   every one. But as sickness and diseases have created the necessity of
   medicines and physicians, so the change and disorder of our rational
   nature have introduced the necessity of education and tutors.

   And as the only end of the physician is to restore nature to its own
   state, so the only end of education is to restore our rational nature
   to its proper state. Education, therefore, is to be considered as a
   reason borrowed at second-hand, which is, as far as it can, to supply
   the loss of original perfection. And as physic may justly be called the
   art of restoring health, so education should be considered in no other
   light, than as the art of recovering to man the use of his reason.

   Now as the instruction of every art or science is founded upon the
   discoveries, the wisdom, experience, and maxims, of the several great
   men that have laboured in it; so human wisdom, or right use of our
   reason, which young people should be called to by their education, is
   nothing else but the best experience, and finest reasonings, of men
   that have devoted themselves to the study of wisdom, and the
   improvement of human nature.

   All, therefore, that great saints, and dying men, when the fullest of
   light and conviction, and after the highest improvement of their
   reason, all that they have said of the necessity of piety, of the
   excellency of virtue, of their duty to God, of the emptiness of riches,
   of the vanity of the world; all the sentences, judgments, reasonings,
   and maxims, of the wisest of philosophers, when in their highest state
   of wisdom, should constitute the common lessons of instruction for
   youthful minds.

   This is the only way to make the young and ignorant part of the world
   the better for the wisdom and knowledge of the wise and ancient.

   An education which is not wholly intent upon this, is as much beside
   the point, as an art of physic that had little or no regard to the
   restoration of health.

   The youths that attended upon Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, and
   Epictetus, were thus educated. Their everyday lessons and instructions
   were so many lectures upon the nature of man, his true end and the
   right use of his faculties; upon the immortality of the soul, its
   relation to God, the beauty of virtue, and its agreeableness to the
   Divine Nature; upon the dignity of reason, the necessity of temperance,
   fortitude, and generosity, and the shame and folly of indulging our
   passions.

   Now as Christianity has, as it were, new created the moral and
   religious world, and set everything that is reasonable, wise, holy, and
   desirable, in its true point of light; so one would expect, that the
   education of youth should be as much bettered and amended by
   Christianity, as the faith and doctrines of religion are amended by it.

   As it has introduced such a new state of things, and so fully informed
   us of the nature of man, the ends of his creation, the state of his
   condition; as it has fixed all our goods and evils, taught us the means
   of purifying our souls, pleasing God, and becoming eternally happy; one
   might naturally suppose, that every Christian country abounded with
   schools for the teaching, not only a few questions and answers of a
   Catechism, but for the forming, training, and practising youth in such
   an outward course of life, as the highest precepts, the strictest
   rules, and the sublimest doctrines of Christianity require.

   An education under Pythagoras, or Socrates, had no other end, but to
   teach you to think, judge, act, and follow such rules of life as
   Pythagoras and Socrates used.

   And is it not as reasonable to suppose, that a Christian education
   should have no other end, but to teach youth how to think, and judge,
   and act, and live, according to the strictest laws of Christianity?

   At least, one would suppose, that, in all Christian schools, the
   teaching youth to begin their lives in the spirit of Christianity, in
   such severity of behaviour, such abstinence, sobriety, humility, and
   devotion, as Christianity requires, should not only be more, but a
   hundred times more regarded, than any, or all things else.

   For our education should imitate our guardian Angels; suggest nothing
   to our minds but what is wise and holy; help us to discover and subdue
   every vain passion of our hearts, and every false judgment of our
   minds.

   And it is as sober and as reasonable to expect and require all this
   benefit of a Christian education, as to require that physic should
   strengthen all that is right in our nature, and remove that which is
   sickly and diseased.

   But, alas, our modern education is not of this kind.

   The first temper that we try to awaken in children, is pride; as
   dangerous a passion as that of lust. We stir them up to vain thoughts
   of themselves, and do everything we can to puff up their minds with a
   sense of their own abilities.

   Whatever way of life we intend them for, we apply to the fire and
   vanity of their minds, and exhort them to everything from corrupt
   motives. We stir them up to action from principles of strife and
   ambition, from glory, envy, and a desire of distinction, that they may
   excel others, and shine in the eyes of the world.

   We repeat and inculcate these motives upon them, till they think it a
   part of their duty to be proud, envious, and vain-glorious of their own
   accomplishments.

   And when we have taught them to scorn to be outdone by any, to bear no
   rival, to thirst after every instance of applause, to be content with
   nothing but the highest distinctions, then we begin to take comfort in
   them, and promise the world some mighty things from youths of such a
   glorious spirit.

   If children are intended for holy orders, we set before them some
   eminent orator, whose fine preaching has made him the admiration of the
   age, and carried him through all the dignities and preferments of the
   Church.

   We encourage them to have these honours in their eye, and to expect the
   reward of their studies from them.

   If the youth is intended for a trade, we bid him look at all the rich
   men of the same trade, and consider how many now are carried about in
   their stately coaches, who began in the same low degree as he now does.
   We awaken his ambition, and endeavour to give his mind a right turn, by
   often telling him how very rich such and such a tradesman died.

   If he is to be a lawyer, then we set great counsellors, lords, judges,
   and chancellors, before his eyes. We tell him what great fees, and
   great applause, attend fine pleading. We exhort him to take fire at
   these things, to raise a spirit of emulation in himself, and to be
   content with nothing less than the highest honours of the long robe.

   That this is the nature of our best education, is too plain to need any
   proof; and I believe there are few parents, but would be glad to see
   these instructions daily given to their children.

   And after all this, we complain of the effects of pride; we wonder to
   see grown men actuated and governed by ambition, envy, scorn, and a
   desire of glory; not considering that they were all the time of their
   youth called upon to all their action and industry, upon the same
   principles.

   You teach a child to scorn to be outdone, to thirst for distinction and
   applause; and is it any wonder that he continues to act all his life in
   the same manner?

   Now if a youth is ever to be so far a Christian, as to govern his heart
   by the doctrines of humility, I would fain know at what time he is to
   begin it: or, if he is ever to begin it at all, why we train him up in
   tempers quite contrary to it?

   How dry and poor must the doctrine of humility sound to a youth, that
   has been spurred up to all his industry by ambition, envy, emulation,
   and a desire of glory and distinction! And if he is not to act by these
   principles when he is a man, why do we call him to act by them in his
   youth?

   Envy is acknowledged by all people to be the most ungenerous, base, and
   wicked passion that can enter into the heart of man.

   And is this a temper to be instilled, nourished, and established, in
   the minds of young people?

   I know it is said, that it is not envy, but emulation, that is intended
   to be awakened in the minds of young men.

   But this is vainly said. For when children are taught to bear no rival,
   and to scorn to be outdone by any of their age, they are plainly and
   directly taught to be envious. For it is impossible for any one to have
   this scorn of being outdone, and this contention with rivals, without
   burning with envy against all those that seem to excel him, or get any
   distinction from him. So that what children are taught is rank envy,
   and only covered with a name of a less odious sound.

   Secondly, If envy is thus confessedly bad, and it be only emulation
   that is endeavoured to be awakened in children, surely there ought to
   be great care taken, that children may know the one from the other:--
   that they may abominate the one as a great crime, whilst they give the
   other admission into their minds.

   But if this were to be attempted, the fineness of the distinction
   betwixt envy and emulation would show that it was easier to divide them
   in words, than to separate them in action.

   For emulation, when it is defined in its best manner, is nothing else
   but a refinement upon envy, or rather the most plausible part of that
   black and venomous passion.

   And though it is easy to separate them in the notion, yet the most
   acute philosopher, that understands the art of distinguishing ever so
   well, if he gives himself up to emulation, will certainly find himself
   deep in envy.

   For envy is not an original temper, but the natural, necessary, and
   unavoidable effect of emulation, or a desire of glory.

   So that he who establishes the one in the minds of people, necessarily
   fixes the other there. And there is no other possible way of destroying
   envy, but by destroying emulation, or a desire of glory. For the one
   always rises and falls in proportion to the other.

   I know it is said in defence of this method of education, that
   ambition, and a desire of glory, are necessary to excite young people
   to industry; and that if we were to press upon them the doctrines of
   humility, we should deject their minds, and sink them into dulness and
   idleness.

   But those people who say this, do not consider, that this reason, if it
   has any strength, is full as strong against pressing the doctrines of
   humility upon grown men, lest we should deject their minds, and sink
   them into dulness and idleness.

   For who does not see, that middle-aged men want as much the assistance
   of pride, ambition, and vainglory, to spur them up to action and
   industry, as children do? And it is very certain, that the precepts of
   humility are more contrary to the designs of such men, and more
   grievous to their minds when they are pressed upon them, than they are
   to the minds of young persons.

   This reason, therefore, that is given, why children should not be
   trained up in the principles of true humility, is as good a reason why
   the same humility should never be required of grown men.

   Thirdly, Let those people who think that children would be spoiled, if
   they were not thus educated, consider this:--

   Could they think, that, if any children had been educated by our
   Blessed Lord, or His Holy Apostles, their minds would have been sunk
   into dulness and idleness?

   Or could they think, that such children would not have been trained up
   in the profoundest principles of a strict and true humility? Can they
   say that our Blessed Lord, who was the meekest and humblest Man that
   ever was on earth, was hindered by His humility from being the greatest
   example of worthy and glorious actions, that ever were done by man?

   Can they say that His Apostles, who lived in the humble spirit of their
   Master, did therefore cease to be laborious and active instruments of
   doing good to all the world?

   A few such reflections as these are sufficient to expose all the poor
   pretences for an education in pride and ambition.

   Paternus [34] lived about two hundred years ago; he had but one son,
   whom he educated himself in his own house. As they were sitting
   together in the garden, when the child was ten years old, Paternus thus
   began to him:

   The little time that you have been in the world, my child, you have
   spent wholly with me; and my love and tenderness to you has made you
   look upon me as your only friend and benefactor, and the cause of all
   the comfort and pleasure that you enjoy; your heart, I know, would be
   ready to break with grief, if you thought this was the last day that I
   should live with you.

   But, my child, though you now think yourself mighty happy, because you
   have hold of my hand, you are now in the hands, and under the tender
   care of a much greater Father and Friend than I am, whose love to you
   is far greater than mine, and from whom you receive such blessings as
   no mortal can give.

   That God whom you have seen me daily worship, whom I daily call upon to
   bless both you and me, and all mankind, whose wondrous acts are
   recorded in those Scriptures which you constantly read; that God who
   created the heavens and the earth, who brought a flood upon the whole
   world, who saved Noah in the ark, who was the God of Abraham, Isaac,
   and Jacob, whom Job blessed and praised in the greatest afflictions,
   who delivered the Israelites out of the hands of the Egyptians, who was
   the Protector of righteous Joseph, Moses, Joshua, and holy Daniel, who
   sent so many Prophets into the world, who sent His Son Jesus Christ to
   redeem mankind; this God, who has done all these great things, who has
   created so many millions of men who lived and died before you were
   born, with whom the spirits of good men that are departed this life now
   live, whom infinite numbers of Angels now worship in Heaven; this great
   God, who is the Creator of worlds, of Angels, and men, is your loving
   Father and Friend, your good Creator and Nourisher, from whom, and not
   from me, you received your being ten years ago, at the time that I
   planted that little tender elm which you there see.

   I myself am not half the age of this shady oak, under which we sit;
   many of our fathers have sat under its boughs, we have all of us called
   it ours in our turn, though it stands, and drops its masters, as it
   drops its leaves.

   You see, my son, this wide and large firmament over our heads, where
   the sun and moon, and all the stars appear in their turns. If you were
   to be carried up to any of these bodies at this vast distance from us,
   you would still discover others as much above you, as the stars that
   you see here are above the earth. Were you to go up or down, east or
   west, north or south, you would find the same height without any top,
   and the same depth without any bottom.

   And yet, my child, so great is God, that all these bodies added
   together are but as a grain of sand in His sight. And yet you are as
   much the care of this great God and Father of all worlds and all
   spirits, as if He had no son but you, or there was no creature for Him
   to love and protect but you alone. He numbers the hairs of your head,
   watches over you, sleeping and waking, and has preserved you from a
   thousand dangers, which neither you, nor I, know anything of.

   How poor my power is, and how little I am able to do for you, you have
   often seen. Your late sickness has shown you how little I could do for
   you in that state; and the frequent pains of your head are plain proofs
   that I have no power to remove them.

   I can bring you food and medicines, but have no power to turn them into
   your relief and nourishment. It is God alone that can do this for you.

   Therefore, my child, fear, and worship, and love God. Your eyes,
   indeed, cannot yet see Him. But all things that you see are so many
   marks of His power and presence, and He is nearer to you than anything
   that you can see.

   Take Him for your Lord, and Father, and Friend, look up unto Him as the
   fountain and cause of all the good that you have received through my
   hands; and reverence me only as the bearer and minister of God's good
   things unto you. And He that blessed my father before I was born, will
   bless you when I am dead.

   Your youth and little mind is only yet acquainted with my family, and
   therefore you think there is no happiness out of it.

   But, my child, you belong to a greater family than mine; you are a
   young member of the family of this Almighty Father of all nations, who
   has created infinite orders of Angels, and numberless generations of
   men, to be fellow-members of one and the same society in Heaven.

   You do well to reverence and obey my authority because God has given me
   power over you, to bring you up in His fear, and to do for you as the
   holy fathers recorded in Scripture did for their children, who are now
   in rest and peace with God.

   I shall in a short time die, and leave you to God and yourself; and, if
   God forgiveth my sins, I shall go to His Son Jesus Christ, and live
   amongst patriarchs and prophets, saints and martyrs, where I shall pray
   for you, and hope for your safe arrival at the same place.

   Therefore, my child, meditate on these great things; and your soul will
   soon grow great and noble by so meditating upon them.

   Let your thoughts often leave these gardens, these fields and farms, to
   contemplate God and Heaven, to consider upon [35] the Angels, and the
   spirits of good men living in light and glory.

   As you have been used to look to me in all your actions, and have been
   afraid to do anything, unless you first knew my will, so let it now be
   a rule of your life, to look up to God in all your actions, to do
   everything in His fear, and to abstain from everything that is not
   according to His will.

   Bear Him always in your mind, teach your thoughts to reverence Him in
   every place, for there is no place where He is not.

   God keepeth a book of life, wherein all the actions of all men are
   written; your name is there, my child; and when you die, this book will
   be laid open before men and Angels, and, according as your actions are
   there found, you will either be received to the happiness of those holy
   men who have died before you, or be turned away amongst wicked spirits,
   that are never to see God any more.

   Never forget this book, my son, for it is written, it must be opened,
   you must see it, and you must be tried by it. Strive, therefore, to
   fill it with your good deeds, that the handwriting of God may not
   appear against you.

   God, my child, is all love, and wisdom, and goodness; and everything
   that He has made, and every action that He does, is the effect of them
   all. Therefore you cannot please God, but so far as you strive to walk
   in love, wisdom, and goodness. As all wisdom, love, and goodness,
   proceed from God, so nothing but love, wisdom, and goodness, can lead
   to God.

   When you love that which God loves, you act with Him, you join yourself
   to Him; and when you love what He dislikes, then you oppose Him, and
   separate yourself from Him. This is the true and the right way: think
   what God loves, and do you love it with all your heart.

   First of all, my child, worship and adore God, think of Him
   magnificently, speak of Him reverently, magnify His providence, adore
   His power, frequent His service, and pray unto Him frequently and
   constantly.

   Next to this, love your neighbour, which is all mankind, with such
   tenderness and affection as you love yourself. Think how God loves all
   mankind, how merciful He is to them, how tender He is of them, how
   carefully He preserves them; and then strive to love the world, as God
   loves it.

   God would have all men to be happy; therefore do you will and desire
   the same. All men are great instances of Divine Love; therefore let all
   men be instances of your love.

   But above all, my son, mark this; never do anything through strife, or
   envy, or emulation, or vain-glory. Never do anything in order to excel
   other people, but in order to please God, and because it is His will
   that you should do everything in the best manner that you can.

   For if it is once a pleasure to you to excel other people, it will by
   degrees be a pleasure to you to see other people not so good as
   yourself.

   Banish therefore every thought of self-pride, and self-distinction, and
   accustom yourself to rejoice in all the excellencies and perfections of
   your fellow-creatures, and be as glad to see any of their good actions
   as your own.

   For as God is as well pleased with their well-doings, as with yours; so
   you ought to desire, that everything that is wise, and holy, and good,
   may be performed in as high a manner by other people, as by yourself.

   Let this therefore be your only motive and spur to all good actions,
   honest industry, and business, to do everything in as perfect and
   excellent a manner as you can, for this only reason, because it is
   pleasing to God, who desires your perfection, and writes all your
   actions in a book. When I am dead, my son, you will be master of all my
   estate, which will be a great deal more than the necessities of one
   family require. Therefore, as you are to be charitable to the souls of
   men, and wish them the same happiness with you in Heaven, so be
   charitable to their bodies, and endeavour to make them as happy as you
   upon earth.

   As God has created all things for the common good of all men, so let
   that part of them which has fallen to your share be employed, as God
   would have all employed, for the common good of all.

   Do good, my son, first of all to those that most deserve it; but
   remember to do good to all. The greatest sinners receive daily
   instances of God's goodness towards them; He nourishes and preserves
   them, that they may repent, and return to Him: do you therefore imitate
   God, and think no one too bad to receive your relief and kindness, when
   you see that he wants it.

   I am teaching you Latin and Greek, not that you should desire to be a
   great critic, a fine poet, or an eloquent orator; I would not have your
   heart feel any of these desires; for the desire of these
   accomplishments is a vanity of the mind, and the masters of them are
   generally vain men. For the desire of anything that is not a real good,
   lessens the application of the mind after that which is so.

   But I teach you these languages, that at proper times you may look into
   the history of past ages, and learn the methods of God's providence
   over the world: that, reading the writings of the ancient Sages, you
   may see how wisdom and virtue have been the praise of great men of all
   ages, and fortify your mind by their wise sayings.

   Let truth and plainness therefore be the only ornament of your
   language, and study nothing but how to think of all things as they
   deserve, to choose everything that is best, to live according to reason
   and order, and to act in every part of your life in conformity to the
   will of God.

   Study how to fill your heart full of the love of God, and the love of
   your neighbour, and then be content to be no deeper a scholar, no finer
   a gentleman, than these tempers will make you. As true religion is
   nothing else but simple nature governed by right reason, so it loves
   and requires great plainness and simplicity of life. Therefore avoid
   all superfluous shows of finery and equipage, and let your house be
   plainly furnished with moderate conveniences. Do not consider what your
   estate can afford, but what right reason requires.

   Let your dress be sober, clean, and modest, not to set out the beauty
   of your person, but to declare the sobriety of your mind, that your
   outward garb may resemble the inward plainness and simplicity of your
   heart. For it is highly reasonable that you should be one man, all of a
   piece, and appear outwardly such as you are inwardly.

   As to your meat and drink, in them observe the highest rules of
   Christian temperance and sobriety; consider your body only as the
   servant and minister of your soul; and only so nourish it, as it may
   best perform an humble and obedient service to it.

   But, my son, observe this as a most principal thing, which I shall
   remember you of as long as I live with you:--

   Hate and despise all human glory, for it is nothing else but human
   folly. It is the greatest snare, and the greatest betrayer, that you
   can possibly admit into your heart.

   Love humility in all its instances; practise it in all its parts, for
   it is the noblest state of the soul of man; it will set your heart and
   affections right towards God, and fill you with every temper that is
   tender and affectionate towards men.

   Let every day, therefore, be a day of humility; condescend to all the
   weaknesses and infirmities of your fellow-creatures, cover their
   frailties, love their excellencies, encourage their virtues, relieve
   their wants, rejoice in their prosperities, compassionate their
   distress, receive their friendship, overlook their unkindness, forgive
   their malice, be a servant of servants, and condescend to do the lowest
   offices to the lowest of mankind.

   Aspire after nothing but your own purity and perfection, and have no
   ambition, but to do everything in so reasonable and religious a manner,
   that you may be glad that God is everywhere present, and sees and
   observes all your actions. The greatest trial of humility is an humble
   behaviour towards your equals in age, estate, and condition of life.
   Therefore be careful of all the motions of your heart towards these
   people. Let all your behaviour towards them be governed by unfeigned
   love. Have no desire to put any of your equals below you, nor any anger
   at those that would put themselves above you. If they are proud, they
   are ill of a very bad distemper; let them, therefore, have your tender
   pity; and perhaps your meekness may prove an occasion of their cure.
   But if your humility should do them no good, it will, however, be the
   greatest good that you can do to yourself.

   Remember that there is but one man in the world, with whom you are to
   have perpetual contention, and be always striving to exceed him, and
   that is yourself.

   The time of practising these precepts, my child, will soon be over with
   you, the world will soon slip through your hands, or rather you will
   soon slip through it; it seems but the other day since I received these
   same instructions from my dear father, that I am now leaving with you.
   And the God that gave me ears to hear, and a heart to receive, what my
   father said unto me, will, I hope, give you grace to love and follow
   the same instructions.

   Thus did Paternus educate his son. [36]

   Can any one now think that such an education as this would weaken and
   deject the minds of young people, and deprive the world of any worthy
   and reasonable labours?

   It is so far from that, that there is nothing so likely to ennoble and
   exalt the mind, and prepare it for the most heroical exercise of all
   virtues.

   For who will say, that a love of God, a desire of pleasing Him, a love
   of our neighbour, a love of truth of reason, and virtue, a
   contemplation of eternity, and the rewards of piety, are not stronger
   motives to great and good actions, than a little uncertain popular
   praise?

   On the other hand, there is nothing in reality that more weakens the
   mind, and reduces it to meanness and slavery, nothing that makes it
   less master of its own actions, or less capable of following reason,
   than a love of praise and honour.

   For, as praise and honour are often given to things and persons, where
   they are not due, as that is generally most praised and honoured, that
   most gratifies the humours, fashions, and vicious tempers of the world;
   so he that acts upon the desire of praise and applause, must part with
   every other principle; he must say black is white, put bitter for
   sweet, and sweet for bitter, and do the meanest, basest things, in
   order to be applauded.

   For in a corrupt world, as this is, worthy actions are only to be
   supported by their own worth, where, instead of being praised and
   honoured, they are most often reproached and persecuted.

   So that to educate children upon a motive of emulation, or a desire of
   glory, in a world where glory itself is false, and most commonly given
   wrongly, is to destroy the natural integrity and fortitude of their
   minds, and give them a bias, which will oftener carry them to base and
   mean, than to great and worthy actions.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [34] Paternus: the character, it is thought, is drawn from Law's
   father.

   [35] This usage of "consider" with the preposition "upon" died with the
   eighteenth century.

   [36] This address of Paternus might be an antidote to Chesterfield's
   letters to his son. At this date, 1728, Chesterfield was ambassador at
   the Hague, and the son Philip Stanhope was bornfour years later.
     __________________________________________________________________


  CHAPTER XIX


   Showing how the method of educating daughters makes it difficult for
   them to enter into the spirit of Christian humility. How miserably they
   are injured and abused by such an education. The spirit of a better
   education, represented in the character of Eusebia.


   THAT turn of mind which is taught and encouraged in the education of
   daughters, makes it exceeding difficult for them to enter into such a
   sense and practice of humility, as the spirit of Christianity
   requireth.

   The right education of this sex is of the utmost importance to human
   life. There is nothing that is more desirable for the common good of
   all the world. For though women do not carry on the trade and business
   of the world, yet as they are mothers, and mistresses of families, that
   have for some time the care of the education of their children of both
   sorts, they are entrusted with that which is of the greatest
   consequence to human life. For this reason, good or bad women are
   likely to do as much good or harm in the world, as good or bad men in
   the greatest business of life.

   For, as the health and strength, or weakness of our bodies, is very
   much owing to their methods of treating us when we were young; so the
   soundness or folly of our minds are not less owing to those first
   tempers and ways of thinking, which we eagerly receive from the love,
   tenderness, authority, and constant conversation of our mothers.

   As we call our first language our mother-tongue, so we may as justly
   call our first tempers [37] our mother-tempers; and perhaps it may be
   found more easy to forget the language, than to part entirely with
   those tempers, which we learnt in the nursery.

   It is, therefore, much to be lamented, that this sex, on whom so much
   depends, who have the first forming both of our bodies and our minds,
   are not only educated in pride, but in the silliest and most
   contemptible part of it.

   They are not indeed suffered to dispute with us the proud prizes of
   arts and sciences, of learning and eloquence, in which I have much
   suspicion they would often prove our superiors; but we turn them over
   to the study of beauty and dress, and the whole world conspires to make
   them think of nothing else. Fathers and mothers, friends and relations,
   seem to have no other wish towards the little girl, but that she may
   have a fair skin, a fine shape, dress well, and dance to admiration.

   Now if a fondness for our persons, a desire of beauty, a love of dress,
   be a part of pride (as surely it is a most contemptible part of it),
   the first step towards a woman's humility, seems to require a
   repentance of her education.

   For it must be owned that, generally speaking, good parents are never
   more fond of their daughters, than when they see them too fond of
   themselves, and dressed in such a manner, as is a great reproach to the
   gravity and sobriety of the Christian life.

   And what makes this matter still more to be lamented is this, that
   women are not only spoiled by this education, but we spoil that part of
   the world, which would otherwise furnish most instances of an eminent
   and exalted piety.

   For I believe it may be affirmed, that for the most part there is a
   finer sense, a clearer mind, a readier apprehension, and gentler
   dispositions in that sex than in the other.

   All which tempers, if they were truly improved by proper studies and
   sober methods of education, would in all probability carry them to
   greater heights of piety, than are to be found amongst the generality
   of men.

   For this reason, I speak to this matter with so much openness and
   plainness, because it is much to be lamented, that persons so naturally
   qualified to be great examples of piety, should, by an erroneous
   education, be made poor and gaudy spectacles of the greatest vanity.

   The Church has formerly had eminent saints in that sex, and it may
   reasonably be thought, that it is purely owing to their poor and vain
   education, that this honour of their sex is for the most part confined
   to former ages.

   The corruption of the world indulges them in great vanity, and mankind
   seem to consider them in no other view than as so many painted idols,
   that are to allure and gratify their passions; so that if many women
   are vain, light, gewgaw creatures, they have this to excuse themselves,
   that they are not only such as their education has made them, but such
   as the generality of the world allows them to be.

   But then they should consider, that the friends to their vanity are no
   friends of theirs; they should consider that they are to live for
   themselves; that they have as great a share in the rational nature as
   men have; that they have as much reason to pretend to, and as much
   necessity to aspire after, the highest accomplishments of a Christian
   and solid virtue, as the gravest and wisest among Christian
   philosophers.

   They should consider that they are abused, and injured, and betrayed
   from their only perfection, whenever they are taught that anything is
   an ornament in them, that is not an ornament in the wisest among
   mankind.

   It is generally said, that women are naturally of little and vain
   minds; but this I look upon to be as false and unreasonable, as to say
   that butchers are naturally cruel; for, as their cruelty is not owing
   to their nature, but to their way of life, which has changed their
   nature; so whatever littleness and vanity is to be observed in the
   minds of women, it is like the cruelty of butchers, a temper that is
   wrought into them by that life which they are taught and accustomed to
   lead.

   At least thus much must be said, that we cannot charge anything upon
   their nature, till we take care that it is not perverted by their
   education.

   And, on the other hand, if it were true that they were thus naturally
   vain and light, then how much more blameable is that education, which
   seems contrived to strengthen and increase this folly and weakness of
   their minds!

   For if it were a virtue in a woman to be proud and vain in herself, we
   could hardly take better means to raise this passion in her, than those
   that are now used in her education.

   Matilda [38] is a fine woman, of good breeding, great sense, and much
   religion. She has three daughters that are educated by herself. She
   will not trust them with any one else, or at any school, for fear they
   should learn anything ill. She stays with the dancing-master all the
   time he is with them, because she will hear everything that is said to
   them. She has heard them read the Scriptures so often, that they can
   repeat great part of it without book: and there is scarce a good book
   of devotion, but you may find it in their closets.

   Had Matilda lived in the first ages of Christianity, when it was
   practised in the fulness and plainness of its doctrines, she had in all
   probability been one of its greatest saints. But as she was born in
   corrupt times, where she wants examples of Christian perfection, and
   hardly ever saw a piety higher than her own; so she has many defects,
   and communicates them all to her daughters.

   Matilda never was meanly dressed in her life; and nothing pleases her
   in dress, but that which is very rich and beautiful to the eye.

   Her daughters see her great zeal for religion, but then they see an
   equal earnestness for all sorts of finery. They see she is not
   negligent of her devotion, but then they see her more careful to
   preserve her complexion, and to prevent those changes which time and
   age threaten her with.

   They are afraid to meet her, if they have missed the church; but then
   they are more afraid to see her, if they are not laced as strait as
   they can possibly be.

   She often shows them her own picture, which was taken when their father
   fell in love with her. She tells them how distracted he was with
   passion at the first sight of her, and that she had never had so fine a
   complexion, but for the diligence of her good mother, who took
   exceeding care of it.

   Matilda is so intent upon all the arts of improving their dress, that
   she has some new fancy almost every day, and leaves no ornament
   untried, from the richest jewel to the poorest flower. She is so nice
   and critical in her judgment, so sensible of the smallest error, that
   the maid is often forced to dress and undress her daughters three or
   four times in a day, before she can be satisfied with it.

   As to the patching, she reserves that to herself, for, she says, if
   they are not stuck on with judgment, they are rather a prejudice than
   an advantage to the face.

   The children see so plainly the temper of their mother, that they even
   affect to be more pleased with dress, and to be more fond of every
   little ornament than they really are, merely to gain her favour.

   They saw their eldest sister once brought to tears, and her
   perverseness severely reprimanded for presuming to say, that she
   thought it was better to cover the neck, than to go so far naked as the
   modern dress requires.

   She stints them in their meals, and is very scrupulous of what they eat
   and drink, and tells them how many fine shapes she has seen spoiled in
   her time, for want of such care. If a pimple rises in their faces, she
   is in a great fright, and they themselves are as afraid to see her with
   it, as if they had committed some great sin.

   Whenever they begin to look too sanguine and healthful, she calls in
   the assistance of the doctor; and if physic, or issues, will keep the
   complexion from inclining to coarse or ruddy, she thinks them well
   employed.

   By this means they are poor, pale, sickly, infirm creatures, vapoured
   through want of spirits, crying at the smallest accidents, swooning
   away at anything that frights them, and hardly able to bear the weight
   of their best clothes.

   The eldest daughter lived as long as she could under this discipline,
   and died in the twentieth year of her age.

   When her body was opened it appeared that her ribs had grown into her
   liver, and that her other entrails were much hurt by being crushed
   together with her stays, which her mother had ordered to be twitched so
   strait, that it often brought tears into her eyes whilst the maid was
   dressing her.

   Her youngest daughter has run away with a gamester, a man of great
   beauty, who in dressing and dancing has no superior.

   Matilda says, she should die with grief at this accident, but that her
   conscience tells her, she has contributed nothing to it herself. She
   appeals to their closets, to their books of devotion, to testify what
   care she has taken to establish her children in a life of solid piety
   and devotion.

   Now, though I do not intend to say, that no daughters are brought up in
   a better way than this, for I hope there are many that are; yet thus
   much I believe may be said, that the much greater part of them are not
   brought up so well, or accustomed to so much religion, as in the
   present instance.

   Their minds are turned as much to the care of their beauty and dress,
   and the indulgence of vain desires, as in the present case, without
   having such rules of devotion to stand against it. So that if solid
   piety, humility, and a sober sense of themselves, is much wanted in
   that sex, it is the plain and natural consequence of a vain and corrupt
   education.

   And if they are often too ready to receive the first fops, beaux, and
   fine dancers, for their husbands, it is no wonder they should like that
   in men, which they have been taught to admire in themselves.

   And if they are often seen to lose that little religion they were
   taught in their youth, it is no more to be wondered at than to see a
   little flower choked and killed amongst rank weeds.

   For personal pride and affectation, a delight in beauty and fondness of
   finery, are tempers that must either kill all religion in the soul, or
   be themselves killed by it; they can no more thrive together than
   health and sickness.

   Some people that judge hastily will perhaps here say, that I am
   exercising too great a severity against the sex.

   But more reasonable persons will easily observe, that I entirely spare
   the sex, and only arraign their education; that I not only spare them,
   but plead their interest, assert their honour, set forth their
   perfections, commend their natural tempers, and only condemn that
   education which is so injurious to their interests, so debases their
   honour, and deprives them of the benefit of their excellent natures and
   tempers.

   Their education, I profess, I cannot spare; but the only reason is,
   because it is their greatest enemy; because it deprives the world of so
   many blessings, and the Church of so many saints, as might reasonably
   be expected from persons so formed by their natural tempers to all
   goodness and tenderness, and so fitted by the clearness and brightness
   of their minds to contemplate, love, and admire everything that is
   holy, virtuous, and Divine.

   If it should here be said, that I even charge too high upon their
   education, and that they are not so much hurt by it as I imagine:

   It may be answered, that though I do not pretend to state the exact
   degree of mischief that is done by it, yet its plain and natural
   tendency to do harm is sufficient to justify the most absolute
   condemnation of it.

   But if any one would know how generally women are hurt by this
   education; if he imagines there may be no personal pride or vain
   fondness of themselves, in those that are patched and dressed out with
   so much glitter of art and ornament; let him only make the following
   experiment wherever he pleases.

   Let him only acquaint any such woman with his opinion of her: I do not
   mean that he should tell her to her face, or do it in any rude public
   manner; but let him contrive the most civil, secret, friendly way that
   he can think of, only to let her know his opinion, that he thinks she
   is neither handsome, nor dresses well, nor becomes her finery; and I
   daresay he will find there are but very few finely dressed women that
   will like him never the worse for his bare opinion, though known to
   none but themselves; and that he will not be long without seeing the
   effects of their resentment.

   But if such an experiment would show him that there are but few such
   women that could bear with his friendship, after they knew he had such
   an opinion of them, surely it is time to complain of, and accuse that
   education, which so generally corrupts their hearts.

   For, though it is hard to judge of the hearts of people, yet where they
   declare their resentment and uneasiness at anything, there they pass
   the judgment upon themselves. If a woman cannot forgive a man who
   thinks she has no beauty, nor any ornament from her dress, there she
   infallibly discovers the state of her own heart, and is condemned by
   her own, and not another's judgment.

   For we never are angry at others, but when their opinions of us are
   contrary to that which we have of ourselves.

   A man that makes no pretences to scholarship, is never angry at those
   that do not take him to be a scholar: so if a woman had no opinion of
   her own person and dress, she should never be angry at those who are of
   the same opinion with herself.

   So that the general bad effects of this education are too much known to
   admit of any reasonable doubt.

   But how possible it is to bring up daughters in the more excellent way,
   let the following character declare.

   Eusebia is a pious widow, well born, and well bred, and has a good
   estate for five daughters, whom she brings up as one entrusted by God
   to fit five virgins for the kingdom of Heaven. Her family has the same
   regulation as a religious house, and all its orders tend to the support
   of a constant regular devotion.

   She, her daughters, and her maids, meet together at all the hours of
   prayer in the day, and chant psalms and other devotions, and spend the
   rest of their time in such good works and innocent diversions as render
   them fit to return to their psalms and prayers.

   She loves them as her spiritual children, and they reverence her as
   their spiritual mother, with an affection far above that of the fondest
   friends.

   She has divided part of her estate amongst them, that every one may be
   charitable out of her own stock, and each of them takes it in her turn
   to provide for the poor and sick of the parish.

   Eusebia brings them up to all kinds of labour that are proper for
   women, as sewing, knitting, spinning, and all other parts of
   housewifery; not for their amusement, but that they may be serviceable
   to themselves and others, and be saved from those temptations which
   attend an idle life.

   She tells them, she had rather see them reduced to the necessity of
   maintaining themselves by their own work, than to have riches to excuse
   themselves from labour. For though, says she, you may be able to assist
   the poor without your labour, yet by your labour you will be able to
   assist them more.

   If Eusebia has lived as free from sin as it is possible for human
   nature, it is because she is always watching and guarding against all
   instances of pride. And if her virtues are stronger and higher than
   other people's, it is because they are all founded in a deep humility.

   My children, says she, when your father died I was much pitied by my
   friends as having all the care of a family, and the management of an
   estate fallen upon me.

   But my own grief was founded upon another principle; I was grieved to
   see myself deprived of so faithful a friend, and that such an eminent
   example of Christian virtues should be taken from the eyes of his
   children, before they were of an age to love and follow it.

   But as to worldly cares, which my friends thought so heavy upon me,
   they are most of them of our own making, and fall away as soon as we
   know ourselves.

   If a person in a dream is disturbed with strange appearances, his
   trouble is over as soon as he is awake, and sees that it was the folly
   of a dream.

   Now, when a right knowledge of ourselves enters into our minds, it
   makes as great change in all our thoughts and apprehensions, as when we
   awake from the wanderings of a dream.

   We acknowledge a man to be mad or melancholy who fancies himself to be
   a glass, and so is afraid of stirring; or, taking himself to be wax,
   dare not let the sun shine upon him.

   But, my children, there are things in the world which pass for wisdom,
   politeness, grandeur, happiness, and fine breeding, which show as great
   ignorance of ourselves, and might as justly pass for thorough madness,
   as when a man fancies himself to be glass or ice.

   A woman that dares not appear in the world without fine clothes, that
   thinks it a happiness to have a face finely coloured, to have a skin
   delicately fair, that had rather die than be reduced to poverty and be
   forced to work for a poor maintenance, is as ignorant of herself, to
   the full, as he that fancies himself to be glass.

   For this reason, all my discourse with you, has been to acquaint you
   with yourselves, and to accustom you to such books and devotions, as
   may best instruct you in this greatest of all knowledge.

   You would think it hard not to know the family into which you were
   born, what ancestors you were descended from, and what estate was to
   come to you. But, my children, you may know all this with exactness,
   and yet be as ignorant of yourselves, as he that takes himself to be
   wax.

   For though you were all of you born of my body, and bear your father's
   name, yet you are all of you pure spirits. I do not mean that you have
   not bodies that want meat and drink, and sleep and clothing, but that
   all that deserves to be called you, is nothing else but spirit; a being
   spiritual and rational in its nature, that is as contrary to all
   fleshly or corporeal beings as life is contrary to death; that is made
   in the image of God, to live forever, never to cease any more, but to
   enjoy life, and reason, and knowledge, and happiness in the presence of
   God, and the society of Angels, and glorious spirits to all eternity.

   Everything that you call yours, besides this spirit, is but like your
   clothing; something that is only to be used for a while, and then to
   end, and die, and wear away, and to signify no more to you, than the
   clothing and bodies of other people.

   But, my children, you are not only in this manner spirits, but you are
   fallen spirits, that began your life in a state of corruption and
   disorder, full of tempers and passions that blind and darken the reason
   of your mind, and incline you to that which is hurtful.

   Your bodies are not only poor and perishing like your clothes, but they
   are like infected clothes, that fill you with ill diseases and
   distempers, which oppress the soul with sickly appetites, and vain
   cravings.

   So that all of us are like two beings, that have, as it were, two
   hearts within us; with the one we see, and taste, and admire reason,
   purity, and holiness: with the other we incline to pride, and vanity,
   and sensual delights.

   This internal war we always feel within us more or less: and if you
   would know the one thing necessary to all the world, it is this; to
   preserve and perfect all that is rational, holy, and Divine in our
   nature, and to mortify, remove, and destroy all that vanity, pride, and
   sensuality, which springs from the corruption of our state.

   Could you think, my children, when you look at the world, and see what
   customs, and fashions, and pleasures, and troubles, and projects, and
   tempers, employ the hearts and time of mankind, that things were thus,
   as I have told you?

   But do not you be affected at these things; the world is in a great
   dream, and but few people are awake in it.

   We fancy that we fall into darkness when we die; but, alas, we are most
   of us in the dark till then; and the eyes of our souls only then begin
   to see, when our bodily eyes are closing.

   You see then your state, my children; you are to honour, improve, and
   perfect the spirit that is within you; you are to prepare it for the
   kingdom of Heaven, to nourish it with the love of God and of virtue, to
   adorn it with good works, and to make it as holy and heavenly as you
   can. You are to preserve it from the errors and vanities of the world;
   to save it from the corruptions of the body, from those false delights
   and sensual tempers which the body tempts it with.

   You are to nourish your spirits with pious readings and holy
   meditations, with watchings, fastings, and prayers, that you may taste,
   and relish, and desire that eternal state, which is to begin when this
   life ends.

   As to your bodies, you are to consider them as poor, perishing things,
   that are sickly and corrupt at present, and will soon drop into common
   dust. You are to watch over them as enemies that are always trying to
   tempt and betray you, and so never follow their advice and counsel; you
   are to consider them as the place and habitation of your souls, and so
   keep them pure, and clean, and decent; you are to consider them as the
   servants and instruments of action, and so give them food, and rest,
   and raiment, that they may be strong and healthful to do the duties of
   a charitable, useful, pious life.

   Whilst you live thus, you live like yourselves; and whenever you have
   less regard to your souls, or more regard to your bodies, than this
   comes to; whenever you are more intent upon adorning your persons, than
   upon the perfecting of your souls, you are much more beside yourselves
   than he that had rather have a laced coat than a healthful body.

   For this reason, my children, I have taught you nothing that was
   dangerous for you to learn; I have kept you from everything that might
   betray you into weakness, and folly; or make you think anything fine,
   but a fine mind; anything happy, but the favour of God; or anything
   desirable, but to do all the good you possibly can.

   Instead of the vain, immodest entertainment of plays and operas, I have
   taught you to delight in visiting the sick and poor. What music, and
   dancing, and diversions are to many in the world, that prayers and
   devotions, and psalms, are to you. Your hands have not been employed in
   plaiting the hair, and adorning your persons; but in making clothes for
   the naked. You have not wasted your fortunes upon yourselves, but have
   added your labour to them, to do more good to other people.

   Instead of forced shapes, patched faces, genteel airs, and affected
   motions, I have taught you to conceal your bodies with modest garments,
   and let the world have nothing to view of you, but the plainness, the
   sincerity, and humility of all your behaviour.

   You know, my children, the high perfection and the great rewards of
   virginity; you know how it frees from worldly cares and troubles, and
   furnishes means and opportunities of higher advancements in a Divine
   life; therefore, love, and esteem, and honour virginity: bless God for
   all that glorious company of holy virgins, that from the beginning of
   Christianity have, in the several ages of the Church, renounced the
   cares and pleasures of matrimony, to be perpetual examples of solitude,
   contemplation, and prayer.

   But as every one has his proper gift from God, as I look upon you all
   to be so many great blessings of a married state; so I leave it to your
   choice, either to do as I have done, or to aspire after higher degrees
   of perfection in a virgin state of life.

   I desire nothing, I press nothing upon you, but to make the most of
   human life, and to aspire after perfection; whatever state of life you
   choose.

   Never, therefore, consider yourselves as persons that are to be seen,
   admired, and courted by men; but as poor sinners, that are to save
   yourselves from the vanities and follies of a miserable world, by
   humility, devotion, and self-denial. Learn to live for your own sakes
   and the service of God; and let nothing in the world be of any value
   with you, but that which you can turn into a service to God, and a
   means of your future happiness.

   Consider often how powerfully you are called to a virtuous life, and
   what great and glorious things God has done for you, to make you in
   love with everything that can promote His glory.

   Think upon the vanity and shortness of human life, and let death and
   eternity be often in your minds; for these thoughts will strengthen and
   exalt your minds, make you wise and judicious, and truly sensible of
   the littleness of all human things.

   Think of the happiness of Prophets and Apostles, saints and martyrs,
   who are now rejoicing in the presence of God, and see themselves
   possessors of eternal glory. And then think how desirable a thing it is
   to watch, and pray, and do good, as they did, that when you die you may
   have your lot amongst them.

   Whether married, therefore, or unmarried, consider yourselves as
   mothers and sisters, as friends and relations, to all that want your
   assistance; and never allow yourselves to be idle, whilst others are in
   want of anything that your hands can make for them.

   This useful, charitable, humble employment of yourselves, is what I
   recommend to you with great earnestness, as being a substantial part of
   a wise and pious life. And besides the good you will thereby do to
   other people, every virtue of your own heart will be very much improved
   by it.

   For next to reading, meditation, and prayer, there is nothing that so
   secures our hearts from foolish passions, nothing that preserves so
   holy and wise a frame of mind, as some useful, humble employment of
   ourselves.

   Never, therefore, consider your labour as an amusement that is to get
   rid of your time, and so may be as trifling as you please; but consider
   it as something that is to be serviceable to yourselves and others,
   that is to serve some sober ends of life, to save and redeem your time,
   and make it turn to your account when the works of all people shall be
   tried by fire.

   When you were little, I left you to little amusements, to please
   yourselves in any things that were free from harm; but as you are now
   grown up to a knowledge of God and yourselves; as your minds are now
   acquainted with the worth and value of virtue, and exalted with the
   great doctrines of religion, you are now to do nothing as children, but
   despise everything that is poor, or vain, or impertinent; you are now
   to make the labours of your hands suitable to the piety of your hearts,
   and employ themselves for the same ends, and with the same spirit, as
   you watch and pray.

   For if there is any good to be done by your labour, if you can possibly
   employ yourselves usefully to other people; how silly is it, how
   contrary to the wisdom of religion, to make that a mere amusement,
   which might as easily be made an exercise of the greatest charity!

   What would you think of the wisdom of him that should employ his time
   in distilling of waters, and making liquors which nobody could use,
   merely to amuse himself with the variety of their colour and clearness,
   when with less labour and expense he might satisfy the wants of those
   who have nothing to drink?

   Yet he would be as wisely employed as those that are amusing themselves
   with such tedious works as they neither need, nor hardly know how to
   use when they are finished; when with less labour and expense they
   might be doing as much good as he that is clothing the naked, or
   visiting the sick.

   Be glad therefore to know the wants of the poorest people, and let your
   hands be employed in making such mean and ordinary things for them, as
   their necessities require. By thus making your labour a gift and
   service to the poor, your ordinary work will be changed into a holy
   service, and made as acceptable to God as your devotions.

   And as charity is the greatest of all virtues, as it always was the
   chief temper of the greatest saints; so nothing can make your own
   charity more amiable in the sight of God, than this method of adding
   your labour to it.

   The humility also of this employment will be as beneficial to you as
   the charity of it. It will keep you from all vain and proud thoughts of
   your own state and distinction in life, and from treating the poor as
   creatures of a different species. By accustoming yourselves to this
   labour and service for the poor, as the representatives of Jesus
   Christ, you will soon find your heart softened into the greatest
   meekness and lowliness towards them. You will reverence their state and
   condition, think it an honour to serve them, and never be so pleased
   with yourself as when you are most humbly employed in their service.

   This will make you true disciples of your meek Lord and Master, who
   came into the world not to be ministered unto, but to minister; and
   though He was Lord of all, and amongst the creatures of His own making,
   yet was amongst them as one that serveth.

   Christianity has then had its most glorious effects upon your hearts,
   when it has thus changed your spirit, removed all the pride of life
   from you, and made you delight in humbling yourselves beneath the
   lowest of all your fellow-creatures.

   Live, therefore, my children, as you have begun your lives, in humble
   labour for the good of others; and let ceremonious visits and vain
   acquaintances have as little of your time as you possibly can. Contract
   no foolish friendships, or vain fondnesses for particular persons; but
   love them most that most turn your love towards God, and your
   compassion towards all the world.

   But, above all, avoid the conversation of fine-bred fops and beaux, and
   hate nothing more than the idle discourse, the flattery and compliments
   of that sort of men; for they are the shame of their own sex, and ought
   to be the abhorrence of ours.

   When you go abroad, let humility, modesty, and a decent carriage, be
   all the state that you take upon you; and let tenderness, compassion,
   and good nature, be all the fine breeding that you show in any place.

   If evil-speaking, scandal, or back-biting, be the conversation where
   you happen to be, keep your heart and your tongue to yourself: be as
   much grieved as if you were amongst cursing and swearing, and retire as
   soon as you can.

   Though you intend to marry, yet let the time never come, till you find
   a man that has those perfections which you have been labouring after
   yourselves; who is likely to be a friend to all your virtues, and with
   whom it is better to live, than to want the benefit of his example.

   Love poverty, and reverence poor people; as for many reasons, so
   particularly for this, because our Blessed Saviour was one of the
   number, and because you may make them all so many friends and advocates
   with God for you.

   Visit and converse with them frequently; you will often find
   simplicity, innocence, patience, fortitude, and great piety amongst
   them; and where they are not so, your good example may amend them.

   Rejoice at every opportunity of doing an humble action, and exercising
   the meekness of your minds, whether it be, as the Scripture expresses
   it, in washing the saints' feet, that is, in waiting upon, and serving
   those that are below you; or in bearing with the haughtiness and
   ill-manners of those that are your equals, or above you. For there is
   nothing better than humility; it is the fruitful soil of all virtues;
   and everything that is kind and good naturally grows from it.

   Therefore, my children, pray for, and practise humility, and reject
   everything in dress, or carriage, or conversation, that has any
   appearance of pride.

   Strive to do everything that is praiseworthy, but do nothing in order
   to be praised; nor think of any reward for all your labours of love and
   virtues, till Christ cometh with all His Holy Angels.

   And above all, my children, have a care of vain and proud thoughts of
   your own virtues. For as soon as ever people live different from the
   common way of the world, and despise its vanities, the devil represents
   to their minds the height of their own perfections; and is content they
   should excel in good works, provided that he can but make them proud of
   them.

   Therefore watch over your virtues with a jealous eye, and reject every
   vain thought, as you would reject the most wicked imagination; and
   think what a loss it would be to you to have the fruit of all your good
   works devoured by the vanity of your own minds.

   Never, therefore, allow yourselves to despise those who do not follow
   your rules of life: but force your hearts to love them, and pray to God
   for them; and let humility be always whispering it into your ears, that
   you yourselves would fall from those rules to-morrow, if God should
   leave you to your own strength and wisdom.

   When, therefore, you have spent days and weeks well, do not suffer your
   hearts to contemplate anything as your own, but give all the glory to
   the goodness of God, who has carried you through such rules of holy
   living, as you were not able to observe by your own strength; and take
   care to begin the next day, not as proficients in virtue, that can do
   great matters, but as poor beginners, that want the daily assistance of
   God to save you from the grossest sins.

   Your dear father was an humble, watchful, pious, wise man. Whilst his
   sickness would suffer him to talk with me, his discourse was chiefly
   about your education. He knew the benefits of humility, he saw the
   ruins which pride made in our sex; and therefore he conjured me, with
   the tenderest expressions, to renounce the fashionable ways of
   educating daughters in pride and softness, in the care of their beauty,
   and dress; and to bring you all up in the plainest, simplest instances
   of an humble, holy, and industrious life.

   He taught me an admirable rule of humility, which he practised all the
   days of his life, which was this: to let no morning pass without
   thinking upon some frailty and infirmity of our own, that may put us to
   confusion, make us blush inwardly, and entertain a mean opinion of
   ourselves.

   Think, therefore, my children, that the soul of your good father, who
   is now with God, speaks to you through my mouth; and let the double
   desire of your father, who is gone, and of me, who am with you, prevail
   upon you to love God, to study your own perfection, to practise
   humility, and with innocent labour and charity to do all the good that
   you can to all your fellow-creatures, till God calls you to another
   life.

   Thus did the pious widow educate her daughters.

   The spirit of this education speaks so plainly for itself, that I hope
   I need say nothing in its justification. If we could see it in life, as
   well as read of it in books, the world would soon find the happy
   effects of it.

   A daughter thus educated, would be a blessing to any family that she
   came into; a fit companion for a wise man, and make him happy in the
   government of his family, and the education of his children.

   And she that either was not inclined, or could not dispose of herself
   well in marriage, would know how to live to great and excellent ends in
   a state of virginity.

   A very ordinary knowledge of the spirit of Christianity seems to be
   enough to convince us, that no education can be of true advantage to
   young women, but that which trains them up in humble industry, in great
   plainness of life, in exact modesty of dress, manners, and carriage,
   and in strict devotion. For what should a Christian woman be, but a
   plain, unaffected, modest, humble creature, averse to everything in her
   dress and carriage that can draw the eyes of beholders, or gratify the
   passions of lewd and amorous persons?

   How great a stranger must he be to the Gospel who does not know, that
   it requires this to be the spirit of a pious woman!

   Our blessed Saviour saith, "Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after
   her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart." [Matt. v.
   28]

   Need an education, which turns women's minds to the arts and ornaments
   of dress and beauty, be more strongly condemned, than by these words?
   For surely, if the eye is so easily and dangerously betrayed, every art
   and ornament is sufficiently condemned, that naturally tends to betray
   it.

   And how can a woman of piety more justly abhor and avoid anything, than
   that which makes her person more a snare and temptation to other
   people? If lust and wanton eyes are the death of the soul, can any
   women think themselves innocent, who with naked breasts, patched faces,
   and every ornament of dress, invite the eye to offend?

   And as there is no pretence for innocence in such a behaviour, so
   neither can they tell how to set any bounds to their guilt. For as they
   can never know how much or how often they have occasioned sin in other
   people, so they can never know how much guilt will be placed to their
   own account.

   This, one would think, should sufficiently deter every pious woman from
   everything that might render her the occasion of loose passions in
   other people.

   St. Paul, speaking of a thing entirely innocent, reasons after this
   manner: "But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
   stumbling-block to those that are weak . . . And through thy knowledge
   thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ died. But when ye sin so
   against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against
   Christ. Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no
   flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend." [1
   Cor. viii. 11-13]

   Now if this is the spirit of Christianity; if it requires us to abstain
   from things thus lawful, innocent, and useful, when there is any danger
   of betraying our weak brethren into any error thereby: surely it cannot
   be reckoned too nice or needless a point of conscience for women to
   avoid such things as are neither innocent nor useful, but naturally
   tend to corrupt their own hearts, and raise ill passions in other
   people.

   Surely every woman of Christian piety ought to say, in the spirit of
   the Apostle, If patching and paint, or any vain adorning of my person,
   be a natural means of making weak, unwary eyes to offend, I will
   renounce all these arts as long as I live, lest I should make my
   fellow-creatures to offend.

   I shall now leave this subject of humility, having said enough, as I
   hope, to recommend the necessity of making it the constant, chief
   subject of your devotion, at this hour of prayer.

   I have considered the nature and necessity of humility, and its great
   importance to a religious life. I have shown you how many difficulties
   are formed against it from our natural tempers, the spirit of the
   world, and the common education of both sexes.

   These considerations will, I hope, instruct you how to form your
   prayers for it to the best advantage, and teach you the necessity of
   letting no day pass, without a serious, earnest application to God, for
   the whole spirit of humility: fervently beseeching Him to fill every
   part of your soul with it, to make it the ruling, constant habit of
   your mind, that you may not only feel it, but feel all your other
   tempers arising from it; that you may have no thoughts, no desires, no
   designs, but such as are the true fruits of a humble, meek, and lowly
   heart.

   That you may always appear poor, and little, and mean in your own eyes,
   and fully content that others should have the same opinion of you.

   That the whole course of your life, your expense, your house, your
   dress, your manner of eating, drinking, conversing, and doing
   everything, may be so many continual proofs of the true, unfeigned
   humility of your heart.

   That you may look for nothing, claim nothing, resent nothing; that you
   may go through all the actions and accidents of life, calmly and
   quietly, as in the presence of God, looking wholly unto Him, acting
   wholly for Him: neither seeking vain applause, nor resenting neglect or
   affronts, but doing and receiving everything in the meek and lowly
   spirit of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [37] Tempers, i.e. disposition.

   [38] Matilda, perhaps chosen as the name of the first English Empress.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XX


   Recommending devotion at twelve o'clock, called in Scripture the sixth
   hour of the day. This frequency of devotion equally desirable by all
   orders of people. Universal love is here recommended to be the subject
   of prayer at this hour. Of intercession, as an act of universal love.


   IT WILL perhaps be thought by some people, that these hours of prayer
   come too thick; that they can only be observed by people of great
   leisure, and ought not to be pressed upon the generality of men, who
   have the cares of families, trades, and employments; nor upon the
   gentry, whose state and figure in the world cannot admit of this
   frequency of devotion. And that it is only fit for monasteries and
   nunneries, or such people as have no more to do in the world than they
   have.

   To this it is answered,

   First, That this method of devotion is not pressed upon any sort of
   people, as absolutely necessary, but recommended to all people, as the
   best, the happiest, and most perfect way of life.

   And if a great and exemplary devotion is as much the greatest happiness
   and perfection of a merchant, a soldier, or a man of quality, as it is
   the greatest happiness and perfection of the most retired contemplative
   life, then it is as proper to recommend it without any abatements to
   one order of men, as to another: because happiness and perfection are
   of the same worth and value to all people.

   The gentleman and tradesman may, and must, spend much of their time
   differently from the pious monk in the cloister, or the contemplative
   hermit in the desert; but then, as the monk and hermit lose the ends of
   retirement unless they make it all serviceable to devotion; so the
   gentleman and merchant fail of the greatest ends of a social life, and
   live to their loss in the world, unless devotion be their chief and
   governing temper.

   It is certainly very honest and creditable for people to engage in
   trades and employments; it is reasonable for gentlemen to manage well
   their estates and families, and take such recreations as are proper to
   their state. But then every gentleman and tradesman loses the greatest
   happiness of his creation, is robbed of something that is greater than
   all employments, distinctions, and pleasures of the world, if he does
   not live more to piety and devotion than to anything else in the world.

   Here are therefore no excuses made for men of business and figure in
   the world. First, Because it would be to excuse them from that which is
   the greatest end of living; and be only finding so many reasons for
   making them less beneficial to themselves and less serviceable to God
   and the world.

   Secondly, Because most men of business and figure engage too far in
   worldly matters; much farther than the reasons of human life, or the
   necessities of the world require.

   Merchants and tradesmen, for instance, are generally ten times farther
   engaged in business than they need; which is so far from being a
   reasonable excuse for their want of time for devotion, that it is their
   crime, and must be censured as a blameable instance of covetousness and
   ambition.

   The gentry and people of figure either give themselves up to state
   employments, or to the gratifications of their passions, in a life of
   gaiety and debauchery; and if these things might be admitted as
   allowable avocations from devotion, devotion must be reckoned a poor
   circumstance of life.

   Unless gentlemen can show that they have another God than the Father of
   our Lord Jesus Christ; another nature than that which is derived from
   Adam; another religion than the Christian; it is in vain to plead their
   state, and dignity, and pleasures, as reasons for not preparing their
   souls for God, by a strict and regular devotion.

   For since piety and devotion are the common unchangeable means of
   saving all the souls in the world that shall be saved, there is nothing
   left for the gentleman, the soldier, and the tradesman, but to take
   care that their several states be, by care and watchfulness, by
   meditation and prayer, made states of an exact and solid piety.

   If a merchant, having forborne from too great business, that he might
   quietly attend on the service of God, should therefore die worth twenty
   instead of fifty thousand pounds, could any one say that he had
   mistaken his calling, or gone a loser out of the world?

   If a gentleman should have killed fewer foxes, been less frequent at
   balls, gaming, and merry meetings, because stated parts of his time had
   been given to retirement, and meditation, and devotion, could it be
   thought, that when he left the world, he would regret the loss of those
   hours that he had given to the care and improvement of his soul?

   If a tradesman, by aspiring after Christian perfection, and retiring
   himself often from his business, should, instead of leaving his
   children fortunes to spend in luxury and idleness, leave them to live
   by their own honest labour, could it be said that he had made a wrong
   use of the world, because he had shown his children that he had more
   regard to that which is eternal, than to this which is so soon to be at
   an end?

   Since, therefore, devotion is not only the best and most desirable
   practice in a cloister, but the best and most desirable practice of
   men, as men, and in every state of life; they that desire to be excused
   from it, because they are men of figure, and estates, and business, are
   no wiser than those that should desire to be excused from health and
   happiness, because they were men of figure and estates.

   I cannot see why every gentleman, merchant, or soldier, should not put
   those questions seriously to himself:

   What is the best thing for me to intend and drive at in all my actions?
   How shall I do to make the most of human life? What ways shall I wish
   that I had taken, when I am leaving the world?

   Now to be thus wise, and to make thus much use of our reason, seems to
   be but a small and necessary piece of wisdom. For how can we pretend to
   sense and judgment, if we dare not seriously consider, and answer, and
   govern our lives by that which such questions require of us?

   Shall a nobleman think his birth too high a dignity to condescend to
   such questions as these? Or a tradesman think his business too great,
   to take any care about himself?

   Now here is desired no more devotion in any one's life, than the
   answering these few questions requires.

   Any devotion that is not to the greater advantage of him that uses it
   than anything that he can do in the room of it; any devotion that does
   not procure an infinitely greater good than can be got by neglecting
   it, is freely yielded up; here is no demand of it.

   But if people will live in so much ignorance, as never to put these
   questions to themselves, but push on a blind life at all chances, in
   quest of they know not what, nor why; without ever considering the
   worth, or value, or tendency of their actions, without considering what
   God, reason, eternity, and their own happiness require of them; it is
   for the honour of devotion, that none can neglect it, but those who are
   thus inconsiderate, who dare not inquire after that which is the best,
   and most worthy of their choice.

   It is true, Claudius, [39] you are a man of figure and estate, and are
   to act the part of such a station in human life; you are not called, as
   Elijah was, to be a prophet, or as St. Paul, to be an Apostle.

   But will you therefore not love yourself? Will you not seek and study
   your own happiness, because you are not called to preach up the same
   things to other people?

   You would think it very absurd, for a man not to value his own health,
   because he was not a physician; nor the preservation of his limbs
   because he was not a bone-setter. Yet it is more absurd for you,
   Claudius, to neglect the improvement of your soul in piety, because you
   are not an Apostle, or a bishop.

   Consider this text of Scripture: "If ye live after the flesh, ye shall
   die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
   shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
   sons of God." [Rom. viii. 13, 14] Do you think that this Scripture does
   not equally relate to all mankind? Can you find any exception here for
   men of figure and estates? Is not a spiritual and devout life here made
   the common condition on which all men are to become sons of God? Will
   you leave hours of prayer, and rules of devotion to particular states
   of life, when nothing but the same spirit of devotion can save you, or
   any man, from eternal death?

   Consider again this text: "For we must all appear before the
   judgment-seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in
   his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad."
   [2 Cor. v. 10] Now if your estate would excuse you from appearing
   before this judgment-seat, if your figure could protect you from
   receiving according to your works, there would be some pretence for
   your leaving devotion to other people. But if you, who are now thus
   distinguished, must then appear naked amongst common souls, without any
   other distinction from others but such as your virtues or sins give
   you; does it not as much concern you, as any prophet or Apostle, to
   make the best provision for the best rewards at that great day?

   Again, consider this doctrine of the Apostle: "For none of us," that
   is, of us Christians, "liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.
   For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die
   unto the Lord. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived,
   that He might be Lord both of the dead and living." [Rom. xiv. 7, 8, 9]

   Now are you, Claudius, excepted out of the doctrine of this text? Will
   you, because of your condition, leave it to any particular sort of
   people, to live and die unto Christ? If so, you must leave it to them,
   to be redeemed by the Death and Resurrection of Christ. For it is the
   express doctrine of the text, that for this end Christ died and rose
   again, that none of us should live to himself. It is not that priests,
   or Apostles, or monks, or hermits, should live no longer to themselves;
   but that none of us, that is, no Christian of what state soever, should
   live unto himself.

   If, therefore, there be any instances of piety, any rules of devotion,
   which you can neglect, and yet live as truly unto Christ as if you
   observed them, this text calls you to no such devotion. But if you
   forsake such devotion, as you yourself know is expected from some
   particular sorts of people; such devotion as you know becomes people
   that live wholly unto Christ, that aspire after great piety; if you
   neglect such devotion for any worldly consideration, that you may live
   more to your own temper and taste, more to the fashions and ways of the
   world, you forsake the terms on which all Christians are to receive the
   benefit of Christ's Death and Resurrection.

   Observe, farther, how the same doctrine is taught by St. Peter: "As He
   which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
   conversation." [1 Pet. i. 15]

   If, therefore, Claudius, you are one of those that are here called, you
   see what it is that you are called to. It is not to have so much
   religion as suits with your temper, your business, or your pleasures;
   it is not to a particular sort of piety, that may be sufficient for
   gentlemen of figure and estates; but it is, first, to be holy, as He
   which hath called you is holy; secondly, it is to be thus holy in all
   manner of conversation; that is, to carry this spirit and degree of
   holiness into every port, [40] and through the whole form of your life.

   And the reason the Apostle immediately gives, why this spirit of
   holiness must be the common spirit of Christians, as such, is very
   affecting, and such as equally calls upon all sorts of Christians.
   "Forasmuch as ye know," says he, "that ye were not redeemed with
   corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation . .
   . but with the precious blood of Christ," [1 Pet. i. 18, 19]

   As if he had said, Forasmuch as ye know ye were made capable of this
   state of holiness, entered into a society with Christ, and made heirs
   of His glory, not by any human means, but by such a mysterious instance
   of love, as infinitely exceeds everything that can be thought of in
   this world; since God has redeemed you to Himself, and your own
   happiness, at so great a price; how base and shameful must it be, if
   you do not henceforth devote yourselves wholly to the glory of God, and
   become holy, as He who hath called you is holy!

   If, therefore, Claudius, you consider your figure and estate; or if, in
   the words of the text, you consider your gold and silver, and the
   corruptible things of this life, as any reason why you may live to your
   own humour and fancy, why you may neglect a life of strict piety and
   great devotion; if you think anything in the world can be an excuse for
   your not imitating the holiness of Christ in the whole course and form
   of your life; you make yourself as guilty as if you should neglect the
   holiness of Christianity, for the sake of picking straws.

   For the greatness of this new state of life, to which we are called in
   Christ Jesus, to be forever as the Angels of God in Heaven, and the
   greatness of the price by which we are made capable of this state of
   glory, has turned everything that is worldly, temporal, and
   corruptible, into an equal littleness; and made it as great baseness
   and folly, as great a contempt of the Blood of Christ, to neglect any
   degrees of holiness, because you are a man of some estate and quality,
   as it would be to neglect it because you had a fancy to pick straws.

   Again; the same Apostle saith, "Know ye not that your body is the
   temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, and ye are not your own? For
   ye are bought with price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in
   your spirit, which are God's." [1 Cor. vi. 19, 20]

   How poorly, therefore, Claudius, have you read the scripture, how
   little do you know of Christianity if you can yet talk of your estate
   and condition, as a pretence for a freer kind of life.

   Are you any more your own, than he that has no state or dignity in the
   world? Must mean and little people preserve their bodies as temples of
   the Holy Ghost by watching, fasting, and prayer; but may you indulge
   yours in idleness, in lusts, and sensuality, because you have so much
   rent, or such a title of distinction? How poor and ignorant are such
   thoughts as these!

   And yet you must either think thus, or else acknowledge, that the
   holiness of saints, Prophets, and Apostles, is the holiness that you
   are to labour after, with all the diligence and care that you can.

   And if you leave it to others to live in such piety and devotion, in
   such self-denial, humility, and temperance, as may render them able to
   glorify God in their body, and in their spirit; you must leave it to
   them also, to have the benefit of the Blood of Christ.

   Again; the Apostle saith, "Ye know how we exhorted, comforted, and
   charged every one of you, that ye would walk worthy of God, who hath
   called you unto His kingdom and glory." [1 Thess. ii. 11, 12]

   You perhaps, Claudius, have often heard these words, without ever
   thinking how much they require of you. And yet you cannot consider
   them, without perceiving to what an imminent [41] state of holiness
   they call you.

   For how can the holiness of the Christian life be set before you in
   higher terms, than when it is represented to you as walking worthy of
   God? Can you think of any abatements of virtue, any neglects of
   devotion, that are well consistent with a life that is to be made
   worthy of God? Can you suppose that any man walks in this manner, but
   he that watches over all his steps, and considers how everything he
   does may be done in the spirit of holiness? and yet as high as these
   expressions carry this holiness, it is here plainly made the necessary
   holiness of all Christians. For the Apostle does not here exhort his
   fellow Apostles and saints to this holiness, but he commands all
   Christians to endeavour after it. "We charged," says he, "every one of
   you, that ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto His
   kingdom and glory."

   Again; St. Peter saith, "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles
   of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability that God
   giveth; that God in all things may be glorified in Jesus Christ." [1
   Pet. iv. 11]

   Do you not here, Claudius, plainly perceive your high calling? Is he
   that speaketh to have such regard to his words, that he appear to speak
   as by the direction of God? Is he that giveth to take care that he so
   giveth, that what he disposeth of may appear to be a gift that he hath
   of God? And is all this to be done, that God may be glorified in all
   things?

   Must it not then be said, Has any man nobility, dignity of state, or
   figure in the world? Let him so use his nobility, or figure of life,
   that it may appear he uses these as the gifts of God, for the greater
   setting forth of His glory. Is there now, Claudius, anything forced, or
   far-fetched in this conclusion? Is it not the plain sense of the words,
   that everything in life is to be made a matter of holiness unto God? If
   so, then your estate and dignity is so far from excusing you from great
   piety and holiness of life, that it lays you under a greater necessity
   of living more to the glory of God, because you have more of His gifts
   that may be made serviceable to it.

   For people, therefore, of figure, or business, or dignity in the world,
   to leave great piety and eminent devotion to any particular orders of
   men, or such as they think have little else to do in the world, is to
   leave the kingdom of God to them.

   For it is the very end of Christianity to redeem all orders of men into
   one holy society, that rich and poor, high and low, masters and
   servants, may in one and the same spirit of piety become "a chosen
   generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that
   are to show forth the praises of Him who hath called them out of
   darkness, into His marvellous light." [1 Pet. ii. 9]

   Thus much being said to show that great devotion and holiness is not to
   be left to any particular sort of people, but to be the common spirit
   of all that desire to live up to the terms of common Christianity; I
   now proceed to consider the nature and necessity of universal love,
   which is here recommended to be the subject of your devotion at this
   hour. You are here also called to intercession, as the most proper
   exercise to raise and preserve that love.

   By intercession is meant a praying to God, and interceding with Him for
   our fellow-creatures.

   Our Blessed Lord hath recommended His love to us, as the pattern and
   example of our love to one another. As, therefore, He is continually
   making intercession for us all, so ought we to intercede and pray for
   one another.

   "A new commandment," saith He, "I give unto you, That ye love one
   another, as I have loved you. By this shall all men know that ye are my
   disciples, if ye love one another." [John xiii. 34, 35]

   The newness of this precept did not consist in this, that men were
   commanded to love one another; for this was an old precept, both of the
   law of Moses, and of nature. But it was new in this respect, that it
   was to imitate a new, and till then unheard-of example of love; it was
   to love one another, as Christ had loved us.

   And if men are to know that we are disciples of Christ, by thus loving
   one another, according to His new example of love, then it is certain,
   that if we are void of this love, we make it as plainly known unto men,
   that we are none of His disciples.

   There is no principle of the heart that is more acceptable to God, than
   an universal fervent love to all mankind, wishing and praying for their
   happiness; because there is no principle of the heart that makes us
   more like God, who is love and goodness itself, and created all beings
   for their enjoyment of happiness.

   The greatest idea that we can frame of God, is when we conceive Him to
   be a Being of infinite love and goodness; using an infinite wisdom and
   power, for the common good and happiness of all His creatures.

   The highest notion, therefore, that we can form of man is when we
   conceive him as like to God, in this respect, as he can be; using all
   his infinite faculties, whether of wisdom, power, or prayers, for the
   common good of all his fellow-creatures; heartily desiring they may
   have all the happiness they are capable of, and as many benefits and
   assistances from him, as his state and condition in the world will
   permit him to give them.

   And on the other hand, what a baseness and iniquity is there in all
   instances of hatred, envy, spite, and ill-will; if we consider that
   every instance of them is so far acting in opposition to God, and
   intending mischief and harm to those creatures which God favours, and
   protects, and preserves, in order to their happiness! An ill-natured
   man, amongst God's creatures, is the most perverse creature in the
   world, acting contrary to that love by which himself subsists, and
   which alone gives subsistence to all that variety of beings, that enjoy
   life in any part of the creation.

   "Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto
   them." [Matt. vii. 12]

   Now, though this is a doctrine of strict justice, yet it is only an
   universal love that can comply with it. For as love is the measure of
   our acting towards ourselves, so we can never act in the same manner
   towards other people, till we look upon them with that love, with which
   we look upon ourselves.

   As we have no degrees of spite, or envy, or ill-will, to ourselves, so
   we cannot be disposed towards others as we are towards ourselves, till
   we universally renounce all instances of spite, and envy, and ill-will,
   even in the smallest degrees.

   If we had any imperfection in our eyes, that made us see any one thing
   wrong, for the same reason they would show us an hundred things wrong.

   So, if we have any temper of our hearts, that makes us envious, or
   spiteful, or ill-natured towards any one man, the same temper will make
   us envious, and spiteful, and ill-natured towards a great many more.

   If, therefore, we desire this Divine virtue of love we must exercise
   and practise our hearts in the love of all because it is not Christian
   love, till it is the love of all.

   If a man could keep this whole law of love, and yet offend in one
   point, he would be guilty of all. For as one allowed instance of
   injustice destroys the justice of all our other actions, so one allowed
   instance of envy, spite, and ill-will, renders all our other acts of
   benevolence and affection nothing worth.

   Acts of love, that proceed not from a principle of universal love, are
   but like acts of justice, that proceed from a heart not disposed to
   universal justice.

   A love which is not universal, may indeed have tenderness and
   affection, but it hath nothing of righteousness or piety in it: it is
   but humour, and temper, or interest, or such a love as publicans and
   heathens practise.

   All particular envies and spites are as plain departures from the
   spirit of Christianity, as any particular acts of injustice. For it is
   as much a law of Christ to treat everybody as your neighbour, and to
   love your neighbour as yourself, as it is a law of Christianity to
   abstain from theft.

   Now the noblest motive to this universal tenderness and affection is
   founded in this doctrine: "God is love, and he that dwelleth in love,
   dwelleth in God." [1 John iv. 16]

   Who, therefore, whose heart has any tendency towards God, would not
   aspire after this Divine temper, which so changes and exalts our nature
   into an union with Him?

   How should we rejoice in the exercise and practice of this love, which,
   so often as we feel it, is so often an assurance to us, that God is in
   us, that we act according to His Spirit, who is Love itself! But we
   must observe, that love has then only this mighty power of uniting us
   to God, when it is so pure and universal as to imitate that love which
   God beareth to all His creatures.

   God willeth the happiness of all beings, though it is no happiness to
   Himself. Therefore we must desire the happiness of all beings, though
   no happiness cometh to us from it.

   God equally delighteth in the perfections of all His creatures:
   therefore we should rejoice in those perfections, wherever we see them,
   and be as glad to have other people perfect as ourselves.

   As God forgiveth all, and giveth grace to all, so we should forgive all
   those injuries and affronts which we receive from others, and do all
   the good that we can to them.

   God Almighty, besides His own great example of love, which ought to
   draw all His creatures after it, has so provided for us, and made our
   happiness so common to us all, that we have no occasion to envy or hate
   one another.

   For we cannot stand in one another's way, or by enjoying any particular
   good, keep another from his full share of it.

   As we cannot be happy but in the enjoyment of God, so we cannot rival
   or rob one another of this happiness.

   And as to other things, the enjoyments and prosperities of this life,
   they are so little in themselves, so foreign to our happiness, and,
   generally speaking, so contrary to that which they appear to be, that
   they are no foundation for envy, or spite, or hatred.

   How silly would it be to envy a man, that was drinking poison out of a
   golden cup! And yet who can say that he is acting wiser than thus, when
   he is envying any instance of worldly greatness?

   How many saints has adversity sent to Heaven! And how many poor sinners
   has prosperity plunged into everlasting misery! A man seems then to be
   in the most glorious state, when he has conquered, disgraced, and
   humbled his enemy; though it may be, that same conquest has saved his
   adversary and undone himself.

   This man had perhaps never been debauched, but for his fortune and
   advancement; that had never been pious, but through his poverty and
   disgrace.

   She that is envied for her beauty, may perchance owe all her misery to
   it; and another may be forever happy, for having had no admirers of her
   person.

   One man succeeds in everything, and so loses all; another meets with
   nothing but crosses and disappointments, and thereby gains more than
   all the world is worth.

   This clergyman may be undone by his being made a bishop; and that may
   save both himself and others, by being fixed to his first poor
   vicarage.

   How envied was Alexander, when, conquering the world, he built towns,
   set up his statues, and left marks of his glory in so many kingdoms!

   And how despised was the poor preacher St. Paul, when he was beaten
   with rods! And yet how strangely was the world mistaken in their
   judgment! How much to be envied was St. Paul! How much to be pitied was
   Alexander!

   These few reflections sufficiently show us, that the different
   conditions of this life have nothing in them to excite our uneasy
   passions, nothing that can reasonably interrupt our love and affection
   to one another.

   To proceed now to another motive to this universal love.

   Our power of doing external acts of love and goodness is often very
   narrow and restrained. There are, it may be, but few people to whom we
   can contribute any worldly relief.

   But though our outward means of doing good are often thus limited, yet,
   if our hearts are but full of love and goodness, we get, as it were, an
   infinite power; because God will attribute to us those good works,
   those acts of love, and tender charities, which we sincerely desired,
   and would gladly have performed, had it been in our power.

   You cannot heal all the sick, relieve all the poor; you cannot comfort
   all in distress, nor be a father to all the fatherless; you cannot, it
   may be, deliver many from their misfortunes, or teach them to find
   comfort in God.

   But if there is a love and tenderness in your heart, that delights in
   these good works, and excites you to do all that you can: if your love
   has no bounds, but continually wishes and prays for the relief and
   happiness of all that are in distress; you will be received by God as a
   benefactor to those, who have had nothing from you but your good will,
   and tender affections.

   You cannot build hospitals for the incurable; you cannot erect
   monasteries for the education of persons in holy solitude, continual
   prayer, and mortification; but if you join in your heart with those
   that do, and thank God for their pious designs; if you are a friend to
   these great friends to mankind, and rejoice in their eminent virtues;
   you will be received by God as a sharer of such good works as, though
   they had none of your hands, yet had all your heart.

   This consideration surely is sufficient to make us look to, and watch
   over our hearts with all diligence; to study the improvement of our
   inward tempers, and aspire after every height and perfection of a
   loving, charitable, and benevolent mind.

   And on the other hand, we may hence learn the great evil and mischief
   of all wrong turns of mind, of envy, spite, hatred, and ill-will. For
   if the goodness of our hearts will entitle us to the reward of good
   actions, which we never performed; it is certain that the badness of
   our hearts, our envy, ill-nature, and hatred, will bring us under the
   guilt of actions that we have never committed.

   As he that lusteth after a woman shall be reckoned an adulterer, though
   he has only committed the crime in his heart; so the malicious,
   spiteful, ill-natured man, that only secretly rejoices at evil, shall
   be reckoned a murderer, though he has shed no blood.

   Since, therefore, our hearts, which are always naked and open to the
   eyes of God, give such an exceeding extent and increase, either to our
   virtues or vices, it is our best and greatest business to govern the
   motions of our hearts, to watch, correct, and improve the inward state
   and temper of our souls.

   Now there is nothing that so much exalts our souls, as this heavenly
   love: it cleanses and purifies like a holy fire, and all ill tempers
   fall away before it. It makes room for all virtues, and carries them to
   their greatest height. Everything that is good and holy grows out of
   it, and it becomes a continual source of all holy desires and pious
   practices.

   By love, I do not mean any natural tenderness, which is more or less in
   people, according to their constitutions; but I mean a larger principle
   of the soul, founded in reason and piety, which makes us tender, kind,
   and benevolent to all our fellow-creatures, as creatures of God, and
   for His sake.

   It is this love, that loves all things in God, as His creatures, as the
   images of His power, as the creatures of His goodness, as parts of His
   family, as members of His society, that becomes a holy principle of all
   great and good actions.

   The love, therefore, of our neighbour, is only a branch of our love to
   God. For when we love God with all our hearts, and with all our souls,
   and with all our strength, we shall necessarily love those beings that
   are so nearly related to God, that have everything from Him, and are
   created by Him to be objects of His own eternal love. If I hate or
   despise any one man in the world, I hate something that God cannot
   hate, and despise that which He loves.

   And can I think that I love God with all my heart whilst I hate that
   which belongs only to God, which has no other master but Him, which
   bears His image, is part of His family, and exists only by the
   continuance of His love towards it?

   It was the impossibility of this that made St. John say, that "If any
   man saith he loveth God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar." [1 John
   iv. 20]

   These reasons sufficiently show us, that no love is holy or religious,
   till it becomes universal.

   For if religion requires me to love all persons, as God's creatures,
   that belong to Him, that bear His image, enjoy His protection, and make
   parts of His family and household; if these are the great and necessary
   reasons why I should live in love and friendship with any one man in
   the world; they are the same great and necessary reasons why I should
   live in love and friendship with every man in the world; and,
   consequently, I offend against all these reasons, and break through all
   these ties and obligations, whenever I want love towards any one man.
   The sin, therefore, of hating, or despising any one man, is like the
   sin of hating all God's creation; and the necessity of loving any one
   man, is the same necessity of loving every man in the world. And though
   many people may appear to us ever so sinful, odious, or extravagant in
   their conduct, we must never look upon that as the least motive for any
   contempt or disregard of them; but look upon them with the greater
   compassion, as being in the most pitiable condition that can be.

   As it was the sins of the world that made the Son of God become a
   compassionate suffering Advocate for all mankind, so no one is of the
   Spirit of Christ, but he that has the utmost compassion for sinners.
   Nor is there any greater sign of your own perfection, than when you
   find yourself all love and compassion towards them that are very weak
   and defective. And on the other hand, you have never less reason to be
   pleased with yourself, than when you find yourself most angry and
   offended at the behaviour of others. All sin is certainly to be hated
   and abhorred, wherever it is; but then we must set ourselves against
   sin, as we do against sickness and diseases, by showing ourselves
   tender and compassionate to the sick and diseased.

   All other hatred of sin, which does not fill the heart with the
   softest, tenderest affections towards persons miserable in it, is the
   servant of sin, at the same time that it seems to be hating it.

   And there is no temper which even good men ought more carefully to
   watch and guard against, than this. For it is a temper that lurks and
   hides itself under the mover of many virtues, and by being unsuspected,
   does the more mischief.

   A man naturally fancies, that it is his own exceeding love of virtue
   that makes him not able to bear with those that want it. And when he
   abhors one man, despises another, and cannot bear the name of a third,
   he supposes it all to be a proof of his own high sense of virtue, and
   just hatred of sin.

   And yet, one would think, that a man needed no other cure for this
   temper, than this one reflection:

   That if this had been the spirit of the Son of God, if He had hated sin
   in this manner, there had been no redemption of the world; that if God
   had hated sinners in this manner, day and night, the world itself had
   ceased long ago.

   This, therefore, we may take for a certain rule, that the more we
   partake of the Divine nature, the more improved we are ourselves; and
   the higher our sense of virtue is, the more we shall pity and
   compassionate those that want it. The sight of such people will then,
   instead of raising in us a haughty contempt, or peevish indignation
   towards them, fill us with such bowels of compassion, as when we see
   the miseries of an hospital.

   That the follies, therefore, crimes, and ill-behaviour of our
   fellow-creatures, may not lessen that love and tenderness which we are
   to have for all mankind, we should often consider the reasons on which
   the duty of love is founded.

   Now we are to love our neighbour, that is, all mankind, not because
   they are wise, holy, virtuous, or well-behaved; for all mankind neither
   ever was, nor ever will be so; therefore it is certain, that the reason
   of our being obliged to love them cannot be founded in their virtue.

   Again; if their virtue or goodness were the reason of our being obliged
   to love people, we should have no rule to proceed by; because though
   some people's virtues or vices are very notorious, yet, generally
   speaking, we are but very ill judges of the virtue and merit of other
   people.

   Thirdly, We are sure that the virtue or merit of persons is not the
   reason of our being obliged to love them, because we are commanded to
   pay the highest instances of love to our worst enemies: we are to love,
   and bless, and pray for those that most injuriously treat us. This
   therefore is demonstration, that the merit of persons is not the reason
   on which our obligation to love them is founded.

   Let us farther consider, what that love is which we owe to our
   neighbour. It is to love him as ourselves, that is, to have all those
   sentiments towards him which we have towards ourselves; to wish him
   everything that we may lawfully wish to ourselves; to be glad of every
   good, and sorry for every evil, that happens to him; and to be ready to
   do him all such acts of kindness, as we are always ready to do to
   ourselves.

   This love, therefore, you see, is nothing else but a love of
   benevolence; it requires nothing of us but such good wishes, tender
   affections, and such acts of kindness, as we show to ourselves.

   This is all the love that we owe to the best of men; and we are never
   to want any degree of this love to the worst or most unreasonable man
   in the world.

   Now what is the reason why we are to love every man in this manner? It
   is answered that our obligation to love all men in this manner is
   founded upon many reasons.

   First, Upon a reason of equity; for if it is just to love ourselves in
   this manner, it must be unjust to deny any degree of this love to
   others, because every man is so exactly of the same nature, and in the
   same condition as ourselves.

   If, therefore, your own crimes and follies do not lessen your
   obligation to seek your own good, and wish well to yourself; neither do
   the follies and crimes of your neighbour lessen your obligation to wish
   and seek the good of your neighbour.

   Another reason for this love is founded in the authority of God, who
   has commanded us to love every man as ourself.

   Thirdly, We are obliged to this love in imitation of God's goodness,
   that we may be children of our Father which is in Heaven, who willeth
   the happiness of all His creatures, and maketh His sun to rise on the
   evil, and on the good.

   Fourthly, Our redemption by Jesus Christ calleth us to the exercise of
   this love, who came from Heaven and laid down His life, out of love to
   the whole sinful world.

   Fifthly, By the command of our Lord and Saviour, who has required us to
   love one another, as he has loved us.

   These are the great, perpetual reasons, on which our obligation to love
   all mankind as ourselves is founded.

   These reasons never vary or change, they always continue in the full
   force; and therefore equally oblige at all times, and in regard to all
   persons.

   God loves us, not because we are wise, and good, and holy, but in pity
   to us, because we want this happiness: He loves us, in order to make us
   good. Our love, therefore, must take this course; not looking for, or
   requiring the merit of our brethren, but pitying their disorders, and
   wishing them all the good that they want and are capable of receiving.

   It appears now plainly, from what has been said, that the love which we
   owe to our brethren, is only a love of benevolence. Secondly, That this
   duty of benevolence is founded upon such reasons as never vary or
   change, such as have no dependence upon the qualities of persons. From
   whence it follows that it is the same great sin, to want this love to a
   bad man, as to want it to a good man. Because he that denies any of
   this benevolence to a bad man, offends against all the same reasons of
   love, as he does that denies any benevolence to a good man; and
   consequently it is the same sin.

   When, therefore, you let loose any ill-natured passion, either of
   hatred or contempt, towards (as you suppose) an ill man, consider what
   you would think of another that was doing the same towards a good man,
   and be assured that you are committing the same sin.

   You will perhaps say, How is it possible to love a good and a bad man
   in the same degree?

   Just as it is possible to be as just and faithful to a good man, as to
   an evil man. Now are you in any difficulty about performing justice and
   faithfulness to a bad man? Are you in any doubts, whether you need be
   so just and faithful to him, as you need be to a good man? Now why is
   it that you are in no doubt about it? It is because you know that
   justice and faithfulness are founded upon reasons that never vary or
   change, that have no dependence upon the merits of men, but are founded
   in the nature of things, in the laws of God, and therefore are to be
   observed with an equal exactness towards good and bad men.

   Now do but think thus justly of charity or love to your neighbour; that
   it is founded upon reasons that vary not, that have no dependence upon
   the merits of men, and then you will find it as possible to perform the
   same exact charity, as the same exact justice, to all men, whether good
   or bad.

   You will, perhaps, farther ask if you are not to have a particular
   esteem, veneration, and reverence for good men? It is answered, Yes.
   But then this high esteem and veneration is a thing very different from
   that love of benevolence which we owe to our neighbour.

   The high esteem and veneration which you have for a man of eminent
   piety, is no act of charity to him -- it is not out of pity and
   compassion that you so reverence him, but it is rather an act of
   charity to yourself, that such esteem and veneration may excite you to
   follow his example.

   You may, and ought to love, like, and approve the life which the good
   man leads; but then this is only the loving of virtue, wherever we see
   it. And we do not love virtue, with the love of benevolence, as
   anything that wants our good wishes, but as something that is our
   proper good.

   The whole of the matter is this. The actions which you are to love,
   esteem, and admire, are the actions of good and pious men; but the
   persons to whom you are to do all the good you can, in all sorts of
   kindness and compassion, are all persons, whether good or bad.

   This distinction betwixt love of benevolence, and esteem or veneration,
   is very plain and obvious. And you may, perhaps, still better see the
   plainness and necessity of it, by this following instance.

   No man is to have a high esteem or honour for his own accomplishments,
   or behaviour; yet every man is to love himself, that is, to wish well
   to himself; therefore this distinction betwixt love and esteem is not
   only plain, but very necessary to be observed.

   Again, if you think it hardly possible to dislike the actions of
   unreasonable men, and yet have a true love for them: consider this with
   relation to yourself.

   It is very possible, I hope, for you not only to dislike, but to detest
   and abhor a great many of your own past actions, and to accuse yourself
   of great folly for them. But do you then lose any of those tender
   sentiments towards yourself, which you used to have? Do you then cease
   to wish well to yourself? Is not the love of yourself as strong then,
   as at any other time?

   Now what is thus possible with relation to ourselves, is in the same
   manner possible with relation to others. We may have the highest good
   wishes towards them, desiring for them every good that we desire for
   ourselves, and yet, at the same time, dislike their way of life.

   To proceed: all that love which we may justly have for ourselves, we
   are, in strict justice, obliged to exercise towards all other men; and
   we offend against the great law of our nature, and the greatest laws of
   God, when our tempers towards others are different from those which we
   have towards ourselves.

   Now that self-love which is just and reasonable, keeps us constantly
   tender, compassionate, and well-affected towards ourselves: if,
   therefore, you do not feel these kind dispositions towards all other
   people, you may be assured, that you are not in that state of charity,
   which is the very life and soul of Christian piety.

   You know how it hurts you to be made the jest and ridicule of other
   people; how it grieves you to be robbed of your reputation, and
   deprived of the favourable opinion of your neighbours; if, therefore,
   you expose others to scorn and contempt in any degree; if it pleases
   you to see or hear of their frailties and infirmities; or if you are
   only loth to conceal their faults; you are so far from loving such
   people as yourself, that you may be justly supposed to have as much
   hatred for them, as you have love for yourself. For such tempers are as
   truly the proper fruits of hatred, as the contrary tempers are the
   proper fruits of love.

   And as it is a certain sign that you love yourself because you are
   tender of everything that concerns you; so it is as certain a sign that
   you hate your neighbour, when you are pleased with anything that hurts
   him.

   But now, if the want of a true and exact charity be so great a want,
   that, as St. Paul saith, it renders our greatest virtues but empty
   sounds and tinkling cymbals, how highly does it concern us to study
   every art, and practise every method of raising our souls to this state
   of charity! It is for this reason that you are here desired not to let
   this hour of prayer pass, without a full and solemn supplication to
   God, for all the instances of an universal love and benevolence to all
   mankind; such daily constant devotion being the only likely means of
   preserving you in such a state of love as is necessary to prove you to
   be a true follower of Jesus Christ.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [39] Claudius; chosen as a Patrician name.

   [40] port, i.e. behaviour.

   [41] imminent: if not merely a slip for eminent, may mean perilously
   high, like Lowell's "imminent crags of noiseless snow."
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XXI


   Of the necessity and benefit of intercession, considered as an exercise
   of universal love. How all orders of men are to pray and intercede with
   God for one another. How naturally such intercession amends and reforms
   the hearts of those that use it.


   THAT intercession is a great and necessary part of Christian devotion,
   is very evident from Scripture.

   The first followers of Christ seem to support all their love, and to
   maintain all their intercourse and correspondence, by mutual prayers
   for one another.

   St. Paul, whether he writes to churches or particular persons, shows
   his intercession to be perpetual for them, that they are the constant
   subject of his prayers.

   Thus to the Philippians, "I thank my God upon every remembrance of you,
   always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy."
   [Phil. i. 3, 4] Here we see, not only a continual intercession, but
   performed with so much gladness, as shows that it was an exercise of
   love in which he highly rejoiced.

   His devotion had also the same care for particular persons, as appears
   by the following passages: "I thank God, whom I serve from my
   forefathers, with a pure conscience, that without ceasing I have
   remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day." [2 Tim. i. 3] How
   holy an acquaintance and friendship was this, how worthy of persons
   that were raised above the world, and related to one another, as new
   members of a kingdom of Heaven!

   Apostles and great saints did not only thus benefit and bless
   particular churches, and private persons; but they themselves also
   received graces from God by the prayers of others. Thus saith St. Paul
   to the Corinthians: "You also helping together by prayer for us, that
   for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may
   be given by many on our behalf." [2 Cor. i. 11]

   This was the ancient friendship of Christians, uniting and cementing
   their hearts, not by worldly considerations, or human passions, but by
   the mutual communication of spiritual blessings, by prayers and
   thanksgivings to God for one another.

   It was this holy intercession that raised Christians to such a state of
   mutual love, as far exceeded all that had been praised and admired in
   human friendship. And when the same spirit of intercession is again in
   the world, when Christianity has the same power over the hearts of
   people that it then had, this holy friendship will be again in fashion,
   and Christians will be again the wonder of the world, for that
   exceeding love which they bear to one another.

   For a frequent intercession with God, earnestly beseeching him to
   forgive the sins of all mankind, to bless them with His providence,
   enlighten them with His Spirit, and bring them to everlasting
   happiness, is the divinest exercise that the heart of man can be
   engaged in.

   Be daily, therefore, on your knees, in a solemn deliberate performance
   of this devotion, praying for others in such forms, with such length,
   importunity, and earnestness, as you use for yourself; and you will
   find all little, ill-natured passions die away, your heart grow great
   and generous, delighting in the common happiness of others, as you used
   only to delight in your own.

   For he that daily prays to God, that all men may be happy in Heaven,
   takes the likeliest way to make him wish for, and delight in their
   happiness on earth. And it is hardly possible for you to beseech and
   entreat God to make any one happy in the highest enjoyments of his
   glory to all eternity, and yet be troubled to see him enjoy the much
   smaller gifts of God in this short and low state of human life.

   For how strange and unnatural would it be, to pray to God to grant
   health and a longer life to a sick man, and at the same time to envy
   him the poor pleasure of agreeable medicines!

   Yet this would be no more strange or unnatural than to pray to God that
   your neighbour may enjoy the highest degrees of His mercy and favour,
   and yet at the same time envy him the little credit and figure he hath
   amongst his fellow-creatures.

   When therefore you have once habituated your heart to a serious
   performance of this holy intercession, you have done a great deal to
   render it incapable of spite and envy, and to make it naturally delight
   in the happiness of all mankind.

   This is the natural effect of a general intercession for all mankind.
   But the greatest benefits of it are then received, when it descends to
   such particular instances as our state and condition in life more
   particularly require of us.

   Though we are to treat all mankind as neighbours and brethren, as any
   occasion offers; yet as we can only live in the actual society of a
   few, and are by our state and condition more particularly related to
   some than others; so when our intercession is made an exercise of love
   and care for those amongst whom our lot is fallen, or who belong to us
   in a nearer relation, it then becomes the greatest benefit to
   ourselves, and produces its best effects in our own hearts.

   If therefore you should always change and alter your intercessions,
   according as the needs and necessities of your neighbours or
   acquaintance seem to require; beseeching God to deliver them from such
   or such particular evils, or to grant them this or that particular
   gift, or blessing; such intercessions, besides the great charity of
   them, would have a mighty effect upon your own heart, as disposing you
   to every other good office, and to the exercise of every other virtue
   towards such persons, as have so often a place in your prayers.

   This would make it pleasant to you to be courteous, civil, and
   condescending to all about you; and make you unable to say or do a rude
   or hard thing to those, for whom you had used yourself to be so kind
   and compassionate in your prayers.

   For there is nothing that makes us love a man so much as praying for
   him; and when you can once do this sincerely for any man, you have
   fitted your soul for the performance of everything that is kind and
   civil towards him. This will fill your heart with a generosity and
   tenderness, that will give you a better and sweeter behaviour than
   anything that is called fine breeding and good manners.

   By considering yourself as an advocate with God for your neighbours and
   acquaintance, you would never find it hard to be at peace with them
   yourself. It would be easy to you to bear with and forgive those, for
   whom you particularly implored the Divine mercy and forgiveness.

   Such prayers as these amongst neighbours and acquaintance, would unite
   them to one another in the strongest bonds of love and tenderness. It
   would exalt and ennoble their souls, and teach them to consider one
   another in a higher state, as members of a spiritual society, that are
   created for the enjoyment of the common blessings of God, and
   fellow-heirs of the same future glory.

   And by being thus desirous that every one should have his full share of
   the favours of God, they would not only be content, but glad to see one
   another happy in the little enjoyments of this transitory life.

   These would be the natural effects of such an intercession, amongst
   people of the same town or neighbourhood, or that were acquainted with
   one another's state and condition.

   Ouranius [42] is a holy priest, full of the spirit of the Gospel,
   watching, labouring, and praying for a poor country village. Every soul
   in it is as dear to him as himself; and he loves them all, as he loves
   himself, because he prays for them all, as often as he prays for
   himself.

   If his whole life is one continual exercise of great zeal and labour,
   hardly ever satisfied with any degrees of care and watchfulness, it is
   because he has learned the great value of souls, by so often appearing
   before God as an intercessor for them.

   He never thinks he can love, or do enough for his flock; because he
   never considers them in any other view than as so many persons, that by
   receiving the gifts and graces of God, are to become his hope, his joy,
   and his crown of rejoicing.

   He goes about his parish, and visits everybody in it; but visits in the
   same spirit of piety that he preaches to them: he visits them to
   encourage their virtues, to assist them with his advice and counsel, to
   discover their manner of life, and to know the state of their souls,
   that he may intercede with God for them, according to their particular
   necessities.

   When Ouranius first entered into holy orders, he had a haughtiness in
   his temper, a great contempt and disregard for all foolish and
   unreasonable people; but he has prayed away this spirit, and has now
   the greatest tenderness for the most obstinate sinners; because he is
   always hoping, that God will, sooner or later, hear those prayers that
   he makes for their repentance.

   The rudeness, ill-nature, or perverse behaviour of any of his flock,
   used at first to betray him into impatience; but it now raises no other
   passion in him, than a desire of being upon his knees in prayer to God
   for them. Thus have his prayers for others altered and amended the
   state of his own heart.

   It would strangely delight you to see with what spirit he converses,
   with what tenderness he reproves, with what affection he exhorts, and
   with what vigour he preaches; and it is all owing to this, because he
   reproves, exhorts, and preaches to those for whom he first prays to
   God.

   This devotion softens his heart, enlightens his mind, sweetens his
   temper, and makes everything that comes from him, instructive, amiable,
   and affecting.

   At his first coming to his little village, it was as disagreeable to
   him as a prison, and every day seemed too tedious to be endured in so
   retired a place. He thought his parish was too full of poor and mean
   people, that were none of them fit for the conversation of a gentleman.

   This put him upon a close application to his studies. He kept much at
   home, writ notes upon Homer and Plautus, and sometimes thought it hard
   to be called to pray by any poor body, when he was just in the midst of
   one of Homer's battles.

   This was his polite, or I may rather say, poor, ignorant turn of mind,
   before devotion had got the government of his heart.

   But now his days are so far from being tedious, or his parish too great
   a retirement, that he now only wants more time to do that variety of
   good, which his soul thirsts after. The solitude of his little parish
   is become matter of great comfort to him, because he hopes that God has
   placed him and his flock there, to make it their way to Heaven.

   He can now not only converse with, but gladly attend and wait upon the
   poorest kind of people. He is now daily watching over the weak and
   infirm, humbling himself to perverse, rude, ignorant people, wherever
   he can find them; and is so far from desiring to be considered as a
   gentleman, that he desires to be used as the servant of all; and in the
   spirit of his Lord and Master girds himself, and is glad to kneel down
   and wash any of their feet.

   He now thinks the poorest creature in his parish good enough, and great
   enough, to deserve the humblest attendances, the kindest friendships,
   the tenderest offices, he can possibly show them.

   He is so far now from wanting agreeable company, that he thinks there
   is no better conversation in the world, than to be talking with poor
   and mean people about the kingdom of Heaven.

   All these noble thoughts and Divine sentiments are the effects of his
   great devotion; he presents every one so often before God in his
   prayers, that he never thinks he can esteem, reverence, or serve those
   enough, for whom he implores so many mercies from God.

   Ouranius is mightily affected with this passage of holy Scripture, "The
   effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much." [James v.
   16]

   This makes him practise all the arts of holy living, and aspire after
   every instance of piety and righteousness, that his prayers for his
   flock may have their full force, and avail much with God.

   For this reason, he has sold a small estate that he had, and has
   erected a charitable retirement for ancient poor people, to live in
   prayer and piety, that his prayers, being assisted by such good works,
   may pierce the clouds, and bring down blessings upon those souls
   committed to his care.

   Ouranius reads how God Himself said unto Abimelech, concerning Abraham:
   "He is a prophet; he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live." [Gen.
   xx. 7]

   And again, how he said of Job, "And my servant Job shall pray for you:
   for him will I accept." [Job xlii. 8]

   From these passages Ouranius justly concludes, that the prayers of men
   eminent for holiness of life have an extraordinary power with God; that
   He grants to other people such pardons, reliefs, and blessings, through
   their prayers, as would not be granted to men of less piety and
   perfection. This makes Ouranius exceeding studious of Christian
   perfection, searching after every grace and holy temper, purifying his
   heart all manner of ways, fearful of every error and defect in his
   life, lest his prayers for his flock should be less availing with God,
   through his own defects in holiness.

   This makes him careful of every temper of his heart, give alms of all
   that he hath, watch, and fast, and mortify, and live according to the
   strictest rules of temperance, meekness, and humility, that he may be
   in some degree like an Abraham or a Job in his parish, and make such
   prayers for them, as God will hear and accept.

   These are the happy effects which a devout intercession hath produced
   in the life of Ouranius.

   And if other people, in their several stations, were to imitate this
   example, in such a manner as suited their particular state of life,
   they would certainly find the same happy effects from it.

   If masters, for instance, were thus to remember their servants in their
   prayers, beseeching God to bless them, and suiting their petitions to
   the particular wants and necessities of their servants; letting no day
   pass without a full performance of this part of devotion, the benefit
   would be as great to themselves, as to their servants.

   No way so likely as this, to inspire them with a true sense of that
   power which they have in their hands, to make them delight in doing
   good, and becoming exemplary in all the parts of a wise and good
   master.

   The presenting their servants so often before God, as equally related
   to God, and entitled to the same expectations of Heaven as themselves,
   would naturally incline them to treat them not only with such humanity
   as became fellow-creatures, but with such tenderness, care, and
   generosity, as became fellow-heirs of the same glory. This devotion
   would make masters inclined to everything that was good towards their
   servants; be watchful of their behaviour, and as ready to require of
   them an exact observance of the duties of Christianity, as of the
   duties of their service.

   This would teach them to consider their servants as God's servants, to
   desire their perfection, to do nothing before them that might corrupt
   their minds, to impose no business upon them that should lessen their
   sense of religion, or hinder them from their full share of devotion,
   both public and private. This praying for them would make them as glad
   to see their servants eminent in piety as themselves, and contrive that
   they should have all the opportunities and encouragements, both to know
   and perform all the duties of the Christian life.

   How natural would it be for such a master to perform every part of
   family devotion; to have constant prayers; to excuse no one's absence
   from them; to have the Scriptures and books of piety often read amongst
   his servants; to take all opportunities of instructing them, of raising
   their minds to God, and teaching them to do all their business as a
   service to God and upon the hopes and expectations of another life!

   How natural would it be for such an one to pity their weakness and
   ignorance, to bear with the dulness of their understandings, or the
   perverseness of their tempers, to reprove them with tenderness, exhort
   them with affection, as hoping that God would hear his prayers for
   them!

   How impossible would it be for a master, that thus interceded with God
   for his servants, to use any unkind threatenings towards them, to damn
   and curse them as dogs and scoundrels, and treat them only as the dregs
   of the creation!

   This devotion would give them another spirit, and make them consider
   how to make proper returns of care, kindness, and protection to those
   who had spent their strength and time in service and attendance upon
   them.

   Now if gentlemen think it too low an employment for their state and
   dignity, to exercise such a devotion as this for their servants, let
   them consider how far they are from the Spirit of Christ, who made
   Himself not only an Intercessor, but a Sacrifice for the whole race of
   sinful mankind.

   Let them consider how miserable their greatness would be, if the Son of
   God should think it as much below Him to pray for them, as they do to
   pray for their fellow-creatures.

   Let them consider how far they are from that spirit, which prays for
   its most unjust enemies, if they have not kindness enough to pray for
   those by whose labours and service they live in ease themselves.

   Again; if parents should thus make themselves advocates and
   intercessors with God for their children, constantly applying to Heaven
   in behalf of them, nothing would be more likely not only to bless their
   children, but also to form and dispose their own minds to the
   performance of everything that was excellent and praiseworthy.

   I do not suppose, but that the generality of parents remember their
   children in their prayers, and call upon God to bless them. But the
   thing here intended is not a general remembrance of them, but a regular
   method of recommending all their particular needs and necessities unto
   God; and of praying for every such particular grace and virtue for
   them, as their state and condition of life shall seem to require.

   The state of parents is a holy state, in some degree like that of the
   priesthood, and calls upon them to bless their children with their
   prayers and sacrifices to God. Thus it was that holy Job watched over
   and blessed his children, he sanctified them, "he rose up early in the
   morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of them
   all." [Job i. 5]

   If parents, therefore, considering themselves in this light, should be
   daily calling upon God in a solemn, deliberate manner, altering and
   extending their intercessions, as the state and growth of their
   children required, such devotion would have a mighty influence upon the
   rest of their lives; it would make them very circumspect in the
   government of themselves; prudent and careful of everything they said
   or did, lest their example should hinder that which they so constantly
   desired in their prayers.

   If a father were daily making particular prayers to God, that He would
   please to inspire his children with true piety, great humility, and
   strict temperance, what could be more likely to make the father himself
   become exemplary in these virtues? How naturally would he grow ashamed
   of wanting such virtues, as he thought necessary for his children! So
   that his prayers for their piety would be a certain means of exalting
   his own to its greatest height.

   If a father thus considered himself as an intercessor with God for his
   children, to bless them with his prayers, what more likely means to
   make him aspire after every degree of holiness, that he might thereby
   be fitter to obtain blessings from Heaven for them? How would such
   thoughts make him avoid everything that was sinful and displeasing to
   God, lest when he prayed for his children, God should reject his
   prayers!

   How tenderly, how religiously would such a father converse with his
   children, whom he considered as his little spiritual flock, whose
   virtues he was to form by his example, encourage by his authority,
   nourish by his counsel, and prosper by his prayers to God for them.

   How fearful would he be of all greedy and unjust ways of raising their
   fortune, of bringing them up in pride and indulgence, or of making them
   too fond of the world, lest he should thereby render them incapable of
   those graces which he was so often beseeching God to grant them.

   These being the plain, natural, happy effects of this intercession, all
   parents, I hope, who have the real welfare of their children at heart,
   who desire to be their true friends and benefactors, and to live
   amongst them, in the spirit of wisdom and piety, will not neglect so
   great a means, both of raising their own virtue, and doing an eternal
   good to those, who are so near and dear to them by the strongest ties
   of nature.

   Lastly, If all people, when they feel the first approaches of
   resentment, envy, or contempt, towards others; or if in all little
   disagreements and misunderstandings whatever, they should, instead of
   indulging their minds with little low reflections, have recourse, at
   such times, to a more particular and extraordinary intercession with
   God, for such persons as had raised their envy, resentment, or
   discontent; this would be a certain way to prevent the growth of all
   uncharitable tempers.

   If you were also to form your prayer or intercession at that time, to
   the greatest degree of contrariety to that temper which you were then
   in, it would be an excellent means of raising your heart to the
   greatest state of perfection.

   As for instance, when at any time you find in your heart motions of
   envy towards any person, whether on account of his riches, power,
   reputation, learning, or advancement, if you should immediately betake
   yourself at that time to your prayers, and pray to God to bless. and
   prosper him in that very thing which raised your envy; if you should
   express and repeat your petitions in the strongest terms, beseeching
   God to grant him all the happiness from the enjoyment of it, that can
   possibly be received; you would soon find it to be the best antidote in
   the world, to expel the venom of that poisonous passion.

   This would be such a triumph over yourself, would so humble and reduce
   your heart into obedience and order, that the devil would even be
   afraid of tempting you again in the same manner, when he saw the
   temptation turned into so great a means of amending and reforming the
   state of your heart.

   Again; if in any little difference, or misunderstandings that you
   happened to have at any time, with a relation, a neighbour, or any one
   else, you should then pray for them in a more extraordinary manner than
   you ever did before; beseeching God to give them every grace, and
   blessing, and happiness, you can think of; you would have taken the
   speediest method that can be, of reconciling all differences, and
   clearing up all misunderstandings. You would then think nothing too
   great to be forgiven; stay for no condescensions, need no mediation of
   a third person, but be glad to testify your love and good-will to him
   who had so high a place in your secret prayers.

   This would be the mighty power of such Christian devotion: it would
   remove all peevish passions, soften your heart into the most tender
   condescensions, and be the best arbitrator of all differences that
   happened betwixt you and any of your acquaintance.

   The greatest resentments amongst friends and neighbours, most often
   arise from poor punctilios and little mistakes in conduct. A certain
   sign that their friendship is merely human, not founded upon religious
   considerations, or supported by such a course of mutual prayer for one
   another as the first Christians used.

   For such devotion must necessarily either destroy such tempers, or be
   itself destroyed by them: you cannot possibly have any ill temper, or
   show any unkind behaviour to a man, for whose welfare you are so much
   concerned, as to be his advocate with God in private.

   Hence we may also learn the odious nature and exceeding guilt of all
   spite, hatred, contempt, and angry passions; they are not to be
   considered as defects in good nature, and sweetness of temper, not as
   failings in civility of manners, or good breeding, but as such base
   tempers as are entirely inconsistent with the charity of intercession.

   You think it a small matter to be peevish or illnatured to such or such
   a man; but you should consider whether it be a small matter to do that,
   which you could not do if you had but so much charity as to be able to
   recommend him to God in your prayers.

   You think it a small matter to ridicule one man, and despise another;
   but you should consider whether it be a small matter to want that
   charity toward these people, which Christians are not allowed to want
   toward their most inveterate enemies.

   For be but as charitable to these men, do but bless and pray for them,
   as you are obliged to bless and pray for your enemies, and then you
   will find that you have charity enough, to make it impossible for you
   to treat them with any degree of scorn or contempt.

   For you cannot possibly despise and ridicule that man, whom your
   private prayers recommend to the love and favour of God.

   When you despise and ridicule a man, it is with no other end but to
   make him ridiculous and contemptible in the eyes of other men, and in
   order to prevent their esteem of him. How, therefore, can it be
   possible for you sincerely to beseech God to bless that man with the
   honour of His love and favour, whom you desire men to treat as worthy
   of their contempt?

   Could you, out of love to a neighbour, desire your Prince to honour him
   with every mark of his esteem and favour, and yet, at the same time,
   expose him to the scorn and derision of your own servants?

   Yet this is as possible as to expose that man to the scorn and contempt
   of your fellow-creatures whom you recommend to the favour of God in
   your secret prayers.

   From these considerations we may plainly discover the reasonableness
   and justice of this doctrine of the Gospel, "Whosoever shall say to his
   brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever shall
   say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell-fire." [Matt. v. 22]

   We are not, I suppose, to believe that every hasty word, or
   unreasonable expression that slips from us by chance or surprise, and
   is contrary to our intention and tempers, is the great sin here
   signified.

   But he that says "Raca," or "Thou fool," must chiefly mean him that
   allows himself in deliberate, designed acts of scorn and contempt
   towards his brother, and in that temper [43] speak to him, and of him,
   in reproachful language.

   Now since it appears that these tempers are at the bottom the most rank
   uncharitableness; since no one can be guilty of them, but because he
   has not charity enough to pray to God for his brother; it cannot be
   thought hard or rigorous justice, that such tempers should endanger the
   salvation of Christians. For who would think it hard, that a Christian
   cannot obtain the favour of God for himself, unless he reverence and
   esteem his brother Christian, as one that bears the image of God, as
   one for whom Christ died, as a member of Christ's body, as a member of
   that holy society on earth, which is in union with that triumphant
   Church in Heaven?

   Yet all these considerations must be forgot, all these glorious
   privileges disregarded, before a man can treat him that has them, as an
   object of scorn and contempt.

   So that to scorn, or despise a brother, or, as our blessed Lord says,
   to call him Raca or fool, must be looked upon as amongst the most
   odious, unjust, and guilty tempers, that can be supported in the heart
   of a Christian, and justly excluding him from all his hopes in the
   salvation of Jesus Christ.

   For to despise one for whom Christ died, is to be as contrary to
   Christ, as he that despises anything that Christ has said or done.

   If a Christian that had lived with the holy Virgin Mary, should, after
   the death of our Lord, have taken any occasion to treat her with
   contempt, you would certainly say, that he had lost his piety towards
   our Blessed Lord. For a true reverence for Christ must have forced him
   to treat her with respect who was so nearly related to Him.

   I dare appeal to any man's mind, whether it does not tell him, that
   this relation of the Virgin Mary to our Blessed Lord, must have obliged
   all those that lived and conversed with her, to treat her with great
   respect and esteem. Might not a man have justly dreaded the vengeance
   of God upon him, for any scorn or contempt that he had shown to her?

   Now if this be plain and obvious reasoning, if a contempt offered to
   the Virgin Mary must have been interpreted a contempt of Christ,
   because of her near relation to Him, then let the same reasoning show
   you the great impiety of despising any brother.

   You cannot despise a brother, without despising him that stands in a
   high relation to God, to His Son Jesus Christ, and to the Holy Trinity.

   You would certainly think it a mighty impiety to treat a writing with
   great contempt that had been written by the finger of God; and can you
   think it a less impiety to contemn and vilify a brother, who is not
   only the workmanship but the image of God?

   You would justly think it great profaneness, to contemn and trample
   upon an altar, because it was appropriated to holy uses, and had had
   the body of Christ so often placed upon it; and can you suppose it to
   be less profaneness to scorn and trample upon a brother, who so belongs
   to God, that his very body is to be considered as the temple of the
   Holy Ghost? [1 Cor. vi. 19]

   Had you despised and ill-treated the Virgin Mary, you had been
   chargeable with the impiety of despising her of whom Christ was born.
   And if you scorn and despise a brother, you are chargeable with the
   impiety of despising him for whom Christ laid down His life.

   And now, if this scornful temper is founded upon a disregard of all
   these relations which every Christian bears to God, and Christ, and the
   Holy Trinity, can you wonder, or think it hard, that a Christian who
   thus allows himself to despise a brother, should be in danger of
   hell-fire?

   Secondly, It must here be observed, that though in these words,
   "Whosoever shall say, Thou fool," etc., the great sin there condemned
   is an allowed temper of despising a brother; yet we are also to
   believe, that all hasty expressions, and words of contempt, though
   spoken by surprise or accident, are by this text condemned as great
   sins, and notorious breaches of Christian charity.

   They proceed from great want of Christian love and meekness, and call
   for great repentance. They are only little sins, when compared with
   habits and settled tempers of treating a brother despitefully, and fall
   as directly under the condemnation of this text as the grossest habits
   of uncharitableness.

   And the reason why we are always to apprehend great guilt, and call
   ourselves to a strict repentance for these hasty expressions of anger
   and contempt, is this; because they seldom are what they seem to be,
   that is, mere starts of temper that were occasioned purely by surprise
   or accident, but are much more our own proper acts than we generally
   imagine.

   A man says a great many bitter things; he presently forgives himself,
   because he supposes it was only the suddenness of the occasion, or
   something accidental that carried him so far beyond himself.

   But he should consider, that perhaps the accident, or surprise, was not
   the occasion of his angry expressions but might only be the occasion of
   his angry temper showing itself.

   Now as this is, generally speaking, the case, as all haughty, angry
   language generally proceeds from some secret habits of pride in the
   heart; so people that are subject to it, though only now and then as
   accidents happen, have great reason to repent of more than their
   present behaviour, to charge themselves with greater guilt than
   accidental passion, and to bring themselves to such penance and
   mortification, as is proper to destroy habits of a haughty spirit.

   And this may be the reason why the text looks no farther than the
   outward language; why it only says Whosoever shall say, Thou fool;
   because few can proceed so far as to the accidental use of haughty,
   disdainful language, but they whose hearts are more or less possessed
   with habits and settled tempers of pride and haughtiness.

   But to return: intercession is not only the best arbitrator of all
   differences, the best promoter of true friendship, the best cure and
   preservative against all unkind tempers, all angry and haughty
   passions, but is also of great use to discover to us the true state of
   our own hearts.

   There are many tempers which we think lawful and innocent, which we
   never suspect of any harm; which, if they were to be tried by this
   devotion, would soon show us how we have deceived ourselves.

   Susurrus [44] is a pious, temperate, good man, remarkable for abundance
   of excellent qualities. No one more constant at the service of the
   Church, or whose heart is more affected with it. His charity is so
   great, that he almost starves himself, to be able to give greater alms
   to the poor. Yet Susurrus had a prodigious failing along with these
   great virtues.

   He had a mighty inclination to hear and discover all the defects and
   infirmities of all about him. You were welcome to tell him anything of
   anybody, provided that you did not do it in the style of an enemy. He
   never disliked an evil-speaker, but when his language was rough and
   passionate. If you would but whisper anything gently, though it were
   ever so bad in itself, Susurrus was ready to receive it.

   When he visits, you generally hear him relating how sorry he is for the
   defects and failings of such a neighbour. He is always letting you know
   how tender he is of the reputation of his neighbour; how loth to say
   that which he is forced to say; and how gladly he would conceal it, if
   it could be concealed.

   Susurrus had such a tender, compassionate manner of relating things the
   most prejudicial to his neighbour, that he even seemed, both to himself
   and others, to be exercising a Christian charity, at the same time that
   he was indulging a whispering, evil-speaking temper.

   Susurrus once whispered to a particular friend in great secrecy,
   something too bad to be spoken of publicly. He ended with saying, how
   glad he was that it had not yet taken wind, and that he had some hopes
   it might not be true, though the suspicions were very strong. His
   friend made him this reply:

   You say, Susurrus, that you are glad it has not yet taken wind: and
   that you may have some hopes it may not prove true. Go home, therefore,
   to your closet, and pray to God for this man, in such a manner, and
   with such earnestness, as you would pray for yourself on the like
   occasion.

   Beseech God to interpose in his favour, to save him from false
   accusers, and bring all those to shame who, by uncharitable whispers
   and secret stories, wound him, like those that stab in the dark. And
   when you have made this prayer, then you may, if you please, go tell
   the same secret to some other friend, that you have told to me.

   Susurrus was exceedingly affected with this rebuke, and felt the force
   of it upon his conscience in as lively a manner, as if he had seen the
   books opened at the day of judgment.

   All other arguments might have been resisted; but it was impossible for
   Susurrus either to reject, or to follow this advice, without being
   equally self-condemned in the highest degree.

   From that time to this, he has constantly used himself to this method
   of intercession; and his heart is so entirely changed by it, that he
   can now no more privately whisper anything to the prejudice of another
   than he can openly pray to God to do people hurt.

   Whisperings and evil-speakings now hurt his ears like oaths and curses:
   and he has appointed one day in the week to be a day of penance as long
   as he lives, to humble himself before God, in the sorrowful confession
   of his former guilt.

   It may well be wondered, how a man of so much piety as Susurrus could
   be so long deceived in himself, as to live in such a state of scandal
   and evil-speaking, without suspecting himself to be guilty of it. But
   it was the tenderness and seeming compassion with which he heard and
   related everything that deceived both himself and others.

   This was a falseness of heart, which was only to be fully discovered by
   the true charity of intercession.

   And if people of virtue, who think as little harm of themselves as
   Susurrus did, were often to try their spirit by such an intercession,
   they would often find themselves to be such as they least of all
   suspected.

   I have laid before you the many and great advantages of intercession.
   You have seen what a Divine friendship it must needs beget amongst
   Christians; how dear it would render all relations and neighbours to
   one another; how it tends to make clergymen, masters, and parents,
   exemplary and perfect in all the duties of their station; how certainly
   it destroys all envy, spite, and ill-natured passions; how speedily it
   reconciles all differences; and with what a piercing light it discovers
   to a man the true state of his heart.

   These considerations will, I hope, persuade you to make such
   intercession as is proper for your state, the constant, chief matter of
   your devotion, at this hour of prayer.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [42] Ouranius, i.e. heavenly.

   [43] i.e. "allows himself . . . speak to him," a rare example of
   carelessness or obscurity in Law's limpid style.

   [44] Susurrus, i.e. whisper.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XXII


   Recommending devotion at three o'clock, called in Scripture the ninth
   hour of the day. The subject of prayer at this hour is resignation to
   the Divine pleasure. The nature and duty of conformity to the will of
   God, in all our actions and designs.


   I HAVE recommended certain subjects to be made the fixed and chief
   matter of your devotions, at all the hours of prayer that have been
   already considered.

   As thanksgiving and oblation of yourself to God, at your first prayers
   in the morning; at nine, the great virtue of Christian humility is to
   be the chief part of your petitions. At twelve, you are called upon to
   pray for all the graces of universal love, and to raise it in your
   heart by such general and particular intercessions as your own state
   and relation to other people seem more particularly to require of you.

   At this hour of the afternoon, you are desired to consider the
   necessity of resignation and conformity to the will of God, and to make
   this great virtue the principal matter of your prayers.

   There is nothing wise, or holy, or just, but the great will of God.
   This is as strictly true, in the most rigid sense, as to say, that
   nothing is infinite and eternal but God.

   No beings, therefore, whether in Heaven, or on earth, can be wise, or
   holy, or just, but so far as they conform to this will of God. It is
   conformity to this will that gives virtue and perfection to the highest
   services of the angels in heaven; and it is conformity to the same will
   that makes the ordinary actions of men on earth become an acceptable
   service unto God.

   The whole nature of virtue consists in conforming to, and the whole
   nature of vice in declining from, the will of God. All God 's creatures
   are created to fulfil His will; the sun and moon obey His will, by the
   necessity of their nature; angels conform to His will, by the
   perfection of their nature; if, therefore, you would show yourself not
   to be a rebel and apostate from the order of the creation, you must act
   like beings both above and below you; it must be the great desire of
   your soul, that God's will may be done by you on earth, as it is done
   in Heaven. It must be the settled purpose and intention of your heart,
   to will nothing, design nothing, do nothing, but so far as you have
   reason to believe that it is the will of God that you should so desire,
   design, and do.

   It is as just and necessary to live in this state of heart, to think
   thus of God and yourself, as to think that you have any dependence upon
   Him. And it is as great a rebellion against God, to think that your
   will may ever differ from His, as to think that you have not received
   the power of willing for Him.

   You are therefore to consider yourself as a being that has no other
   business in the world, but to be that which God requires you to be; to
   have no tempers, no rules of your own, to seek no self-designs or
   self-ends, but to fill some place, and act some part, in strict
   conformity and thankful resignation to the Divine pleasure.

   To think that you are your own, or at your own disposal, is as absurd
   as to think that you created and can preserve yourself. It is as plain
   and necessary a first principle, to believe you are thus God's, that
   you thus belong to Him, and are to act and suffer all in a thankful
   resignation to His pleasure, as to believe that in Him you "live, and
   move, and have your being." [Acts xvii. 28]

   Resignation to the Divine will signifies a cheerful approbation, and
   thankful acceptance of everything that comes from God. It is not enough
   patiently to submit, but we must thankfully receive, and fully approve
   of everything, that by the order of God's providence happens to us.

   For there is no reason why we should be patient, but what is as good
   and strong a reason why we should be thankful. If we were under the
   hands of a wise and good physician, that could not mistake, nor do
   anything to us, but what certainly tended to our benefit; it would not
   be enough to be patient, and abstain from murmurings against such a
   physician; but it would be as great a breach of duty and gratitude to
   him not to be pleased and thankful for what he did, as it would be to
   murmur at him.

   Now this is our true state with relation to God; we cannot be said so
   much as to believe in Him, unless we believe Him to be of infinite
   wisdom. Every argument, therefore, for patience under His disposal of
   us, is as strong an argument for approbation and thankfulness for
   everything that He does to us. And there needs no more to dispose us to
   this gratitude towards God, than a full belief in Him, that He is this
   Being of infinite wisdom, love, and goodness.

   Do but assent to this truth, in the same manner as you assent to things
   of which you have no doubt, and then you will cheerfully approve of
   everything that God has already approved for you.

   For as you cannot possibly be pleased with the behaviour of any person
   towards you, but because it is for your good, is wise in itself, and
   the effect of his love and goodness towards you; so when you are
   satisfied that God does not only do that which is wise, and good, and
   kind, but that which is the effect of an infinite wisdom and love in
   the care of you; it will be as necessary, whilst you have this faith,
   to be thankful and pleased with everything which God chooses for you,
   as to wish your own happiness.

   Whenever, therefore, you find yourself disposed to uneasiness, or
   murmuring at anything that is the effect of God's providence over us,
   you must look upon yourself as denying either the wisdom or goodness of
   God. For every complaint necessarily supposes this. You would never
   complain of your neighbour, but that you suppose you can show either
   his unwise, unjust, or unkind behaviour towards you.

   Now every murmuring, impatient reflection, under the providence of God,
   is the same accusation of God. A complaint always supposes ill-usage.

   Hence also you may see the great necessity and piety of this thankful
   state of heart, because the want of it implies an accusation of God's
   want either of wisdom, or goodness, in His disposal of us. It is not,
   therefore, any high degree of perfection, founded in any uncommon
   nicety of thinking, or refined notions, but a plain principle, founded
   in this plain belief, that God is a Being of infinite wisdom and
   goodness.

   Now this resignation to the Divine will may be considered in two
   respects; First, as it signifies a thankful approbation of God's
   general providence over the world; Secondly, as it signifies a thankful
   acceptance of His particular providence over us.

   First, Every man is, by the law of his creation, by the first article
   of his creed, obliged to consent to, and acknowledge the wisdom and
   goodness of God in His general providence over the whole world. He is
   to believe, that it is the effect of God's great wisdom and goodness,
   that the world itself was formed at such a particular time, and in such
   a manner; that the general order of nature, the whole frame of things,
   is contrived and formed in the best manner. He is to believe that God's
   providence over states and kingdoms, times and seasons, is all for the
   best: that the revolutions of state and changes of empire, the rise and
   fall of monarchies, persecutions, wars, famines, and plagues, are all
   permitted and conducted by God 's providence to the general good of man
   in this state of trial.

   A good man is to believe all this, with the same fulness of assent as
   he believes that God is in every place, though he neither sees, nor can
   comprehend the manner of His presence.

   This is a noble magnificence of thought, a true religious greatness of
   mind, to be thus affected with God's general providence, admiring and
   magnifying His wisdom in all things; never murmuring at the course of
   the world, or the state of things, but looking upon all around, at
   heaven and earth, as a pleased spectator, and adoring that invisible
   hand, which gives laws to all motions, and overrules all events to ends
   suitable to the highest wisdom and goodness.

   It is very common for people to allow themselves great liberty in
   finding fault with such things as have only God for their cause.

   Every one thinks he may justly say, what a wretched abominable climate
   he lives in. This man is frequently telling you, what a dismal cursed
   day it is, and what intolerable seasons we have. Another thinks he has
   very little to thank God for, that it is hardly worth his while to live
   in a world so full of changes and revolutions. But these are tempers of
   great impiety, and show that religion has not yet its seat in the heart
   of those that have them.

   It sounds indeed much better to murmur at the course of the world, or
   the state of things, than to murmur at Providence; to complain of the
   seasons and weather than to complain of God; but if these have no other
   cause but God and His providence, it is a poor distinction to say, that
   you are only angry at the things, but not at the Cause and Director of
   them.

   How sacred the whole frame of the world is, how all things are to be
   considered as God's, and referred to Him, is fully taught by our
   Blessed Lord in the case of oaths: "But I say unto you, Swear not at
   all, neither by heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for
   it is His footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the
   great King; neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst
   not make one hair white or black"; [Matt. v. 34-36] that is, because
   the whiteness or blackness of thy hair is not thine, but God's.

   Here you see all things in the whole order of nature, from the highest
   heavens to the smallest hair, are always to be considered, not
   separately as they are in themselves, but as in some relation to God.
   And if this be good reasoning, thou shalt not swear by the earth, a
   city, or thy hair, because these things are God's, and in a certain
   manner belong to Him; is it not exactly the same reasoning to say, Thou
   shalt not murmur at the seasons of the earth, the states of cities, and
   the change of times, because all these things are in the hands of God,
   have Him for their Author, are directed and governed by Him to such
   ends as are most suitable to His wise providence?

   If you think you can murmur at the state of things without murmuring at
   Providence, or complain of seasons without complaining of God, hear
   what our Blessed Lord says further upon oaths: "Whoso shall swear by
   the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon; and whoso shall
   swear by the temple, sweareth by Him that dwelleth therein; and he that
   shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by Him that
   sitteth thereon." [Matt. xxiii. 20-22]

   Now does not this Scripture plainly oblige us to reason after this
   manner? Whoso murmurs at the course of the world murmurs at God that
   governs the course of the world. Whoso repines at seasons and weather,
   and speaks impatiently of times and events, repines and speaketh
   impatiently of God, who is the sole Lord and Governor of times,
   seasons, and events.

   As therefore when we think of God Himself we are to have no sentiments
   but of praise and thanksgiving; so when we look at those things which
   are under the direction of God, and governed by His providence, we are
   to receive them with the same tempers of praise and gratitude.

   And though we are not to think all things right, and just, and lawful,
   which the providence of God permits; for then nothing could be unjust,
   because nothing is without His permission; yet we must adore God in the
   greatest public calamities, the most grievous persecutions, as things
   that are suffered by God, like plagues and famines, for ends suitable
   to his wisdom and glory in the government of the world.

   There is nothing more suitable to the piety of a reasonable creature,
   or to the spirit of a Christian, than thus to approve, admire, and
   glorify God in all the acts of His general providence; considering the
   whole world as His particular family, and all events as directed by His
   wisdom.

   Every one seems to consent to this, as an undeniable truth, that all
   things must be as God pleases; and is not this enough to make every man
   pleased with them himself? And how can a man be a peevish complainer of
   anything that is the effect of Providence, but by showing that his own
   self-will and self-wisdom is of more weight with him than the will and
   wisdom of God? And what can religion be said to have done for a man
   whose heart is in this state?

   For if he cannot thank and praise God, as well in calamities and
   sufferings as in prosperity and happiness, he is as far from the piety
   of a Christian as he that only loves them that love him, is from the
   charity of a Christian. For to thank God only for such things as you
   like, is no more a proper act of piety, than to believe only what you
   see is an act of faith.

   Resignation and thanksgiving to God are only acts of piety, when they
   are acts of faith, trust, and confidence in the Divine goodness.

   The faith of Abraham was an act of true piety, because it stopped at no
   difficulties, was not altered or lessened by any human appearances. It
   first of all carried him, against all show of happiness, from his own
   kindred and country, into a strange land, not knowing whither he went.
   It afterwards made him, against all appearances of nature, when his
   body was dead, when he was about an hundred years old, depend upon the
   promise of God, being fully persuaded that what God had promised, He
   was able to perform. It was this same faith, that, against so many
   pleas of nature, so many appearances of reason, prevailed upon him to
   offer up Isaac -- "accounting that God was able to raise him up, even
   from the dead." [Heb. xi. 17, 19]

   Now this faith is the true pattern of Christian resignation to the
   Divine pleasure; you are to thank and praise God, not only for things
   agreeable to you, that have the appearance of happiness and comfort;
   but when you are, like Abraham, called from all appearances of comfort
   to be a pilgrim in a strange land, to part with an only son; being as
   fully persuaded of the Divine goodness in all things that happen to
   you, as Abraham was of the Divine promise when there was the least
   appearance of its being performed.

   This is true Christian resignation to God, which requires no more to
   the support of it, than such a plain assurance of the goodness of God,
   as Abraham had of His veracity. And if you ask yourself, what greater
   reason Abraham had to depend upon the Divine veracity, than you have to
   depend upon the Divine goodness, you will find that none can be given.

   You cannot therefore look upon this as an unnecessary high pitch of
   perfection, since the want of it implies the want, not of any high
   notions, but of a plain and ordinary faith in the most certain
   doctrines both of natural and revealed religion.

   Thus much concerning resignation to the Divine will, as it signifies a
   thankful approbation of God's general providence: it is now to be
   considered as it signifies a thankful acceptance of God 's particular
   providence over us.

   Every man is to consider himself as a particular object of God's
   providence; under the same care and protection of God as if the world
   had been made for him alone. It is not by chance that any man is born
   at such a time, of such parents, and in such a place and condition. It
   is as certain that every soul comes into the body at such a time, and
   in such circumstances, by the express designment of God, according to
   some purposes of His will, and for some particular ends; this is as
   certain as that it is by the express designment of God that some beings
   are Angels, and others are men.

   It is as much by the counsel and eternal purpose of God that you should
   be born in your particular state, and that Isaac should be the son of
   Abraham, as that Gabriel should be an Angel, and Isaac a man.

   The Scriptures assure us, that it was by Divine appointment that our
   blessed Saviour was born at Bethlehem, and at such a time. Now although
   it was owing to the dignity of His person, and the great importance of
   His birth, that thus much of the Divine counsel was declared to the
   world, concerning the time and manner of it; yet we are as sure, from
   the same Scriptures, that the time and manner of every man's coming
   into the world is according to some eternal purposes and direction of
   Divine providence, and in such time, and place, and circumstances, as
   are directed and governed by God for particular ends of His wisdom and
   goodness.

   This we are as certain of, from plain revelation, as we can be of
   anything. For if we are told, that not a sparrow falleth to the ground
   without our Heavenly Father; can anything more strongly teach us, that
   much greater beings, such as human souls, come not into the world
   without the care and direction of our Heavenly Father? If it is said,
   "The very hairs of your head are all numbered": is it not to teach us,
   that nothing, not the smallest things imaginable, happen to us by
   chance? But if the smallest things we can conceive are declared to be
   under the Divine direction, need we, or can we, be more plainly taught,
   that the greatest things of life, such as the manner of our coming into
   the world, our parents, the time, and other circumstances of our birth
   and condition, are all according to the eternal purposes, direction,
   and appointment of Divine providence?

   When the disciples put this question to our blessed Lord concerning the
   blind man, saying, "Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that
   he was born blind?" He that was the eternal Wisdom of God, made this
   answer, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the
   works of God should be made manifest in him." [John ix. 2, 3] Plainly
   declaring, that the particular circumstances of every man's birth, the
   body that he receives, and the condition and state of life into which
   he is born, are appointed by a secret Providence, which directs all
   things to their particular times and seasons, and manner of existence,
   that the wisdom and works of God may be made manifest in them all.

   As therefore it is thus certain, that we are what we are, as to birth,
   time, and condition of entering into the world; since all that is
   particular in our state is the effect of God's particular providence
   over us, and intended for some particular ends both of His glory and
   our own happiness; we are, by the greatest obligations of gratitude,
   called upon to conform and resign our will to the will of God in all
   these respects; thankfully approving and accepting everything that is
   particular in our state; praising and glorifying His Name for our birth
   of such parents, and in such circumstances of state and condition;
   being fully assured, that it was for some reasons of infinite wisdom
   and goodness, that we were so born into such particular states of life.

   If the man above mentioned was born blind, that the works of God might
   be manifested in him, had he not great reason to praise God for
   appointing him, in such a particular manner, to be the instrument of
   His glory? And if one person is born here, and another there; if one
   falls amongst riches, and another into poverty; if one receives his
   flesh and blood from these parents, and another from those, for as
   particular ends as the man was born blind; have not all people the
   greatest reason to bless God, and to be thankful for their particular
   state and condition, because all that is particular in it, is as
   directly intended for the glory of God, and their own good, as the
   particular blindness of that man who was so born, that the works of God
   might be manifested in him?

   How noble an idea does this give us of the Divine omniscience presiding
   over the whole world, and governing such a long chain and combination
   of seeming accidents and chances, to the common and particular
   advantage of all beings! So that all persons, in such a wonderful
   variety of causes, accidents, and events, should all fall into such
   particular states as were foreseen and foreordained to their best
   advantage and so as to be most serviceable to the wise and glorious
   ends of God's government of all the world.

   Had you been anything else than what you are, you had, all things
   considered, been less wisely provided for than you are now: you had
   wanted some circumstances and conditions that are best fitted to make
   you happy yourself, and serviceable to the glory of God.

   Could you see all that which God sees, all that happy chain of causes
   and motives which are to move and invite you to a right course of life,
   you would see something to make you like that state you are in, as
   fitter for you than any other.

   But as you cannot see this, so it is here that your Christian faith and
   trust in God is to exercise itself, and render you as grateful and
   thankful for the happiness of your state, as if you saw everything that
   contributes to it with your own eyes.

   But now if this is the case of every man in the world, thus blessed
   with some particular state that is most convenient for him, how
   reasonable is it for every man to will that which God has already
   willed for him! And by a pious faith and trust in the Divine goodness;
   thankfully to adore and magnify that wise providence, which he is sure
   has made the best choice for him of those things which he could not
   choose for himself!

   Every uneasiness at our own state is founded upon comparing it with
   that of other people; which is full as unreasonable as if a man in a
   dropsy should be angry at those that prescribe different things to him
   from those which are prescribed to people in health. For all the
   different states of life are like the different states of diseases;
   what is a remedy to one man in his state, may be poison to another.

   So that to murmur because you are not as some others are, is as if a
   man in one disease should murmur that he is not treated like him that
   is in another. Whereas, if he was to have his will, he would be killed
   by that which will prove the cure of another.

   It is just thus in the various conditions of life; if you give yourself
   up to uneasiness, or complain at anything in your state, you may, for
   aught you know, be so ungrateful to God, as to murmur at that very
   thing which is to prove the cause of your salvation. Had you it in your
   power to get that which you think it is so grievous to want, it might
   perhaps be that very thing which, of all others, would most expose you
   to eternal damnation.

   So that whether we consider the infinite goodness of God, that cannot
   choose amiss for us, or our own great ignorance of what is most
   advantageous to us, there can be nothing so reasonable and pious, as to
   have no will but that of God's, and to desire nothing for ourselves, in
   our persons, our state, and condition, but that which the good
   providence of God appoints us.

   Farther, as the good providence of God thus introduces us into the
   world, into such states and conditions of life as are most convenient
   for us, so the same unerring wisdom orders all events and changes in
   the whole course of our lives, in such a manner, as to render them the
   fittest means to exercise and improve our virtue.

   Nothing hurts us, nothing destroys us, but the ill use of that liberty
   with which God has entrusted us.

   We are as sure that nothing happens to us by chance, as that the world
   itself was not made by chance; we are as certain that all things
   happen, and work together for our good, as that God is goodness itself.
   So that a man has as much reason to will everything that happens to
   him, because God wills it, as to think that is wisest which is directed
   by infinite wisdom.

   This is not cheating or soothing ourselves into any false content, or
   imaginary happiness; but is a satisfaction grounded upon as great a
   certainty as the being and attributes of God.

   For if we are right in believing God to act over us with infinite
   wisdom and goodness, we cannot carry our notions of conformity and
   resignation to the Divine will too high; nor can we ever be deceived,
   by thinking that to be best for us, which God has brought upon us.

   For the providence of God is not more concerned in the government of
   night and day, and the variety of seasons, than in the common course of
   events that seem most to depend upon the mere wills of men. So that it
   is as strictly right to look upon all worldly accidents and changes,
   all the various turns and alternations in your own life, to be as truly
   the effects of Divine providence, as the rising and setting of the sun,
   or the alternations of the seasons of the year. As you are, therefore,
   always to adore the wisdom of God in the direction of these things; so
   it is the same reasonable duty always to magnify God, as an equal
   Director of everything that happens to you in the course of your own
   life.

   This holy resignation and conformity of your will to the will of God
   being so much the true state of piety, I hope you will think it proper
   to make this hour of prayer a constant season of applying to God for so
   great a gift; that by thus constantly praying for it, your heart may be
   habitually disposed towards it, and always in a state of readiness to
   look at everything as God's, and to consider Him in everything; that so
   everything that befalls you may be received in the spirit of piety, and
   made a means of exercising some virtue.

   There is nothing that so powerfully governs the heart, that so strongly
   excites us to wise and reasonable actions, as a true sense of God's
   presence. But as we cannot see, or apprehend the essence of God, so
   nothing will so constantly keep us under a lively sense of the presence
   of God, as this holy resignation which attributes everything to Him,
   and receives everything as from Him.

   Could we see a miracle from God, how would our thoughts be affected
   with an holy awe and veneration of His presence! But if we consider
   everything as God's doing, either by order or permission, we shall then
   be affected with common things, as they would be who saw a miracle.

   For as there is nothing to affect you in a miracle, but as it is the
   action of God, and bespeaks His presence; so when you consider God as
   acting in all things, and all events, then all things will become
   venerable to you, like miracles, and fill you with the same awful
   sentiments of the Divine presence.

   Now you must not reserve the exercise of this pious temper to any
   particular times or occasions, or fancy how resigned you will be to
   God, if such or such trials should happen. For this is amusing yourself
   with the notion or idea of resignation, instead of the virtue itself.

   Do not therefore please yourself with thinking how piously you would
   act and submit to God in a plague, or famine, or persecution, but be
   intent upon the perfection of the present day; and be assured, that the
   best way of showing a true zeal is to make little things the occasions
   of great piety.

   Begin therefore in the smallest matters, and most ordinary occasions,
   and accustom your mind to the daily exercise of this pious temper, in
   the lowest occurrences of life. And when a contempt, an affront, a
   little injury, loss, or disappointment, or the smallest events of every
   day, continually raise your mind to God in proper acts of resignation,
   then you may justly hope that you shall be numbered amongst those that
   are resigned and thankful to God in the greatest trials and
   afflictions.

     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XXIII


   Of evening prayer. Of the nature and necessity of examination. How we
   are to be particular in the confession of all our sins. How we are to
   fill our minds with a just horror and dread of all sin.


   I AM now come to six o'clock in the evening, which, according to the
   Scripture account, is called the twelfth, or last hour of the day. This
   is a time so proper for devotion, that I suppose nothing need be said
   to recommend it as a season of prayer to all people that profess any
   regard to piety.

   As the labour and action of every state of life is generally over at
   this hour, so this is the proper time for every one to call himself to
   account and review all his behaviour from the first action of the day.
   The necessity of this examination is founded upon the necessity of
   repentance. For if it be necessary to repent of all our sins, if the
   guilt of unrepented sins still continue upon us, then it is necessary,
   not only that all our sins, but the particular circumstances and
   aggravations of them, be known, and recollected, and brought to
   repentance.

   The Scripture saith, "If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just
   to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." [1
   John i. 9] Which is as much as to say, that then only our sins are
   forgiven, and we cleansed from the guilt and unrighteousness of them,
   when they are thus confessed and repented of.

   There seems therefore to be the greatest necessity, that all our daily
   actions be constantly observed and brought to account, lest by a
   negligence we load ourselves with the guilt of unrepented sins.

   This examination therefore of ourselves every evening is not only to be
   considered as a commendable rule, and fit for a wise man to observe,
   but as something that is as necessary as a daily confession and
   repentance of our sins; because this daily repentance is very little
   significancy, and loses all its chief benefit, unless it be a
   particular confession and repentance of the sins of that day. This
   examination is necessary to repentance, in the same manner as time is
   necessary; you cannot repent or express your sorrow, unless you allow
   some time for it; nor can you repent, but so far as you know what it is
   that you are repenting of. So that when it is said, that it is
   necessary to examine and call your actions to account; it is only
   saying, that it is necessary to know what, and how many things you are
   to repent of.

   You perhaps have hitherto only used yourself to confess yourself a
   sinner in general, and ask forgiveness in the gross, without any
   particular remembrance, or contrition for the particular sins of that
   day. And by this practice you are brought to believe, that the same
   short general form of confession of sin in general, is a sufficient
   repentance for every day.

   Suppose another person should hold, that a confession of our sins in
   general once at the end of every week was sufficient; and that it was
   as well to confess the sins of seven days altogether, as to have a
   particular repentance at the end of every day: I know you sufficiently
   see the unreasonableness and impiety of this opinion, and that you
   think it is easy enough to show the danger and folly of it.

   Yet you cannot bring one argument against such an opinion, but what
   will be as good an argument against such a daily repentance as does not
   call the particular sins of that day to a strict account.

   For as you can bring no express text of Scripture against such an
   opinion, but must take all your arguments from the nature of
   repentance, and the necessity of a particular repentance for particular
   sins, so every argument of that kind must as fully prove the necessity
   of being very particular in our repentance of the sins of every day;
   since nothing can be justly said against leaving the sins of the whole
   week to be repented for in the gross, but what may as justly be said
   against a daily repentance which considers the sins of that day only in
   the gross.

   Would you tell such a man, that a daily confession was necessary to
   keep up an abhorrence of sin, that the mind would grow hardened and
   senseless of the guilt of sin without it? And is not this as good a
   reason for requiring that your daily repentance be very express and
   particular for your daily sins? For if confession is to raise an
   abhorrence of sin, surely that confession which considers and lays open
   your particular sins, that brings them to light with all their
   circumstances and aggravations, that requires a particular sorrowful
   acknowledgment of every sin, must, in a much greater degree, fill the
   mind with an abhorrence of sin, than that which only, in one and the
   same form of words, confesses you only to be a sinner in general. For
   as this is nothing but what the greatest saint may justly say of
   himself, so the daily repeating of only such a confession has nothing
   in it to make you truly ashamed of your own way of life.

   Again: must you not tell such a man, that by leaving himself to such a
   weekly general confession, he would be in great danger of forgetting a
   great many of his sins? But is there any sense or force in this
   argument, unless you suppose that our sins are all to be remembered,
   and brought to a particular repentance? And is it not necessary that
   our particular sins be not forgotten, but particularly remembered in
   our daily repentances, as in a repentance at any other time?

   So that every argument for a daily confession and repentance, is the
   same argument for the confession and repentance of the particular sins
   of every day.

   Because daily confession has no other reason nor necessity but our
   daily sins; and therefore is nothing of what it should be, but so far
   as it is a repentance and sorrowful acknowledgment of the sins of the
   day.

   You would, I suppose, think yourself chargeable with great impiety, if
   you were to go to bed without confessing yourself to be a sinner and
   asking pardon of God; you would not think it sufficient that you did so
   yesterday. And yet if, without any regard to the present day, you only
   repeat the same form on words that you used yesterday, the sins of the
   present day may justly be looked upon to have had no repentance. For if
   the sins of the present day require a new confession, it must be such a
   new confession as is proper to itself. For it is the state and
   condition of every day that is to determine the state and manner of
   your repentance in the evening; otherwise the same general form of
   words is rather an empty formality that has the appearance of a duty,
   than such a true performance of it as is necessary to make it truly
   useful to you.

   Let it be supposed, that on a certain day you have been guilty of these
   sins; that you have told a vain lie upon yourself, ascribing something
   falsely to yourself, through pride; that you have been guilty of
   detraction, and indulged yourself in some degree of intemperance. Let
   it be supposed, that on the next day you have lived in a contrary
   manner; that you have neglected no duty of devotion, and been the rest
   of the day innocently employed in your proper business. Let it be
   supposed, that on the evening of both these days you only use the same
   confession in general, considering it rather as a duty that is to be
   performed every night, than as a repentance that is to be suited to the
   particular state of the day.

   Can it with any reason be said, that each day has had its proper
   repentance? Is it not as good sense to say, there is no difference in
   the guilt of these days, as to say that there need be no different
   repentance at the end of them? Or how can each of them have its proper
   repentance, but by its having a repentance as large, and extensive, and
   particular as the guilt of each day?

   Again: let it be supposed, that in that day, when you had been guilty
   of the three notorious sins above mentioned, that [45] in your evening
   repentance, you had only called one of them to mind. Is it not plain,
   that the other two are unrepented of, and that, therefore, their guilt
   still abides upon you? So that you are then in the state of him who
   commits himself to the night without the repentance for such a day as
   had betrayed him into two such great sins.

   Now these are not needless particulars, or such scrupulous niceties, as
   a man need not trouble himself about; but are such plain truths, as
   essentially concern the very life of piety. For if repentance is
   necessary, it is full as necessary that it be rightly performed, and in
   due manner.

   And I have entered into all these particulars, only to show you, in the
   plainest manner, that examination and a careful review of all the
   actions of the day, is not only to be looked upon as a good rule, but
   as something as necessary as repentance itself.

   If a man is to account for his expenses at night, can it be thought a
   needless exactness in him, to take notice of every particular expense
   in the day?

   And if a man is to repent of his sins at night, can it be thought too
   great a piece of scrupulosity in him, to know and call to mind what
   sins he is to repent of.

   Farther; though it should be granted that a confession in general may
   be a sufficient repentance for the end of such days as have only the
   unavoidable frailties of our nature to lament; yet even this folly
   proves the absolute necessity of this self-examination: for without
   this examination, who can know that he has gone through any day in this
   manner?

   Again: an evening repentance, which thus brings all the actions of the
   day to account, is not only necessary to wipe off the guilt of sin, but
   is also the most certain way to amend and perfect our lives.

   For it is only such a repentance as this that touches the heart,
   awakens the conscience, and leaves an horror and detestation of sin
   upon the mind.

   For instance: if it should happen, that upon any particular evening,
   all that you could charge yourself with should be this, namely, a
   hasty, negligent performance of your devotions, or too much time spent
   in an impertinent conversation; if the unreasonableness of these things
   were fully reflected upon and acknowledged; if you were then to condemn
   yourself before God for them, and implore His pardon and assisting
   grace; what could be so likely a means to prevent your falling into the
   same faults the next day?

   Or if you should fall into them again the next day, yet if they were
   again brought to the same examination and condemnation in the presence
   of God, their happening again would be such a proof to you of your own
   folly and weakness, would cause such a pain and remorse in your mind,
   and fill you with such shame and confusion at yourself, as would, in
   all probability, make you exceedingly desirous of greater perfection.

   Now in the case of repeated sins, this would be the certain benefit
   that we should receive from this examination and confession; the mind
   would thereby be made humble, full of sorrow and deep compunction, and,
   by degrees, forced into amendment.

   Whereas a formal, general confession, that is only considered as an
   evening duty, that overlooks the particular mistakes of the day, and is
   the same, whether the day be spent ill or well, has little or no effect
   upon the mind; a man may use such a daily confession, and yet go on
   sinning and confessing all his life, without any remorse of mind, or
   true desire of amendment.

   For if your own particular sins are left out of your confession, your
   confessing of sin in general has no more effect upon your mind than if
   you had only confessed that all men in general are sinners. And there
   is nothing in any confession to show that it is yours, but so far as it
   is a self-accusation, not of sin in general, or such as is common to
   all others, but of such particular sins as are your own proper shame
   and reproach.

   No other confession but such as thus discovers and accuses your own
   particular guilt can be an act of true sorrow, or real concern at your
   own condition. And a confession that is without this sorrow and
   compunction of heart, has nothing in it, either to atone for past sins,
   or to produce in us any true reformation and amendment of life.

   To proceed: In order to make this examination still farther beneficial,
   every man should oblige himself to a certain method in it. As every man
   has something particular in his nature, stronger inclinations to some
   vices than others, some infirmities that stick closer to him, and are
   harder to be conquered than others; and as it is as easy for every man
   to know this of himself, as to know whom he likes or dislikes; so it is
   highly necessary, that these particularities of our natures and tempers
   should never escape a severe trial at our evening repentance. I say, a
   severe trial, because nothing but a rigorous severity against these
   natural tempers is sufficient to conquer them.

   They are the right eyes that are not to be spared; but to be plucked
   out and cast from us. For as they are the infirmities of nature, so
   they have the strength of nature, and must be treated with great
   opposition, or they will soon be too strong for us.

   He, therefore, who knows himself most of all subject to anger and
   passion, must be very exact and constant in his examination of this
   temper every evening. He must find out every slip that he has made of
   that kind, whether in thought, or word, or action; he must shame, and
   reproach, and accuse himself before God, for everything that he has
   said or done in obedience to his passion. He must no more allow himself
   to forget the examination of this temper than to forget his whole
   prayers.

   Again: If you find that vanity is your prevailing temper, that is
   always putting you upon the adornment of your person, and catching
   after everything that compliments or flatters your abilities, never
   spare nor forget this temper in your evening examination; but confess
   to God every vanity of thought, or word, or action, that you have been
   guilty of, and put yourself to all the shame and confusion for it that
   you can.

   In this manner should all people act with regard to their chief
   frailty, to which their nature most inclines them. And though it should
   not immediately do all that they would wish, yet, by a constant
   practice, it would certainly in a short time produce its desired
   effect.

   Farther: As all states and employments of life have their particular
   dangers and temptations, and expose people more to some sins than
   others, so every man that wishes his own improvement, should make it a
   necessary part of his evening examination, to consider how he has
   avoided, or fallen into such sins, as are most common to his state of
   life.

   For as our business and condition of life has great power over us, so
   nothing but such watchfulness as this can secure us from those
   temptations to which it daily exposes us.

   The poor man, from his condition of life, is always in danger of
   repining and uneasiness; the rich man is most exposed to sensuality and
   indulgence; the tradesman to lying and unreasonable gains; the scholar
   to pride and vanity: so that in every state of life, a man should
   always, in his examination of himself, have a strict eye upon those
   faults to which his state of life most of all exposes him.

   Again: As it is reasonable to suppose that every good man has entered
   into, or at least proposed to himself, some method of holy living, and
   set himself some such rules to observe, as are not common to other
   people, and only known to himself: so it should be a constant part of
   his night recollection, to examine how, and in what degree, he has
   observed them, and to reproach himself before God for every neglect of
   them.

   By rules, I here mean such rules as relate to the well ordering of our
   time, and the business of our common life; such rules as prescribe a
   certain order to all that we are to do, our business, devotion,
   mortifications, readings, retirements, conversation, meals,
   refreshments, sleep, and the like.

   Now, as good rules relating to all these things are certain means of
   great improvement, and such as all serious Christians must needs
   propose to themselves, so they will hardly ever be observed to any
   purpose, unless they are made the constant subject of our evening
   examination.

   Lastly, You are not to content yourself with a hasty general review of
   the day, but you must enter upon it with deliberation; begin with the
   first action of the day, and proceed, step by step, through every
   particular matter that you have been concerned in, and so let no time,
   place, or action be overlooked.

   An examination thus managed, will in a little time make you as
   different from yourself, as a wise man is different from an idiot. It
   will give you such a newness of mind, such a spirit of wisdom, and
   desire of perfection, as you were an entire stranger to before.

   Thus much concerning the evening examination.

   I proceed now to lay before you such considerations as may fill your
   mind with a just dread and horror of all sin, and help you to confess
   your own, in the most passionate contrition and sorrow of heart.

   Consider first, how odious all sin is to God, what a mighty baseness it
   is, and how abominable it renders sinners in the sight of God. That it
   is sin alone that makes the great difference betwixt an Angel and the
   devil; and that every sinner is, so far as he sins, a friend of the
   devil's, and carrying on his work against God. That sin is a greater
   blemish and defilement of the soul, than any filth or disease is a
   defilement of the body. And to be content to live in sin is a much
   greater baseness, than to desire to wallow in the mire, or love any
   bodily impurity.

   Consider how you must abhor a creature that delighted in nothing but
   filth and nastiness, that hated everything that was decent and clean:
   and let this teach you to apprehend, how odious that soul that delights
   in nothing but the impurity of sin, must appear unto God.

   For all sins, whether of sensuality, pride, or falseness, or any other
   irregular passion, are nothing else but the filth and impure diseases
   of the rational soul. And all righteousness is nothing else but the
   purity, the decency, the beauty, and perfection of that spirit which is
   made in the image of God.

   Again: Learn what horror you ought to have for the guilt of sin, from
   the greatness of that Atonement which has been made for it.

   God made the world by the breath of His mouth, by a word speaking, but
   the redemption of the world has been a work of longer labour.

   How easily God can create beings, we learn from the first chapter of
   Genesis; but how difficult it is for infinite mercy to forgive sins, we
   learn from that costly Atonement, those bloody sacrifices, those pains
   and penances, those sicknesses and deaths, which all must be undergone,
   before the guilty sinner is fit to appear in the presence of God.

   Ponder these great truths: that the Son of God was forced to become
   man, to be partaker of all our infirmities, to undergo a poor, painful,
   miserable, and contemptible life, to be persecuted, hated, and at last
   nailed to a cross, that, by such sufferings, He might render God
   propitious to that nature in which He suffered.

   That all the bloody sacrifices and atonements of the Jewish law were to
   represent the necessity of this great Sacrifice, and the great
   displeasure God bore to sinners.

   That the world is still under the curse of sin, and certain marks of
   God's displeasure at it; such as famines, plagues, tempests, sickness,
   diseases, and death.

   Consider that all the sons of Adam are to go through a painful, sickly
   life, denying and mortifying their natural appetites, and crucifying
   the lusts of the flesh, in order to have a share in the Atonement of
   our Saviour's death.

   That all their penances and self-denials, all their tears and
   repentance, are only made available by that great intercession which is
   still making for them at the right hand of God.

   Consider these great truths; that this mysterious redemption, all these
   sacrifices and sufferings, both of God and man, are only to remove the
   guilt of sin; and then let this teach you, with what tears and
   contrition you ought to purge yourself from it.

   After this general consideration of the guilt of sin, which has done so
   much mischief to your nature, and exposed it to so great punishment,
   and made it so odious to God, that nothing less than so great an
   Atonement of the Son of God, and so great repentance of our own, can
   restore us to the Divine favour:

   Consider next your own particular share in the guilt of sin. And if you
   would know with what zeal you ought to repent yourself, consider how
   you would exhort another sinner to repentance: and what repentance and
   amendment you would expect from him whom you judged to be the greatest
   sinner in the world.

   Now this case every man may justly reckon to be his own. And you may
   fairly look upon yourself to be the greatest sinner that you know in
   the world.

   For though you may know abundance of people to be guilty of some gross
   sins, with which you cannot charge yourself, yet you may justly condemn
   yourself as the greatest sinner that you know. And that for these
   following reasons:

   First, Because you know more of the folly of your own heart, than you
   do of other people's; and can charge yourself with various sins, that
   you only know of yourself, and cannot be sure that other sinners are
   guilty of them. So that as you know more of the folly, the baseness,
   the pride, the deceitfulness and negligence of your own heart, than you
   do of any one's else, so you have just reason to consider yourself as
   the greatest sinner that you know: because you know more of the
   greatness of your own sins, than you do of other people's.

   Secondly, The greatness of our guilt arises chiefly from the greatness
   of God's goodness towards us, from the particular graces and blessings,
   the favours, the lights and instructions that we have received from
   Him.

   Now as these graces and blessings, and the multitude of God's favours
   towards us, are the great aggravations of our sins against God, so they
   are only known to ourselves. And therefore every sinner knows more of
   the aggravations of his own guilt, than he does of other people's; and
   consequently may justly look upon himself to be the greatest sinner
   that he knows.

   How good God has been to other sinners, what light and instruction He
   has vouchsafed to them; what blessings and graces they have received
   from Him; how often He has touched their hearts with holy inspirations,
   you cannot tell. But all this you know of yourself: therefore you know
   greater aggravations of your own guilt, and are able to charge yourself
   with greater ingratitude, than you can charge upon other people.

   And this is the reason, why the greatest saints have in all ages
   condemned themselves as the greatest sinners, because they knew some
   aggravations of their own sins, which they could not know of other
   people's.

   The right way, therefore, to fill your heart with true contrition, and
   a deep sense of your own sins, is this: You are not to consider, or
   compare the outward form, or course of your life, with that of other
   people's, and then think yourself to be less sinful than they, because
   the outward course of your life is less sinful than theirs.

   But in order to know your own guilt, you must consider your own
   particular circumstances, your health, your sickness, your youth or
   age, your particular calling, the happiness of your education, the
   degrees of light and instruction that you have received, the good men
   that you have conversed with, the admonitions that you have had, the
   good books that you have read, the numberless multitude of Divine
   blessings, graces, and favours that you have received, the good motions
   of grace that you have resisted, the resolutions of amendment that you
   have often broken, and the checks of conscience that you have
   disregarded.

   For it is from these circumstances that every one is to state the
   measure and greatness of his own guilt. And as you know only these
   circumstances of your own sins, so you must necessarily know how to
   charge yourself with higher degrees of guilt, than you can charge upon
   other people.

   God Almighty knows greater sinners, it may be, than you are; because He
   sees and knows the circumstances of all men's sins, but your own heart,
   if it is faithful to you, can discover no guilt so great as your own:
   because it can only see in you those circumstances, on which great part
   of the guilt of sin is founded.

   You may see sins in other people that you cannot charge upon yourself;
   but then you know a number of circumstances of your own guilt that you
   cannot lay to their charge.

   And perhaps that person that appears at such a distance from your
   virtue, and so odious in your eyes, would have been much better than
   you are, had he been altogether in your circumstances, and received all
   the same favours and graces from God that you have.

   This is a very humbling reflection, and very proper for those people to
   make, who measure their virtue, by comparing the outward course of
   their lives with that of other people's.

   For to look at whom you will, however different from you in his way of
   life, yet you can never know that he has resisted so much Divine grace
   as you have, or that in all your circumstances, he would not have been
   much truer to his duty than you are.

   Now this is the reason why I desired you to consider how you would
   exhort that man to confess and bewail his sins whom you looked upon to
   be one of the greatest sinners.

   Because if you will deal justly, you must fix the charge at home, and
   look no farther than yourself. For God has given no one any power of
   knowing the true greatness of any sins but his own; and therefore the
   greatest sinner that every one knows is himself.

   You may easily see, how such a one in the outward course of his life
   breaks the laws of God; but then you can never say, that had you been
   exactly in all his circumstances, that you should not have broken them
   more than he has done.

   A serious and frequent reflection upon these things will mightily tend
   to humble us in our own eyes, make us very apprehensive of the
   greatness of our own guilt, and very tender in censuring and condemning
   other people.

   For who would dare to be severe against other people, when, for aught
   he can tell, the severity of God may be more due to him, than to them?
   Who would exclaim against the guilt of others, when he considers that
   he knows more of the greatness of his own guilt, than he does of
   theirs?

   How often you have resisted God's Holy Spirit; how many motives to
   goodness you have disregarded: how many particular blessings you have
   sinned against; how many good resolutions you have broken; how many
   checks and admonitions of conscience you have stifled, you very well
   know; but how often this has been the case of other sinners, you know
   not. And therefore the greatest sinner that you know, must be yourself.

   Whenever, therefore, you are angry at sin or sinners, whenever you read
   or think of God's indignation and wrath at wicked men, let this teach
   you to be the most severe in your censure, and most humble and contrite
   in the acknowledgment and confession of your own sins, because you know
   of no sinner equal to yourself.

   Lastly, to conclude this chapter: Having thus examined and confessed
   your sins at this hour of the evening, you must afterwards look upon
   yourself as still obliged to betake yourself to prayer again, just
   before you go to bed.

   The subject that is most proper for your prayers at that time is death.
   Let your prayers, therefore, then be wholly upon it, reckoning upon all
   the dangers, uncertainties, and terrors of death; let them contain
   everything that can affect and awaken your mind into just apprehensions
   of it. Let your petitions be all for right sentiments of the approach
   and importance of death; and beg of God, that your mind may be
   possessed with such a sense of its nearness, that you may have it
   always in your thoughts, do everything as in sight of it, and make
   every day a day of preparation for it.

   Represent to your imagination, that your bed is your grave; that all
   things are ready for your interment; that you are to have no more to do
   with this world; and that it will be owing to God's great mercy, if you
   ever see the light of the sun again, or have another day to add to your
   works of piety.

   And then commit yourself to sleep, as into the hands of God; as one
   that is to have no more opportunities of doing good; but is to awake
   amongst spirits that are separate from the body, and waiting for the
   judgment of the last great day.

   Such a solemn resignation of yourself into the hands of God every
   evening, and parting with all the world, as if you were never to see it
   any more, and all this in the silence and darkness of the night, is a
   practice that will soon have excellent effects upon your spirit.

   For this time of the night is exceeding proper for such prayers and
   meditations; and the likeness which sleep and darkness have to death,
   will contribute very much to make your thoughts about it the more deep
   and affecting. So that I hope, you will not let a time so proper for
   such prayers, be ever passed over without them.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [45] that carelessly repeated.
     __________________________________________________________________



  CHAPTER XXIV


   The conclusion. Of the excellency and greatness of a devout spirit.


   I HAVE now finished what I intended in this treatise. I have explained
   the nature of devotion, both as it signifies a life devoted to God, and
   as it signifies a regular method of daily prayer. I have now only to
   add a word or two, in recommendation of a life governed by this spirit
   of devotion.

   For though it is as reasonable to suppose it the desire of all
   Christians to arrive at Christian perfection, as to suppose that all
   sick men desire to be restored to perfect health; yet experience shows
   us, that nothing wants more to be pressed, repeated, and forced upon
   our minds, than the plainest rules of Christianity.

   Voluntary poverty, virginity, and devout retirement, have been here
   recommended as things not necessary, yet highly beneficial to those
   that would make the way to perfection the most easy and certain. But
   Christian perfection itself is tied to no particular form of life; but
   is to be attained, though not with the same ease, in every state of
   life.

   This has been fully asserted in another place, where it has been shown,
   that Christian perfection calls no one (necessarily) to a cloister, but
   to the full performance of those duties, which are necessary for all
   Christians, and common to all states of life. [Christ. Perfect. p. 2]

   So that the whole of the matter is plainly this: Virginity, voluntary
   poverty, and such other restraints of lawful things, are not necessary
   to Christian perfection; but are much to be commended in those who
   choose them as helps and means of a more safe and speedy arrival at it.

   It is only in this manner, and in this sense, that I would recommend
   any particularity of life; not as if perfection consisted in it, but
   because of its great tendency to produce and support the true spirit of
   Christian perfection.

   But the thing which is here pressed upon all, is a life of a great and
   strict devotion: which, I think, has been sufficiently shown to be
   equally the duty and happiness of all orders of men. Neither is there
   anything in any particular state of life, that can be justly pleaded as
   a reason for any abatements of a devout spirit.

   But because in this polite age of ours, we have so lived away the
   spirit of devotion, that many seem afraid even to be suspected of it,
   imagining great devotion to be great bigotry: that it is founded in
   ignorance and poorness of spirit; and that little, weak, and dejected
   minds, are generally the greatest proficients in it:

   It shall here be fully shown, that great devotion is the noblest temper
   of the greatest and noblest souls; and that they who think it receives
   any advantage from ignorance and poorness of spirit, are themselves not
   a little, but entirely ignorant of the nature of devotion, the nature
   of God, and the nature of themselves.

   People of fine parts and learning, or of great knowledge in worldly
   matters, may perhaps think it hard to have their want of devotion
   charged upon their ignorance. But if they will be content to be tried
   by reason and Scripture, it may soon be made appear, that a want of
   devotion, wherever it is, either amongst the learned or unlearned, is
   founded in gross ignorance, and the greatest blindness and
   insensibility that can happen to a rational creature; and that devotion
   is so far from being the effect of a little and dejected mind, that it
   must and will be always highest in the most perfect natures.

   And first, who reckons it a sign of a poor, little mind, for a man to
   be full of reverence and duty to his parents, to have the truest love
   and honour for his friend, or to excel in the highest instances of
   gratitude to his benefactor?

   Are not these tempers in the highest degree, in the most exalted and
   perfect minds?

   And yet what is high devotion, but the highest exercise of these
   tempers, of duty, reverence, love, honour, and gratitude to the
   amiable, glorious Parent, Friend, and Benefactor of all mankind?

   Is it a true greatness of mind, to reverence the authority of your
   parents, to fear the displeasure of your friend, to dread the
   reproaches of your benefactor? And must not this fear, and dread, and
   reverence, be much more just, and reasonable, and honourable, when they
   are in the highest degree towards God?

   Now as the higher these tempers are, the more are they esteemed amongst
   men, and are allowed to be so much the greater proofs of a true
   greatness of mind: so the higher and greater these same tempers are
   towards God, so much the more do they prove the nobility, excellence,
   and greatness of the mind.

   So that so long as duty to parents, love to friends, and gratitude to
   benefactors, are thought great and honourable tempers; devotion, which
   is nothing else but duty, love, and gratitude to God, must have the
   highest place amongst our highest virtues.

   If a prince, out of his mere goodness, should send you a pardon by one
   of his slaves, would you think it a part of your duty to receive the
   slave with marks of love, esteem, and gratitude for his great kindness,
   in bringing you so great a gift: and at the same time think it a
   meanness and poorness of spirit, to show love, esteem, and gratitude to
   the prince, who, of his own goodness, freely sent you the pardon?

   And yet this would be as reasonable as to suppose that love, esteem,
   honour, and gratitude, are noble tempers, and instances of a great
   soul, when they are paid to our fellow-creatures; but the effects of a
   poor, ignorant, dejected mind, when they are paid to God.

   Farther; that part of devotion which expresses itself in sorrowful
   confessions, and penitential tears of a broken and a contrite heart, is
   very far from being any sign of a little and ignorant mind.

   For who does not acknowledge it an instance of an ingenuous, generous,
   and brave mind, to acknowledge a fault, and ask pardon for any offence?
   And are not the finest and most improved minds, the most remarkable for
   this excellent temper?

   Is it not also allowed, that the ingenuity [46] and excellence of a
   man's spirit is much shown, when his sorrow and indignation at himself
   rises in proportion to the folly of his crime, and the goodness and
   greatness of the person he has offended?

   Now if things are thus, then the greater any man's mind is, the more he
   knows of God and himself, the more will he be disposed to prostrate
   himself before God, in all the humblest acts and expressions of
   repentance.

   And the greater the ingenuity, the generosity, judgment, and
   penetration of his mind is, the more will he exercise and indulge a
   passionate, tender sense of God's just displeasure; and the more he
   knows of the greatness, the goodness, and perfection of the Divine
   nature, the fuller of shame and confusion will he be at his own sins
   and ingratitude.

   And on the other hand, the more dull and ignorant any soul is, the more
   base and ungenerous it naturally is, the more senseless it is of the
   goodness and purity of God; so much the more averse will it be to all
   acts of humble confession and repentance.

   Devotion, therefore, is so far from being best suited to little
   ignorant minds, that a true elevation of soul, a lively sense of
   honour, and great knowledge of God and ourselves, are the greatest
   natural helps that our devotion hath.

   And on the other hand, it shall here be made appear by variety of
   arguments, that indevotion is founded on the most excessive ignorance.

   And first, our blessed Lord, and His Apostles, were eminent instances
   of great and frequent devotion. Now if we will grant (as all Christians
   must grant) that their great devotion was founded in a true knowledge
   of the nature of devotion, the nature of God, and the nature of man;
   then it is plain, that all those that are insensible of the duty of
   devotion, are in this excessive state of ignorance, they neither know
   God, nor themselves, nor devotion.

   For if a right knowledge in these three respects produces great
   devotion, as in the case of our Saviour and His Apostles, then a
   neglect of devotion must be chargeable upon ignorance.

   Again; how comes it that most people have recourse to devotion, when
   they are in sickness, distress, or fear of death? Is it not because
   this state shows them more of the want of God, and their own weakness,
   than they perceive at other times? Is it not because their infirmities,
   their approaching end, convince them of something, which they did not
   half perceive before?

   Now if devotion at these seasons is the effect of a better knowledge of
   God and ourselves, then the neglect of devotion, at other times, is
   always owing to great ignorance of God and ourselves.

   Farther; as indevotion is ignorance, so it is the most shameful
   ignorance, and such as is to be charged with the greatest folly.

   This will fully appear to any one that considers by what rules we are
   to judge of the excellency of any knowledge, or the shamefulness of any
   ignorance.

   Now knowledge itself would be no excellence, nor ignorance any reproach
   to us, but that we are rational creatures.

   But if this be true, then it follows plainly, that that knowledge which
   is most suitable to our rational nature, and which most concerns us, as
   such, to know, is our highest, finest knowledge; and that ignorance
   which relates to things that are most essential to us as rational
   creatures, and which we are most concerned to know, is, of all others,
   the most gross and shameful ignorance.

   If therefore there be any things that concern us more than others, if
   there be any truths that are more to us than all others, he that has
   the fullest knowledge of these things, that sees these truths in the
   clearest, strongest light, has, of all others, as a rational creature,
   the clearest understanding, and the strongest parts.

   If therefore our relation to God be our greatest relation, if our
   advancement in His favour be our highest advancement, he that has the
   highest notions of the excellence of this relation, he that most
   strongly perceives the highest worth, and great value of holiness and
   virtue, that judges everything little, when compared with it, proves
   himself to be master of the best and most excellent knowledge.

   If a judge has fine skill in painting, architecture, and music, but at
   the same time has gross and confused notions of equity, and a poor,
   dull apprehension of the value of justice, who would scruple to reckon
   him a poor ignorant judge?

   If a bishop should be a man of great address and skill in the arts of
   preferment, and understanding how to raise and enrich his family in the
   world, but should have no taste nor sense of the maxims and principles
   of the saints and fathers of the Church; if he did not conceive the
   holy nature and great obligations of his calling, and judge it better
   to be crucified to the world, than to live idly in pomp and splendour;
   who would scruple to charge such a bishop with want of understanding?

   If we do not judge and pronounce after this manner, our reason and
   judgment are but empty sounds.

   But now, if a judge is to be reckoned ignorant, if he does not feel and
   perceive the value and worth of justice; if a bishop is to be looked
   upon as void of understanding, if he is more experienced in other
   things than in the exalted virtues of his apostolical calling; then all
   common Christians are to be looked upon as more or less knowing,
   accordingly as they know more or less of those great things which are
   the common and greatest concern of all Christians.

   If a gentleman should fancy that the moon is no bigger than it appears
   to the eye, that it shines with its own light, that all the stars are
   only so many spots of light; if, after reading books of astronomy, he
   should still continue in the same opinion, most people would think he
   had but a poor apprehension.

   But if the same person should think it better to provide for a short
   life here, than to prepare for a glorious eternity hereafter; that it
   was better to be rich, than to be eminent in piety, his ignorance and
   dulness would be too great to be compared to anything else.

   There is no knowledge that deserves so much as the name of it, but that
   which we call judgment.

   And that is the most clear and improved understanding, which judges
   best of the value and worth of things. All the rest is but the capacity
   of an animal, it is but mere seeing and hearing.

   And there is no excellence of any knowledge in us, till we exercise our
   judgment, and judge well of the value and worth of things.

   If a man had eyes that could see beyond the stars, or pierce into the
   heart of the earth, but could not see the things that were before him,
   or discern anything that was serviceable to him, we should reckon that
   he had but a very bad sight.

   If another had ears that received sounds from the world in the moon,
   but could hear nothing that was said or done upon earth, we should look
   upon him to be as bad as deaf.

   In like manner, if a man has a memory that can retain a great many
   things; if he has a wit that is sharp and acute in arts and sciences,
   or an imagination that can wander agreeably in fictions, but has a
   dull, poor apprehension of his duty and relation to God, of the value
   of piety, or the worth of moral virtue, he may very justly be reckoned
   to have a bad understanding. He is but like the man, that can only see
   and hear such things as are of no benefit to him.

   As certain therefore as piety, virtue, and eternal happiness are of the
   most concern to man; as certain as the immortality of our nature and
   relation to God, are the most glorious circumstances of our nature; so
   certain is it, that he who dwells most in contemplation of them, whose
   heart is most affected with them, who sees farthest into them, who best
   comprehends the value and excellency of them, who judges all worldly
   attainments to be mere bubbles and shadows in comparison of them,
   proves himself to have, of all others, the finest understanding, and
   the strongest judgment.

   And if we do not reason after this manner, or allow this method of
   reasoning, we have no arguments to prove that there is any such thing
   as a wise man, or a fool.

   For a man is proved to be a natural, not because he wants any of his
   senses, or is incapable of everything, but because he has no judgment,
   and is entirely ignorant of the worth and value of things. He will
   perhaps choose a fine coat rather than a large estate.

   And as the essence of stupidity consists in the entire want of
   judgment, in an ignorance of the value of things, so, on the other
   hand, the essence of wisdom and knowledge must consist in the
   excellency of our judgment, or in the knowledge of the worth and value
   of things.

   This therefore is an undeniable proof, that he who knows most of the
   value of the best things, who judges most rightly of the things which
   are of most concern to him, who had rather have his soul in a state of
   Christian perfection, than the greatest share of worldly happiness, has
   the highest wisdom, and is at the farthest distance from men that are
   naturals, that any knowledge can place him.

   On the other hand, he that can talk the learned languages, and repeat a
   great deal of history, but prefers the indulgence of his body to the
   purity and perfection of his soul, who is more concerned to get a name
   or an estate here, than to live in eternal glory hereafter, is in the
   nearest state to that natural, who chooses a painted coat, rather than
   a large estate.

   He is not called a natural by men, but he must appear to God and
   heavenly beings, as in a more excessive state of stupidity, and will
   sooner or later certainly appear so to himself.

   But now if this be undeniably plain, that we cannot prove a man to be a
   fool, but by showing that he has no knowledge of things that are good
   and evil to himself; then it is undeniably plain, that we cannot prove
   a man to be wise, but by showing that he has the fullest knowledge of
   things, that are his greatest good, and his greatest evil.

   If, therefore, God be our greatest good; if there can be no good but in
   His favour, nor any evil but in departing from Him, then it is plain,
   that he who judges it the best thing he can do to please God to the
   utmost of his power, who worships and adores Him with all his heart and
   soul, who would rather have a pious mind than all the dignities and
   honours in the world, shows himself to be in the highest state of human
   wisdom.

   To proceed: We know how our blessed Lord acted in a human body; it was
   His meat and drink, to do the will of His Father which is in Heaven.

   And if any number of heavenly spirits were to leave their habitations
   in the light of God, and be for a while united to human bodies, they
   would certainly tend towards God in all their actions, and be as
   heavenly as they could, in a state of flesh and blood.

   They would certainly act in this manner, because they would know that
   God was the only good of all spirits; and that whether they were in the
   body, or out of the body, in Heaven, or on earth, they must have every
   degree of their greatness and happiness from God alone.

   All human spirits, therefore, the more exalted they are, the more they
   know their Divine original, the nearer they come to heavenly spirits;
   by so much the more will they live to God in all their actions, and
   make their whole life a state of devotion.

   Devotion therefore is the greatest sign of a great and noble genius; it
   supposes a soul in its highest state of knowledge; and none but little
   and blinded minds, that are sunk into ignorance and vanity, are
   destitute of it.

   If a human spirit should imagine some mighty prince to be greater than
   God, we should take him for a poor, ignorant creature; all people would
   acknowledge such an imagination to be the height of stupidity.

   But if this same human spirit should think it better to be devoted to
   some mighty prince, than to be devoted to God, would not this still be
   a greater proof of a poor, ignorant, and blinded nature?

   Yet this is what all people do, who think anything better, greater, or
   wiser, than a devout life.

   So that which way soever we consider this matter, it plainly appears,
   that devotion is an instance of great judgment, of an elevated nature;
   and the want of devotion is a certain proof of the want of
   understanding.

   The greatest spirits of the heathen world, such as Pythagoras,
   Socrates, Plato, Epictetus, Marcus Antonius, etc., owed all their
   greatness to the spirit of devotion.

   They were full of God; their wisdom and deep contemplations tended only
   to deliver men from the vanity of the world, the slavery of bodily
   passions, that they might act as spirits that came from God, and were
   soon to return to Him.

   Again: To see the dignity and greatness of a devout spirit, we need
   only compare it with other tempers, that are chosen in the room of it.

   St. John tells us, that all in the world (that is, all the tempers of a
   worldly life) is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
   pride of life.

   Let us therefore consider, what wisdom or excellency of mind there is
   required to qualify a man for these delights.

   Let us suppose a man given up to the pleasures of the body; surely this
   can be no sign of a fine mind, or an excellent spirit: for if he has
   but the temper of an animal, he is great enough for these enjoyments.

   Let us suppose him to be devoted to honours and splendours, to be fond
   of glitter and equipage: now if this temper required any great parts,
   or fine understanding, to make a man capable of it, it would prove the
   world to abound with great wits.

   Let us suppose him to be in love with riches, and to be so eager in the
   pursuit of them, as never to think he has enough: now this passion is
   so far from supposing any excellent sense, or great understanding, that
   blindness and folly are the best supports that it hath.

   Let us lastly suppose him in another light, not singly devoted to any
   of these passions, but, as it mostly happens, governed by all of them
   in their turns; does this show a more exalted nature, than to spend his
   days in the service of any one of them?

   For to have a taste for these things, and to be devoted to them, is so
   far from arguing any tolerable parts or understandings, that they are
   suited to the dullest, weakest minds, and require only a great deal of
   pride and folly to be greatly admired.

   But now let libertines bring any such charge as this, if they can,
   against devotion. They may as well endeavour to charge light with
   everything that belongs to darkness.

   Let them but grant that there is a God and providence, and then they
   have granted enough to justify the wisdom, and support the honour of
   devotion.

   For if there is an infinitely wise and good Creator, in whom we live,
   move, and have our being, whose providence governs all things in all
   places, surely it must be the highest act of our understanding to
   conceive rightly of Him; it must be the noblest instance of judgment,
   the most exalted temper of our nature, to worship and adore this
   universal providence, to conform to its laws, to study its wisdom, and
   to live and act everywhere, as in the presence of this infinitely good
   and wise Creator.

   Now he that lives thus, lives in the spirit of devotion.

   And what can show such great parts, and so fine an understanding, as to
   live in this temper?

   For if God is wisdom, surely he must be the wisest man in the world,
   who most conforms to the wisdom of God, who best obeys His providence,
   who enters farthest into His designs, and does all he can, that God's
   will may be done on earth, as it is done in Heaven.

   A devout man makes a true use of his reason: he sees through the vanity
   of the world, discovers the corruption of his nature, and the blindness
   of his passion. He lives by a law which is not visible to vulgar eyes;
   he enters into the world of spirits; he compares the greatest things,
   sets eternity against time; and chooses rather to be forever great in
   the presence of God, when he dies, than to have the greatest share of
   worldly pleasure whilst he lives.

   He that is devout, is full of these great thoughts; he lives upon these
   noble reflections, and conducts himself by rules and principles, which
   can only be apprehended, admired, and loved by reason.

   There is nothing therefore that shows so great a genius, nothing that
   so raises us above vulgar spirits, nothing that so plainly declares an
   heroic greatness of mind, as great devotion.

   When you suppose a man to be a saint, or all devotion, you have raised
   him as much above all other conditions of life, as a philosopher is
   above an animal.

   Lastly; courage and bravery are words of a great sound, and seem to
   signify an heroic spirit; but yet humility, which seems to be the
   lowest, meanest part of devotion, is a more certain argument of a noble
   and courageous mind.

   For humility contends with greater enemies, is more constantly engaged,
   more violently assaulted, bears more, suffers more, and requires
   greater courage to support itself, than any instances of worldly
   bravery.

   A man that dares be poor and contemptible in the eyes of the world, to
   approve himself to God; that resists and rejects all human glory, that
   opposes the clamour of his passions, that meekly puts up with all
   injuries and wrongs, and dares stay for his reward till the invisible
   hand of God gives to every one their proper places, endures a much
   greater trial, and exerts a nobler fortitude, than he that is bold and
   daring in the fire of battle.

   For the boldness of a soldier, if he is a stranger to the spirit of
   devotion, is rather weakness than fortitude; it is at best but mad
   passion, and heated spirits, and has no more true valour in it than the
   fury of a tiger.

   For as we cannot lift up a hand, or stir a foot, but by a power that is
   lent us from God; so bold actions that are not directed by the laws of
   God, as so many executions of His will, are no more true bravery, than
   sedate malice is Christian patience.

   Reason is our universal law, that obliges us in all places, and at all
   times; and no actions have any honour, but so far as they are instances
   of our obedience to reason.

   And it is as base and cowardly, to be bold and daring against the
   principle of reason and justice, as to be bold and daring in lying and
   perjury.

   Would we therefore exercise a true fortitude, we must do all in the
   spirit of devotion, be valiant against the corruptions of the world,
   and the lusts of the flesh, and the temptations of the devil; for to be
   daring and courageous against these enemies, is the noblest bravery
   that an human mind is capable of.

   I have made this digression, for the sake of those who think a great
   devotion to be bigotry and poorness of spirit; that by these
   considerations they may see, how poor and mean all other tempers are,
   if compared to it; that they may see, that all worldly attainments,
   whether of greatness, wisdom, or bravery, are but empty sounds; and
   there is nothing wise, or great, or noble, in an human spirit, but
   rightly to know and heartily worship and adore the great God, that is
   the support and life of all spirits, whether in Heaven or on earth.


   T H E E N D
     __________________________________________________________________

   [46] ingenuity, i.e. ingenuousness.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Appendix A


   From the Introduction to the Methuen edition,

   by C. Bigg, DD, of Christ Church, Oxford


   This edition was originally published in November 1899


   I


   Of the Present Edition [N.B., this note applies to the Methuen edition
   only].


   WHAT is here offered to the reader is a reprint of he First Edition of
   the Serious Call, published by William Innys in 1729. Our pages are
   smaller, but the contents of each page are the same, and in every
   respect -- with the exception of some unimportant details of typography
   -- this edition may be regarded as a facsimile of the Editio princeps.

   Law's writing is so transparently clear that no notes, beyond such as
   are embodied in this Introduction, appear to be either necessary or
   desirable. In the case of so modern and so English a book, the object
   of scholarly fidelity is best attained by presenting the text as nearly
   as possible in the exact shape in which it left the hands of the
   author.

   Even the spelling, and the archaic use of capital letters and italics
   have been carefully preserved. They will serve to remind the reader
   that Law wrote in the eighteenth century, not in the nineteenth -- a
   fact which, as is pointed out in the following pages, is in many
   respects of importance.


   II


   Of the Life of William Law


   FOR a much richer account of the Life and Opinions of the Reverend
   William Law, A.M., than can be given here, the student must be referred
   to the elaborate work of Canon Overton, published by Longmans in 1881.
   Canon Overton writes with a fulness of knowledge of English religion in
   the eighteenth century which is possessed by very few; and Law, more
   than most men, bears the impress of the time in which his lot on earth
   was cast. Here it will not be possible to do more than sketch the
   salient features of his remarkable character and history.

   William Law was born in 1686, at King's Cliffe, a considerable village
   near Stamford, in Northamptonshire. His father, Thomas Law, was a
   grocer and chandler -- kept, that is to say, the village shop. It is a
   position, as all country people know, of some importance in the rustic
   hierarchy, and in those days was more important than it is now. Both
   the father and the mother -- her name was Margaret -- were good,
   religious people. Some have thought that they were the models for
   Paternus and Eusebia in the Serious Call.

   Their son, William -- he was the fourth of eight sons, and there were
   three daughters as well -- entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as
   sizar, or poor scholar, in 1705; took his B.A. degree in 1708; was
   elected Fellow and ordained in 1711; and graduated as M.A. in 1712.
   While at Cambridge he drew up a set of "rules for my future conduct."
   The first rule was "to fix it deep in my mind that I have one business
   upon my hands -- to seek for eternal happiness by doing the will of
   God." "Doing the will of God" sums up the earlier part of Law's
   history, as freedom and peace in the Holy Spirit sums up the later.
   Through the one he rose to the other, like Origen and many other
   saints. Yet, when Law was a curate in London -- the exact date is
   unknown, he is said to have courted fashionable society, and to have
   been "a great beau." It is possible that about 1720 there was a final
   act of self-renunciation.

   In 1713 Law was for a time suspended from his degrees for a Tripos
   speech. Part of the ceremonies attending the Bachelors' commencement at
   Cambridge was a burlesque oration, delivered in the schools on Ash
   Wednesday, by a bachelor seated on a three-legged stool, and hence
   known as Tripos. He was expected to be "witty, but modest withal"; but
   it was difficult for sprightly young men to hit the golden mean. Some
   of these licensed jesters indulged in gross personalities, some
   ventured on political satire, and suspensions were not infrequent. Law
   could not keep the Pretender out of his tirade.

   But at the time Law was not Bachelor but Master. If it were safe for an
   alien to meddle with the arcana of Cambridge life, a suspicion might be
   expressed that Law was really not Tripos but Praevaricator -- a
   personage who played the same part, as Lord of Misrule or Abbot of
   Unreason, at the Masters' commencement. However, we learn here three
   facts about Law: first, that he was a convinced Jacobite; second, that
   he was not discreet, or, at any rate, not worldly wise; third, that he
   was regarded at Cambridge as a man who could and would make an amusing
   speech. Indeed, as we can see from his books, Law had a pretty gift of
   wit, though he was absolutely devoid of humour. The difference is that
   wit sees the absurdities of others, while humour is conscious of its
   own.

   Shortly afterwards Law testified to the sincerity of his political
   convictions in a much more serious fashion. On the accession of George
   I., in 1716, he refused to take the oaths of allegiance and abjuration,
   and was accordingly deprived of his Fellowship, and of all prospect of
   employment in the Church.

   The loss to Law was very great. His stiff conscientiousness cost him
   not only influence but work, and he was condemned henceforth to eat his
   heart as a looker-on. Further, he was exposed to the full force of that
   sour trial which besets the martyr who is not wanted. The history of
   Non-jurism, like that of Jacobitism in general, is not edifying. But
   affliction tries the righteous man, and very pure reverence is due to
   those who, like Ken, Nelson, and Law, retained their saintliness in a
   world which had cast them out, and which they could not understand.

   Almost immediately after the resignation of his Fellowship, Law began
   to make his mark in the world of literature. The Three Letters to the
   Bishop of Bangor appeared in 1717; the Remarks upon the Fable of the
   Bees in 1723; and the Case of Reason in 1731. Mandeville was a silly,
   scoffing creature; but Hoadly, the latitudinarian bishop, and Tindal,
   the philosophical Deist, were formidable antagonists, and Law showed
   himself a match for both. In 1726 appeared the treatise on The Absolute
   Unlawfulness of Stage Entertainments. Of this, we may notice in
   passing, that it was suggested by a piece that had been acted "almost
   every night one whole season," in which Venus, Pan, Silenus, Bacchus,
   and a number of other "filthy demons of the heathen world" were brought
   upon the stage to talk in keeping with their character, or want of
   character. Law, no doubt, was carried too far; he forgot that he was
   not living in the age of Tertullian, and on this, as on many other
   questions, he showed a want of balance. But his disgust at "wanton
   songs and impure rant" was natural enough in days when the Restoration
   drama held the stage; and there is much that might be said about the
   morality of the footlights in any age.

   In 1726 appeared the first of Law's devotional works, the Practical
   Treatise upon Christian Perfection. It is significant that Law uses
   "perfection" here, not, as the old fathers, of love, but of obedience.
   One result of the book was probably that connection with the Gibbon
   family which shaped the whole of Law's after-life. About this time Mr
   Edward Gibbon, the grandfather of the historian, was seeking a tutor
   for his only son. Law was selected for this office, attended the
   younger Gibbon to Cambridge, and in 1730, when his pupil went abroad to
   make the grand tour, found a home in that "spacious house with gardens
   and land at Putney," where his patron resided, "in decent hospitality."
   Here he lived, "as the much honoured friend and spiritual director of
   the whole family," till the establishment was broken up some little
   time after Mr Gibbon's death in 1736.

   In 1729 the publication of the Serious Call had set the seal on Law's
   reputation, and he was visited and consulted at Putney by a little
   circle of disciples. Chief among them were Dr Cheyne, the two Wesleys,
   and Byrom. The Wesleys drifted away from him; but the good and flighty
   John Byrom, squire of Kersall, near Manchester -- poet, mystic,
   Jacobite, physician -- remained his faithful friend and worshipper
   through life. But Law was one of those men who have many admirers and
   few friends, and whose friends are markedly inferior to themselves.
   They are men who cannot bear contradiction.

   In 1737, according to Mr Moreton, in 1740, according to other
   authorities, we find Law settled at King's Cliffe, his birthplace, in a
   good house known as King John's Palace, or the Hall Yard. Here, in
   1744, he was joined by Miss Hester Gibbon, the daughter of his old
   patron, and Mrs Elizabeth Hutcheson, the widow of a wealthy country
   gentleman; and here he died in 1761.

   Law's life at King's Cliffe was wholly uneventful. The only dates that
   emerge are those of the writings which he sent to the Press from time
   to time, down to the very year of his death. It cannot have been a
   wholesome existence for so able a man to have been thus immured as
   domestic chaplain with two women of limited understanding and eccentric
   character. He seems to have had scarcely any contact with the outside
   world. Certainly he suffered through the absence of larger duties and
   converse with his equals. The little household was strictly ordered.
   The Bible and books of theology were the only literature admitted; nor
   was any form of recreation tolerated beyond conversation, a little
   music, and an occasional drive or ride. The historian Gibbon, who is
   oddly divided between dislike of Law's ways and pride in having been,
   in a sense, the proprietor of so famous a man, speaks of the house at
   King's Cliffe as "a hermitage," and the term is not inappropriate.

   The Christian duty most insisted upon by Law was charity. He himself
   was the soul of munificence. He built and endowed a girls' school at
   King's Cliffe, possibly with the thousand pounds which had been sent to
   him anonymously by some person who was grateful for spiritual profit
   received from the Christian Perfection. In 1745 the foundation was
   increased by Mrs Hutcheson, till it included also a school for boys,
   almshouses, and a library, which still exist.

   Such wise generosity could bear none but good fruits. But the rule of
   the house was that all surplus income should be given away in alms. As
   Mrs Hutcheson enjoyed two thousand a year, while Miss Gibbon had
   inherited half her father's large property, and Law himself possessed
   some means, the sums thus disposed of must have been very considerable.
   The natural result was the demoralisation of the whole countryside.
   King's Cliffe was crowded with undeserving mendicants, and the evil
   became so serious that the rector preached against it, and the parish
   made representations to the magistrates. Here, too, there is a
   characteristic feature. Law lived just before the iron age of Political
   Economy set in. Smith's Wealth of nations appeared in 1776. Perhaps the
   rector of King's Cliffe was a magistrate. But Law's heart was fixed on
   the letter of the Gospel, and what he thought to be -- though it by no
   means was -- the practice of primitive Christianity. Here also, as in
   his politics, he stood at the parting of the ways, and failed to see
   that the old road had come to an end. It was an age of giving. Kings
   gave pensions; ministers bestowed sinecures; noblemen rained showers of
   guineas on troops of gaping dependants; and so the ideal country
   priest, as he is painted in Goldsmith's Deserted village, gave all he
   could to all who asked.

   Pleased with his guests the good man learned to glow, And quite forgot
   their vices in their woe.

   Law would never suffer his portrait to be taken; but Mr Tighe, who
   visited King's Cliffe some time before 1813, and received information
   from "a kind person" there, tells us that he "was in stature rather
   over than under the middle size; not corpulent, but stout made, with
   broad shoulders; his visage was round, his eyes grey, his features
   well-proportioned and not large; his complexion ruddy, and his
   countenance open and agreeable. He was naturally more inclined to be
   merry than sad . . . He chose to eat his food from a wooden platter,
   not from an idea of the unnecessary luxury of a plate, but because it
   appeared to him that a plate spoiled the knives."

   He was a thorough Englishman in person and mind, with the English touch
   of whimsy about him. Yet he is a noble figure. In all his numerous
   controversies he never used a discourteous word or used a disingenuous
   argument. He never fought for trifles, nor for any cause that did not
   lie very near to the heart of religion. He made great sacrifices, and
   made them in vain. He found himself condemned to a life of isolation,
   yet he never lost heart or temper, or showed the least trace of
   bitterness, though he was naturally of a masterful and positive
   disposition; indeed, he grew in sweetness and largeness of view to the
   very end. And certainly no one could be more consistent or thorough.
   "He left," says Gibbon the historian, "the reputation of a worthy and a
   pious man, who believed all that he professed and practised all that he
   enjoined," and these words are just.


   III


   Of the Opinions of William Law


   SOME readers possibly may wish to have a brief account of Law's
   intellectual position. It changed very greatly as his life went on.

   At Cambridge he wrote a thesis on Malebranche and the Vision of all
   Things in God. From the first Mysticism had an attraction for him; but
   he was never a Platonist. Nor, indeed, though one of the keenest and
   most logical of men, was he ever a clear and consistent thinker on
   first principles.

   We see his early position best in his controversies with Mandeville and
   Tindal. In his criticism of the Fable of the Bees he insists on the
   "eternal fitness of actions." But he immediately proceeds to explain
   this phrase away. Actions are fit or good when they promote that
   happiness which is "the perfection of every being" -- "the only
   reasonable end of every being."

   But upon what does happiness depend? We learn this from the Case of
   Reason, the reply to Tindal's Christianity as Old as the Creation.
   Happiness is relative to our condition, and depends on what we are. And
   what we are, both in mind and body, depends wholly on the will of God.
   No action is moral or immoral in itself. "To instance, in the case of
   Abraham, required to sacrifice his son, the killing of a man is neither
   good nor bad, considered absolutely in itself." But, when God commanded
   Abraham to slay Isaac, the act became necessary to Abraham's happiness,
   and therefore right.

   It is curious to notice that this is exactly the position of Duns
   Scotus. But it is more important to observe that we have here the key
   to the tremendous emphasis laid by Law, in the Serious Call, on the
   virtue of obedience. All duty resolves itself into a command of the
   Almighty, and we have no course but to submit. Virtue is, as Law
   expressed it in his Cambridge rule, not likeness to God, but "doing the
   will of God."

   Again, "we know," says Law, "our moral and social duties, which have
   their foundation in the conveniences of this life, and the several
   relations we bear to one another." But our relation to God we do not
   know; "this is a question which God alone can resolve. Human reason
   cannot enter into it; it has no principle to proceed upon in it."

   The Deists maintained that those who have reason do not want
   revelation, because reason teaches us our duty both to God and man.
   Further, that if revelation is not reason, reason cannot test, and
   therefore cannot accept it. Further, that the Bible revelation is bad,
   because the conduct of Abraham was not reasonable. These are the
   objections that Law had to meet, and he meets them by falling back upon
   the arbitrary will of God

   In effect, he replies Christianity is true because it is true.
   Obviously, it is not a satisfactory reply; but it is not even acute.

   Let the reader compare here the answer given by St Augustine. The same
   difficulty as to the Old Testament morality that was forced upon Law by
   the Deists was forced upon Augustine by the Manichees. Augustine
   replies (Conf. iii. 9) that all men have some knowledge of God, and
   that this is the criterion of right and wrong. This knowledge grows in
   the individual and in the world, and the law which it supplies is not
   capable of absolutely perfect expression in conduct. Hence we must
   distinguish motive from action, times earlier from times later; we must
   take account of history, and recognise the fact of moral evolution.
   Augustine admits that God may command "some strange and unexpected
   act," but adds the significant words, "Blessed are they who know that
   Thou hast commanded." Law confines the distinction of right and wrong
   to action, admits no criterion but that of happiness, and has no
   historical sense at all. As to revelation, Augustine would have
   answered that it is simply more reason; that it leads us higher, but on
   the same lines; that it sheds light on what we knew before, and brings
   completer harmony into previous experience: hence, that though we do
   not know beforehand what it will be, as Tindal fancied we ought, we can
   recognise it when it comes, as Newton recognised the laws of motion
   when he had discovered them, or when they had been "revealed" to him.
   Law says, "The credibility of any external divine revelation with
   regard to human reason, rests wholly upon such external evidence as is
   a sufficient proof of the divine operation or interposition . . . I
   appeal, therefore, to the miracles and prophecies on which Christianity
   is founded."

   Law, in fact, held a thoroughly empirical view of Reason, derived
   neither from Descartes nor from Malebranche, but from Locke. His
   intellectual position was Agnosticism. To this in his earlier days he
   added Authority; in his later Mysticism, or special revelation; but in
   both periods his creed was external -- was, we may say, an appendix to
   his philosophy -- and was not linked by any vital process to his
   theoretical opinions.

   The most fatal mistake a theologian can make is to set Will above
   Reason. The next worst is to set Love above Reason. Law fell out of one
   of these errors into the other. He never altered his views of Reason;
   indeed, in his later writings he speaks of it with a passionate scorn.

   Is theology a matter of temperament? Law was not wise, but he had a
   strong will and a tender heart, and when he found that his earlier
   views would not accord him the assurance that he needed, he threw
   himself into the arms of one who was even more tender-hearted than
   himself, Jacob Behmen, the illuminated cobbler of Gorlitz.

   Even before he wrote his reply to Tindal, Law was a diligent reader of
   mystical books. His special favourites appear to have been a Kempis,
   Ruysbroek, Tauler, and the Theologia Germanica, who all preach the
   religion of the heart. The French mystics of the seventeenth century --
   Madame de Guyon, Madame Bourignon, and the rest -- he knew but did not
   like; there was too much hysteria about them to suit his manly temper.
   But somewhere about 1733 he fell in with Behmen, who took him by storm.
   Thus Law, who, in his Three Letters to Hoadly, had scornfully lumped
   together Quakers, Ranters, Muggletonians, and Socinians as
   "Enthusiasts," became an enthusiast himself.

   Behmen's works had existed in English since 1641. They gave birth to
   more than one mystical sect, and, in particular, inspired George Fox.
   They led also to a great increase in that love for alchemy, which, as
   we know from Aubrey's Lives, was so common at the time. They induced
   Isaac Newton to waste three months in reaching for the philosopher's
   stone, and suggested the line of inquiry which issued in the discovery
   of the Laws of Motion. It was the mystic belief in the unity of Nature
   that guided Newton in either case.

   In the eighteenth century Behmen was widely read. "In winter evenings,"
   says Rusticus in the Way to Divine Knowledge, "when John the shepherd
   comes out of the fields, his own eyes being bad, the old woman, his
   wife, puts on her spectacles, and reads about an hour to him, sometimes
   out of the Scriptures, and sometimes out of Jacob Behmen. I sat by him
   one evening, when my old dame, reading Behmen, had much ado to get on.
   "John," said I, "do you understand all this?" "Ah," says he, "God bless
   the heart of the dear man, I sometimes understand but little of him;
   and mayhap Betty does not always read aright; but that little which I
   often do understand does me so much good that I love him where I do not
   understand him."

   The truth is that it is not easy, nor, to be frank, is it possible to
   understand Behmen, who was rather Theosopher than Mystic. We can see
   that he was a man of gentle, loving disposition, and when he speaks of
   the sovereign goodness of God we can follow his meaning. But his
   visions and revelations are among those that have brought discredit on
   the name of Mystic -- as if it signified a dreamer who is next door to
   a charlatan.

   To the true Mystic -- Augustine is the most perfect type -- Nature is
   the staircase by which we climb towards the knowledge of its Author.
   Reason is the candle of which Love or Faith is the flame. The Many lead
   on to the One, -- the Visible to the Invisible Earth, in its beauty and
   intelligibility, is a shadow of heaven; matter guides us towards mind,
   and is in its turn explained by mind. Thus Mind and Matter, and the
   reasoning processes in which they meet -- Ethics, Science, Art --
   receive their proper due, as parts of one ordered whole. This is what
   is often called the sacramental view of nature.

   But the false or bastard Mystic, of whom Behmen is a type, looks for
   God in his own soul -- in a faculty specially imparted for this
   purpose, and not possessed by all men. There he finds God, and in God
   all knowledge. The One leads to the Many. The inner light teaches him
   at once all that there is to be known. Thus he discerns the nature and
   hidden virtues of things; the signatures of plants, and the diseases
   they will cure; the affinities of metals, and the method by which they
   may all be transmuted into gold. He casts away true knowledge and
   deludes himself with false.

   It will be seen that this stamp of Mysticism is the exact inversion of
   the first. Augustine exalts Reason and makes full use of it, Behmen
   abolishes Reason; Augustine regards the world as a stepping-stone to
   religion, to Behmen the world has no religious value at all. Hence, the
   invariable notes of what we call the bastard Mysticism are ignorance,
   presumption, and division. What the writers of the seventeenth and
   eighteenth centuries, including Henry More the Platonist, branded as
   Enthusiasm, is as different from true Mysticism as light from darkness.
   It produces Faustus, but not Augustine.

   Both Fox and Law turned away with English common-sense from the worst
   extravagances of Behmenism, though Fox was tempted for a moment to set
   up as a physician on the strength of the inner light. But both took
   from the Gorlitz cobbler the whole of his wild theory of the Fall and
   Redemption. Fox went boldly on to the logical consequence of Behmenism,
   and rejected all forms, including the sacraments. Behmen himself did
   not take this perilous step. Nor did Law. But Law adopted a whole set
   of idle fancies, which are best passed by in silence. Those who care to
   go further into this melancholy topic, may read his Grounds and Reason
   of Christian Regeneratlon. What is more serious still, Law completely
   severed his connection with history, which had never been strong. He
   remained a High Churchman, but without any sort of inner consistency.

   Yet what a strange thing Mysticism is, and what power and beauty attach
   even to its most perverted forms! Behmenism supplied a fruitful idea to
   Newton, and it made Law a better, a more lovable, and even a wiser man.
   In his earlier writings virtue appeared as reasonable self-love; in the
   later he recognises that selfishness in any form is not religious. He
   had made far too much of mechanism and drill: now he insists that
   goodness must be "a living thing." He had leant his whole weight on
   "evidences," on the props and supports of revelation: now he sees that
   everything must be its own proof, and that life can be known only by
   life. He had maintained that goodness is mere utility: now he believes
   that there is but "one God, one Good, and one Goodness."

   The Mystic treatises abound in fine sayings. Let us take a few almost
   at random. "Faith is the power by which a man gives himself up to
   anything," whether it be to conduct, to science, to art, or even to
   politics or business. It follows from this profound definition that
   Reason is not to be regarded as the antithesis of Faith. "Truth, my
   friend, whatever you may think of it, is no less than the Saviour and
   Redeemer of the world." "See that your mind be free, universal,
   impartial."

   In fact, a great change had come over Law, and in many ways it was
   conspicuously for the better. Some readers will think that he gave
   himself up too unrestrainedly to the worship of Love; that Love, unless
   guided by Wisdom, is not truly divine; and that here again Law's fear
   of Reason had brought him to the verge of grave errors. But we have
   already been too critical. "Oh Academicus," we hear Law saying, "forget
   your Scholarship, give up your Art and Criticism, be a plain man, and
   then the first rudiments of sense may teach you that there and there
   only can goodness be, where it comes forth as a Birth of Life, and is
   the free natural work and fruit of that which lives within us." These
   are fine words; only we must not take them quite as Law intended them.


   IV


   Of the Serious Call


   THE Serious Call was published in 1729, when its author was about
   forty-three years of age. The world has always regarded it as Law's
   masterpiece, and with good reason. In it Law describes his own life and
   principles, with all the force of earnest sincerity. The book is, we
   may say, a part of himself. Some prefer the more philosophical
   writings, but Law was not really eminent in that department of thought,
   nor could he ever throw his heart into it. He judged too meanly of
   reason to wish to excel in speculation. Others, again, would place the
   mystical treatises first, and it must be admitted that they contain
   phrases and passages which, both in style and sentiment, rise above
   anything that is to be found in the Serious Call. On the other hand,
   every page of the Behmenist writings is marred by touches that to most
   readers are exceedingly repellent.

   The style of the Serious Call is admirably adapted to its subject. It
   is grave, lucid, strong, but not graceful. There is never the slightest
   doubt about Law's meaning; he conveys to the reader the exact idea that
   is in his own mind. He selects the plainest words, the most homely
   figures, and is not in the least afraid of iteration. A typical
   instance is to be found in the parable of the Pond, in the eleventh
   chapter. The picture is as distinct as possible; but it is a picture
   such as Hogarth drew. Almost the only artistic feature in the book is
   to be found in the Characters. Some of them are drawn with consummate
   skill; many of them show how keen a power of sarcasm Law possessed, and
   how carefully he bridled it.

   Attempts have been made to find real personages behind the characters.
   Paternus and Eusebia have been identified with Law's own father and
   mother; and Gibbon persuaded himself that Flavia and Miranda
   represented his two aunts -- "the heathen and the Christian sister" --
   Katharine and Hester. But of Paternus we are expressly told that "he
   lived about two hundred years ago," and the characters are all types,
   suggested, no doubt, by people whom Law had met, yet not drawn from
   life. Character painting had been for a century a favourite method of
   conveying moral instruction, and many famous writers, from Earle to
   Addison, have left us specimens of their skill in this kind of
   composition. But how few virtuous characters Law has drawn! He gives us
   the foolish country gentleman, the foolish scholar, the foolish man of
   affairs, but not their wise counterparts. The reason is that in Law's
   view of religion, which leaves the world out altogether, one good
   person is exactly like another. A pious physician is acceptable to God
   as pious, but not at all as a physician.

   The Serious Call has not escaped criticism, and, indeed, it is easy
   enough to point out features in which it bears the mark of the
   eighteenth century. But it is a splendid protest against the spiritual
   apathy of the times, and no more strenuous plea for consistency and
   thoroughness was ever delivered.

   The book is addressed to Christians, and it is, as its title implies, a
   Serious Call to be what they profess. The point is inevitable; it is
   driven home with extraordinary force, and Law's whole life gives weight
   to every word.

   It is not in the least necessary to agree with Law in all the details.
   The question which he presses upon the reader is, "Are you living the
   Christian life as you believe it ought to be lived? Are you acting up
   to your convictions? Are you a sham or not?" Few can face this
   question, as Law will put it to them, without many qualms of
   conscience.

   As in the Imitation we have a pure man describing purity, so here we
   have a real man insisting on reality. Every syllable is transparently
   genuine. This is the secret of the Serious Call. It is remarkable that,
   of those whom we know to have been deeply affected by the book, not one
   was in complete sympathy with Law. Nor does Law expect this. He would
   say to the reader, "If you are wiser than I, thank God for it, but
   beware that you are not less sincere." Let us take a few conspicuous
   instances of this fecundity, this catholicity of the book. For, in
   spite of his primness and eccentricity, Law had a truly catholic mind.

   One of the first and most illustrious of his disciples was John Wesley.
   "Meeting now," says Wesley, -- the time was shortly after his election
   to the Lincoln Fellowship -- "with Mr Law's Christian Perfection and
   Serious Call, although I was much offended at many parts of both, yet
   they convinced me more than ever of the exceeding height and breadth
   and depth of the law of God. The light flowed in so mightily upon my
   soul that everything appeared in a new light . . . I was convinced more
   than ever of the impossibility of being half a Christian."

   There were "many parts" of the book which Wesley did not approve, even
   at the first. In 1732 he called upon Law at Putney, consulted him upon
   religious questions, and took him for "a kind of oracle." But in 1738
   the little rift widened into a division. On his return from Georgia,
   Wesley threw in his lot with the Moravians. But Law could not abide
   Peter Bohler, whose views of the Atonement, of faith, of instantaneous
   conversion, and of sinlessness were highly repugnant to him. A sharp
   correspondence ensued between Wesley and Law (it will be found in
   Overton or Tyerman), and these two excellent men drifted apart. Later
   on, Wesley became much more sober in many of his views, but by this
   time Law had taken up with Behmenism, and this was a new barrier. Yet,
   within eighteen months of his death, Wesley spoke of the Serious Call
   as "a treatise which will hardly be excelled, if it be equalled, in the
   English tongue, either for beauty of expression or for justness and
   depth of thought."

   Again, no good man could well be more unlike Law than Dr Johnson.
   Johnson held that no non-juror could reason, and would not admit that
   Law was an exception. He was often too burly and sweeping in his
   assertions, but he could not sympathise with Law's politics, or his
   philosophy, or his peremptory exclusion of the "world" from "religion,"
   which was the unfortunate consequence of his philosophy. Further,
   Johnson was completely agreed with those who spoke of Law's peculiar
   type of Mysticism as "crack-brained fanaticism." "Law," said he, "fell
   latterly into the reveries of Jacob Behmen, whom Law alleged to have
   been somewhat in the same state with St Paul, and to have seen things
   unutterable. Were it even so, Jacob would have resembled St Paul still
   more, by not attempting to utter them." There is truth in this jibe;
   indeed, setting aside the scorn of the expression, it is the truth. Yet
   Johnson thought that the Serious Call was "the finest piece of
   hortatory theology in any language." "When at Oxford," he says in
   another place, "I took it up expecting to find it a dull book, and
   perhaps to laugh at it. But I found Law quite an over-match for me; and
   this was the first occasion of my thinking in earnest of religion after
   I became capable of religious inquiry."

   Thus Law gave a great impulse to Methodism, and breathed new life into
   the old-fashioned High Church. But he also affected strongly the rising
   Evangelical school, though, in this particular, his influence was more
   distinctly of the Socratic kind: he gave a "torpedo shock," which
   quickened life, though of a different type from his own. What Hervey,
   Newton, Venn, and Madan disliked in Law was partly his setting Behmen
   on a practical equality with Scripture, and partly his view of the
   Atonement. As to this latter point, it may be said that it is the cause
   of the depressed tone of all Law's theology. Flying to the opposite
   extreme from that Calvinism which had wrought such havoc in Church and
   State, he sedulously eliminated from our Lord's Passion the idea of
   vicarious suffering; and therefore what he preached was always
   self-denial and never self-sacrifice. There is nothing in Law at all
   like St Bernard's "nosegay of myrrh," or that wonderful outburst of
   mingled sorrow and jubilation which pierced even the sceptical spirit
   of George Eliot, "the King's High Way of the Cross," in the Imitation.
   Law's "ethical view" strikes heroism out of religion, casts aside the
   noblest of motives to which the dullest of men will respond, and turns
   the spiritual life into a round of unceasing penance. It spoils even
   his later mystic rhapsodies on the Divine Love. For a love which will
   not suffer for us is unintelligible, and indeed does not exist.

   One other instance may be selected from the history of the Tractarian
   movement. "Froude told me," says Isaac Williams, "that Keble once,
   before parting from him, seemed to have something on his mind which he
   wished to say, but shrank from saying. At last, while waiting, I think,
   for a coach, he said to him before parting: 'Froude, you said one day
   that Law's Serious Call was a clever (or pretty, I forget which) book;
   it seemed to me as if you had said the Day of Judgment would be a
   pretty sight.'"

   There was much in Law that John Keble would not like -- for Keble was a
   poet; and what a world of difference lies in that one word? There was
   not a grain of poetry in Law's composition. But Keble, too, was caught
   by the deep note of absolute sincerity which dominates the Serious
   Call.

   All these instances will help the reader to understand what use he is
   to make of the book which is here offered to him. Many good men, of
   widely divergent ways of thinking, have read it with great profit to
   their souls. The same thing is true of the Imitation, but with a
   difference. The Imitation deals, upon the whole, rather with the goal
   of the Christian life; the Serious Call, upon the whole, rather with
   the threshold -- with that strait gate through which all must pass.
   Shall we say that the end and the beginning are the same for all
   believers? that only in the middle part of our course do the roads
   diverge? Perhaps we may gather this lesson from the widespread love for
   these two books. But what we are to learn above all things from the
   Serious Call is that there can be no truth and no wholesome life
   without perfect sincerity. "A double-minded man is unstable in all his
   ways."
     __________________________________________________________________

  Appendix B


   From the Introduction to the Dent Everyman edition.

   FIRST ISSUE OF THIS EDITION

   March 1906


   EDITOR'S NOTE


   Law's "Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life" was first published in
   1728, when he had been resident tutor for a time in the house at Putney
   of Edward Gibbon. He accompanied his pupil, a son of the same name, who
   became father to the great historian, to Cambridge in 1727; and when
   this son went abroad, he returned to the Gibbon household. According to
   Gibbon's "Autobiography," Law drew the portraits of Flavia and Miranda
   in the "Devout Life" from the two daughters of the house, Catherine and
   Hester. But, as Leslie Stephen pointed out, he would hardly have done
   this while himself still a member and spiritual adviser of the family.
   Moreover, he had ample opportunities of meeting the Flavias and
   Mirandas of his day. On accompanying young Edward Gibbon to Cambridge,
   Law was already well acquainted with the University, for he had
   graduated there, and become fellow of Emmanuel College in 1711. Law's
   "Three Letters to the Bishop of Bangor," in 1717, were the first
   distinct sign he afforded of his intellectual quality and his unique
   powers as an independent religious thinker. In 1726 appeared his
   "Absolute Unlawfulness of the Stage Entertainment;" also his "Practical
   Treatise on Christian Perfection," which confessedly influenced John
   and Charles Wesley, both of whom afterwards visited him at Putney. But
   they were temperamentally out of sympathy with his mysticism, and they
   parted company with him definitely as time went on. It was in 1740 that
   Law settled at King's Cliffe, where, with the aid of Mrs. Hutcheson,
   widow of a disciple and friend, and Miss Hester Gibbon, he proceeded to
   carry out in downright every-day practice the ideas of the "Serious
   Life." Here the rules were homely, hospitable, austere, and simple; and
   charity to the poor, practices of extreme generosity, kindness to
   animals, and attention to the smaller virtues, proved the absolute
   reality of Law's own "Call."

   The life at King's Cliffe was not unlike that of the household at
   Little Giddings described in "John Inglesant." Law latterly had come
   much under the influence of Jacob Boehme, but the mystics had
   profoundly appealed to him from the first. His "Way to Divine
   Knowledge," which was by way of preamble to a new English edition of
   the works of Boehme, appeared in 1752. We must not forget Dr. Johnson's
   tribute to the "Serious Call": that it was the first occasion of his
   "thinking in earnest of religion after he became capable of rational
   inquiry." William Law was born in 1686, and died in 1761 at King's
   Cliffe.


   The following is the complete table of his published works:--


   Letters to Bishop of Bangor, 1717-1719

   Fable of the Bees, 1724

   Unlawfulness of Stage Entertainments, 1726

   On Christian perfection, 1726

   A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life, etc., 1728

   The Case of Reason, or Natural Religion, etc., 1731

   On the Lord's Supper, 1737

   Answer to Dr. Trapp's Discourse, 1740

   The Spirit of Prayer, 1749

   Christian Regeneration, 1750,

   "Where shall I go . . . to be in the Truth," letter to a friend, 1750

   The Way to Divine Knowledge, 1752

   The Spirit of Love, 1752

   Confutation of Warburton's Defence of Christianity, 1757

   Of Justification by Faith and Works, 1760

   Letters on Important Subjects, and on Several Occasions, 1760

   Address to the Clergy, 1761

   Letters to a Lady inclined to enter the Church of Rome, (1731-2) 1779

   Collected Works, 9 vols, 1762
     __________________________________________________________________


  Appendix C


   The electronic edition.


   IT is a privilege to release this Public Domain edition of Law's
   Serious Call.

   Two hundred and sixty five years on, the social condition within which
   William Law lived has utterly passed away. We might spare a thought, as
   we read those passages in which the segregated positions of sex and
   class are most apparent, for the unquestioned assumptions which hold us
   enthralled in our turn.

   As for the message, it is as insistent and overwhelming as ever it was.
   Never content to use one instance where ten can be lined up in its
   place, William Law holds the reader much as Coleridge's Ancient Mariner
   might have held the Wedding Guest. Mere assent after ten pages is
   insufficient, it would seem. The repetitive strain is, perhaps, a
   demand that the reader should not merely assent, but that he should
   ultimately act.

   It might be felt that the second half of the book, in which the shape
   of a regular day of devotion is sketched out, is redundant. I would
   like to bring the attention of the reader to a monograph by Dietrich
   Bonhoffer, "Life Together", and suggest that the ideas expressed here
   in the Serious Call be compared with it.

   A word on the text. Insofar as I can tell, the Dent Everyman edition
   which I used to scan the text is identical in wording to the Methuen
   facsimile reprint of the first edition. Dent omit, however, the italics
   which are to be found throughout the original, which (I think) the
   author included as a means to convey his tone of voice. I have followed
   the omission, as did Dent, on the ground that the italics made the book
   less easy on the eye.

   I have spoken with the legal adviser to both Dent and Methuen, and am
   advised that both Appendix 1 and 2 are free of copyright restriction.

   It is certain that errors will be found in my transcription, for which
   I apologise in advance. I would welcome notice of any found, however
   trivial.

   In order to distinguish this version from a subsequent corrected copy,
   I label this release 1.0; and to facilitate ARCHIE location, request
   that all distributed copies bear the name WLSCHL10.xxx


   John Harris

   e-mail: j.harris@cb6.com

   mail: 24 beaconsfield rd, bristol, bs8 2ts,

   uk tel: +44 117 974 4055

   24th January 1994, Bristol, England.



   [end of book: A SERIOUS CALL TO A DEVOUT AND HOLY LIFE]
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]20:7

   Exodus

   [2]15:2

   Job

   [3]1:5   [4]42:8

   Psalms

   [5]45   [6]57:7

   Proverbs

   [7]8:1

   Matthew

   [8]5:22   [9]5:28   [10]5:34-36   [11]5:45   [12]6:19   [13]6:20
   [14]6:31   [15]6:32   [16]7:12   [17]7:14   [18]10:42   [19]11:15
   [20]13:16   [21]15:19   [22]18:10   [23]18:21   [24]18:22   [25]19:21
   [26]22:14   [27]23:20-22   [28]25:21   [29]25:24   [30]25:25
   [31]25:30   [32]25:31-64   [33]25:43

   Luke

   [34]2:36   [35]2:36   [36]2:37   [37]2:37   [38]6:22   [39]6:24
   [40]11:42   [41]13:24   [42]13:24   [43]14:12   [44]14:13   [45]14:14
   [46]16:19   [47]17:4

   John

   [48]1:9   [49]9:2   [50]9:3   [51]13:34   [52]13:35   [53]15:18
   [54]15:19   [55]17:14   [56]17:16

   Acts

   [57]3:6   [58]10:2   [59]16:26   [60]16:35   [61]17:11   [62]17:18
   [63]17:28

   Romans

   [64]6:6   [65]8:9   [66]8:13   [67]8:14   [68]12:1   [69]12:20
   [70]14:7   [71]14:8   [72]14:9

   1 Corinthians

   [73]6:19   [74]6:19   [75]6:20   [76]7:32-34   [77]8:11-13   [78]9:26
   [79]9:27   [80]10:31   [81]10:31   [82]11:13   [83]15:58

   2 Corinthians

   [84]1:11   [85]5:7   [86]5:10   [87]5:16   [88]5:17

   Galatians

   [89]1:4   [90]6:14

   Ephesians

   [91]5:26   [92]5:27   [93]6:5

   Philippians

   [94]1:3   [95]1:4   [96]2:12   [97]3:8   [98]3:12-15   [99]3:20
   [100]4:8

   Colossians

   [101]2:20   [102]3:1   [103]3:1   [104]3:1   [105]3:2   [106]3:3
   [107]3:22   [108]3:23

   1 Thessalonians

   [109]2:11   [110]2:12   [111]5:17

   1 Timothy

   [112]2:9

   2 Timothy

   [113]1:3   [114]2:11   [115]2:12

   Hebrews

   [116]11:17   [117]11:19

   James

   [118]5:16

   1 Peter

   [119]1:15   [120]1:15   [121]1:16   [122]1:18   [123]1:19   [124]2:9
   [125]2:11   [126]4:11

   1 John

   [127]2:16   [128]2:16   [129]4:5   [130]4:6   [131]4:16   [132]4:20
   [133]5:4   [134]5:19

   Revelation

   [135]4:10   [136]4:11   [137]7:9-12
     __________________________________________________________________

Acknowledgements

   The cover art for this book is a derivative work of
   [138]http://www.flickr.com/photos/72012121@N00/18543127 and available
   for use under the Creative Commons Attribution Share-Alike 3.0 license.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p49.1
   2. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p32.1
   3. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p68.1
   4. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p50.1
   5. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p109.1
   6. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p34.2
   7. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xiii-p83.1
   8. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p91.1
   9. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xx-p138.1
  10. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p30.1
  11. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ix-p40.1
  12. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p51.2
  13. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xiv-p39.1
  14. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ii-p33.1
  15. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ii-p33.1
  16. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p69.1
  17. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iv-p14.1
  18. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#x-p59.1
  19. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#x-p92.1
  20. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xiv-p6.1
  21. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p34.1
  22. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vi-p20.1
  23. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vii-p27.1
  24. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vii-p27.1
  25. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#x-p88.1
  26. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iv-p14.2
  27. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p32.1
  28. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vi-p15.1
  29. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xii-p69.1
  30. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xii-p69.1
  31. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xii-p69.1
  32. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vii-p22.1
  33. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ix-p38.1
  34. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#viii-p31.1
  35. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xv-p34.1
  36. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#viii-p31.1
  37. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xv-p34.1
  38. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p23.1
  39. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iii-p17.1
  40. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ix-p21.1
  41. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iv-p14.3
  42. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#viii-p31.2
  43. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iii-p18.1
  44. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iii-p18.1
  45. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iii-p18.1
  46. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xiii-p50.1
  47. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vii-p27.2
  48. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiv-p8.1
  49. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p49.1
  50. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p49.1
  51. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p62.1
  52. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p62.1
  53. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p68.1
  54. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p64.1
  55. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p56.1
  56. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p42.1
  57. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ix-p39.1
  58. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p89.1
  59. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p79.1
  60. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xv-p34.2
  61. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xiv-p23.1
  62. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#x-p90.1
  63. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p14.1
  64. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p52.1
  65. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p14.1
  66. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p33.1
  67. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p33.1
  68. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p19.2
  69. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ix-p41.1
  70. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p35.1
  71. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p35.1
  72. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p35.1
  73. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p104.1
  74. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p45.1
  75. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p45.1
  76. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#x-p89.1
  77. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xx-p143.1
  78. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xv-p43.1
  79. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xv-p43.1
  80. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p19.1
  81. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#ix-p27.1
  82. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p52.1
  83. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xiii-p65.1
  84. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p11.1
  85. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p19.3
  86. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p34.1
  87. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p58.1
  88. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p58.1
  89. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p39.1
  90. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p46.1
  91. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p37.3
  92. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p37.3
  93. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p33.1
  94. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p9.1
  95. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p9.1
  96. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iv-p13.1
  97. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xi-p47.1
  98. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iv-p32.1
  99. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p19.4
 100. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#vi-p41.1
 101. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p41.1
 102. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p30.2
 103. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p37.1
 104. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p54.1
 105. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p14.3
 106. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p14.3
 107. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p33.2
 108. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p33.2
 109. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p50.1
 110. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p50.1
 111. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p51.1
 112. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p52.2
 113. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p10.1
 114. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p53.1
 115. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p51.1
 116. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p40.1
 117. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxiii-p40.1
 118. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxii-p46.1
 119. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p37.2
 120. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p38.1
 121. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p37.2
 122. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p41.1
 123. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p41.1
 124. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p58.1
 125. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#v-p30.1
 126. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p54.1
 127. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#iii-p19.1
 128. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p71.1
 129. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p40.1
 130. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p40.1
 131. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p79.1
 132. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xxi-p113.1
 133. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p14.2
 134. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xviii-p40.2
 135. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvii-p58.1
 136. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvii-p58.1
 137. file:///ccel/l/law/serious_call/cache/serious_call.html3#xvi-p102.1
 138. http://www.flickr.com/photos/72012121@N00/18543127
