     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Sermons and Tracts by that Worthy Martyr of Christ, John
                  Bradford
      Creator(s): Bradford, John (1510-1555)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Sermons;
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermons and Tracts by that Worthy Martyr of Christ, John Bradford

   To the Christian reader, John Bradford wishes the true knowledge and
   peace of Jesus Christ, our alone and all-sufficient Saviour.

   Great and heavy is God's anger against us, as the most grievous plague
   of the death of our late king (Edward VI, editor), (a prince the most
   peerless of all that ever were since Christ's ascension into heaven, in
   any region,) now fallen upon us does prognosticate. For when God's
   judgment has begun with his child, this our dear dearling, let other
   men think as they can, I surely cannot be persuaded otherwise, but that
   a grievous and bitter cup of God's vengeance is ready to be petered out
   for us Englishmen to drink of. Judgment is begun at God's house. In
   God's mercy towards him he is taken away, that his eyes should not see
   the miseries which we shall feel. (Heb. xi.) He was too good to tarry
   with us, a generation so wicked, so froward, so perverse, so obstinate,
   so malicious, so hypocritical, so covetous, unclean, untrue, proud, and
   carnal. I will not go about to paint us out in our colours. All the
   world which never saw England, by hearsay sees England; God by his
   plagues and vengeance, I fear, will paint us out, and point us out. We
   have so mocked with him and his gospel, that we shall feel it is no
   bourding (trifling, jesting, editor) with him.

   We have long covered our covetousness and carnality under the cloak of
   his gospel, so that all men shall see us to our shame, when he shall
   take his gospel away, and give it to a people that will bring forth the
   fruits of it. Then shall we appear as we are. Let his gospel tarry with
   us, he cannot; for we despise it, contemn it, are glutted with it. We
   disdain his manna, it is but a vile meat as we think. We would be again
   in Egypt, and sit by the greasy fleshpots, to eat again our garlic,
   onions, and leeks. Since God's gospel came among us, we say now, we
   never had plenty, therefore again let us go and worship the queen of
   heaven. (Jer. vii. xliv.) Children begin to gather sticks, the fathers
   kindle the fire, and the women make the cakes, to offer to the queen of
   heaven and to provoke the Lord to anger. The earth now cannot abide the
   words and sermons of Amos; the cause of all rebellion is Amos, and his
   preaching. (Amos vii.) It is Paul and his fellows that make all out of
   order; the gospel is now the outcast and curse of the realm, and so are
   the preachers, therefore out of the doors with them. So that I say God
   cannot let his gospel tarry with us, but must needs take it away to do
   us some pleasure therein, for so shall we think for a time; as the
   Sodomites thought when Lot departed from them; as the old world
   thought, when Noah went into his ark; as the Jerusalemites thought,
   when the apostles went thence to Peltis (Pella, editor); then were they
   merry, then was all pastime; when Moses was absent, then went they to
   eating and drinking, and rose up again to play, (Exod. xxxii.;) then
   was all peace, all was well, nothing amiss. But, alas! the flood came
   suddenly, and drowned them; God's wrath waxed hot against them; then
   was weal away (happiness departed, editor), mourning, and woe; then was
   crying out, wringing of hands, rending of clothes, sobbing and sighing,
   for the miseries out of which they could not escape. But oh! ye
   mourners and criers out, ye renders of clothes, why mourn ye? What is
   the cause of your misery? The gospel is gone, God's word is little
   preached, you were not disquieted with it; Noah troubled you not, Lot
   is departed, the apostles are gone What now is the cause of these your
   miseries? Will you at length confess it is your sins? Nay, now it is
   too late, God called upon you, and you would not hear him, therefore
   yell and cry out now, for he will not hear you. You bowed your ears
   from hearing of God's law, therefore your prayer is execrable.

   But to come again to us Englishmen. I fear me, I say, that for our
   unthankfulness' sake, for our impiety and wickedness, as God has taken
   away our king, so will he take away his gospel; yea, many think so we
   would have it, then should all be well. Well, if he take that away, for
   a time perchance we shall be quiet, but at length we shall feel the
   want to our woe; at length he will have at us, as at Sodom, at
   Jerusalem, and other places. And now he begins to brew such a brewing,
   wherein one of us is likely to destroy another, and so to make an open
   gap for foreign enemies to devour us, and destroy us. (He refers to the
   hostilities which then appeared likely to ensue between the partisans
   of queen Mary and lady Jane Grey. Editor.) The father is against the
   son, the brother against the brother and with what conscience! Oh, Lord
   !be thou merciful unto us! and in thine anger remember thy mercy;
   suffer thyself to be entreated, be reconciled unto us, nay, reconcile
   us unto thee. Oh! thou God of justice! judge justly. Oh! thou Son of
   God! who comes to destroy the works of Satan, destroy his furies now
   smoking, and almost set on fire, in this realm. We have sinned, we have
   sinned, and therefore thou art angry. Oh! be not angry for ever. Give
   us peace, peace, peace in the Lord; set us to war against sin, against
   Satan, against our carnal desires, and give us the victory this way.
   This victory we obtain by faith; this faith is not without repentance,
   as her gentleman-usher before her. Before her, I say, in discerning
   true faith from false faith; lip faith, English-men's faith; for else
   it springs out of true faith.

   This usher then, Repentance, if me truly possessed, we should be
   certain of true Faith, and so be assured of the victory over death,
   hell, and Satan. His works then, which he has stirred up, would quail.
   God would restore us political peace, right should be right, and have
   right; God's gospel should tarry with us, religion should be cherished,
   superstition suppressed, and so we should yet be something happy,
   notwithstanding the great loss of our most gracious liege sovereign
   lord. All this would come to pass, if the gentleman-usher I speak of, I
   mean, Repentance, were present with us. As if he be absent, we may be
   certain that lady Faith is absent. Wherefore we cannot but be
   vanquished by the world, the flesh, and the devil, and so will Satan's
   works prosper, though not in all things to blear our eyes, yet in that
   thing which he most of all desires. Therefore let us to repentance for
   ourselves privately, and for the realm and church publicly; every one
   should labour to stir up both themselves and others. This to the end
   that for my part I might help, I have now put forth a Sermon of
   Repentance, which has lain by me half a year at the least, as to the
   most part of it. For, the last summer, as I was abroad preaching in the
   country, my chance was to make a Sermon of Repentance, which was
   earnestly by divers desired of me, that I should give it them written,
   or else put it forth in print. The which as I could not grant, for I
   had not written it, I told them so, who had so earnestly desired it.
   But when no way would serve, but I must promise them to write it as I
   could, I consented to their request that they should have it at my
   leisure. This leisure I prolonged so long that as, I think, I offended
   them, so I pleased myself, and, one more glad to read other men's
   writings, than to publish my own for other men to read; not that I
   would others should not profit by me, but that I, knowing how slender
   my store is, would be loath that the enemies should have just occasion
   for evil speaking, and wresting that which is simply spoken. But when I
   considered this present time, to occasion men now to look upon all
   things in such sort as might move them to godliness, rather than to any
   curious questioning, I, for the satisfying of my promise, and profiting
   of the simple, ignorant, and rude, have now caused this sermon to be
   printed; which I beseech God, for his Christ's sake, to use as a mean,
   whereby of his mercy it may please him to work in me and many others
   true hearty repentance for our sins, to the glory of his name.

   Thus fare thou well in the Lord. This 12th of July 1553.

   (Thomas Sampson, in his preface to this Sermon on Repentance, remarks,
   "Our Bradford had his daily exercises and practices of repentance. His
   manner was to make for himself a catalogue of all the grossest and most
   enormous sins which he had committed in his life of ignorance and to
   lay the same before his eyes when he went to private prayer, that by
   the sight and remembrance of them he might be stirred up to offer to
   God the sacrifice of a contrite heart, seek assurance of salvation in
   Christ by faith, thank God for his calling from the ways of wickedness,
   and pray for increase of it, grace, to be conducted in holy life,
   acceptable and pleasing to God. Such a continual exercise or conscience
   he had in private prayer, that he did not count himself to have prayed
   to his contention, unless in it he had felt inwardly some smiting of
   heart for sin, and some healing of that wound by faith, feeling the
   saving health of Christ, with some change of mind into the detestation
   of sin, and love of obeying the good will of God, which things require
   that inward entering into the secret parlour of our hearts of which
   Christ speaks, and is that smiting of the breast which is noted in the
   publican." (Luke xviii.))

     __________________________________________________________________

A fruitful Sermon of Repentance, made by that Constant Martyr of Christ, John
Bradford, 1553

   The life we have at this present is the gift of God, in whom we live,
   move, and are, and therefore he is called Jehovah. For this life we
   should be thankful, and we may not in any wise use it after our own
   fancy, but only to the end for which it is given and lent us; that is,
   to the setting forth of God's praise and glory, by repentance,
   conversion, and obedience to his good will and holy laws whereunto his
   longsuffering, as it were, even draws us if our hearts were not
   hardened by impenitence. And therefore our life in the scripture is
   called a walking; for as the body daily draws more and more near its
   end, that is, the earth, even so our soul draws daily more and more
   near unto death, that is, to salvation or damnation, to heaven or hell!

   Since we are most careless of this, and very fools, (for we, alas! are
   the same today we were yesterday, and not better or nearer to God, but
   rather nearer to hell, Satan, and perdition; being covetous, idle,
   carnal, secure, negligent, proud, &c.) I think my labour cannot be
   better bestowed, than with the Baptist, Christ Jesus, and his apostles,
   to harp on this string, which of all other is most necessary, and most
   especially in these days. What string is that? says one. Truly,
   brother, it is the string of repentance, which Christ our Saviour used
   first in his ministry; and as his minister at this present time, I will
   use it to you all, "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."
   Matt. iv.

   This sentence, thus pronounced and preached by Our Saviour Jesus
   Christ, as it commands us to repent, so to the doing of the same, it
   shows us a sufficient cause to stir us up thereunto, namely, because
   the kingdom of heaven, which is a kingdom of all joy, peace, riches,
   power and pleasure, is at hand, to all such as do repent. So that the
   meaning hereof is, as though our Saviour should thus speak at present:
   "Sirs, since I see you all walking the wrong way, even to Satan and
   unto hell-fire, by following the kingdom of Satan, which now is
   coloured under the vain pleasures of this life, and foolishness of the
   flesh most subtle, to your utter undoing and destruction behold and
   mark well what I say unto you, The kingdom of heaven, that is, another
   manner of joy and felicity, honour and riches, power and pleasure, than
   you now perceive or enjoy, is even at hand, and at your backs; as, if
   you will turn again, that is, repent you, you shall most truly and
   pleasantly feel, see, and inherit. Turn again therefore, I say, that
   is, repent; for this joy I speak of, even the kingdom of heaven is at
   hand.

   Here we may note, first, the corruption of our nature since to this
   commandment, Repent you, he adds a clause, for the kingdom of heaven is
   at hand; for by reason of the corruption and sturdiness of our nature,
   God unto all his commandments commonly either adds some promise to
   provoke us to obedience, or else some sufficient cause which cannot but
   excite as to hearty labouring for doing the same; as here, to the
   commandment of doing penance, he add this cause, saying, for the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand.

   Again, since he joins the cause to the commandment, saying, "For the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand," we may learn, that of the kingdom of
   heaven, none, to whom the ministry of preaching does appertain, can be
   a partaker, but such as repent, and do penance. Therefore, dearly
   beloved, if you regard the kingdom of heaven, as you cannot enter
   therein, except you repent, I beseech you all; of every estate, as you
   desire your own weal, to repent and do penance: the which that you may
   do, I will do my best how to help you by God's grace.

   But first, because we cannot well tell what repentance is, through
   ignorance and for lack of knowledge and false teaching, I will show you
   what repentance is. Repentance, or penance, is no English word, but we
   borrow it of the Latinists, to whom penance is 'forethinking' in
   English; in Greek, it means 'being wise afterwards;' in Hebrew,
   'conversion or turning;' which conversion or turnings, cannot be true
   and hearty, unto God especially, without some good hope or trust of
   pardon for that which is already done and past. I may well in this sort
   define it, namely; that penance is a sorrowing or thinking upon our
   sins past, an earnest purpose to amend, or turning to God, with a trust
   of pardon.

   This definition may be divided into three parts; first, a sorrowing for
   our sins, secondly, a trust of pardon, which otherwise may be called a
   persuasion of God's mercy by the merits of Christ, for the forgiveness
   of our sins, and thirdly, a purpose to amend, or conversion to a new
   life; which third or last part cannot properly be called a part; for it
   is but an effect of penance, as towards the end you shall see by God's
   grace. But lest such as seek for occasion to speak evil should have any
   occasion, though they tarry not out the end of this sermon, I therefore
   divide penance into the three aforesaid parts: I. Of sorrowing for our
   sins: II. Of good hope or trust of pardon: and III Of a new life. Thus
   you now see what penance is, a sorrowing for sin, a purpose to amend,
   with a good hope or trust of pardon.

   I. This penance not only differs from that which men commonly have
   taken to be penance, as saying and doing our enjoined lady psalters,
   seven psalms, fastings, pilgrimages, alms-deeds, and such like things,
   but also from that which the more learned have declared to consist of
   three parts, namely, contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

   Contrition they call a just and a full sorrow for their sin. For this
   word just and full, is one of the differences between contrition and
   attrition.

   Confession they call a numbering of all their sins in the ear of their
   ghostly father; for as, say they, a judge cannot absolve without
   knowledge of the cause or matter, so the priest or ghostly father
   cannot absolve from other sins, than those which he hears.

   Satisfaction they call amends-making unto God for their sins, by their
   undue works, or opera indebita, works more than they need to do, as
   they term them. This is their penance which they preach, write, and
   allow. But how true this their plan is, how it agrees with God's word,
   how it is to be allowed, taught, preached, and written, let us a little
   consider. Dearly beloved, if a man repent not until he have a just and
   full sorrowing for his sins, when shall he repent? For inasmuch as
   hell-fire, and the punishment of the devils, is a just punishment for
   sin, inasmuch as in all sin there is a contempt of God, who is all
   goodness, and therefore there is a deserving of all illness (suffering,
   editor), alas! who can bear or feel this just sorrow, this full sorrow
   for our sins, this their contrition, which they do so discern
   (distinguish, editor) from their attrition? Shall not man by this
   doctrine rather despair than come by repentance? If a man repent not
   until he has made confession of all his sins in the ear of his ghostly
   father, if a man cannot have absolution of his sins until his sins are
   told by tale and number in the priest's ear, since, as David says, none
   can understand, much less, then, utter all his sins; who can understand
   his sins? Since David complains of himself elsewhere, how his sins have
   flowed over his head, and as a heavy burden do depress him, alas! shall
   not man by this doctrine be utterly driven from repentance? Though they
   have gone about something to make plaster for their sores, of
   confession or attrition to assuage their pain, bidding a man to hope
   well of his contrition, though it be not so full as is required, and of
   his confession, though he have not numbered all his sins, if so be that
   he do so much as in him lies. Dearly beloved, since there is none but
   that herein he is guilty; for who does as much as he may? trow ye (do
   you suppose, editor), that this plaster is not like salt for sore eyes?
   Yes, undoubtedly, when they have done all they can for the appeasing of
   consciences in these points, this is the sum, that we yet should hope
   well, but yet so hope that we must stand in a mammering (hesitating,
   editor) and doubting whether our sins are forgiven. For to be certain
   of forgiveness of sins, as our creed teaches us, they count it a
   presumption. Oh! abomination, and that not only herein, but in all
   their penance as they paint it.

   As concerning satisfaction by their opera indebita, undue works, that
   is, by such works as they need not to do, but of their own
   voluntariness and wilfulness, (wilfulness indeed,) who sees not here
   monstrous abomination, blasphemy, and even open fighting against God?
   For if satisfaction can be done by man, then Christ died in vain for
   him that so satisfies; and so he reigns in vain, so is he a bishop and
   a priest in vein. God's law require love to God with all our heart,
   soul, power, might, and strength, (Deut. vi. Matt. xxii. Mark xii. Luke
   x.) so that there is nothing can be done toward God which is not
   contained in this commandment, nothing can be done over and above this.
   Again, Christ requires of men, "that we should love one another as he
   loved us." ( 1 John iv.) And trow we that we can do any good thing
   toward our neighbour which is not herein comprised?

   Yea, let them tell me when they do anything in the love of God and
   their neighbour, so that they had not need to cry, "Forgive us our
   sins?" (Matt. vi.) So far are we off from satisfying, does not Christ
   say, "When you have done all things that I have commanded you, say that
   you are but unprofitable servants." (Luke xvii.) "Put nothing to my
   word," says God. (Deut. iv.) Yes, works of supererogation, (yea,
   super-abomination,) say they. "Whatsoever things are true, (says the
   apostle Paul,) whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
   just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love,
   whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
   be any praise, have you them in your mind, and do them, and the God of
   peace shall be with you." I mean, this well looked on will pull us from
   popish satisfactory works, which do deface Christ's treasure and
   satisfaction.

   In heaven and in earth was there none found that could satisfy God's
   anger for our sins, or get heaven for man, but only the Son of God,
   Jesus Christ, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, who by his blood has
   wrought the work of satisfaction, and alone is worthy all honour,
   glory, and praise, for he has opened the book with the seven seals.

   Dearly beloved, therefore abhor this abomination, even to think that
   there is any other satisfaction toward God for sin, than Christ's blood
   only. Blasphemy it is, and that horrible, to think otherwise. "The
   blood of Christ purifies (says St. John) from all sin," and therefore
   he is called the Lamb slain frond the beginning of the world, because
   there never was sin forgiven of God, nor shall be from the beginning
   unto the end of the world, but only through Christ's death, though the
   pope and his prelates prate as please them, about their pardons,
   purgations, placeboes, trentals, dirges, works of supererogation,
   super-abomination, &c.

   "I am he (says the Lord) which puts away thine offences, and that for
   mine own sake, and will no more remember thine iniquities. Put me in
   remembrance, (for we will reason together,) and tell me what thou hast
   for thee, to make thee righteous. Thy first father offended sore, &c."
   (Isa. xliii.) And thus writes St. John: "If any man sin, we have an
   advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
   the propitiation, or satisfaction, for our sins." As in chapter iv. he
   says, that God has sent his Son to be a propitiation or mean for the
   taking away of our sins, according to that which Paul writes, where he
   calls Christ a merciful and faithful priest, to purge the people's
   sins, (Heb. ii.;) so that blind buzzards and perverse papists are they,
   which yet will prate of our merits or works to satisfy for our sins, in
   part or in whole, before baptism or after. For to omit the testimonies
   I brought out of John and Paul, which the blind cannot but see, I pray
   you remember the text out of Isaiah, which even now I rehearsed, being
   spoken to such as were then the people of God, and had been a long
   time, but yet were fallen into grievous sins after their adoption into
   the number of God's children. "It is for mine own sake (says God) that
   I put away thy sins." Where is your parting of the stake now? If it is
   for God's own sake, if Christ is the propitiation; then recant, except
   you will become idolaters, making your works God and Christ. Say as
   David teaches us, "Not to us, Lord, not to us, but to thy name be the
   glory."

   And it is to be noted, that God casts in their teeth, eyed the sin of
   their first father, lest they should think thin perchance for the
   righteousness and goodness of their good fathers, their sins might be
   the sooner pardoned, and so God accept their works.

   If they had made satisfaction for that which is done to the
   congregation, publicly, by some notable punishment, in the primitive
   church was used to open offenders, sparkles whereof and some traces yet
   remain, when such as have sinned in adultery go about the church in
   their shirts with a taper. Or if they had made satisfaction for
   restitution toward man of such goods as wrongfully are gotten, which
   true penance cannot be without; or if by satisfaction they had meant a
   new life to make amends to the congregation thereby, as by their evil
   life they offended the congregation, in which sense the apostle seems
   to take that which he writes in 2 Cor. vii., where the old interpreter
   calls apologium, satisfaction, which rather signifies a defence or
   answering again; if, I say, they had taken satisfaction any of these
   ways, then they had done well, so that the satisfaction to God had been
   left alone to Christ.

   Again, if they had made confession either that which is to God
   privately, or that which is to the congregation publicly, either that
   which is a free consultation with some one learned in God's book, and
   appointed thereto, as first it was used, and I wish were now used
   amongst us; or that which is a reconciliation of one to another, it had
   been something. Yea, if they had made it for faith, because it is a
   true demonstration of faith, as in Paul we may see, when he calls
   Christ the captain of our confession, that is, of our faith, so
   confessors were called in the primitive church such as manfully did
   witness their faith with the peril of their lives; if, I say, they had
   taken it thus, then had they done right well.

   And so contrition, if they had left out their subtle distinction
   between it and attrition, by this word just or full, making it a hearty
   sorrow for their sins, then we would never have cried out against them
   therefore. For we say penance has three parts; contrition, if you
   understand it for a hearty sorrowing for sin; confession, if you
   understand it for faith of free pardon in God's mercy by Jesus Christ;
   and satisfaction, if you understand it not to be towards God, (for that
   must be left alone, only to Christ,) but toward man in restitution of
   goods wrongfully or fraudulently gotten, of name hindered by our
   slanders, and in newness of life; although, as I said before, and
   presently will show more plainly, by God's grace, that this last is no
   part of penance indeed, but a plain effect or fruit of true penance.

   I might here bring in examples of their penance, how perilous it is to
   be embraced; but let the example of their grandsire Judas serve, in
   whom we see all the parts of their penance, as they describe it, and
   yet notwithstanding he was damned. He was sorry enough, as the effect
   showed; he had their contrition fully, out of the which he confessed
   his fault, saying, "I have betrayed innocent blood;" and thereunto he
   made satisfaction, restoring the money he had received. But yet all was
   but lost, he hanged up himself, his bowels burst out, and he remains a
   child of perdition for ever. I would wish that this example of Judas,
   in whom we see the parts of their penance, contrition, confession, and
   satisfaction, would move them to penance, and to describe it a little
   better, making hope or trust of God's free mercy a piece thereof, or
   else with Judas they will mar all.

   Perchance these words contrition, confession, and satisfaction, were
   used at the first as I have expounded them. But as we see so much
   danger and hurt by using them without expositions, either let us always
   join to them open expositions, or else let us not use them at all, but
   say as I write, that penance is a hearty sorrow for our sins, a good
   hope or trust of pardon through Christ, which is not without an earnest
   purpose to amend, or a new life. This penance is the thing whereto all
   the scripture calls us. This penance I now call you all onto; must be
   continually in us, and not for a Lent season, as we have thought; this
   must increase daily more and more in us; without this, we cannot be
   saved.

   Search therefore your hearts, all ye swearers, blasphemers, liars,
   flatterers, filthy or idle talkers, jesters, bribers, covetous persons,
   drunkards, gluttons, whore-mongers, thieves, murderers, slanderers,
   idle livers, negligent in their vocation, &c. All such and all other as
   lament not their sins, as hope not in God's mercy for pardon, as
   purpose not heartily to amend, to leave their swearing, drunkenness,
   fornication, covetousness, idleness, &c.; all such, I say, shall not
   and cannot enter into God's kingdom, but hell-fire is prepared for
   them, weeping and gnashing of teeth, whereunto, alas! I fear, very man,
   will needs go, since very many will be as they have been, let us even,
   to the wearying of our tongue to the stumps, preach and pray ever so
   much to the contrary; and that even in the bowels of Jesus Christ, as
   now I beseech you all, and every one, to repent and lament your sins,
   to trust in God's mercy, and to amend your lives.

   Now methinks you are somewhat astonished, whereby I gather that at
   present you desire this repentance, that is, this sorrow, good hope,
   and newness of life; to the which that you may the rather attain, and
   get to your comforts. As I have gone about to be a mean to stir up in
   you, by God's grace, this desire of repentance, so through the same
   grace of God will I now go about to show you, how you may have your
   desire in this behalf.

   And first, concerning this part, namely, sorrow for your sins and
   hearty lamenting of the same; for this if you desire the having of it,
   you must beware that you think not that of yourselves, or of your own
   free will, you can by any means get it. You may easily deceive
   yourselves, and mock yourselves, thinking more of yourselves than is
   seemly. All good things, and not pieces of good things, but all good
   things, says St. James, come from God, the Father of light. If
   therefore penance is good, as it is good, then the parts of it are
   good: from God therefore do they come, and not of our free will. It is
   the Lord that mortifies, that brings down, that humbles, says the
   scripture in sundry places. "After thou had stricken my thigh (says
   Jeremiah xxxi.) I was ashamed. Lo!" he says, "After thou had stricken
   me", and therefore prays he; even in the last words almost he writes,
   "Turn us, Lord, and we shall be turned," which David uses very often.
   Wherefore, first of all, if thou wouldst have this part of penance, as
   the whole is God's gift, so for this part go thou unto God, and make
   some little prayer, as thou canst, unto his mercy for the same, in this
   or the like sort:

   "Merciful Father of our Saviour Jesus Christ, because I have sinned,
   and done wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire of
   repentance, whereto this thy long-sufferance does draw my hard heart, I
   beseech thee, for thy mercy's sake in Christ, to work the same
   repentance in me, and by thy Spirit, power, and grace, so to humble,
   mortify, and fear my conscience for my sins, to salvation, that in thy
   good time thou may comfort and quicken me again, through Jesus Christ,
   thy dearly beloved Son. Amen."

   After this sort, I say, or otherwise, as thou thinks good, if thou wilt
   have this first part, contrition or sorrow for thy sins, do thou beg it
   of God through Christ. And when thou hast asked it, as I have laboured
   to drive thee from trusting in thyself, so now I go about to move thee
   from flattering of thyself; from sluggishness and negligence, to be
   diligent to use these means following.

   First unto prayer, which I would thou should use as thou can; secondly,
   get God's law as a glass to look in, for in it and by it comes the true
   knowledge of sin, without which knowledge there can be no sorrow. For
   how can a man sorrow for his sins, who knows not his sins? As when a
   man is sick, the first step to health is to know his sickness; even so
   to salvation, the first step is to know that thy damnation is due for
   thy sins.

   The law of God therefore must be gotten and well looked in, that is, we
   must look in it spiritually, and not corporally or carnally, as the
   outward word or letter declares and utters; and so our Saviour teaches
   us in Matthew, expounding the sixth and seventh commandment, not only
   after the outward deed, but also after the heart; making there the
   anger of the heart a kind of murder, and lusting after another man's
   wife, a kind of adultery.

   And this is one of the differences between God's law and men's law;
   that of this, man's law I mean, I am not condemnable, so long as I
   outwardly observe the same. But God's law goes to the root, and to the
   heart, condemning me for the inward motion, although outwardly I live
   most holily. As for example: if I kill no man, though in my heart I
   hate, man's law condemns me not, but God's law does otherwise. And why?
   for it sees the fountain whence the evil does spring. If hatred were
   taken out of the heart, then loftiness in looks, detraction in tongue,
   and murder by hand, could never ensue. If lusting were out of the
   heart, curiosity in countenance, wantonness in words, indecent boldness
   in body, would not appear.

   Since therefore this outward evil springs out of the inward corruption,
   seeing God's law also is a law of liberty, as says St. James, (chap.
   i.) and spiritual, as says St. Paul, (Rom. vii.) it is to be understood
   perfectly and spiritually, if we will truly come to the knowledge of
   our sins. For of this inward corruption, reason knows but little or
   nothing. "I had not known," says Paul, (Rom. vii.) "that lusting,"
   (which to reason, and to them which are guided only by reason, is
   thought but a trifle), "I had not known," says he, "this lusting to
   have been sin, if the law had not said, Thou shalt not lust."

   To the knowledge therefore of our sins, without which we cannot repent,
   or be sorry for our sin, let us secondly get us God's law as a glass to
   look in, and that not only literally, outwardly, or partly, but also
   spiritually, inwardly, and thoroughly. Let us consider the heart, and
   so shall we see the foul spots we are stained withal, at least
   inwardly; whereby we may the rather be moved to hearty sorrow and
   sighing. For, as St. Austin says, it is a glass which fears (affrights,
   editor) nobody; but even look, as thou art, so it paints thee out.

   In the law we see it is a foul spot, not to love the Lord our God with
   all, all, I say, our heart, soul, power, might and strength; and that
   continually.

   In the law it is a foul spot, not only to make to ourselves any graven
   image or similitude, to bow thereto, &c., but also not to frame
   ourselves wholly after the image (of God, Gen. 1:26, editor) whereto we
   are made, not to bow to it, to worship it.

   In the law we see that it is a foul spot, not only to take God's name
   in vain, but also not earnestly, heartily, and even continually to call
   upon his name only; to give thanks unto him, to believe, to publish,
   and live according to his holy word.

   In God's law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an
   open profaner of the Sabbath-day, but also not to rest from our own
   words and works, that the Lord might both speak and work in us and by
   us. Also not to hear his holy word, not to communicate his sacraments,
   not to give occasion to others to holiness by our example in godly
   works, and reverent esteeming of the ministry of his word.

   In God's law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an
   open disobeyer of our parents and magistrates, masters, and such as are
   in any authority over us, but also not to honour such even in our
   hearts, not to give thanks to God for them, not to pray for them, to
   aid, to help, or relieve them, to bear with their infirmities, &c.

   In God's law we see it is a foul spot in our souls, not only to be a
   man-killer in hatred, malice, proud looks, brags, backbiting, railing,
   or bodily slaughter, but also not to love our neighbours, yea, our
   enemies, even in our hearts, and to declare the same in all our
   gestures, words, and works.

   In God's law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be a
   whoremonger in lusting in our hearts, in wanton looking, in unclean and
   wanton talking, in actual doing dishonestly with our neighbour's wife,
   daughter, servant, &c.; but also not to be chaste, sober, temperate in
   heart, looks, tongue, apparel, deeds, and to help others thereunto
   accordingly, &c.

   In God's law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to covet
   in heart, to flatter in look or word, lie, colour, &c. in deed, and to
   take away anything which pertains to another, but also in heart,
   countenance, word, and deed, not to keep, save, and defend that which
   pertains to thy neighbour, as thou wouldst thine own.

   In God's law we may see it is a foul spot, not only to lie or bear
   false witness against any man, but also not to have as great care over
   thy neighbour's name, as over thine own.

   Sin in God's law we may see it is, and a foul spot, nor only to consent
   to evil, lust, or carnal desires, but even the very natural or carnal
   lusts and desires themselves, (for so I may call them, nature itself
   being now so corrupted,) are sin; as self-love, and many such. By
   reason whereof I trow there is none that looks well herein; but though
   he is blameless to the world, and fair to the show, yet certainly
   inwardly his face is foul arrayed, and so shameful, proud, diseased,
   and loathsome, that he cannot but be sorry at the contemplation
   thereof, and that so much more, by how much he continues to look in
   this glass accordingly.

   And thus much concerning the second mean to the stirring up of sorrow
   for sin, that next unto prayer we should look in God's law spiritually;
   the which looking, if we use with prayer, as I said, let us not doubt
   but at length God's Spirit will work as now, to such as believe; for to
   the unbelievers all is in vain, their eyes are stark blind, they can
   see nothing; to such as believe, (I say,) I trust something is done
   even already. But if neither by prayer, nor by looking in God's law
   spiritually, as yet thy hard unbelieving heart feels no sorrow nor
   lamenting for thy sins; thirdly, look upon the penalty attached to
   God's law: for as to man's law there is a penalty affixed, so is there
   to God's law a penalty, and that no small one, but such a great one as
   cannot but make us fear if we believe it, for all is in vain if we are
   faithless so as not to believe before we feel.

   This penalty is God's malediction or curse: "Lo! accursed," says he,
   "is all," no exception, all, says God, "which continues not in all
   things, (for he that is guilty of one is guilty of the whole, says St.
   James,) in all things therefore (says the Holy Ghost) which are written
   in the book of the law to do them." He says not to hear them, to talk
   of them, to dispute of them, but to do them.

   Who is he now that does these? Rara avis (a rare bird, editor), few
   such birds, yea none at all. For all are gone out of the way, though
   not outwardly by word or deed, yet inwardly, at least by default and
   wanting of that which is required; so that a child of one night's age
   is not pure, but (by reason of birth-sin) in danger of God's
   malediction; much more then we, which, alas! have drunken in iniquity,
   as it were water, as Job says. (Chap. xv.) But yet, alas! we quake not.

   Tell me now, good brother, why do you so lightly consider God's curse
   that for your past sins you are so careless, as though you had made a
   covenant with death and damnation, as the wicked did in Isaiah's time?
   What is God's curse? At the pope's curse with hook, belly and candle,
   oh! how we trembled which heard it, and though the same was not
   directed unto us, but unto others. For is God's curse, which is
   incomparably more fell and importable (severe and unbearable, editor)
   and is directed to us, yea, hanging over us all reason of our sins,
   alas! how careless are we! Oh! faithless hard hearts! oh! Jezebel's
   guests! rocked and laid in a sleep in her bed! (Rev. ii.) Oh! wicked
   wretches! which being come into the depth of sin, do entomb the same.
   Oh! sorrowless sinners, and shameless harlots!

   Is not the anger of a king death? And is the anger of the King of all
   kings a matter to be so lightly regarded as we do regard it, who are so
   reckless for our sins that we slug and sleep it out? As wax melts away
   at the heat of the fire, (says David,) so do the wicked perish at the
   face or countenance of the Lord. If, dearly beloved, his face is so
   terrible and intolerable for sinners and the wicked, what think we his
   hand is? At the face or appearing of God's anger, the earth trembles,
   but we, earth, earth, yea, stones, iron, flints, tremble nothing at
   all. It we will not tremble in hearing, woe unto us, for then we shall
   be crushed in pieces, in feeling. If a lion roar, the casts quake; but
   we are worse than beasts, which quake not at the roaring of the lion; I
   mean the Lord of hosts. And why? because the curse of God, hardness of
   heart, is already fallen upon us, or else we could not but lament and
   tremble for our sins, if not for the shame and foulness hereof, yet at
   least for the malediction and curse of God, which hangs over us for our
   sins.

   Lord, be merciful unto us, for thy Christ's sake, and spare us; in
   thine anger remember thy mercy towards us. Amen. And thus much for the
   third thing to the moving of us to sorrow for our sins, that is, for
   the penalty affixed to God's law, I mean, for the malediction and curse
   of God. But if our hearts are so hard, that we feel not yet hearty
   sorrow for our sins, let us, fourthly, set before us examples past and
   present, old and new, that thereby the Holy Spirit may be effectual to
   work in his time this work of sorrowing for our sin.

   Look upon God's anger for sin in Adam and Eve, for eating a piece of an
   apple. Were not they, the dearest creatures of God, cast out of
   paradise? Were not they subject to mortality, travail, labour, &c.? Was
   not the earth accursed for their sins? Do not we all feel the same, men
   in labour, women in travailing with child, and all in death, mortality,
   and misery, even in this life? And was God so angry for their sin, and
   will he, being the same God, say nothing to us for ours, (alas!) much
   more horrible than the eating once of one piece of one apple?

   In the time of Noah and Lot, God destroyed the whole world with water,
   and the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Zeboim and Admah, with fire and
   brimstone from heaven for their sins; namely, for their whoredoms,
   pride, idleness, unmercifulness to the poor, tyranny, &c. In which
   wrath of God even the very babes, birds, fowls, fishes, herds, trees,
   and grass perished; and think we that nothing will be spoken to us, who
   are much worse and more abominable than they? For all men may see, if
   they will, that the whoredoms, pride, unmercifulness, tyranny, &c. of
   England in this age far passes any age that ever was before. Lot's wife
   looking back was turned into a salt stone; and will our looking back
   again, yea, our running back again to our wickedness, do us no hurt? If
   we were not already blind, we should blush. Pharaoh's heart was
   hardened, so that no miracle could convert him; if ours were any thing
   soft, we should begin to sob.

   Of six hundred thousand men, only two entered into the land of promise,
   because they had ten times sinned against the Lord, as he himself says,
   (Numb. xiv.;) and think we that God will not swear in his wrath, that
   we shall never enter into his rest, which have sinned so many ten times
   as we have hairs of our heads and beards, (I tear,) and yet we repent
   not.

   The man that swore, and he that gathered sticks on the sabbathday, were
   stoned to death; but we think our swearing is no sin, our bibbing
   (drinking, editor), rioting, yea, fornication on the sabbath-day,
   pleases God, or else we would something amend our manners.

   Eli's negligence in correcting his sons, brake his neck in two; but
   ours, which pamper up our children like puppets, will put us to no
   plunge (difficulty, editor). Eli's sons, for disobeying their father's
   admonition, brought over them God's vengeance; and will our
   stubbornness do nothing?

   Saul's malice to David, Ahab's displeasure against Naboth, brought
   their blood to the ground for dogs to eat; yea, their children were
   hanged up and slain for this; but we continue in malice, envy, and
   murders as though we were able to wage war with the Lord.

   David's adultery with Bathsheba was visited on the child born; on
   David's daughter, defiled by her brother; and on his children, one
   slaying another; his wives defiled by his own son; on himself driven
   out of his realm in his old age, and otherwise also, although he most
   heartily repented his sin. But we think we are more dear unto God than
   David, which yet was a man after God's own heart, or else we could not
   but tremble, and begin to repent.

   The rich glutton's gay paunch-filling, what did it? It brought him to
   hell; and have we a placard (a notice or declaration, editor) that God
   will do nothing to us?

   Achan's subtle theft provoked God's anger against all Israel; and our
   subtilty, yea, open extortion, is it so fine and politic that God
   cannot espy it?

   Gehazi's covetousness brought the leprosy upon him and on all his seed.
   Judas also hanged himself. But the covetousness of England is of
   another cloth and colour. Well, if it were so, the same tailor will cut
   it accordingly

   Ananias and Sapphira, by lying, linked to themselves sudden death; but
   ours now prolongs our life, the longer to last in eternal death.

   The false witnesses of the two judges against Susanne lighted on their
   own pates; and so will ours do at length.

   But what go I about to avouch ancient examples, where daily experience
   teaches? The sweating sickness of the other year, the storms the winter
   following, call upon us to weigh them in the same balances. The hanging
   and killing of men themselves, which are (alas!) too rife (frequent,
   editor) in all places, require us to register them in the same rolls.
   At the least in children, infants, and such like, which cannot yet
   utter sin by word or deed, we see God's anger against sin in punishing
   them by sickness, death, mishap, or otherwise, so plainly that we
   cannot but groan and lament again, in that we have gushed out this more
   abundantly in word and deed.

   And here with me a little look on God's anger yet so fresh, that we
   cannot but smell it, although we stop our noses never so much; I pray
   God we smell it not more fresh hereafter; I mean it forsooth, for I
   know you look for it, in our dear late sovereign lord the king's
   majesty (King Edward VI, editor). You all know he was but a child in
   years; defiled he was not with notorious offences. Defiled, quoth I?
   nay, rather adorned with so many goodly gifts and wonderful qualities,
   as never prince was from the beginning of the world, should I speak of
   his wisdom, of his ripeness in judgment, of his learning, of his godly
   zeal, heroical heart, fatherly care for his commons, nurse-like
   solicitude for religion, &c. Nay, so many things are to be spoken in
   commendation of God's exceeding graces in this child, that, as Sallust
   writes of Carthage, I had rather speak nothing than too little, for too
   much is too little. This gift God gave unto us Englishmen before all
   nations under the sun, and that of his exceeding love towards us. But,
   alas, and well away, for our unthankfulness' sake, for our sin's sake,
   for our carnality, and profane living, God's anger has touched not only
   the body, but also the mind of our king by a long sickness, and at
   length has taken him away by death, death, cruel death, fearful death.

   Oh! if God's judgment is begun in him which, as he was the chiefest, so
   I think he was the holiest and godliest in the realm of England, alas!
   what will it be on us, whose sins are overgrown to our heads, so that
   they are climbed up into heaven! I pray you, my good brethren, know
   that God's anger towards us for our sins cannot but be great; yea, we
   see it was so great, that our good king could not bear it. What
   followed to Jewry after the death of Josias? May God save England, and
   give us repentance! My heart will not suffer me to tarry longer herein.
   I think this will thrust out some tears of repentance.

   If therefore prayer for God's fear, the looking in God's glass, and the
   penalty thereto, will not burst open thy blackish heart, yet I think
   the tossing to and fro of these examples, and especially of our late
   king, and this troublesome time, will tumble some tears out of your
   heart, if you still pray for God's Spirit accordingly. For who are you,
   (think always with yourself that God should spare you more than them
   whose examples thou hast heard? What friends have you? Were not these
   kings prophets, apostles, learned, and come of holy stocks? I deceive
   myself (think you with yourself) if I believe that God, being the same
   God that he was, will spare me, whose wickedness is no less, but much
   more than some of theirs. He hates sin now as much as ever he did. The
   longer he spares, the greater vengeance will fall; the deeper he draws
   his bow, the sorer will the shaft pierce.

   But if yet your heart is so hardened that all this will not more you,
   surely you are in a very evil state, and remedy now know I none. What!
   said I, none? know I none? Yes; there is one which is sure to serve, if
   anything will serve. You look to know what this is; it is the passion
   and death of Jesus Christ. You know that the cause why Christ became
   man, and suffered as he suffered, was the sins of his people, that he
   might save them from the same. Consider the greatness of the sore, I
   mean sin, by the greatness of the Surgeon and of the remedy. Who was
   the Surgeon? No angel, no saint, no archangel, no power, no creature in
   heaven or in earth, but only He by whom all things were made, all
   things are ruled, also even God's own darling and only beloved Son
   becoming man.

   Oh! what a great thing is this that could not be done by the angels,
   archangels, potentates, powers, or all the creatures of God, without
   his own Son, who yet must needs be thrust out of heaven, as a man would
   say, to take our nature, and become man. Here have you the Surgeon;
   great was the cure that this mighty Lord took in hand.

   Now what was the remedy? It was purchased dearly, and of many
   compositions; I cannot recite all, but rather must leave it to your
   hearty consideration. Three-and-thirty years was he curing our wounds:
   he sought it earnestly by fasting, watching, praying, &c. The same
   night that he was betrayed, I read how busy he was about a remedy in
   the garden, when he, lying flat on the ground, praying with tears, and
   that of blood, not a few, but so many as flowed down on the ground,
   crying in this sort: "Father, if it be possible, let this cup depart
   from me;" that is, if it be possible that the sin of mankind can be
   otherwise taken away, grant that it may be so. Thou heard Moses crying,
   for the idolaters; thou heard Lot for the Zoarites; Samuel, David, and
   many others, for the Israelites; and, dear Father, I only am thine own
   Son, as thou hast said, in whom thou art well pleased; wilt thou not
   hear me? I have by the space of three-and thirty years done always thy
   will; I have so humbled myself, that I would become an abject among men
   to obey thee; therefore, dear Father, if it be possible, grant my
   request, save mankind now without any further labour or remedy." But
   yet, (says he,) "not as I will, but as thou wilt."

   But, sirs, what heard he? Though he sweat blood and water in making his
   remedy for our sore of sin, yet it framed (sufficed, editor) not. Twice
   he cried without comfort; yea, though God sent an angel to comfort him,
   we yet knot that this remedy was not allowed for sufficient, until
   Christ Jesus was betrayed, forsaken of all his disciples, forsworn of
   his dearly beloved, bound like a thief, belied, buffeted, whipped,
   scourged, crowned with thorns, derided, crucified, racked, wailed,
   hanged up between two thieves, cursed and railed upon, mocked in
   misery, and had given up the ghost. Then bowed down the head of Christ,
   that is, God the Father, which is the head of Christ; then he allowed
   the remedy to be sufficient and good for the healing of our sore, which
   is sin. Now God would abide us, because the damnation or guiltiness was
   taken away by this Lamb, thus offered once for all!

   So that here, dearly beloved, we as in a glass may see God's great
   judgment and anger against sin for the bruising of our blackish hard
   hearts. The Lord of lords, the King of kings, the brightness of God's
   glory, the Son of God, the darling of his Father, in whom he is well
   pleased, hangs between two thieves, crying for thee and me, and for us
   all, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Oh! hard hearts that
   we have, which make light of sin. Look on this; look on the very heart
   of Christ, pierced with a spear, wherein you may see and read God's
   horrible anger for sin. Woe to thy hard heart that pierced it.

   And thus much for the first part of repentance; I mean, for the means
   of working contrition: first, use prayer; then look on God's law;
   thirdly, see his curse; fourthly, set examples of his anger before you;
   and, last of all, set before you the death of Christ. From this and
   prayer cease not until you feel some hearty sorrow for your sin; which
   when you feel, then labour for the second part, that is, for faith, on
   this sort.

   II. As first, in contrition, I willed you not to trust to your free
   will for the attaining of it, so do I will you in this. Faith is so far
   from the reach of man's free will, that to reason, it is plain
   foolishness; you must first go to God; whose gift it is; you must, I
   say, get you to the Father of mercy, whose work it is, that, as he has
   brought you down by contrition, and humbled you, so he would give you
   faith, raise you up, and exalt you.

   On this manner therefore with the apostles, and the poor man in the
   gospel, that cried, "Lord, increase our faith; Lord, help my unbelief;"
   pray you and say, "O merciful God, and dear Father of our Lord and
   Saviour Jesus Christ, in whom as thou art well pleased, so hast thou
   commanded us to hear him; forasmuch as he often bids us to ask of thee,
   and thereto promises that thou wilt hear us, and grant us that which in
   his name we shall ask of thee: lo! gracious Father, I am bold to beg of
   thy mercy, through thy Son Jesus Christ, one sparkle of true faith, and
   certain persuasion of thy goodness and love towards me in Christ,
   wherethrough I, being assured of the pardon of all my sins, by the
   mercies of Christ, thy Son, may be thankful to thee, love thee, and
   serve thee, in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life."

   On this sort I say, or otherwise, as God shall move you, pray first of
   all, and look for your request at God's hand; and without any doubting,
   though forthwith you feel not the same; for oftentimes we have things
   of God given us long before we feel them as are would do. Now unto this
   prayer, use these means following:

   After prayer for faith, which I would should be first; secondly,
   because the same springs out of the hearing, not of masses, matins,
   canons, councils, doctors, decrees, but out of the hearing of God's
   word; get God's word, but not that part which serves especially to
   contrition, that is the law, but the other part, which serves
   especially to consolation and certain persuasion of God's love towards
   thee, that is the gospel or publication of God's mercy in Christ; I
   mean the free promises.

   But here you must know, that there are two kinds of promises; one,
   which is properly of the law, another, which is properly of the gospel.
   In the promises of the law we may indeed behold God's mercy, but so
   that it hangs upon the condition of our worthiness; as, if thou love
   the Lord with all thy heart, &c., thou shalt find mercy. This kind of
   promises, though it declare unto us God's dove, which promises where he
   need not, yet unto him that feels not Christ, which is the end of the
   law, they are so far from comforting, that with the law they utterly
   bring man to deep despair, so greatly are we corrupted, for none loves
   God as he ought to do. From these therefore get thee to the other
   promises of the gospel, in which we may see such plenty and frank
   liberality of God's goodness, that we cannot but be much comforted,
   though we have very deeply sinned.

   For these promises of the gospel do not hang on the condition of our
   worthiness, as the promises of the law do, but they depend and hang on
   God's truth; that as God is true, so they cannot but be performed to
   all them which lay hold on them by faith I had almost said, which cast
   them not away by unbelief.

   Mark in them therefore two things, namely, that they are free promises
   without any condition of our worthiness, as also that they are
   universal, offered to all; all, I say, who are not so stubborn, as by
   unbelief, to keep their hands still, whereby they should receive this
   alms in their bosom. As concerning infants and children, you know I now
   speak not, but concerning such as are of years of discretion; and now
   you look that I should give you a taste of these promises, which are
   both free and universal, excepting none but such as except themselves.
   Well, you shall have one or two for a say (specimen, editor).

   In the third of John, says our Saviour, "So God loved the world, that
   he would give his darling, his own only Son, that all that believe in
   him should not perish, but have everlasting life." Lo! sir, he says not
   that some might have life; but all, says he. And what all? All that
   love him with all their hearts, all that have lived a godly life? Nay,
   all that believe in him; although thou hast lived a most wicked and
   horrible life, if now thou believe in him, thou shalt be saved. Is not
   this sweet?

   Again, says Christ, "Come unto me all ye that labour and are laden, and
   I will refresh you." Let us a little look on this letter. "Come unto
   me." Who should come? Lords, priests, holy men, monks, friars; yea,
   cobblers, tinkers, harlots, thieves, murderers also, if they lament
   their sins." Come unto me (says he) all ye that labour and are laden,"
   that is, which are afraid of your sins. And what wilt thou do, Lord?
   "And I will refresh you," says he. Oh! what a thing is this, "And I
   will refresh you." Wot (know, editor) you who spake this? He that never
   told a lie; he is the truth, there was never guile found in his mouth,
   and now will he be untrue to you, good brother, who are sorry for your
   grievous sins? No, truly! Heaven and earth shall pass and perish, but
   his word shall never fail. Saint Paul says, "God would have all men
   saved." Lo! he exempts none. And to Titus, "The grace of God brings
   salvation to all men." As from Adam all have received sin to damnation,
   so by Christ all have grace offered to salvation, if they reject not
   the same. I speak not now of infants, I say, and I need not enter into
   the matter of predestination. In preaching of repentance, I would
   gather where I could with Christ. "As surely as I live, (says God,) I
   will not the death of a sinner." Art thou a sinner? Yea. Lo! God swears
   he desires not thy death. How can thou now perish? Consider with
   yourself what profit you should have to believe this to be true to
   others, if not to yourself also. Satan does so. Rather consider with
   Peter, that the promise of salvation pertains not only to them which
   are nigh, that is, to such as are fallen a little, but also to all whom
   the Lord has called, be they ever so far off

   Lo! now by me the Lord calls thee, thou man, thou woman, that art very
   far off. The promise therefore pertains to thee: needs must thou be
   saved, except thou with Satan say God is false; and yet if thou do so,
   God is faithful, and cannot deny himself; as thou shalt feel by his
   plagues in hell, for so dishonouring God as to think that he is not
   true. Will he be found false now? The matter hangs not on your
   worthiness; but it hangs on God's truth. Take hold on it, and I warrant
   you Christ is the propitiation for our sins, yea, for the sins of the
   whole world; believe this, man, I know you believe it; say therefore in
   your heart, still, Lord, increase my faith; Lord, help my unbelief.
   Blessed are they which see not this by reason, but yet believe; hope,
   man, past all hope, as Abraham did.

   And thus much for a taste of these promises which are everywhere not
   only in the New Testament, but also in the Old. Read the latter end of
   Leviticus, xxvi., the prophet Isaiah, xxx. where he says, God tarries,
   looking for thee to show thee mercy; also the 4oth, and so on to the
   60th. Read also Psa. xxxii., Joel, ii. &c.

   Howbeit, if this will not serve, if yet thou feel no faith, no certain
   persuasion of God's love, then unto prayer add diligent considering of
   the free and universal promises of the gospel. Thirdly set before thee
   those benefits which God has heretofore given thee, and at present
   gives thee. Consider how he has made you a man or a woman, who might
   have made you a toad, a dog. And why did he this? Verily, because he
   loved you. And do you think, that if he loved thee when you were not,
   to make thee such a one as he most graciously has made thee, will he
   not now love thee, being his handiwork? Does he hate anything that he
   has made? Is there unableness with him? Does he love for a day and so
   farewell? No, indeed, he loves to the end, his mercy endures for ever.
   Say therefore with Job, "To the work of thy hands put thy helping
   hand." Again, has he not made you a Christian man or woman, whereas if
   he would, he might have made you a Turk or pagan? This you know he did
   of love. And do you think his love if lessened, if you lament your sin?
   Is his hand shortened for helping you? Can a women forget the child of
   her womb? And though she should do it, yet will not I forget thee, says
   the Lord. He has given you limbs to see, hear, go, &c.; he has given
   you wit, reason, discretion, &c.; he has long spared you, and borne
   with you, when you never purposed to repent; and now you repent, will
   he not give you mercy? Wherefore does he suffer you to live at this
   present to hear me speak this and suffer me to speak this, but of love
   to us all? Oh! therefore let us pray him, that he would add to this,
   that we might believe these love-tokens that he loves us, and indeed he
   will do it. Lord, open our eyes, in thy gifts to see thy gracious
   goodness. Amen.

   But tarry in this I will not. Let every man consider God's benefits
   past and present, public and private, spiritual and corporeal, to
   confirm his faith concerning the promises of the gospel, for the pardon
   of his sins. I will now endeavour to show you a fourth means to confirm
   your faith in this, even by examples. Of these there are in the
   scriptures very many, as also daily experience diversely teaches the
   same, if we were diligent to observe things accordingly; wherefore I
   will be more brief herein, having respect to time, which steals fast
   away.

   Adam in paradise transgressed grievously, as the painful punishment,
   which we all as yet do feel, proves, if nothing else did. Though by
   reason of his sin he displeased God sorely, and ran away from God, for
   he would have hid himself, yea, he would have made God the causer of
   his sin, because he gave him such a mate, so far was he from asking
   mercy; yet notwithstanding all this, God turned his fierce wrath
   neither upon him nor Eve who also required not mercy, but upon the
   serpent, Satan promising unto them a seed, Jesus Christ, by whom they
   at length should be delivered. In token whereof, though they were cast
   out of paradise for their nurture (instruction or correction, editor),
   to serve in sorrow since they would not serve in joy; yet he made them
   apparel to cover their bodies, a visible sacrament and token of his
   invisible love and grace concerning their souls. If God was so merciful
   to Adam, who so brake his commandment, and rather blamed God than asked
   mercy; thinkest thou, O man, that he will not be merciful to thee,
   which blamest thyself, and desirest pardon?

   To Cain he offered mercy, if he would have asked it. "What hast thou
   done? (says God:) the voice of thy brother's blood cries unto me out of
   the earth." O merciful Lord, Cain should have said, I confess it! But,
   alas! he did not so, and therefore said God, "Now," that is, in that
   thou desirest not mercy, now, "I say, be thou accursed," &c. Lo, to the
   reprobate he offered mercy, and will he deny it to thee, which art his
   child?

   Noah, did not he sin, and was dumb? Good Lot also both in Sodom
   dissembled a little with the angels, prolonging the time, and out of
   Sodom he fell very foully (Gen. xix.) as did Judah and the patriarchs
   against Joseph; but yet I ween (doubt not, editor) they found mercy.
   Moses, Miriam, Aaron, though they stumbled a little, yet they received
   mercy; yea, the people in the wilderness often sinned and displeased
   God, so that he was purposed to have destroyed them. Let me alone, says
   he to Moses, that I may destroy them; but Moses did not let him alone,
   for he prayed still for them, and therefore God spared them. If the
   people were spared through Moses' prayer, they not praying with him,
   but rather worshipping their golden calf, eating, drinking, and making
   good cheer, why should thou doubt whether God will be merciful to thee,
   having, as indeed thou hast, One much better than Moses to pray for
   thee (Numb. xiv.) and with thee, even Jesus Christ, who sits on the
   right hand of his Father, and prays for us, being no less faithful in
   his Father's house, the church, than Moses was in the synagogue? David
   the good king had a foul foil (fall, editor) with Bathsheba. whereunto
   he added also a mischievous murder, causing her husband, his most
   faithful soldier, Uriah, to be slain with an honest company of his most
   valiant men of war, and that with the sword of the uncircumcised.

   In this his sin, though he lay asleep a great while, (as many do
   now-a-days, God give them good waking!) thinking, that by the
   sacrifices he offered, all was well, and that God was content; yet at
   length, when the prophet by a parable had opened the poke, and brought
   him in remembrance of his own sin in such sort, that he gave judgment
   against himself, then he quaked. Eli's sacrifices had no more taken
   away his sins, than our sir John's trentals (Romish priest's services,
   editor) and wagging of his fingers over the heads of such as lie asleep
   in their sins, out of the which, when they are awaked, they will well
   see that it is neither mass nor matins, blessing nor crossing, will
   serve. Then, I say, David cried out, saying, "I have sinned against my
   Lord and good God, which has done so much for me; indeed I caused Uriah
   to be killed; 1 have sinned, I have sinned. What shall I do? I have
   sinned, and am worthy of eternal damnation." But what says God by his
   prophet? "The Lord has taken away thy sins; thou shalt not die." "O
   good God," he said, "but I have sinned," but he said so from his heart
   and not from the lips only, as Pharaoh and Saul did, and he speedily
   heard, "thou shalt not die; the Lord has taken away thy sins," or
   rather, has laid them upon another, yea, translated them upon his Son
   Jesus Christ, who bare there, and not only them, but thine and mine
   also, if we will now but cry, from our hearts, "We have sinned, good
   Lord, we have done wickedly, enter not into judgment with us, but be
   merciful unto us after thy great mercy, and according to the multitude
   of thy compassions do away our iniquities, &c." For indeed God is not
   the God of David only; he is the God of all, so that he or she,
   whosoever they are, that call upon the name of the Lord, shall be
   saved. In confirmation whereof this history is written, as are also the
   others which I have recited, and many more which I might recite. As of
   Manasses, the wicked king, who slew Isaiah the prophet, and wrought
   very much wickedness, yet the Lord showed mercy upon him, being in
   prison, as his prayer does teach us. Nebuchadnezzar, though for a time
   he bare God's anger, yet at length he found mercy. The city of Nineveh
   also found favour with God, as did many others, which I omit for time's
   sake, and will bring forth one or two out of the New Testament, that we
   may see God is the same God in the New Testament that he was in the
   Old.

   I might tell you of many, if I should speak of the lunatic, such as
   were possessed with devils, lame, blind, dumb, deaf; lepers, &c., but
   time will not suffice me; one or two therefore shall serve. Mary
   Magdalen had seven devils, but yet they were cast out of her; and of
   all others she was the first that Christ appeared unto after his
   resurrection. Thomas would not believe Christ's resurrection, though
   many told him which had seen and felt him, by reason whereof a man
   might have thought that his sins would have cast him away. "Except I
   should see and feel, says he, I will not believe." Oh! wilful Thomas,
   "I will not" said he. But Christ appeared unto him, end he will not
   loose him, as he will not loose you, good brother, if with Thomas you
   will keep company with the disciples, as Thomas did. Peter's fall was
   ugly; he accursed himself if ever he knew Christ, and that for fear of
   a girl, and this not once, but even three divers times, and that in the
   hearing of Christ his Master; but yet the third time Christ looked
   back, and cast on him his eye of grace, so that he went out, and wept
   bitterly. And after Christ's resurrection, not only did the angels
   direct the women to tell Peter that Christ was risen, but Christ
   himself appeared to him alone, such a good Lord is he. The thief
   hanging on the cross said but this: "Lord, when thou comest into thy
   kingdom, remember me;" and what answer had he? "This day," said Christ,
   "shalt thou be with me in paradise." What a comfort is this! since he
   is now the same Christ to you, and to me, and to us all, if we will run
   unto him; for he is the same Christ today, and tomorrow, and until he
   come to judgment. Then indeed he will be inexorable, but now is he more
   ready to give than you are to ask. If you cry, he hears you, yea,
   before you cry. (Isaiah.) Cry therefore, be bold, man; he is not
   partial. "Call," says he, "and I will hear thee. Ask, and thou shalt
   have; seek, and thou shalt find, though not at the first, yet at the
   length." (Matt. vii.) If he tarry awhile, it is but to try you; he is
   coming, and will not be long. (Heb. x.)

   Thus have you four means which you must use to the attainment of faith
   or certain persuasion of God's mercy towards you, which is the second
   part of penance, namely 1, Prayer. 2, The free and universal promises
   of Gods grace. 3, The remembrance of the benefits of God, past and
   present. 4, The examples of God's mercy. Which, although they might
   suffice, yet will I put one more to them, which alone of itself is
   fully sufficient: I mean the death of the Son of God, Jesus Christ,
   which, if thou set before the eyes of thy mind, it will confirm thy
   placard (grant, editor); for it is the great seal of England as they
   say, yea, of all the world, for the confirmation of all patents and
   perpetuities of the everlasting life, whereunto we are all called.

   If I thought these which I have before recited were not sufficient to
   confirm your faith of God's love towards such as do repent, I would
   tarry longer herein; but because both I have been long, and also I
   trust you have some exercise of conscience in this daily, (or else you
   are to blame,) I will but touch and go. Consider with yourselves what
   we are, miserable wretches, and enemies to God. Consider what God is,
   even he which has all power, majesty, might, glory, riches, &c.,
   perfectly of himself, and needs nothing, but has all things. Consider
   what Christ is concerning his Godhead, co-equal with his Father, even
   him by whom all things were made, are ruled and governed concerning his
   manhood, the only darling of his Father, in whom is all his joy. Now,
   sirs, what a love is this, that this God, which needs nothing, should
   give wholly his own self to thee his enemy, wreaking his wrath upon
   himself in this his Son, as a man may say, to spare you, to save you,
   to win you, to buy you, to have you, to enjoy you for ever. Because thy
   sin had separated thee from him, that thou might come speedily into his
   company again, and therein remain, he himself became, as a man would
   say, a sinner, or rather sin itself, even a malediction or curse, that
   we sinners, we accursed by our sin, might, by his oblation or offering
   for our sins, by his curse be delivered from sin and malediction. For
   by sin he destroyed sin, killing death, Satan, and sin, by their own
   weapons, and that for thee and me, (O man!) if we cast it not away by
   unbelief Oh! wonderful love of God! Who ever heard of such a love, the
   Father of heaven, for us his enemies, to give his own dear Son Jesus
   Christ! And that not only to be our brother, to dwell among us, but
   also to the death of the cross for us! Oh, wonderful love of Christ to
   us all! He was content and willing to work this feat for us. Was there
   any dove like to this dove?

   God indeed has commended his charity and love to us herein, that when
   we were very enemies unto him, he would give his own Son for us; that
   we, being men, might become, as you would say, gods, God would become
   man; that we, being mortal, might become immortal, the immortal God
   would become mortal man;- that we, earthly wretches, might be citizens
   of heaven, the Lord of heaven would become, as a man would say,
   earthly; that we, being accursed, might be blessed, God would be
   accursed; that we, by our father Adam being brought out of paradise
   into the puddle of all pain, might be redeemed, and brought into
   paradise again, God would be our Father and an Adam thereunto; that we,
   having nothing, might have all things, God having all things, would
   have nothing; that we, being vassals and slaves to all, even to Satan
   the fiend, might be lords of all, and of Satan; the Lord of all would
   become a vassal and a slave to us all, and in danger of Satan. Oh, love
   incomprehensible! If the gracious good Lord disdained not to give his
   own Son, his own heart's joy, for us his very enemies, before we
   thought to beg any such thing at his hands, yea, before we were; who
   can think otherwise but that with Him he will give us all good things?
   If when we hated him and fled away from him, he sent his Son to seek
   us, who can think otherwise than that now, we loving him and lamenting
   because we love him no more, he will for ever love us? He that gives
   the greater to his enemies, will not he give the lesser, think you, to
   his friends? God has given his own Son, than which nothing is greater,
   to us his enemies, and we now being become his friends, will he deny us
   faith and pardon of our sins which, though they are great, yet in
   comparison they are nothing at all? Christ Jesus would give his own
   self for us when we willed it not, and will he now deny us faith, if we
   will it? This will is his earnest, that he has given us truly to look
   indeed for the thing willed. And look thou for it indeed; for as he has
   given thee to will, so will he give thee to do.

   Jesus Christ gave his life for our evils, and by his death delivered
   us. Oh then, since he lives now, and cannot die, will he forsake us?
   His heart's blood was not too dear for us when we asked it not; what
   then can be now too dear for us asking it? Is he a changeling? Is he
   mutable as man is? Can he repent of his gifts? Did he not foresee our
   falls? Paid not he the price therefore? Because he saw we should fall
   sorely, therefore he would suffer sorely, yea, if his suffering had not
   been enough, he would yet once more come again. I am sure that God the
   Father, if the death of his Son incarnate would not serve, would
   himself and the Holy Ghost also become incarnate, and die for us (it is
   better to avoid such suppositions, editor). This death of Christ,
   therefore; look on as the very pledge of God's love towards them
   whosoever thou art, how deeply soever thou hast sinned. See God's hands
   are nailed, they cannot strike thee; his feet also, he cannot run from
   thee; his arms are wide open to embrace thee, his head hangs down to
   kiss thee, his very heart is open, so that therein see, look, spy,
   behold, and thou shalt see nothing therein but love, love, love to
   thee; hide thee therefore, lay thy head there with the evangelist.

   This is the cleft of the rock where lilies stood. This is the pillow of
   down for all aching heads. Anoint your head with this oil, let this
   ointment embalm your head and wash your face. Tarry thou here, and
   quite sure are you. I warrant thee. Say with Paul, What can separate of
   from the love of God? Can death, can poverty, sickness, hunger, or any
   misery persuade you now that God loves thee not? Nay, nothing can
   separate you from the love wherewith God has loved you in Christ Jesus;
   whom he loves he loves to the end: so that now where abundance of sin
   has been in you, the more is the abundance of grace. But to what end?
   Even that as -sin has reigned to death, as you see, to the killing of
   God's Son, so now grace must reign to life, to the honouring of God's
   Son, who is now alive, and cannot die any more.

   So that they which by faith feel this, cannot any more die to God, but
   to sin, whereunto they are dead and buried with Christ. As Christ
   therefore lives, so do they, and that to God, to righteousness and
   holiness. The life which they live is in the faith of the Son of God;
   whereby you see that now I am slipped into that which I made the third
   part of penance, namely, newness of life, which I could not so have
   done if it were a part of itself indeed, as it is an effect or fruit of
   the second part, that is, of faith or trust in God's mercy. For he that
   believes, that is, he who certainly is persuaded sin is such a thing
   that it is the cause of all misery, and of itself so greatly angers
   God, that in heaven or in earth nothing could appease his wrath, save
   only the death and precious blood-shedding of the Son of God, in whom
   is all the delight and pleasure of the Father; he, I say, that is
   persuaded thus of sin, the same cannot but in heart abhor and quake to
   do or to say, yea, to think anything willingly which God's law teaches
   him to be sin.

   Again: he that believes, that is, he who certainly is persuaded God's
   love to be so much towards him, that whereas through sin he was lost,
   and made a firebrand of hell; yet the eternal Father of mercy, who is
   the all-sufficient God, and needs nothing of us, or of anything that we
   can do, to deliver us out of hell, and to bring us into heaven, sent
   even his own most dear Son out of his bosom, out of heaven into hell,
   as a man would say, to bring us, as I said, from thence into his own
   bosom and mercy, we being his very enemies. He, I say, that is thus
   persuaded of God's love towards him, and of the price of his
   redemption, by the dear blood of the Lamb immaculate, Jesus Christ, the
   same man cannot but love God again, and of love do that which might
   please God, and heartily desire to do still better. Think you, that
   such a one as knows this by faith will willingly welter and wallow in
   his wilful lusts, pleasures, and fantasies? Will such a one as knows by
   faith Christ Jesus to have given his blood to wash him from his sins,
   play the sow, to wallow in his puddle of filthy sin and vice again?
   Nay, rather than he will be defiled again by wilful sinning, he will
   wash often the feet of his affections, watching over that vice still
   sticking in him, which as a spring continually sends out poison enough
   to drown and defile him, if the sweet water of Christ's passion did not
   wash it in God's sight, and his blood satisfy the rigour of God's
   justice due for the same. This blood of Christ, shed for our sins, is
   so dear in the sight of him that believes, that he will abhor sin in
   his heart, and stamp it and tread it under his feet. He knows now by
   his belief that it is too much, that hitherto he has set too little by
   it and is ashamed thereof; therefore for the residue of his life he
   purposes to take better heed to himself than he did before: because he
   sees by his faith the grievousness of God's anger, that foulness of his
   sin, the greatness of God's mercy, and of Christ's love towards him, he
   will now be heedy (careful, editor) to pray to God to give him his
   grace accordingly; that as with his eyes, tongue, hands, feet, &c. he
   has displeased God, doing his own will, even so now with the same eyes,
   tongue, ears, hands, feet, &c. he may displease his own self, and do
   God's will. He will not willingly do that which might renew the death
   of the Son of God? He knows he has too much sin in him unwillingly, so
   that thereto he will not add willing offences.

   This willing and witting (knowing, editor) offending and sinning,
   whosoever flatters himself therein, evidently demonstrates and shows
   that he never yet tasted of Christ truly; he never was truly persuaded
   or believed how foul a thing sin is, how grievous a thing God's anger
   is, how joyful and precious a thing God's mercy in Christ is, how
   exceeding broad, wide, high, and deep Christ's love is. Perchance he
   can write, prate, talk, and preach of this; but yet he in part by faith
   never felt this. For if he once felt this indeed, then would he be so
   far from continuing in sin willingly: and wittingly, that he would
   wholly and heartily give himself over to that which is contrary; I
   mean, to a new life, renewing his youth, even as the eagle.

   For, as we, being in the servitude of sin, demonstrated our service by
   giving over our members to the obeying of sin, from iniquity to
   iniquity; even so we, being made free from sin by faith in Jesus
   Christ, and endued with God's Spirit, a spirit of liberty, must needs
   demonstrate this freedom and liberty, by giving over our members to the
   obedience of the Spirit; by which we are led and guided from virtue to
   virtue, and all kinds of holiness. As the unbelievers declare their
   unbelief by the evil spirit working in them outwardly the fruits of the
   flesh, even so the believers declare their faith by the working of
   God's good Spirit in them outwardly the fruits of the Spirit. For as
   the devil is not dead in those which are his, but works still their
   damnation; so is not God dead in those who are his, but he works still
   to their salvation; which working is not the cause of the one or the
   other being in any, but only a demonstration, a sign, a fruit of the
   same, as the apple is not the cause of the apple-tree, but a fruit of
   it. (Matt. vii.)

   Thus, then, you see briefly that newness of life is not indeed a part
   of penance, but a fruit of it, a demonstration of justifying faith, a
   sign of God's good Spirit possessing the heart of the penitent; as the
   old life is a fruit of impenitence, a demonstration of a lip-faith or
   unbelief, a sign of Satan's spirit possessing the heart of the
   impenitent, which all those are that are not penitent. For I know no
   middle state. He that is not penitent, the same is impenitent; he that
   is not governed by God's Spirit, the same is governed by Satan's
   spirit; for all that are Christ's are governed by the Spirit of Christ,
   which Spirit has his fruits. All others that are not Christ's are the
   devil's. He that gathers not with Christ, scatters abroad.

   Therefore, dearly beloved, I beseech you to consider this, and deceive
   not yourselves; if you are not Christ's, then you pertain to the devil
   of which the fruits of the flesh assure you, as whoredom, adultery,
   uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, envy, strife,
   contention, wrath, sedition, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, blasphemy,
   slothfulness, idleness, licentious talking, slandering, &c. If these
   apples grow out of the apple-trees of your heart, surely, surely the
   devil is at inn (abiding, editor) with you; you are his birds, whom,
   when he has well fed, he will broach (spit, editor) you and eat you,
   chew you and chump you, world without end, in eternal woe and misery.
   But I am otherwise persuaded of you all; I trust you are all Christ
   Jesus' people and children, yea, brethren by faith.

   As you see your sins in God's law, and tremble, sigh, sorrow, and sob
   for the same, even so you see his great mercies in his gospel and free
   promises, and therefore are glad, merry, and joyful, that you are
   accepted into God's favour, have your sins pardoned, and are endued
   with the good Spirit of God, even the seal and sign manual of your
   election in Christ before the beginning of the world; the which Spirit,
   for that he is the Spirit of life, is given to you, to work in you,
   with you, and by you, here in this life, sanctification and holiness,
   whereunto you are called, that you might be holy, even as your heavenly
   Father is holy. I beseech you all, by admonishing and warning you, that
   you would stir up the gift of God given to you, generally and
   particularly, to the edifying of his church; that is, I pray you that
   you would not molest the good Spirit of God, by refuelling against it
   when it excites and calls you to go on forwards, that he which is holy,
   might yet be more holy, that he which is righteous, might be more
   righteous; as the evil spirit moves and stirs up the filthy to be yet
   more filthy, the covetous to be more covetous, the wicked to be more
   wicked.

   Declare now your repentance by works of repentance; bring forth fruits,
   and worthy fruits; let your sorrowing for your evils demonstrate itself
   by departing from the evils you have used. Let your certainty of pardon
   of your sins through Christ, and your joy in him be demonstrated by
   pursuing the good things which God's word teaches you. You are now
   God's workmanship in Christ Jesus, to do good works, which God has
   prepared for you to walk in. For the grace of God, which brings
   salvation unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us that we should
   deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly,
   righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed
   hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and of our Saviour Jesus
   Christ; who gave himself for us, to redeem us from all unrighteousness,
   and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself; fervently given unto
   good works. Again (Titus iii.,) for we ourselves also were in times
   past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving lusts and divers pleasures,
   living in maliciousness and envy, full of hatred, and hating one
   another. But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward
   man appeared, not by the deeds of righteousness which we wrought, but
   of his mercy, He saved us by the fountain of the new birth, and with
   the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which He shed on us abundantly through
   Jesus Christ our Saviour, that we being once justified by his grace
   should be heirs of eternal life through hope. This is a true saying;
   but I will make an end, for I am too tedious.

   Dearly beloved, repent your sins, that is, be sorry for that which is
   past; believe in God's mercy for pardon, how deeply soever you have
   sinned, and both purpose and earnestly pursue a new life, bringing
   forth worthy and true fruits of repentance. As you have given over your
   members from sin to sin, to serve the devil, your tongues to swear, to
   lie, to flatter, to scold, to jest, to scoff, to lewd talk, to vain
   jangling, to boasting, &c., your hands to picking, groping, idleness,
   fighting, &c., your feet to skipping, going to evil, to dancing, &c.;
   your ears to hear garbles, lies, vanities, and evil things, &c.; so now
   give over your members to godliness, your tongues to speak, your ears
   to hear, your eyes to see, your mouths to taste, your hands to work,
   your feet to go about such things as may make to God's glory, sobriety
   of life, and love to your brethren, and that daily more and more
   diligently; for you cannot stand still, you are either better or worse
   today than you were yesterday. But better I trust you are, and will be,
   if you mark well my theme, that is, repent you; which I have humbly
   besought you to do, and yet once more I do again beseech you, and that
   for the tender mercies of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, "repent you,
   repent you, for the kingdom of heaven" (that is, a kingdom full of all
   riches, pleasures, joy, beauty, sweetness, and eternal felicity! "is at
   hand." The eye has not seen the like, the ear has not heard the like,
   the heart of man cannot conceive the treasures and pleasures of his
   kingdom, which is now at hand, to such as repent, that is, to such as
   are sorry for their sins, believe God's mercy through Christ, and
   earnestly purpose to lead a new life. The God of mercy, through Christ
   his Son, grant us his Holy Spirit, and work in our hearts this sorrow,
   faith, and new life, which through his grace I have spoken of, both now
   and for ever. Amen.

     __________________________________________________________________

A Sermon upon the Supper of the Lord

   There are two sacraments in Christ's church; the one of initiation,
   that is, wherewith we are enrolled, as it were, into the household and
   family of God, which sacrament we call baptism; the other wherewith we
   are conserved, fed, kept, and nourished, to continue in the same
   family, which is called the Lord's supper, or the body and blood of our
   Saviour Jesus Christ, broken for our sins, and shed for our
   transgressions.

   Of the former sacrament, that is, of baptism, I do not design to speak
   now. But of the Lord's supper I purpose at present to speak, through
   the help of God, because we are assembled in Christ (I hope) to
   celebrate the same. Now that what I shall speak may be better observed
   and retained by you, I will tell you how and in what sort I will speak
   of it. Three things I would have marked, as the principles and scopes
   whereto I will refer all that I shall at this time speak of it. They
   are these: Who, What, and Wherefore. That is, First: Who instituted
   this thing which we are about to celebrate? Secondly, What the thing is
   which is instituted? And, Thirdly, Wherefore and to what end it was
   instituted? whereby we shall be taught how to use it.

   First, Who instituted this sacrament and supper? You all know that
   things are more esteemed sometimes by the dignify and authority of the
   person, sometimes for the wisdom of the person, sometimes for the power
   and magnificence of the person, and sometimes for the tender love and
   kindness of the person.

   If need were, I could by examples set forth each of these; but I hope
   it is not necessary. Now then, how can the thing, which we are about to
   celebrate, but be highly esteemed of every one, since the Author of it
   does want no dignity, no authority, no wisdom, no power, no
   magnificence, no holiness, no tender love and kindness, but has all
   dignity, authority, wisdom, power, magnificence, holiness, tender love,
   mercy, glory, and absolutely all that can be wished. He is God eternal,
   coequal and substantial with the Father, and with the Holy Ghost, the
   Image of the substance of God, the Wisdom of the Father, the Brightness
   of his glory, by whom all things were made, are ruled, and governed. He
   is the King of all kings, and the Lord of all lords. He is the Messias
   of the world, our most dear and loving Brother, Saviour, Mediator,
   Advocate, Intercessor, Husband, Priest. So that whatever comes from Him
   cannot but be esteemed, loved, and embraced, if dignity, authority,
   wisdom power, glory, goodness, and mercy please us. Yea, if any thing
   that can be wished please us, then cannot this which our Lord
   instituted but please us, and that so much the more, by how much it is
   one of the last things which he instituted and commanded. May God open
   our eyes to see these things accordingly, so shall we come with more
   reverence to this table of the Lord, which may he grant for his mercy's
   sake. Amen. And thus much for the first, Who instituted this sacrament.

   Second, What the sacrament is? If we ask our eyes, our nose, our mouth,
   our taste, our hands, and the reason of man, they will all make the
   same answer that it is bread and wine. And verily, herein they speak
   the truth and lie not, as by many things may be proved, although the
   papists prate their pleasure to the contrary.

   And here, my dearly beloved, I think I shall not be either tedious or
   unprofitable unto you if I tarry a little in showing this verity, that
   the substance of bread and wine remains in the sacrament after the
   words of consecration (as they call them) are spoken: whereby we may
   learn how shameless they are, who would force men to believe
   transubstantiation, which is an error whereupon in a manner all popery
   depends. For it is the stay of their priesthood, which is neither after
   the order of Aaron, nor after the order of Melchizedek, but after the
   order of Baal, as is partly seen by their number. For the false
   prophets and priests of Baal were always many more in number, when the
   wicked were in authority, than the true priests and prophets of the
   Lord, as the holy histories of the Bible teach. Read 1 Kings xviii.

   The supper of the Lord, or the sacrament of Christ's body, which the
   papists call the sacrament of the altar, as though that were Christ's
   sacrament, which they can never prove; for it being perverted and used
   to a contrary end (as sacrificing propitiatorily for the sins of the
   quick and of the dead, and idolatry, by adorning or worshipping it by
   godly honour, &c.) is no more Christ's sacrament but a horrible
   profanation of it. And therefore as Christ called God's temple, which
   was called a house of prayer, a den of thieves, because of the abusing
   and profaning of it by the priests; so this which the papists call the
   sacrament of the altar, we may truly call an abominable idol and
   therefore I would all men should know that the sacrament of the altar,
   as the papists now do abuse it, omitting certain substantial points of
   the Lord's institution, and putting in the stead thereof their own
   dregs and dreams is not the sacrament of Christ's body, nor the Lord's
   supper, whereof, when we speak reverently, as our duty is, we would not
   that men should think we speak of the popish mass. I say, therefore, in
   the supper of the Lord, or in the sacrament of Christ's body, there
   remains the substance of bread and wine, as our senses and reason
   teach, and these many things also teach the same.

   First, the Holy Ghost plainly tells us so, by calling it often bread,
   after the words of consecration, as 1 Cor. x. "Is not the bread which
   we break a partaking of the body of Christ?'' says Paul. Lo! he plainly
   says, the bread which we break, not only calling it bread, but adding
   thereto 'breaking,' which cannot be attributed either to Christ's body,
   whereof no bone was broken, nor to any accident (or mere appearance
   without substance, editor), but must needs be of a substance, which
   substance, if it is not Christ's body, must be bread. As in the 11th
   chapter four times he plainly calls it so. "He that eats of this bread,
   he that receives this bread," &c. And in the Acts of the Apostles, we
   read how that (in speaking of the communion) "they met together break
   bread," &c. So that it is plain that the substance of bread and wine
   remains in the supper after the words of consecration, as also may
   appear plainly by Christ's own words, who calls that which he gave them
   in the cup, wine, or the fruit of the vine, as both Matthew and Mark
   write: whereby we see that there is no transubstantiation of the wine,
   and therefore we may also see, that there is no transubstantiation of
   the bread.

   As for the papists' cavilling, that it has the name of bread, because
   it was bread, as Simon the leper was still called leprous, though he
   was healed, or as Moses' rod, being turned into a serpent, was still
   called a rod, (Matt. xxvi., Exod. vii.,) it proves nothing; for there
   was in the one a plain sight, and the senses certified, that Simon was
   no leper, and in the other plain mention that the rod was turned into a
   serpent. But concerning the sacrament, neither the senses see any other
   thing than bread, neither is there any mention made of turning; and
   therefore their cavil is plainly seen to be but a cavil, and of no
   force. But to bring more reasons against transubstantiation.

   Secondly, that the substance of bread remains still, the very text
   teaches, (Matt. xxvi., Mark xiv., Luke xxii., 1 Cor. xi.) For the
   evangelist and the apostle St. Paul witness that Christ gave that to
   his disciples, and called it his body, which he took, for which he gave
   thanks, and which he brake; but he took bread, gave thanks on bread,
   and broke bread; therefore he gave bread, and called bread his body, as
   he called the cup the new testament; so that it follows by this, that
   there is no transubstantiation. And this reason I myself have promised
   in writing to prove by the authority of the fathers, namely, Irenaeus,
   Tertullian, Origen, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Jerome, Augustine, Theodoret,
   Cyril, Bede, if I may have the use of my books.

   Thirdly, that in the sacrament there is no transubstantiation of the
   bread, I prove by this reason. As by our Saviour Christ, the Spirit of
   truth spake of the bread. "This is my body," so says the same Spirit of
   truth of the same bread, that we being many are one body and one bread,
   &c. (1 Cor. x.) So that as it appears the sacrament is not the church
   by transubstantiation, even so is it not Christ's natural body by
   transubstantiation.

   Fourthly, I prove that there is no transubstantiation, by Luke and
   Paul's words spoken over the cup. For they are no less effectual to
   transubstantiate the cup, than their words spoken of the bread are
   operative and mighty to transubstantiate the bread. For as they say of
   the bread 'This is my body,' so say they of the cup, 'This cup is the
   new testament,' which is absurd to be spoken or thought either of the
   cup, or of the thing in the cup, by transubstantiation; yea, rather in
   saying these words, 'This cup is the new testament,' we are taught by
   their coupling the word cup to the demonstrative this, how we should in
   the words, 'This is my body,' know that the word this there
   demonstrates bread.

   Fifthly, as the reasons before brought forth prove, that the substance
   of bread remains in the sacrament, so does the definition of a
   sacrament. For the fathers affirm it to Consist of an earthly thing and
   of a heavenly thing, of the word and of the element, of sensible things
   and of things which are perceived by the mind. But transubstantiation
   wholly takes away the earthly thing, the element, the sensible thing,
   and so makes it no sacrament; and therefore the definition of a
   sacrament teaches, that bread, which is the earthly thing, the sensible
   thing, and the element, remains still, as St. Augustine says. The word
   comes to the element, (he says not, takes away the element,) and so it
   is made a sacrament.

   Sixthly, the nature and property of a sacrament teaches also what I
   have alarmed. For as Cyprian writes, that sacraments bear the names of
   the things which they signify, so St. Augustine teaches, that if
   sacraments have not some signification with the things whereof they are
   sacraments, then they are no sacraments. Now in the Lord's supper this
   similitude is first in nourishing, that as bread nourishes the body, so
   Christ's body broken feeds the soul; secondly, in bringing together
   many into one, that as in the sacrament many grains of corn are made
   one bread, many grapes are made one liquor and wine, so the multitude,
   which worthily receive the sacrament, are made one body with Christ and
   his church. Last of all, in a still stronger likeness or similitude,
   that as bread eaten turns into our nature, so we, rightly eating the
   sacrament by faith, turn into the nature of Christ; so that it is plain
   to them that will see, that to take the substance of bread away is
   quite against the nature and property of a sacrament.

   I will speak nothing how this their doctrine of transubstantiation,
   besides the manifold absurdities it has in it, (to rehearse which I
   omit,) utterly overthrows the use of the sacrament, and is quite
   contrary to the end wherefore it was instituted, and so is no longer a
   sacrament, but an idol, and is the cause of much idolatry, converting
   the people's hearts from a heavenly conversation to an earthly, and
   turning the communion into a private action, and a matter of gazing and
   peeping, adoring and worshipping the work of men's hands for the living
   God, who dwells not in temples made with men's hands, much less lies he
   in pixes (the box or case in which the consecrated wafer is carried,
   editor) and chests (or tabernacle, a repository upon the altar in which
   the wafer is kept, editor), whose true worship is in spirit and verity,
   which may God grant us all to render unto him continually. Amen.

   The sacrament of baptism also teaches us, that as the substance of the
   water remains there, so in the Lord's supper the substance of bread
   remains after consecration. For as by baptism we are engrafted into
   Christ, so by the supper we are fed with Christ. These two sacraments
   the apostle gladly unites together, 1 Cor. x. and xii. "We are baptised
   into one body, (says he,) and have drunk all of one spirit," meanings
   by it the cup, as Chrysostom and other great and learned men well
   interpret it. As therefore in baptism is given unto us the Holy Ghost,
   and pardon of our sins, which yet lie not lurking in the water, so in
   the Lord's supper is given unto us the communion of Christ's body and
   blood, that is, grace, forgiveness of sins, innocence, life,
   immortality, without any transubstantiation, or including of the same
   in the bread. By baptism the old man is put off, and the new man put
   on; yea, Christ is put on, but without transubstantiating the water.
   (Gal. iii.) And even so it is in the Lord's supper. We, by faith,
   spiritually in our souls, feed on Christ's body broken, eat his flesh
   and drink his blood, dwell in him and he in us, but without
   transubstantiation.

   As for the cavil they make, that we are baptised into one body, meaning
   thereby the mystical body, and not the natural body of Christ, whereby
   they would enforce that we are fed with the natural body of Christ,
   while we are not engraved into it, but into the mystical body, and so
   would put away the reason aforesaid as for this cavil, I say, we may
   soon avoid (refute, editor) it, if we consider that Christ, who is the
   head of the mystical body, is not separate from the body; and therefore
   to be engrafted into the mystical body, is to be engrafted into the
   natural body of Christ, to be a member of his flesh, and bone of his
   bones, as pope Leo well does witness, in saying, that 'the body of the
   regenerate is made the flesh of Christ crucified.' And hereto I could
   add some reasons for the excellency of baptism. I trow (think, editor)
   it is rather to be begotten than to be nourished. As for the excellent
   miracle of the manifestation of the Trinity, and the descending of the
   Holy Ghost in baptism in a visible form, the like whereto was not seen
   in the Lord's supper, I will omit to speak of it further than that I
   would you should know that it were not difficult to set forth the
   excellency of this sacrament, as well as of the supper.

   It is a plain sign of antichrist, to deny that the substance of bread
   and wine is in the Lord's supper after consecration; for in so doing
   and granting transubstantiation the property of the human nature of
   Christ is denied, for it is not of the human nature, but of the divine
   nature, to be in many places at once. Now grant transubstantiation, and
   then Christ's natural body must needs be in many places, which is
   nothing else but to confound the two natures in Christ, or to deny
   Christ's human nature which is the selfsame that St John says is to
   deny Christ to be come in the flesh. And this whoso does, by the
   testimony of St. John, is an antichrist in his so doing whatsoever
   otherwise he may say. Read St. Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus,
   and his thirty-first treatise upon St. John, and you small easily see
   that Christ's body must needs be in one place, but his truth is in all
   places.

   If there is no substance of bread in the sacrament but
   transubstantiation, then Christ's body is received of the ungodly, and
   eaten with their teeth, which is not only against St Augustine, who
   calls this expression, "Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man,"
   &c. a figurative speech; but also against the plain scriptures, which
   affirm them to dwell in Christ and Christ in them, and they to have
   everlasting life that eat him, which the wicked have not, although they
   eat the sacrament. He that eats of this bread (says Christ) shall live
   for evermore: therefore they eat not Christ's body, but (as Paul says,)
   they eat in judgment and damnation, which I think is another thing than
   Christ's body. And this St. Augustine affirms, saying, None eat
   Christ's body who are not in the body of Christ, that is, (as he
   expounds it,) in whom Christ dwells not, and he in Christ: which thing
   the wicked do not, because they want faith and the Holy Spirit, which
   are the means whereby Christ is received.

   Besides the things which I have here brought forth to impugn
   transubstantiation, I could bring the fathers, who succeeded
   continually many hundred years after Christ, to confirm the same. Also
   I could show that transubstantiation is only a new doctrine, not
   established before satan, who was tied for a thousand years, was let
   loose: also I could show that ever hitherto since it was established,
   in all times it has been resisted and spoken against; yea, before this
   doctrine, the church was by no means so endowed with goods, lands, and
   possessions, as it has been ever since. It has brought no small gain,
   no small honour, no small ease to the clergy, and therefore no marvel
   that they strive and fight for it. It is their Maozim (Dan. 11:38,
   editor), it is their Helen (an allusion to the Trojan war: Bradford
   means that transubstantiation is the leading object with the church of
   Rome, which it will not relinquish, and for which it will hazard all
   other things, editor). May God destroy it with the breath of his mouth,
   as shortly he will for his name's sake. Amen.

   If time would serve, I could and would here tell you of the absurdities
   which come by this doctrine, but for time's sake I must omit it. Only,
   I beseech you, see this; already I have proved that this their doctrine
   of transubstantiation is an untruth; and forget not that it is the
   whole stay of all popery, and the pillow of their priesthood, whereby
   Christ's priesthood, sacrifice, ministry, and truth is hindered, yea,
   perverted and utterly overthrown. May God our Father, in the blood of
   his Son Christ, open the eyes and minds of all our magistrates, and all
   others that bear the name of Christ, to see it in time, to God's glory
   and their own salvation. Amen.

   Now to return to the second matter, What the sacrament is? you see that
   to the senses and reason of man it is bread and wine, which is most
   true, as by the scriptures and otherwise I have already proved, and
   therefore away with transubstantiation.

   But here, lest we should make it no sacrament, for a sacrament consists
   of two things, and lest a man should by this gather, that we make it
   none other thing but bare bread and a naked sign, and so rail at their
   pleasure on us, saying, How can a man be guilty of the body and blood
   of Christ by unworthy receiving of it, if it is but bare bread, and so
   forth? For this purpose I will now speak a little more about it, by
   God's grace, to stop their mouths, and to stir up your good hearts more
   to the worthy estimation and perception of this holy mystery. When a
   loving friend gives to you a thing, or sends to you a token, even
   though it be of small account, I think you do not as you should do, if
   with the thing you consider not the mind of your friend that sends or
   gives it, and esteem and receive it accordingly. And so of this bread,
   I think, that if you do not rather consider the mind of Christ than the
   thing which you see; yea, if you do not altogether consider Christ's
   mind, you deal dishonestly and harlot-like with him. For it is the
   property of harlots to consider the things given and sent them, rather
   than the love and mind of the giver and sender; whereas, true lovers do
   not consider in any point the things given or sent, but the mind of the
   party: so we, if we are true lovers of Christ, must not consider merely
   the outward thing which we see, and our senses perceive, but rather
   altogether we must and should see and consider the mind of Christ, and
   thereafter and accordingly esteem the sacrament.

   But how shall we know the mind of Christ? Even as a man's mind is best
   known by his word, so by Christ's word shall we know his mind. Now his
   words are manifest and most plain. "This (says he) is my body,"
   therefore should we esteem, take, and receive it accordingly. If he had
   spoken nothing, or if he had spoken doubtfully, then might we have been
   in some doubt. But since he speaks so plainly, saying, "This is my
   body," who can, may, or dare be so bold as to doubt of it? He is the
   truth, and cannot lie; he is omnipotent, and can do all things,
   therefore it is his body. This I believe, this I confess, and pray you
   all heartily to beware of thinking these and such like words, to be but
   a sign or a figure of his body; except you will discern betwixt signs
   which signify only, and signs which also represent, confirm, and seal
   up, or (as a man may say) give with their signification. As for
   example: an ivy-bush is a sign of wine to be sold; the budding of
   Aaron's rod signified Aaron's priesthood allowed of the Lord; the
   reservation of Moses' rod signified the rebellion of the children of
   Israel; the stones taken out of Jordan, Gideon's fleece of wool, &c.;
   such as these are signs significative, and show no gift. But in the
   other signs, which some call exhibitive, there is not only a
   signification of the thing, but also a declaration of a gift, yea, in a
   certain manner, a giving also. As baptism signifies not only the
   cleansing of the conscience from sin by the merits of Christ's blood,
   but also is a very cleansing from sin; and therefore it was said to
   Paul, that he should arise, and wash away his sins, and not that he
   should arise, and take only a sign of washing away his sins. In the
   Lords supper the bread is called a partaking of the Lord's body, and
   not only a bare sign of the Lord's body.

   This I speak not as though the elements of these sacraments were
   transubstantiated, which I have already impugned, neither as though
   Christ's body were in the bread or wine, or were tied to the elements,
   otherwise than sacramentally and spiritually, nor that the bread and
   wine may not and must not be called sacramental and external figures,
   but that they might be discerned from significative and bare signs
   only, and be taken for signs exhibitive and representative.

   By this means a Christian conscience will call and esteem the bread of
   the Lord as the body of Christ; for it never will esteem the sacraments
   of Christ after their exterior appearance, but after the words of
   Christ, whereof it comes that the fathers, as Chrysostom and others
   speak with so full a mouth, when they speak of the sacrament, for their
   respect was to Christ's words. If the schoolmen who followed them had
   possessed the same spirit which they had, then would they never have
   consented to transubstantiation. For with great admiration some of the
   fathers do say that the bread is changed, or turned into the body of
   Christ, and the wine into his blood, meaning it of a mutation or
   change, not corporeal, but spiritual, figurative, sacramental, or
   mystical. For now it is not common bread nor common wine, being
   ordained to serve for the food of the soul. The schoolmen have
   understood it as the papists now preach, of a substantial changing, as
   though it were no great miracle that common bread should now be assumed
   into that dignity, that it should be called Christ's body, and serve
   for a celestial food, and be made a sacrament of his body and blood.

   As therefore I have before spoken, I would wish that this sacrament
   should be esteemed and called by us Christian men, after Christ's
   words, namely, Christ's body, and the wine Christ's blood, rather than
   otherwise. Not that I mean any other presence of Christ's body than a
   presence of grace, a presence to faith, a presence spiritually; and not
   corporally, really, naturally, and carnally, as the papists mean. For
   in such a manner Christ's body is only in heaven, on the right hand of
   God, the Father Almighty, whither our faith in the use of the sacrament
   ascends, and receives the whole Christ accordingly.

   Yea, but one will say, that to call the sacrament on that sort is to
   give an occasion of idolatry to the people, who will take the sacrament
   which they see simply for Christ's body, as we are well taught by
   experience; and therefore it were better to call it bread, and so
   should there be less harm, especially in this age.

   To this objection I answer, that indeed great idolatry is committed to
   and about this sacrament, and therefore men ought, as much as they can,
   to avoid occasioning or confirming it. But inasmuch as the Holy Ghost
   is wiser than man, and had foresight of the evils that might be, and
   yet notwithstanding calls it Christ's body, I think we should do evil,
   if we should take upon us to reform his speech. If ministers did their
   duties in catechising and preaching, then doubtless to call the
   sacrament Christ's body, and to esteem it accordingly could not give
   occasion to idolatry, and confirm it; therefore woe unto them that
   preach not.

   There are two evils about the sacraments, which the Holy Ghost has
   taught us to avoid. For lest we should with the papists think Christ's
   body present in or with the bread really, naturally, and corporally to
   be received with our bodily mouths (whereas there is no other presence
   of Christ's body than spiritual and to the faith,) in many places he
   keeps still the name of bread, as in the epistle to the Corinthians,
   the tenth and eleventh chapters. And lest we should make too light of
   it, making it but a bare sign, and no better than common bread, the
   Holy Ghost calls it Christ's body, whose speech I wish we would follow,
   and that not only as well to avoid the evil which is nowadays most to
   be feared concerning the sacrament, I mean the contemning it, as also
   because no faithful man comes to the sacrament to receive bread simply,
   but rather, yea, altogether to communicate with Christ's body and
   blood; for to eat and drink (as Paul says,) they have houses of their
   own. The contempt of the sacrament in the days of king Edward caused
   these plagues upon us at present; the Lord be merciful unto us. Amen.
   And thus much for the objection of calling the sacrament by the name of
   Christ's body.

   But some may say, "To call the sacrament Christ's body, and to make no
   other presence than by grace or spirituality to faith, which is of
   things hoped for, and of things which to the bodily senses do not
   appear, is to make no presence at all, or to make him no otherwise
   present, than he is in his word when it is preached, and therefore what
   need have we to receive the sacrament: inasmuch as by this doctrine a
   man may receive him daily in the field, as well and as much as in the
   church, in the celebration and use of the sacrament?"

   To this objection I first answer, that indeed neither the scripture nor
   Christian faith will give us leave to suppose there is any carnal,
   real, natural, corporeal, or any such gross presence of Christ's
   natural body in the sacrament, for it is in heaven, and the heavens
   must have it (as says Peter,) till Christ's coming to judgment; except
   we would deny the humanity of Christ, and the verity of man's nature in
   him. The presence therefore which we believe and confess, is such a
   presence as reason knows not, and the world cannot learn, nor any that
   look at this matter with other eyes, or hear with other ears, than with
   the ears and eyes of the Spirit and of faith; which faith, though it is
   of things hoped for, and so of things absent to the corporeal senses,
   yet this absence is not an absence indeed, except to reason and the odd
   man; the nature of faith being a possession of things hoped for;
   therefore to grant a presence to faith is not to make no presence at
   all, except to such as know not faith. And this the fathers taught,
   affirming Christ to be present by grace, and therefore there was not
   only a signification, but also an exhibition and giving of the grace of
   Christ's body, that is, of life, and of the seed of immortality, as
   Cyprian writes. We eat life, and drink life, says St. Augustine. We
   feel a presence of the Lord by grace or in grace, says Chrysostom. We
   receive the celestial food that comes from above, says Athanasius. We
   receive the property of the natural conjunction and knitting together,
   says Hilarius. We perceive the nature of flesh, the blessing that gives
   life, in bread and wine, says Cyrillus: and elsewhere he says, that
   with the bread and wine we eat the virtue of Christ's proper flesh,
   life, grace, and the property of the body of the only begotten Son of
   God,, which he himself expounds to be life. Basilius says, that we by
   the sacrament receive the mystical advent of Christ, grace, and the
   very virtue of his very nature. Ambrose says, that we receive the
   sacrament of the true body. Epiphanius says, we receive the body of
   grace. And Jerome says, that we receive spiritual flesh, which be calls
   other flesh than that which was crucified. Chrysostom says, that we
   receive influence of grace, and the grace of the Holy Ghost. St.
   Augustine says, that we receive grace and verity, the invisible grace
   and holiness of the members of Christ's body. All these sayings of the
   fathers confirm this our faith and doctrine of the sacrament, we
   granting all things herein according to them, and they in like manner
   unto us. And therefore the lying lips, which belie the doctors, as
   though they granted a carnal and real presence of Christ's body
   naturally and corporally according to the papists' declaration and
   meaning, and which belie us also, as though we denied all presence of
   Christ, and so made it but a bare sign, these lying lips the Lord will
   destroy, if they repent not, and with us believe and teach the truth,
   that the sacrament is a food of the soul and a matter of faith, and
   therefore spiritually and by faith to be talked of and understood;
   which faith they want, and therefore they err so grossly, since they
   would have such a presence of Christ as is contrary to all the
   Scriptures, and to our Christian religion; whereby comes no such
   advantage to the receiver as by the spiritual presence which we teach
   and affirm, according to God's word.

   For we teach these benefits to be had by the worthy receiving of this
   sacrament, namely, that we abide in Christ, and Christ in us: again,
   that we attain by it a celestial life, or a life with God; moreover,
   that by faith and in spirit we receive not only Christ's body and
   blood, but also whole Christ God and man. Besides these, we grant that
   by the worthy receiving of this sacrament we receive remission of our
   sins, and confirmation of the New Testament. Last of all, by worthy
   receiving we get an increase of incorporation with Christ, and amongst
   ourselves which are his members, than which what more can be desired?
   Alas! that men consider nothing at all how that the coming (or union,
   editor) of Christ's body and blood to the sacrament is a spiritual
   thing, and therefore there needs no such carnal presence as the papists
   imagine. Who will deny a man's wife to be one body and flesh with her
   husband, although he be at London, and she at York? But the papists are
   carnal men, guided by carnal reason only, or else they would know that
   the Holy Ghost, because of our infirmity, uses metaphorically the words
   of abiding dwelling, eating, and drinking of Christ, that the
   unspeakable conjunction of Christ with us might partly be known. May
   God open their eyes to see it: and thus much for this.

   Now to that part of the objection which says, that we teach Christ to
   be none otherwise present in the sacrament than in his word. I wish
   that the objectors would well consider what a presence of Christ is, in
   his word. I remember that St. Augustine writes that Christ's body is
   received sometimes visibly, and sometimes invisibly. The visible
   receiving he calls that which is by the sacrament; the invisible
   receiving he calls that which we receive by the exercise of our faith
   with ourselves. And St. Jerome, in the third book upon Ecclesiastes,
   affirms, that we are fed with the body of Christ, and we drink his
   blood, not only in mystery, but also in the knowledge of holy
   scripture; wherein he plainly shows that the same meat is offered in
   the words of scripture, which is offered in the sacraments; so that
   Christ's body and blood is no less offered by the scriptures than by
   the sacraments. Upon the 147th Psalm he writes also, that though these
   words, "He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood," may be understood
   as a mystery, yet he says it is more true to take Christ's body and his
   blood for the word of the scriptures and the doctrine of God. Yea, upon
   the same Psalm he says plainly, that Christ's flesh and blood is poured
   into our ears by hearing the word, and therefore great is the peril if
   we yield to other cogitations while we hear it. And therefore St.
   Augustine says, that it is no less dangerous to hear God's word
   negligently than so to use the sacrament. But hereof may no man gather,
   that therefore it needs not to receive the sacrament, or to affirm that
   a man by himself meditating the word in the field may as much receive
   Christ's body as in the church, in the right use of the sacrament. For
   Christ ordains nothing in vain or superfluously; he ordains nothing
   whereof we have not need, although his authority is such, that without
   any questioning, his ordinances are to be observed.

   Again, though in the fields a man may receive Christ's body by faith in
   the meditation of the word, yet I deny that a man ordinarily receives
   Christ's body by the meditation of Christ's death only, or by hearing
   of his word, with so much sight and by such sensible assurance (whereof
   God knows our infirmity has no small need,) as he does by the receiving
   of the sacrament. Not that Christ is not so much present in his word
   preached as he is in or with his sacrament, but because there are in
   the perception of the sacrament more windows open for Christ to enter
   into us, than by his word preached or heard. For there, I mean in the
   word, he has an entrance into our hearts, but only by the ears through
   the sound and voice of the words; but here in the sacrament he has an
   entrance by all our senses, by our eyes, by our nose, by our taste, and
   by our handling also; and therefore the sacrament well may be called
   seeable, sensible, tasteable, and touchable words. As therefore when
   many windows are opened in a house, more light may come in than when
   there is but one opened, even so by the perception of the sacrament a
   Christian man's conscience has more help to receive Christ, than simply
   by the word preached, heard or meditated. And therefore I think the
   apostle rightly calls the sacraments obsignations or scalings of God's
   promise. Read Rom. iv. of circumcision. And thus much for the answer to
   the objection aforesaid.

   Now to return from whence we came, namely, to the consideration of the
   second thing, What the sacrament is? I have told you that it is not
   simply bread and wine, but rather Christ's body, so called by Christ,
   and so to be called and esteemed by us. But here let us mark what body
   and what blood Christ called it. The papists still dabble, "This is my
   body, this is my blood;" but what body it is, what blood it is, they
   show not. Look therefore, my dearly beloved, on Christ's own words, and
   you shall see that Christ calls it "his body broken," and "his blood
   shed." Mark, I say, that Christ calls it his body, which is broken, his
   blood, which is shed at present, and, not which was broken, or shall be
   broken, which was shed, or shall be shed, even as the Greek texts
   plainly show, thereby teaching us, that as God would have the Passover
   called, not "which was the Passover," or "which shall be the Passover,"
   but plainly "the Passover," that in the use of it the passing over of
   the striking angel should be set before their eyes as present; so in
   the celebration of the Lords supper, the very passion (sufferings,
   editor) of Christ should be beholden with the eyes of faith as if
   present: for which end Christ our Saviour especially instituted this
   supper, saying, "Do ye this in remembrance of me;" or, as Paul says,
   "Show you the Lord's death till he come". The supper of the Lord then
   is not simply Christ's body and blood, but Christ's body broken and his
   blood shed. Wherefore broken, wherefore shed? Forsooth, Christ himself
   teaches that, saying, "Broken for you, shed for your sins, and for the
   sins of many." Here then we have occasion in the use of the sacrament
   to call to mind the greatness and grievousness of sin, which could not
   be taken away by any other means than by the shedding. of the most
   precious blood, and the breaking of the most pure body of the only
   begotten Son of God, Jesus Christ; by whom all things were made, all
   things are ruled and governed, &c. Who, considering this, shall not be
   touched to repent? Who in receiving this sacrament, thinking that
   Christ says to him, "Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for
   thee; this is my blood, which is shed for thy sins;" can but tremble at
   the grievousness of his sins, for which such a price was paid? If there
   were no plague at all else to admonish man of sin, to show how grievous
   a thing it is in God's sight, surely that one were enough. But, alas!
   how are our hearts bewitched through Satan's subtilties, and the custom
   of sin, that we make sin a thing of no moment! May God open our eyes in
   time, and give us repentance, which we see this sacrament, as it were,
   enforces us unto, in the reverence and true use of the same.

   Again, in hearing that this which we take and eat is Christ's body
   broken for our sins, and his blood shed for our iniquities, we are
   occasioned to call to mind the infinite greatness of God's mercy and
   truth, and of Christ's love towards us. For what a mercy is this, that
   God would, for man, being lost through his wilful sins, be content,
   yea, desirous to give his own only Son, "the image of his substance,
   the brightness of his glory," being in his own bosom, to be made man
   for us, that we men by him might be, as it were, made gods! What a
   mercy is this, that God the Father should be so merciful to us, that he
   would make this his Son, being coequal with him in divinity, a mortal
   man for us, that we might be made immortal by him! What a kindness is
   this, that the Almighty Lord should send to us his enemies, his dearly
   beloved Son, to he made poor, that we by him might be made rich! What
   compassion was this, that the omnipotent Creator of heaven and earth
   would deliver his own only beloved Son, for his creatures, to be not
   only flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, that we might by him
   through the Holy Ghost be made one with him, and so with the Father by
   communicating the merits of his flesh, that is, righteousness,
   holiness, innocence, and immortality, but also to be a slain sacrifice
   for our sins, to satisfy his justice, to convert or turn death into
   life, our sin into righteousness, hell into heaven, misery into
   felicity for us. What a mercy is this, them God raised up this his Son
   Christ, not only to justify and regenerate us, but also in his person
   to demonstrate unto us our state which we shall have; for in his coming
   we shall be like unto him. Oh! wonderful mercy of Gods which would
   assume (take up, editor) this his Christ, even in human body, into the
   heavens, there to take and keep possession for us, to lead our
   captivity captive, to appear before him, always praying for us; to make
   the throne of justice a throne of mercy, the seat of glory a seat of
   grace; so that with boldness we may come and appear before God, to ask
   and find grace in time convenient! Again, what a verity and constant
   truth in God is this, that he would, according to his promise made
   first to Adam, and so to Abraham and others, in his time accomplish it,
   by sending his Son so graciously! Who would doubt hereafter of any
   thing that he has promised? And as for Christ's dove, oh! whose heart
   can be able to think of it at all as it deserves? He being God would
   become man, he being rich would become poor, he being Lord of all the
   world, became a servant to us all; he being immortal, would become
   mortal, miserable, and last of all, endure God's curses for us. His
   blood was nothing too dear, his life he nothing considered, to bring us
   from death to life. But this his love needs more hearty weighing than
   many words speaking, and therefore I omit and leave it to your
   consideration; so in the receiving of this supper, as I desire you
   would tremble at God's wrath for sin, so would I have you to couple to
   that terror and fear, true faith, by which you might be assuredly
   persuaded of God's mercy towards you, and Christ's love, though all
   things else preached to the contrary.

   Does every one of you surely think when you hear these words, .` Take,
   eat, this is my body, broken for your sins; drink, this is my blood,
   shed for your sins; that God the eternal Father, embracing you, Christ
   calls and embraces you most lovingly, making himself one with you, and
   you one with him, and one with another amongst yourselves? You ought no
   less to be certain now that God loves you, pardons your sins, and that
   Christ is all yours, than if you heard an angel out of heaven speaking
   so unto you. And therefore rejoice and be glad, and make this supper
   Eucharistiam, a thanksgiving, as the fathers named it. Be no less
   certain that Christ and you now are all one, than you are certain the
   bread and wine is one with your nature and substance after you have
   eaten and drunk it. Howbeit, in this it differs, that you by faith are,
   as it were, changed into Christ, and not Christ into you, as the bread
   is; for by faith he dwells in us, and we in him. May God give us faith
   in the use of this sacrament to receive Christ, as he gives us hands to
   receive the element, symbol, and visible sacrament. May God grant us,
   not to prepare our teeth and belly, (as St. Augustine says,) but rather
   of his mercy may he prepare and give us true and lively faith to use
   this, and all his other ordinances, to his glory and our comfort. May
   he sweep the houses of our hearts, and make them clean, that they may
   be a worthy harbour and lodging for the Lord. Amen.

   Now let us come and look on the third and last thing, namely, Wherefore
   the Lord instituted this sacrament? Our nature is very oblivious (apt
   to forget, editor) of God and all his benefits: and again, it is very
   full of dubitation and doubting of God's love, and his kindness;
   therefore that these two things might be somewhat reformed and helped
   in us, the Lord has instituted this sacrament. I mean, that we might
   have in memory the principal benefit of all benefits, that is, Christ's
   death, and that we might be on all parts assured of communion with
   Christ, of all kindness the greatest that ever God gave unto man. That
   the former is the end wherefore Christ instituted this sacrament, he
   himself teaches us, saying, "Do ye this in remembrance of me." The
   latter the apostle no less sets forth in saying, "The bread which we
   break, is it not the partaking or communion of the body of Christ? Is
   not the cup of blessing which we bless, the partaking or communion of
   the blood of Christ?" So that it appears that this sacrament was
   instituted for the reformation and help of our forgetfulness of that
   which we should never forget, and our dubitation of that whereof we
   ought to be most certain.

   Concerning the former, namely, the memory of Christy death, what
   advantage it brings with it, I will purposely, for time's sake, omit.
   Only a little will I speak of the advantages coming unto us by the
   partaking and communion we have with Christ. First, it teaches us, that
   no man can communicate with Christ, but the same must needs communicate
   with God's grace and favour, wherethrough sins are forgiven; therefore
   this advantage comes herethrough, namely, that we should be certain of
   the remission and pardon of our sins; which we may also perceive by the
   cup, in that it is called the cup of the new testament, to which
   testament is properly attributed on God's behalf, oblivion or remission
   of our sins. First, I say, therefore the supper is instituted to this
   end, that he which worthily receives should be certain of the remission
   and pardon of his sins and iniquities, how many and great soever they
   are. How great a benefit this is they only know who have felt the
   burden of sin, which of all head things is the most heavy. Again, no
   man can communicate with Christ's body and blood, but the same must
   communicate with his Spirit, for Christ's body is no dead carcass. Now
   he that communicates with Christ's Spirit, communicates, as with
   holiness, righteousness, innocence and immortality, and with all the
   merits of Christ's body; so does he with God and all his glory, and
   with the church, and all the good that ever it or any member of it had,
   has, or shall have. This is the communion of saints, which we believe
   in our creed, which has waiting on it remission of sins, resurrection
   of the flesh, and life everlasting.

   To the end that we should be most assured and certain of all these,
   Christ our Saviour instituted this his supper, and therefore would have
   us use it; so that, I think, there is no man who sees not great cause
   for giving thanks to God for this holy sacrament of the Lord, whereby,
   if we worthily receive it, we ought to be certain that all our sins,
   whatsoever they are, are pardoned clearly; that we are regenerate, and
   born again unto a lively hope, unto an inheritance immortal, undefiled,
   and which can never wither away; that we are in the fellowship of God
   the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; that we are God's temples, at
   one with God, and God at one with us; that we are members of Christ's
   church, and fellows with the saints in all felicity; that we are
   certain of immortality in soul and body, and so of eternal life, than
   which what more can be demanded? Christ is ours, and we are Christ's;
   he dwells in us, and we in him. Oh! happy eyes, that see these things,
   and most happy hearts, that feel them! My dear brethren, let us pray
   unto the Lord to open our eyes to see these wonderful things, to give
   us faith to feel them. Surely we ought no less to be assured of them
   now in the worthy receiving of this sacrament than we are assured of
   the exterior symbols and sacraments. If an angel from heaven should
   come and tell you these things, then you would rejoice and be glad.
   And, my dear hearts in the Lord, I even now, though most unworthy, am
   sent of the Lord to tell you no less, but that you, worthily receiving
   this sacrament, shall receive remission of all your sins, or rather a
   certainty that they are remitted, and that you are even now God's
   darlings, temples, and fellow-inheritors of all the good that ever he
   has; wherefore see that you give thanks unto the Lord for this his
   great goodness, and praise his name for ever.

   Oh, says one, I could be glad in very deed, and give thanks from my
   very heart, if I worthily received this sacrament. But, alas! I am a
   very grievous sinner, and I feel in myself very little repentance and
   faith, and therefore I am afraid that I am unworthy.

   To answer this objection, I think it necessary to speak something of
   the worthy receiving in this sacrament, with as great brevity and
   plainness as I can. The apostle wills all men to prove and examine
   themselves before they eat of the bread, and drink of the cup, for they
   that eat and drink unworthily, eat and drink damnation; therefore this
   probation and examination is necessary. If men will try their gold and
   silver whether it is copper or no, is it not more necessary that men
   should try their consciences? Now how this should be, the papists teach
   amiss, in sending us to their auricular confession, which is
   impossible. The true probation and trial of a Christian conscience
   consists altogether in faith and repentance. Faith has respect to the
   doctrine and articles of our belief; repentance has respect to manners
   and conversation. Concerning the former, I mean faith, we may see the
   apostle teaches us (1 Cor. ii.;) concerning the latter, or our
   conversation, those sins, which are commonly called mortal or deadly,
   are to be removed. These sins are discerned from other sins by the
   apostle (Rom. vi.,) in saying, "Let not sin reign and bear sway in your
   mortal bodies." For truly we sin deadly when we give over to sin, and
   let it have the bridle at liberty, when we strive not against it, but
   allow it and consent to it. Howbeit, if we strive against it, if it
   displease us, then truly, though sin be in us, (for we ought to obey
   God without any resistance or unwillingness,) yet our sins are not of
   those sins which separate us from God, but for Christ's sake shall not
   be imputed unto us believing.

   Therefore, my dearly beloved, if your sins do now displease you; if you
   purpose unfeignedly to be enemies to sin in yourselves and in others as
   you may, during your whole life if you hope in Christ for pardon; if
   you believe: according to the holy Scriptures and articles of the
   Christian faith set forth in your creed. If, I say, you now trust in
   God's mercy through Christ's merits; if you repent and earnestly
   purpose before God to amend your life, and to give yourselves over to
   serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness all the days of your life,
   although before this present you have most grievously sinned; I publish
   unto you, that you are worthy guests for this table, you shall be
   welcome to Christ, your sins shall be pardoned, you shall be endued
   with his Spirit, and so with communion with him and with the Father,
   and the whole church of God, Christ will dwell in you, and you shall
   dwell in him for evermore. Wherefore, behave yourselves accordingly
   with joyfulness and thanksgiving. Do you now appear before the Lord?
   Make clean your houses, and open the doors of your hearts by repentance
   and faith, that the Lord of hosts, the King of glory, may enter in; and
   for ever hereafter beware of all such things as might displease the
   eyes of his Majesty. Flee from sin as from a toad; come away from
   popery and all antichristian religion; be diligent and earnest in
   prayer; hearken to the voice of God in his word, with reverence; live
   worthy of your profession. Let your light so shine in your life, that
   men may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
   heaven. As you have been darkness, so now henceforth be light in the
   Lord, and have society with the works of light. Now has God renewed his
   covenant with you: in God's sight now you are as clean and healed from
   all your sores of sins. Go your way, sin no more, lest a worse thing
   happen onto you. See that your house is new swept, and furnished with
   godliness and virtue, and beware of idleness, lest the devil come with
   seven spirits worse than himself, and so take his lodging, and then
   your latter end will be worse than the first.

   God our Father, for the tender mercy and merits of his Son, be merciful
   unto us, forgive us all our sins, and give us his Holy Spirit, to
   purge, cleanse, and sanctify us; that if he may be holy in his sight
   through Christ, and that we now may be made ready and worthy to receive
   this holy sacrament, with the fruits of the same, to the full rejoicing
   and strengthening of our hearts in the Lord. To whom be all honour and
   glory, world without end. Amen.

     __________________________________________________________________

A Fruitful Treatise, and Full of Heavenly Consolation against the Fear of Death

   Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord and put not off from day to day;
   for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the day of vengeance he shall
   destroy thee. Stand fast in the way of the Lord, be steadfast in thine
   understanding, and follow the word or peace and righteousness.
   Ecclesiasticus

   Being minded, through the help of God, for my own comfort and the
   encouraging of others, to speak something of death, at whose door,
   though I have stood a great while, yet, according to man's judgment,
   never so near as I do now, I think it most requisite to call and cry
   for thy help, O blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, who hast destroyed death
   by thy death, and brought in place thereof life and immortality, as
   appears by the gospel. Grant to me true and lively faith, whereby men
   pass from death to eternal life; that of practice, and not of mere
   speculation, I may write something concerning death, which is dreadful
   out of thee, and in itself, to the glory of thy holy name, to my own
   comfort in thee, and to the edifying of all them, to whom this my
   writing shall come, to be read or heard. Amen.

   There are four kinds of death; one which is natural, another which is
   spiritual, a third which is temporal, and a fourth which is eternal.
   Concerning the first and the last, what they are I need not declare;
   but the second and third, perchance, are not so soon espied by the
   simple (uninstructed, editor), for whose sake especially I write.

   By a spiritual death, I mean such a death as when though the body is
   living the soul is dead. This the apostle mentions in speaking of
   widows, who living daintily, being alive in body, are dead in soul. (1
   Tim. v.) Thus you see what I mean by the spiritual death. Now, by a
   temporal death, I mean a death whereby the body and the affections
   thereof are mortified, that the spirit may live: of which kind of death
   the apostle speaks when exhorting us to kill our members. Col. iii. And
   thus much concerning the kinds of death, wherein the judgment of the
   world is not to be approved, for it cares less for spiritual death than
   for a natural death, it is less apprehensive of eternal death than
   temporal death, or else men would leave sin, which procures both the
   one and the other, I mean spiritual and eternal death, and would choose
   temporally to die, that, by natural death, they might enter into the
   full fruition of eternal life, which none can enjoy nor enter into,
   that will not here temporally die, that is, mortify their affections,
   and crucify their lusts and concupiscences; for by obeying them at the
   first came death, as we may read, Gen. iii. If Eve had not obeyed her
   desire in eating the forbidden fruit, whereby she died spiritually,
   none of these kinds of death had ever come unto man, nor been known by
   us. Therefore, as I said, here we must needs temporally die, that is,
   mortify our affections, to escape the spiritual death, and by natural
   death, not only escape eternal death of soul and body, but also by it,
   as by a door, enter into eternal life, which Christ Jesus our Saviour
   has procured and purchased to and for all that are in him, changing
   eternal death into a deliverance of soul and body from all kind of
   misery and sin. By reason whereof we may see, that to those who are in
   Christ, that is, to such as believe, which believers are discerned from
   others by their not walking after the flesh, but after the Spirit, to
   those I say, death is no damage, but an advantage; no dreadful thing,
   but rather desirable, and of all messengers the most joyful, whilst
   looked upon with the eye of faith in the gospel. But more of this
   hereafter.

   Thus I have briefly showed the kinds of death, what they are, whence
   they come, and what is the remedy for them. But now, as I purpose to
   treat only of the first kind of death, that is, of natural death,
   something to comfort myself and others against the dread and pains of
   the same, I will speak of it as God shall instruct me, and as I
   accustom myself to muse on it now and then, the better to be prepared
   against the hour of trial.

   I have shown that this natural death came by spiritual death, that is,
   by obeying our affections in the transgression of God's precepts. But
   through the benefit of Christ, it is no destruction to such as are in
   him and die temporally, that is, to such believers as labour to mortify
   their affections, but only a plain dissolution, both of soul and body,
   from all kind of perils, dangers, and miseries; and therefore by such
   it is not to be dreaded, but to be desired, as we see in the apostle,
   who desired to be dissolved, (Phil. i.) and in Simeon, who desired to
   be loosed, saying, Dismiss, or loose me, O Lord. (Luke ii.) By which
   words he seems plainly to teach, that this life is a bondage, and
   nothing to be desired, as now I will partly show.

   First, consider the pleasures of this life what they are, how long they
   last, how painfully we come by them, what they leave behind them, and
   thou shalt even in them see nothing but vanity. As for example: how
   long lasts the pleasure of licentiousness? How it leaves behind a
   certain loathsomeness. I will speak nothing of the sting of conscience,
   if pleasures are come by unlawfully. Who, well seeing this, and
   forecasting it beforehand, would not desire to forego unlawful
   pleasures?

   Put the case, that the pleasures of this life were permanent during
   this life, yet since this life itself is as nothing, and therefore is
   full well compared to a candlelight, which is soon blown out; to a
   flower, which fades away; to a smoke, to a shadow, to a sleep, to
   running water, to a day, to an hour, to a moment, and to vanity itself;
   who would esteem pleasures and commodities (advantages, editor), which
   last so little a while? Before they are well begun they are gone and
   past away. How much of our time was spend in sleeping, in eating, in
   drinking, and in talking! Infancy is not perceived, youth is shortly
   overblown, middle age is nothing, old age is not long; and therefore,
   as I said, this life, even in the consideration of the pleasures and
   advantages of it, should little move us to love it, but rather to loath
   it. God open our eyes to see these things, and to weigh them
   accordingly. Secondly, consider the miseries of this life, so that if
   the pleasures and commodities in it should move us to love it, yet the
   miseries might countervail and make us take it as we should do; I mean,
   rather to desire to be loosed and dismissed hence than otherwise. Look
   upon your bodies, and see in how many perils and dangers you are. Your
   eves are in danger of blindness and blear-eyedness; your ears in danger
   of deafness; your mouth and tongue of cankers, toothache, and dumbness;
   your head in danger of rheums, and metrics; your throat in danger of
   hoarseness; your hands in danger of gout, palsies, &se. But who is able
   to express the number of diseases whereof man's body is in danger,
   seeing that some have written that more than three hundred diseases may
   happen unto man? I speak nothing of the hurt that may come to our
   bodies by poisons, venomous beasts, water, fire, horses, men, &c.

   Again, look upon your soul, see how many vices you are in danger of, as
   heresy, hypocrisy, idolatry, covetousness, idleness, security, envy,
   ambition, pride, &c. How many temptations may you fall into? But this
   you shall better see by looking upon your old falls, folly, and
   temptations; and by looking on other men's faults, for no man has done
   any thing so evil but you may do the same. Moreover, look upon your
   name, and see how it is in danger of slanders and false reports. Look
   upon your goods, see what danger they are in from thieves, from fire,
   &c. Look upon your wife, children, parents, brethren, sisters
   kinsfolks, servants, friends, and neighbours, and behold how they also
   are in danger, both in soul, body, name, and goods, as you are. Look
   upon the commonweal and country. Look upon the church, upon the
   ministers and magistrates, and see what great dangers they are in, so
   that if you love them, you cannot, but for the evil which may come to
   them, be heavy and sad. You know it is not in your power, nor in the
   power of any man, to hinder all evil that may come. How many perils is
   infancy in danger of! What danger is youth subject unto! Man's state is
   full of cares; age is full of diseases and sores. If thou art rich, thy
   care is the greater; if thou art in honour, thy perils are the more, if
   thou art poor, thou art the more in danger from oppression. But, alas!
   what tongue is able to express the miserableness of this life, which,
   if considered, should make us little to love it!

   I can compare our life to nothing so fitly as to a ship in the midst of
   the sea. In what danger is the ship and they that are in it! Here are
   they in danger of tempests, there of quicksands; on this side of
   pirates, on that side of rocks; now it may leak, now the mast may
   break, now the master may fall sick, now diseases may come among the
   mariners, now dissension may arise among themselves. I speak nothing of
   want of fresh water, meat, drink, and such other necessaries. Even such
   is this life. Here is the devil, there is the world; on this side is
   the flesh, on that side is sin; which thoroughly cleaves unto our ribs,
   and will do so as long as we are in this flesh, and natural life. So
   that none but blind men can see this life to be much and greatly
   desired; but rather as sailors are most glad when they approach to the
   haven, even so should we be most glad when we approach to the haven,
   that is, to death, which sets us to a land whose commodities no eye has
   seen, no tongue can tell, no heart can conceive, in any point as it
   should do. (1 Cor. ii.) Happy, oh! happy were we, if we saw these
   things accordingly! God open our eyes to see them. Amen.

   If any man would desire testimonies of these things, al though
   experience, a sufficient mistress, is to be credited, yet I will here
   mark certain places whereunto the reader may resort, and he will find
   no less than I say, but rather much more, if he read and weigh the
   places with diligence. Job (x.) calls this life a warfare. In the
   eighth chapter he paints it out in a lively manner, under divers
   similitudes. St. James compares it to a vapour. (James iv.) All the
   book of Ecclesiastes teaches that it is but vanity. St. John says it is
   altogether put in evil. (1 John viii.) David (or rather Moses, editor)
   says, the best thing in this life is but vanity, labour, and sorrow.
   (Ps. xc.) But why go I hereabout, seeing that almost every leaf in the
   Scripture is full of the brevity and misery of this life, so that I
   think, as St. Austin writes, that there is no man who has lived so
   happily in this world, that he would be content, when death comes, to
   go back again by the same steps whereby he has come into the world and
   lived, except he is in despair, and looks for nothing after this life
   but confusion.

   Thus I trust you see, that though the commodities of this life were
   such as could cause us to love it, yet the brevity, vanity, and misery
   of it is such, as should make us little regard it, who believe and
   know, death is the end of all miseries to them that are in Christ, as
   we all ought to take ourselves to be, (being baptised in his name, for
   our baptism requires this faith under pain of damnation,) although we
   have not observed our profession as we should have done, if we now
   repent, and come to amendment. By such I say as are in Christ, death is
   to be desired, even in this respect, that it delivers us from so
   miserable a life and so dangerous a state as we are now in. So that I
   may well say, they are senseless, without understanding, void of love
   to God, void of all hatred and sense of sin wherewith this life flows,
   who desire not to depart hence out of all these miseries, rather than
   still to remain here to their continual grief.

   But if these things will not move us, I would yet that we beheld the
   commodities whereunto death brings us. If we are not moved to leave
   this life in respect of the miseries whereof it is full, yet we should
   be moved to leave it in respect of the infinite goodness which the
   other life, whereto death brings us, has most plentifully. Men, though
   they love things, yet can be content to forego them for other things
   which are better; even so we now, for the good things in the life to
   come, if we consider them, shall and will be content to forego the most
   commons things in this present life. Here we have great pleasure in the
   beauty of the world, and of the pleasures, honours, and dignities of
   the same; also in the company of our friends, parents, wife, children,
   subjects, also in plenty of riches, cattle, &c.; and yet we know that
   not one of these is without its discommodity, which God sends, lest we
   should love them too much, as, if you will weigh things, you shall
   easily perceive. The sun though it is fair and cheerful, yet it burns
   sometimes too hot. The air, though it is generally light and pleasant,
   yet sometimes it is dark and troublous; and so of other things. But be
   it so, that there were no discommodities mingled with the commodities,
   yet as I said before, the brevity and short time that we have to use
   them should assuage their sweetness.

   But even if the pleasures of this life were without discommodity, if
   they were permanent and without peril, whereof they are full, yet are
   they nothing at all to be compared to the commodities of the life to
   come. What is this earth, heaven, and shape of the world, wherein
   beasts have places, and wicked men, God's enemies, have abiding and
   liberty, in comparison of the new heaven and earth wherein
   righteousness shall dwell? In comparison of the place where angels and
   archangels, and all God's people, yea, God himself, has his abiding and
   dwelling? What is the company of wife children, &c. in comparison to
   the company of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the patriarchs, prophets,
   apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and all the saints of God? What
   is the company of any in this world, in comparison to the company of
   the angels, archangels, cherubim, seraphim, powers, thrones, dominions,
   yea, of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost? What are
   the riches and pleasures of this life, in comparison of the felicity of
   everlasting life, which is without all discommodities, perpetual,
   without all peril and jeopardy, without all grief and molestation? Oh,
   the mirth and melody! oh, the honour and glory! oh, the riches and
   beauty! oh, the power and majesty! oh, the sweetness and dignity of the
   life to come! The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, and the
   heart of man is not able to conceive in any thing, any part of the
   eternal felicity and happy state of heaven: therefore the saints of God
   have desired so earnestly and so heartily to be there. "Oh! how amiable
   are thy tabernacles!" said David. (Ps. lxxxiv.) "My soul has a desire
   to enter into the courts of the Lord, my heart and my soul rejoice in
   the living God. Blessed are those that dwell in thy house, that they
   may always be praising thee; for one day in thy courts is better than a
   thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my
   God, than to dwell in the tents of ungodliness; for the Lord God is a
   light and defence." And again, (Ps. xlli.,) "As the hart desires the
   waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God. My soul is athirst for
   God, yea, even for the living God. When shall I come to appear before
   the presence of God?" And (Ps. lxiii.,) "My soul thirsts for thee in a
   barren and dry land, where no water is." They, God's people I mean,
   (Rom. viii.,) desire the day of their redemption, and they still cry,
   "Let thy kingdom come;" they cry, (Rev. xxii.,) "Come, Lord Jesus,
   come;" they lift up their heads looking for his appearing, who will
   make their vile bodies like to his own glorious and immortal body,
   (Phil. iii.;) for when he shall appear, they shall be like unto him;
   the angels will gather them together, and they shall meet him in the
   clouds, and be always with him; they shall hear this joyful voice,
   (Matt. xxv.,) "Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom
   prepared for you from the beginning." Then shall they be like unto his
   angels, (Rev. vii. :) then shall they shine like the sun in the
   kingdom; then shall they have crowns of glory, and be endued (clothed,
   editor) with white garments of innocence and righteousness, and palms
   of victory in their hands. Oh! happy, happy is he who may with them see
   that immortal and incorruptible inheritance, which then we shall enjoy
   for ever!

   Thus you see (I hope) sufficiently, that in respect of heaven and
   eternal bliss, (whereunto by the haven of death we land,) this life,
   though there were no evil in it, is not to be loved, but rather, we
   that are pilgrims in it should desire with Paul and Simeon to be loosed
   and dissolved that we might be with God. Here our bodies, as before is
   spoken, are in danger of innumerable evils; but there our bodies shall
   be, not only free from all danger, but also be like the glorious and
   immortal body of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now our bodies are dark, then
   shall they be most clear and light, as we see Christ's face did shine
   in his transfiguration, like to the sun. (Matt. xvii.) Now our bodies
   are vile, miserable, mortal, and corruptible; but then shall they be
   glorious, happy, immortal, and incorruptible. (1 Cor. xv.) We shall be
   like unto Christ our Saviour; even as he is, so shall we be. (1 John
   iii.) As we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the
   image of the heavenly. Here our souls are in great darkness, and in
   danger of many evils; but there they shall be in great light, safe
   security, and secure felicity. We shall see God face to face, where now
   we see him but as in a glass through a dark speaking, there shall we
   behold him even as he is, and be satisfied with his presence; yea we
   shall be endued with most perfect knowledge. Where now we know but
   partly, there shall we know as we are known. Here our commodities are
   measurable, short, uncertain, and mingled with many incommodities. But
   there is bliss without measure, all liberty, all light, all joy,
   rejoicing, pleasure, health, wealth, riches, glory, power, treasure,
   honour, triumph, comfort, solace, love, unity, peace, concord, wisdom,
   virtue, melody, meekness, felicity, beatitude, and all that ever can be
   wished or desired; and that in the greatest security and perpetuity
   that may be conceived or thought, not only of men, but also of angels;
   as he witnesses that saw it, (I mean Paul,) who was carried up into the
   third heaven. The eye has not seen, (says he,) the ear has not heard,
   neither has entered into the heart of man the felicity that God has
   prepared for them that love him. (1 Cor. ii.) There the archangels,
   angels, powers, thrones, dominions, cherubim, seraphim, patriarchs,
   prophets, apostles, martyrs, virgins, confessors, and righteous
   spirits, cease not to sing night and day, "Holy, holy, holy Lord God of
   hosts; honour, majesty, glory, empire, and dominion, be unto thee, O
   Lord God the Creator, O Lord Jesus the Redeemer, O Holy Spirit the
   Comforter." (Rev. iv.) For the light of the moon shall be as the light
   of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, even as the
   light of seven days (Isa. lx.) in his blessed kingdom, where and when
   he will bind up the wounds of his people, and heal their plagues. Oh!
   that we might have some lively sight hereof, that we might rejoice over
   the undefiled and immortal inheritance, whereunto God has called us,
   and which he keeps for us in heaven; that we might hear the sweet song
   of his saved people, crying, "Salvation be unto Him that sits on the
   throne of our God, and unto the Lamb." That we might with the elders
   and angels sing and say, "Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and
   thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be to thee our God for
   evermore." That we might be covered with a white stole (robe, editor),
   and have a palm in our hands, to stand before God's throne night and
   day, to serve him in his temple, and to have him dwell in us; that we
   might hear the great voice saying from heaven, "Behold the tabernacle
   of the Lord is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
   his people, and God himself will be with them, their God." Oh! happy
   were they that now might have a little glimpse of that holy city, New
   Jerusalem, descending from heaven, prepared of God as a bride decked
   for her husband, which he showed to his servant John. (Rev. xxi.) Truly
   this should we see, if we were with him in the Spirit; but this cannot
   be, so long as we are in the flesh. Alas then, and well away, that we
   love this life as we do! It is a sign that we have little faith, for
   else how could we fail night and day to desire the messenger of the
   Lord, death I mean, to deliver us out of all miseries, that we might
   enter into the enjoyment of eternal felicity.

   But here some man will say, " Oh I sir, if I were certain that I should
   depart from this miserable life into that so great felicity, then could
   I be right glad and rejoice, as you tell me, and bid death welcome. But
   I am a sinner, I have grievously transgressed and broken God's will,
   and therefore I am afraid I shall be sent into eternal woe, perdition,
   and misery." Here, my brother, thou dost well that thou cost
   acknowledge thyself a sinner, and to have deserved eternal death; for
   doubtless, if we say we have no sin, we are liars, and the truth is not
   in us. (1 John i.) A child of a nights birth is not pure in God's
   sight. (Job xxv.) In sin we were born, and by birth or nature we are
   the children of wrath, and firebrands of hell; therefore confess
   ourselves to be sinners we needs must. For if the Lord will observe any
   man's iniquities, none shall be able to abide it; yea, we must needs
   all cry, "Enter not into judgment, O Lord; for in thy sight no flesh
   nor man living can be saved." (Ps. cxxx. cxliii.) In this point
   therefore thou hast done well to confess that thou art a sinner.

   But now where thou stand in doubt of pardon of thy sins, and thereby
   art afraid of damnation, my dear brother, I would have thee answer me,
   whether thou desire pardon or no? Whether thou dost repent or no?
   Whether thou dost unfeignedly purpose, if thou should live, to amend
   thy life or no? If thou dost even before God so purpose, and desire his
   mercy, then hearken, my good brother, to what the Lord says unto thee:
   "I am he, I am he, that for my own sake will do away thine offences; if
   thy sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow; for
   I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner. (Isa. xliii. l.) As surely
   as I live, I will not thy death, but rather that thou should live, and
   be converted. (Ezek. xxxiii.) I have so loved the world, that I would
   not spare my dearly beloved Son, (John iii.,) the image of my
   substance, and brightness of my glory, by whom all things were given;
   but gave him for thee, not only to be man, but also to take thy nature,
   and to purge it from mortality, sin, and all corruption, and to adorn
   and endue it with immortality and eternal glory not only in his own
   person, but also in thee and for thee, whereof now by faith I would
   have thee certain, as in very deed thou shalt at length feel and fully
   enjoy for ever. (Phil. ii.) This, my Son, I have given to death, and
   that a most shameful death, even of the cross, for thee, to destroy
   death, to satisfy my justice for thy sins; therefore believe, and
   according to thy faith, so be it unto thee. Hearken what my Son himself
   says unto thee, (Matt. xi.,) Come unto me all ye that labour and are
   heavy laden, and I will refresh you. (John iii.) I came not into the
   world to condemn the world, but to save it. (Luke v.) I came not to
   call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. I pray not (says he)
   (John xvii.) for these mine apostles only, but also for all them that
   by their preaching shall believe in me. Now what prayed he for such?
   Father, (says he,) I will that where I am they also may be, that they
   may see and enjoy the glory I have, and always had with thee. Father,
   save them, and keep them in thy truth. Father, (says he,) I sanctify
   myself, and offer up myself for them. Lo! thus thou hear how my Son
   prays for thee. Mark now what my apostle Paul says: We know, says he,
   (Heb. v.) that our Saviour Christ's prayers were heard. (1 Tim. i.)
   Also this is a true saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
   save sinners. Hearken what he said to the jailer, (Acts, xvi.,) Believe
   in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved. (Heb. ix.) For he by his
   own self has made purgation for our sins. To him, says Peter, (Acts,
   x.) all the prophets bear witness, that whosoever believes in his name
   shall receive remission of their sins. Believe man; pray, (Mark, ix.)
   Lord, help mine unbelief (Luke xvii.) Lord, increase my faith: ask, and
   thou shalt have. Hearken what St. John says: If we confess our sins,
   God is righteous to forgive us all our iniquities, and the blood of our
   Lord Jesus Christ shall wash us from all our sins; for if we sin, we
   have an Advocate (says he) with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
   and he is the propitiation for our sins. (1 John i. ii.) Hearken what
   Christ is called, (Matt. i.,) Call his name Jesus, says the angel, for
   he shall save his people from their sins; so that where abundance of
   sin is, there is abundance of grace; say therefore, Who shall lay
   anything to my charge? It is God that absolves me; who then shall
   condemn me? It is Christ who is dead for my sins, yea, who is risen for
   my righteousness, and sits on the right hand of the Father, and prays
   for me. (Rom. viii.) Be certain, therefore, and sure of pardon of thy
   sins; be certain and sure of everlasting life. Do not now say in thy
   heart, Who shall descend into the deep? that is, doubt not of pardon of
   thy sins, for that is to fetch up Christ; neither say thou, Who shall
   ascend up into heaven? that is, doubt not of eternal bliss, for that is
   to put Christ out of heaven: but mark what the Lord says unto thee, The
   word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, and this is the
   word of faith which we preach: if thou confess with thy mouth that
   Jesus Christ is the Lord. and believe with thy heart, that God raised
   him up from the dead, thou shalt be safe. (Rom. x.) If thou believe
   that Jesus Christ died, and rose again, even so shalt thou be assured
   (says the Lord God) that, dying with Christ, I will bring thee again
   with him. (1 Thess. iv.)

   Thus, dear brother, I thought good to write to thee in the name of the
   Lord, that thou, fearing death for nothing else but because of thy
   sins, might be assured of pardon of them, and so embrace death as a
   dear friend, and insult against his terror, sting, and power, saying,
   Death, where is thy sting? hell, where is thy victory? (1 Cor. xv.)
   Nothing in all the world so displeases the Lord as to doubt of his
   mercy. In the mouth of two or three witnesses, we should be content;
   therefore, since thou hast heard from so many witnesses, how that in
   deed desiring mercy with the Lord, thou art not sent empty away, give
   credit thereto, and say with the good virgin Mary, "Behold thy servant,
   O Lord, be it unto me according to thy word." (Luke i.) Upon which
   word, see thou set thine eye only and wholly. For here thou see not God
   thy Father, except in his word, which is the glass wherein now we
   behold his grace and fatherly love towards us in Christ; and therefore
   herewith we should be content, and give more credit to it, than to all
   our senses, and to all the world besides. The word, says our Saviour,
   (John xii.) shall judge. According to it therefore, and not according
   to any exterior or interior show, judge both of thyself and of all
   other things else, concerning thyself, if thou desire indeed God's
   mercy, and lament that thou hast offended. Lo! it pronounces that there
   is mercy with the Lord for thee, and plenteous redemption. (Ps. cxxx.)
   It tells thee who would have mercy at the Lords hand, that the Lord
   wills the same, and therefore thou art happy, for he would not thy
   death. It tells thee, that if thou acknowledge thy faults unto the
   Lord, he will cover them in his mercy. Again, concerning death, it
   tells thee, that it is but a sleep, that it is but a passing unto thy
   Father, that it is but a deliverance out of misery, that it is but a
   putting off mortality and corruption, that it is a putting on
   immortality and incorruption; that it is a putting away of an earthly
   tabernacle, that thou may receive a heavenly house or mansion, (2 Cor.
   v.;) that this is but a calling of thee home from the watching and
   standing in the warfare of this miserable life. According to this, (the
   word I mean,) do thou judge of death, and thou shalt not be afraid of
   it, but desire it as a most wholesome medicine, and a friendly
   messenger of the Lord's justice and mercy. Embrace him therefore, make
   him good cheer, for of all enemies he is the least. An enemy, said I?
   nay, rather of all friends he is the best; for he brings thee out of
   all danger of enemies into that most sure and safe place of thy
   unfeigned Friend for ever.

   Let these things be often thought upon. Let death be premeditated, not
   only because he comes uncertainly, I mean as to the time, for else he
   is most certain; but also because he helps much to the contempt of this
   world, out of which, as nothing will go with thee, so can thou take
   nothing with thee. Because it helps to the mortifying of the flesh,
   which when thou feed, thou dost nothing else but feed worms. Because it
   helps to the well disposing and due ordering of the things thou has in
   this life. Because it helps to repentance, to bring thee unto the
   knowledge of thyself, that thou art but earth and ashes, and brings
   thee the better to know God. But who is able to tell the commodities
   (advantages, editor) that come by the frequent and true consideration
   of death? Whose time is left unto us uncertain and unknown, (although
   to God it be certain, and the bounds thereof not only known, but
   appointed of the Lord, over the which none can passed Job xiv.;) that
   we should not prolong and put off frowzy day to day the amendment of
   our life, as the rich man (Luke xii.) did under hope of long life. And
   seeing it is the ordinance of God, and comes not but by the will of
   God, even unto a sparrow; much more then unto us, who are incomparably
   much more dear than many sparrows; and since this will of God is not
   only just, but also good, for he is our Father, let us, if there were
   no other cause but this, submit ourselves, our senses, and judgments,
   unto his pleasure, being content to come out of the room (place or
   appointed station, editor) of our soldiership, whenever he shall send
   for us by his pursuivant (messenger, editor), death. Let us render to
   him, that which he has lent us so long, (I mean life,) lest we be
   counted unthankful. And since death comes not but by sin, forasmuch as
   we have sinned so often, and yet the Lord has ceased from exacting this
   tribute and punishment of us until this present time, let us with
   thankfulness praise his patience, and pay our debt, not doubting but
   that he, being our Father and our almighty Father, can and will, if
   death were evil unto us, as God knows it is a chief benefit unto us by
   Christ, convert and turn it into good. But death being, as I have
   before showed, not to be dreaded, but to be desired, let us lift up our
   heads in thinking on it, and know that our redemption draws nigh. (Luke
   xxi.) Let our minds be occupied in the consideration, or often
   contemplation of the four last articles of our belief, that is, the
   communion of saints or holy catholic church; remission of sins,
   resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.

   By faith in Christ, be it ever so faint, little, or cold we are members
   in very deed of the catholic and holy church of Christ, that is, we
   have communion or fellowship with all the saints of God that ever were,
   are, or shall be. Whereby we may receive great comfort; for though our
   faith be feeble, yet the faith of that church, whereof our Saviour
   Christ is the head, is mighty enough. Though our repentance be little,
   yet the repentance of the church, wherewith we have communion, is
   sufficient. Though our love be languishing, yet the love of the church
   and of the Spouse of the church is ardent, and so of all other things
   we want. Not that I mean this, as though any man should think that our
   faith should be in any, or upon any other, than only upon God the
   Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; neither that tat any should think
   I mean thereby any other merits or means to salvation, than only the
   merits and name of the Lord Jesus. But I would that the poor Christian
   conscience, which by baptism is brought into God's church, and made a
   member of the same through faith, should, not for his sin's sake, or
   for the want of anything he has not, despair; but rather should know,
   that he is a member of Christ's church and mystical body; and therefore
   cannot but have communion and fellowship with both; that is, with
   Christ himself, being the Lord, husband, and head thereof, and of all
   that ever have been, are, or shall be members of it, in all good things
   that ever they have had, have, or shall have. Still does the church
   pray for us by Christ's commandment. Forgive us our sins, lead us not
   into temptation, deliver us from evil; yea, Christ himself prays for
   us, being members of his body, as we are indeed, if we believe, though
   it is ever so little. God grant this faith unto us all, and increase it
   in us. Amen. Out of this church no pope nor prelate can cast us, or
   excommunicate us indeed, although exteriorly they separate us from the
   society of God's saints. But enough of this.

   As I would have us often muse upon the catholic church, or communion of
   saints, so would I have us to meditate upon the other articles
   following, that is, remission of sins, resurrection of the body, and
   life everlasting. It is an article of our faith to believe, that is, to
   be certain that our sins are pardoned; therefore doubt not thereof,
   lest thou become an infidel. Though thou hast sinned ever so sorely,
   yet now despair not, but be certain that God is thy God, that is, that
   he forgives thee thy sin. Therefore, as I said, doubt not thereof, for
   in so doing thou put a sallet (a covering, or scull-cap, editor) on the
   head of thy soul, so that the dew of God's grace cannot drop into it,
   but slips by as fast as it drops. Therefore be without that sallet or
   soul-night-cap; be bareheaded; that is, hope still in the mercy of the
   Lord, and so mercy shall compass thee on every side. (Psalm v.)

   In like manner, often have the article of the resurrection of the body
   in thy mind, being assured thereby that thy body shall be raised up
   again in the last day, when the Lord shall come to judgment, and that
   it shall be made incorruptible, immortal, glorious, spiritual, perfect,
   light, and even like to the glorious body of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
   (Phil. iii.) For he is the first-fruit of the dead; and as God is all
   in all, so shall he be unto thee in Christ. Look therefore upon thine
   own estate; for as he is, so shalt thou be. As thou hast borne the
   image of the earthly Adam, so shalt thou bear the image of the
   heavenly, (1 Cor. xv.;) therefore glorify thou God now, both in soul
   and body. Wait and look for this day of the Lord with groaning and
   sighing. Gather together testimonies of this, which I omit for time's
   sake.

   Last of all, often have life everlasting in thy mind, whereunto thou
   art even landing. Death is the haven that carries thee unto this land,
   where is all that can be wished, yea, above all wishes and desires; for
   in it we shall see God face to face, which now we can in no wise do,
   but must cover our faces, with Moses and Elias, till the face or
   fore-parts of the Lord be gone by. (Exod. xxxiv.) Now must we look on
   his back-parts, beholding him in his word, and in his creatures, and in
   the face of Jesus Christ our Mediator; but then we shall see him face
   to face, and we shall know, even as we are known. (1 Cor. xiii.)
   Therefore let us often think on these things, that we may have faith
   lustily (heartily, editor) and cheerfully to arrive at the happy haven
   of death, which you see is to be desired, and not to be dreaded, by all
   those that are in Christ: that is, by such as believe indeed, who are
   discerned (distinguished, editor) from those that only say they do
   believe, by their dying temporally, that is, by labouring to mortify
   through God's Spirit the affections of the flesh: not that they should
   not be in them, but that they should not reign in them, that is, in
   their mortal bodies, to give themselves over to serve sin, whose
   servants we are not, but are made servants unto righteousness, (Rom.
   vi.,) being now under grace, and not under the law, and therefore God
   has mercifully promised that sin shall not reign in us; the which may
   be continually grant for his truth, power, and mercy's sake. Amen.

     __________________________________________________________________

An Exhortation to the Patient Suffering of Trouble and Affliction for Christ's
Cause

   Written to all the unfeigned professors of the gospel throughout the
   realm of England, by John Bradford, at the beginning of his
   imprisonment, A. D. 1554.

   May the Holy Spirit of God, who is the earnest and pledge of God given
   to his people for their comfort and consolation, be poured into our
   hearts by the mighty power and mercies of our only Saviour Jesus
   Christ, now and for ever. Amen.

   Because I perceive plainly, that to the evils fallen upon us who
   profess Christ's gospel, greater are most likely to ensue, and after
   them greater, till the measure of iniquity is heaped up, except we
   shrink, and having put our hands to the plough look back, and with
   Lot's wife, and the Israelites desiring to return into Egypt, fall into
   God's heavy displeasure incurable, Gen. xix. Luke ix.; all which God
   forbid; and because I am persuaded of you, my dearly beloved brethren
   and sisters, throughout the realm of England, which have professed
   unfeignedly the gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, (for unto
   such do I write this epistle,) that as ye have begun to take part with
   God's gospel and truth, so through his grace ye will persevere, and go
   on forwards, notwithstanding the storms which have risen and are to
   arise; I cannot but write something unto you, to go on forwards with
   earnestness in the way of the Lord, and not to become as the
   faint-hearted or fearful, whose place St. John appoints (Rev. xxi.)
   with the unbelievers, murderers, and idolaters in eternal perdition,
   but cheerfully to take the Lord's Cup, and drink of it before it draw
   towards the dregs and bottom, whereof at length they shall drink with
   the wicked to eternal destruction, who will not receive it at first
   with God's children, and with whom God begins his judgment, that as the
   wicked world rejoices when they lament, so they may rejoice when the
   wicked world shall mourn, and finds woe intolerable without end. (Ps.
   lxxv., 1 Pet. iv., John xvi.)

   First therefore, my dearly beloved in the Lord, I beseech you to
   consider, that though you are in the world, yet you are not of the
   world. (John xiv.) You are not of them which look for their portion in
   this life, (Psa. xvii.) whose captain is the god of this world, even
   Satan, who now ruffles it apace, as if he were wood (enraged,
   distracted, editor), because his time on earth is not long. (2 Cor.
   iv., Rev. xii.) But you are of them that look for a city of God's own
   blessing. You are of them that know yourselves to be here but pilgrims
   and strangers; for here you have no dwelling-place. (Heb xi. xii.
   xiii., l Pet. ii.) You are of them whose portion is the Lord, and which
   have their hope in heaven whose captain is Christ Jesus, the Son of
   God, and governor of heaven and earth. Unto him is given all power,
   yea, he is God Almighty, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
   praiseworthy for ever. (Matt. xxviii., Rom ix.) You are not of them
   which receive the beast's mark, which here rejoice, laugh, and have
   their heart's ease, joy, paradise, and pleasure; but you are of them
   which have received the angels mark, yea, God's mark, which here
   lament, mourn, sigh, sob, weep, and have your wilderness to wander in,
   your purgatory, and even hell to purge and burn up your sins. (Rev.
   xiii., Luke vi., Ezek. ix.) You are not of them which cry, Let us eat
   and drink, for tomorrow we shall die. You are not of that number which
   say, they have made a covenant with death and hell not to hurt them.
   You are not of them which take it for a vain thing to serve the Lord.
   (Matt. v., 1 Cor. xv., Isaiah xxii. xxviii.) You are not of them which
   are lulled and rocked asleep in Jezebel's bed a bed of security. (Rev.
   iii.) You are not of the number of them which say, Tush, God is in
   heaven, and sees us not, nor cares for what we do. (Ps. lxxiii.) You
   are not of the number of them which will fall down for the muck of the
   world to worship the fiend, or for fear of displeasing men worship the
   golden image. (Matt. iv., Dan. iii.) Finally, you are not of the number
   of them which set more by your swine than by Christ, (Matt. viii.)
   which, for ease and rest in this life, say and do as Antiochus bids you
   do or say, (Maccabees,) and will follow the multitude to do evil, with
   Zedechias and the three hundred false prophets; yea, Ahab, Jezebel, and
   the whole court and country. (Matt. viii., 1 Kings xxii.) But you are
   of the number of them which are dead already, or at least are dying
   daily to yourselves and to this world. You are of them which have made
   a covenant with God, to forsake yourselves in this world, and Satan
   also. You are of them which say, Nay, the Lord has all things written
   in his memorial book, for such as fear him, and remember his name.
   (Rom. vi. vii., Col. iii., Luke xii., Mal. iii.) You are of them which
   have their loins girded about, and their lights burning in their hands,
   like unto men that wait for their Lord's coming. (Luke xii.) You are in
   the number of them that say, The Lord looks down from heaven, and
   beholds the children of men: from the habitation of his dwelling, he
   considers all them that dwell upon the earth. (Ps. xxxiii. xiv. i.) You
   are of the number of them which will worship the Lord God only, and
   will not worship the work at man's hands, though the oven burn never so
   hot. You are of the number of them to whom Christ is precious and dear,
   which cry out rather because your habitation is prolonged here, as
   David did. (1 Pet. ii., Ps. cxx.) You are of them which follow
   Mattathias and the godly Jews, which knew the way to life to be a
   strait way, and that few go through it, which will not stick to follow
   poor Micaiah, although he is racked and cast into prison, having the
   sun, moon, seven stars, and all against him. (Matt. vii, 1 Kings xxii.)

   Thus therefore, dearly beloved, remember, first, that, as I said, you
   are not of this world; that Satan is not your captain: your joy and
   paradise is not here; your companions are not the multitude of
   worldlings, and such as seek to please men, and live here at ease in
   the service of Satan. But you are of another world; Christ is your
   captain, your joy is in heaven, where your conversation is; your
   companions are the fathers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs,
   virgins, confessors, and the dear saints of God, which follow the Lamb
   whithersoever he goes; dipping their garments in his blood, knowing
   this life and world to be full of evil, a warfare, a smoke, a shadow, a
   vapour, replenished and environed with all kinds of miseries. (Heb.
   xiii., Rev. vii., Job vii. viii. xiv., Ps. ix., James iv.) This is the
   first thing which I would have you often and diligently with yourselves
   consider and muse well upon, namely, what you are, and where you are.

   Now, secondly, forget not to call to mind that you ought not to think
   it a strange thing if misery, trouble, adversity, persecution, and
   displeasure come upon you. For how can it be otherwise, but that
   trouble and persecution must come upon you. Can the world love you,
   which are none of his? Can worldly men, which are your chief enemy's
   soldiers, regard you? (1 Pet. iv. v., John xiv.) Can Satan suffer you
   to be at rest, who will do no homage unto him? Can this way be chosen
   by any that account it so narrow and strait as they do? Will you look
   to travel, and to have no foul way or rain? Will shipmen shrink, or
   sailors on the sea give over, if storms arise? Do they not look for
   such? and, dearly beloved, did not we enter into God's ship and ark of
   baptism at the first? will you then count it strange, if perils come or
   tempests blots? Are not you travelling to your heavenly city of
   Jerusalem, were is all joy and felicity, and will you tarry by the way
   for storms and showers? The mart and fair will then be past; the night
   will so come upon you, that you cannot travel; the door will be barred,
   and the bride will be at supper. (John ix., Matt. xxv.) Therefore away
   with dainty niceness. Will you think that the Father of heaven will
   deal more gently with you in this age than he has done with others, his
   dearest friends, in other ages? What way, yea, what storms and
   tempests, what troubles and disquietness Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
   Jacob, and good Joseph found! Which of these had so fair a life, and
   such restful times, as we have had? Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David the
   king, and all the good kings, priests, and prophets in the Old
   Testament, at one time or other, if not throughout their lives, felt a
   thousand times more misery than we have felt hitherto. (Gen. iv. vi.
   vii. viii. ix. &c., Exod. ii. iii. iv. v. &:c.)

   As for the New Testament, how great was the affliction of Mary, of
   Joseph, of Zacharias, of Elizabeth, of John the Baptist, of all the
   apostles and evangelists, yea, of Jesus Christ our Lord, the dear Son
   and darling of God! And since the time of the apostles, how many and
   great are the numbers of martyrs, confessors, and such as have suffered
   the shedding of their blood in this life, rather than they would be
   stayed in their journey, or lodge in any of Satan's inns, lest the
   storms or winds which fell in their travellings might have touched
   them! And, dearly beloved, let us think what we are, and how far unfit
   to be matched with these, with whom yet we expect we are to be placed
   in heaven. But with what face can we look for this, who are so fearful
   and unwilling to leave that, which will we nill we, we must leave, and
   so shortly that we know not the time when? Where is our renouncing and
   forsaking of the world and the flesh, which we solemnly took upon us in
   baptism? Ah! shameless cowards that we are, which will not follow the
   trace of so many fathers, patriarchs, kings, priests, prophets,
   apostles, evangelists, and saints of God, yea, even of the very Son of
   God! (1 Pet. v.) How many now go with you heartily, as I and all your
   brethren in bonds and exile for the gospel! Pray for us, for, God
   willing, we will not leave you now. We will go before you; ye shall see
   in us, by God's grace, that we preached no lies nor idle tales, but
   even the very true word of God. For the confirmation whereof we by
   God's grace, and the help of your prayers, willingly and joyfully give
   our blood to be shed, as already we have given our livings, goods,
   friends, and natural country. For now we are certain that we are in the
   highway to heaven's bliss; as St. Paul says, By many tribulations and
   persecutions we must enter into God's kingdom. (Acts, xiv.) And because
   we would go thither ourselves and bring you thither also, therefore the
   devil stirs up the coals. And forasmuch as we all loitered in the way,
   he has therefore received power of God to overcast the weather, and to
   stir up storms, that we, God's children, might more speedily go on
   forwards, and make more haste, (Matt. vii.. xiv.,) as the counterfeits
   and hypocrites will tarry and linger till the storms are past; and so
   when they come, the market will be done, and the doors barred, as it is
   to be feared. Read Matt. xxv. This wind will blow God's children
   forward, and the devil's darlings backward. Therefore, like God's
   children, let us go on forward apace, the wind is on our backs, hoist
   up the sails, lift up your hearts and hands unto God in prayer, and
   keep your anchor of faith to cast out in time of trouble on the rock of
   God's word and mercy in Christ, by the cable of God's verity, and I
   warrant your safely. And thus much for you secondly to consider, that
   affliction, persecution, and trouble are no strange thing to God's
   children, and therefore it should not dismay, discourage, or discomfort
   us, for it is no other thing than all God's dear friends have tasted in
   their journey heavenwards.

   As I would in this troublesome time that ye would consider what you are
   by the goodness of God in Christ even citizens of heaven, though you
   are at present in the flesh, even in a strange region on every side
   file of fierce enemies, and what weather and way the dearest friends of
   God have found; even so would I have you, thirdly, to consider for your
   further comfort, that if you shrink not, but go on forwards, pressing
   to the mark appointed, all the power of your enemies shall not overcome
   you, nor in any point hurt you. (Phil. iii.) But this you must not
   consider according to the judgment of reason, and the sense of old
   Adam, but according to the judgment of God's word and the experience of
   faith and the new man, for else you mar all. For to reason, and to the
   experience of our sense, or of the outward man, we poor souls which
   stick to God's word, to serve him as he requires, are only accounted to
   be vanquished and to be overcome; for we are cast into prison, lose our
   livings, friends, goods, country, and life also at length, as concerns
   this world. But, dearly beloved, God's word teaches otherwise, and
   faith feels accordingly. Is it not written, Who shall separate us from
   the love of God? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
   hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (Rom. viii.) As it is
   written, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted
   as sheep appointed to be slain. (Ps. xliv.) Nevertheless, in all these
   things we overcome through Him that loved us: for I am sure that
   neither death, nor life, neither angels, nor rule, nor power, neither
   things present, nor things to come, neither high nor low, neither any
   creature, shall be able to part us from that love wherewith God loves
   us in Christ Jesus our Lord. Thus spake one who was in affliction, as I
   am, for the Lord's gospel sake; his holy name be praised therefore, and
   may he grant me grace with the same to continue in like suffering unto
   the end. This (I say) one spoke who was in affliction for the gospel,
   but yet so far from being overcome, that he rejoiced rather for the
   victory which the gospel had. For though he was bound, yet the gospel
   was not bound (2 Tim. ii.,) and therefore he gives thanks unto God
   which always gives the victory in Christ, and opens the savour of his
   knowledge by us, and such as suffer for his truth, although they shut
   us up nearer so much, and drive us never so far out of our own natural
   country in every place. (2 Cor. ii.)

   The world for a time may deceive itself, thinking it has, the victory,
   but the end will try the contrary. Did not Cain think he had the
   victory when Abel was slain? (Gen. iv.) But how say you now is it not
   found otherwise? Thought not the old world and men then living, that
   they were wise and well, and Noah a fool, who would creep into an ark,
   leaving his house, lands, and possessions, for I think he was in an
   honest (prosperous, editor) state for the world. But I pray you who was
   wise when the flood came? Abraham was considered a fool to leave his
   own country, friends, and kin, because of God's word; but, dearly
   beloved, we know it proved otherwise. (Gen. xii.) I will leave all the
   patriarchs, and come to Moses, and the children of Israel. Tell me,
   were not they thought to be overcome and stark mad, when for fear of
   Pharaoh, at God's word, they ran into the Red Sea? (Exod. xiv.) Did not
   Pharaoh and the Egyptians think themselves sure of the victory? But it
   proved clean contrary. Saul was thought to be well, but David in an
   evil case, and most miserable, because he had no hole to hide him in;
   yet at length Saul's misery was seen, and David's felicity began to
   appear. (1 Sam. xvi. xvii. xviii. xix.) The prophet Micaiah being cast
   into prison for telling Ahab the truth was thought to be overcome by
   Zedekiah and the other false prophets; but, my good brethren and
   sisters, the holy history tells otherwise. (1 Kings xxii.) Who did not
   think the prophets happy in their time? For they were slain, prisoned,
   laughed to scorn, and jested at of every man. (Jer. xx., Isa. viii., 2
   Kings ii.) And so were all the apostles, (1 Cor. iv.) yea, the dearly
   beloved friend of God, than whom among the children of women none arose
   greater, I mean, John Baptist, who was beheaded, and that in prison,
   even for a dancing damsel's desire. As all these by the judgment of
   reason were then counted heretics, runagates, unlearned fools, fishers,
   publicans, &c., so now were they unhappy and overcome indeed, if God's
   word and faith did not show the contrary. (Rom. viii.)

   But what speak I of these? Look upon Jesus Christ, to whom we must be
   like fashioned here, if we will be like him elsewhere. Now, say you,
   was not he taken for a fool, a seditious person, a new fellow, a
   heretic, and one overcome of every body; yea, even forsaken, both of
   God and men? But the end told them, and tells us another tale; for now
   is he in majesty and glory unspeakable. When he was led to Pilate or
   Herod, or when he was in prison in Caiaphas' house, did not their
   reason think that he was overcome? When he was beaten, buffeted,
   scourged, crowned with thorns, banged upon the cross, and utterly left
   by all his disciples, taunted by the high-priests and elders, cursed by
   the commons, railed on by the magistrates, and laughed to scorn by the
   lewd (ignorant, editor) heathen, would not a man then have thought that
   he had been out of the way, and that his disciples were fools to follow
   him, and believe him? Think you, that whilst he lay in his grave, men
   did not point with their fingers, when they saw any that had followed
   and loved him, or believed in him and his doctrine, saying, "Where is
   their master and teacher now? What! is he gone? Forsooth, if they had
   not been fools, they might have well known that the learning he taught
   could not long continue." Our doctors and Pharisees are no fools now,
   they may see." On this sort men either spoke, or might have spoken,
   against all such as loved Christ or his doctrine; but yet at length
   they and all such were proved fools and wicked wretches. For our
   Saviour arose, maugre their beards (in spite of their opposition,
   editor), and published his gospel plentifully, in spite of their heads,
   and the heads of all the wicked world, with the great powers of the
   same; always overcoming, and then most of all, when he and his doctrine
   were thought to have had the greatest fall. As now, dearly beloved, the
   wicked world rejoices, the papists are puffed up against Christ and his
   people after their own kind, now they cry out, Where are these
   new-found preachers? Are they not in the Tower, Marshalsea, Fleet, and
   beyond the seas? Who would have thought that our old bishops, doctors,
   and deans, were fools, as they would have made us to believe, and
   indeed have persuaded some already, which are not of the wisest,
   especially if they come not home again to the holy church?

   These and such-like words they have, to cast in our teeth, as
   triumphers and conquerors; but, dearly beloved, short is their joy;
   they beguile themselves, this is but a lightening before their death.
   As God, after he had given the Jews a time to repent, visited them by
   Vespasian and Titus, most horribly to their utter subversion,
   delivering first all his people from among them, even so, my dear
   brethren, will he do with this age, when he has tried his children from
   amongst them, as now he begins to do, and, by suffering, has made us
   like to his Christ, and, by being overcome, to overcome indeed, to our
   eternal comfort. Then will he, if not otherwise, come himself in the
   clouds: (I Thess. iv.) I mean, our dear Lord, whom we confess, preach,
   and believe on; he will come (I say) with the blast of a trump, and
   shout of an archangel, and so shall we be caught up in the clouds to
   meet him in the air: the angels gathering together the wicked wretches,
   which now welter and wallow as the world and wind blows, to be tied in
   bundles and cast into the fire, which burns for ever most painfully.
   (Matt. xiii.) There and then shall they see who has the victory, they
   or we, when they shall see us afar ok in Abraham's bosom. (Luke xvi.)
   Then will they say, "Oh! we thought these folks fools, and had them in
   derision; we thought their life madness, and their end to be without
   honour: but look how they are counted among the children of God, and
   their portion is with the saints. (See the book of Wisdom.) Oh! we have
   gone amiss, and would not hearken." Such words as these shall the
   wicked say one day in hell, whereas now they triumph as conquerors. And
   thus much for you, thirdly, to look often upon; namely, that whatsoever
   is done unto you, yea, even death itself, shall not hurt you, any more
   than it did Abel, David, Daniel, John Baptist, Jesus Christ our Lord
   with other dear saints of God, who suffered for his name's sake. Let
   not reason therefore be judge in this matter, nor present sense, but
   faith and God's word, as I have shown; in the which, let us set before
   our eyes the shortness of this present time wherein we suffer, and
   consider the eternity to come, when our enemies and persecutors shall
   be in intolerable pains, helpless; and we, if we persevere to the end,
   shall be in such felicity and joys, dangerless, as the very heart of
   man in no point is able to conceive. (1 Cor. ii., Isa. ixiv.) If we
   consider this, (1 say,) we cannot but contemn and set nothing by the
   sorrows and gresses of (steps towards, editor) the cross, and lustily
   go through thick and thin with good courage.

   Thus have I declared unto you, things necessary to be mused on by every
   one who will abide by Christ and his gospel in this troublesome time,
   as I trust you all will. Namely, first to consider that we are not of
   this world, nor of the number of the worldlings, or retainers to Satan;
   that we are not at home in our own country, but of another world, of
   the congregation of the saints, and retainers to Christ, although in a
   region replete and full of untractable enemies. Secondly, that we may
   not think it a strange thing to be persecuted for God's gospel, from
   which the dearest friends of God were in no age free, as indeed it is
   impossible that they should for any long time be, their enemies being
   always about them to destroy them if they could. And thirdly, that the
   assaults of our enemies, be they never so many and fierce, in no point
   shall be able to prevail against our faith, albeit to reason it seems
   otherwise, wherethrough we ought to conceive good courage and comfort;
   for who will be afraid when he knows the enemies cannot prevail? Now I
   will, for the more encouraging you to the cross, give you a further
   memorandum, namely, of the commodities (advantages, editor) and profits
   which come by the trouble and affliction now risen and to arise to us,
   which are God's children, elect through Jesus Christ. But look not here
   to have repeated all the commodities which come by the cross to such as
   are well exercised therein, for that were more than I can do; I will
   only speak of a few, thereby to occasion you to gather and at the
   length to feel and perceive more.

   First, That there is no cross which comes upon any of us without the
   counsel of our heavenly Father; for as to the fancy about Fortune, it
   is wicked, as many places of the Scriptures do teach, Amos, iii. Matt.
   x. Isa. xiv. And we must needs, to the commendation of God's justice
   (for in all his doings he is just,) acknowledge in ourselves that we
   have deserved at the hands of our heavenly Father this his cross or rod
   which is fallen upon us, we have deserved it, if not by our
   unthankfulness, slothfulness, negligence, intemperance, uncleanness,
   and other sins committed often by us, whereof our consciences can and
   will accuse us if we call them to counsel, with the examination of our
   former life, yet at least by our original and birth sin. Also by
   doubling of the greatness of God's anger and mercy; by self-love,
   concupiscence, and such-like sins, which as we brought them with us
   into this world, so the same always abide in us, and even as a spring
   always bring something forth in act with us, notwithstanding the
   continual fight of God's Spirit in us against it. Ps. 1., Heb. xii.,
   Gal. v.

   The first advantage therefore that the cross brings is knowledge, and
   that both of God and of ourselves. Of God, that he is just, pure, and
   hates sin. Of ourselves, that we are born in sin, and are from top to
   toe defiled with concupiscence and corruption, out of which have sprung
   all the evils that ever at any time we have spoken and done. (Ps. li.,
   Gen. viii., Jer. xvii.) The greatest and most special whereof we are
   occasioned by the cross to call to mind, as the brethren of Joseph did
   their evil deed against him when the cross once came upon them. (Gen.
   xiii.) And so by it we come to the first step to get health for our
   souls, that is, we are driven to know our sins, original and actual, by
   God's justice declared in the cross.

   Secondly, the end wherefore God declares his justice against our sin
   both original and actual; and would by his cross have us consider the
   same, and call to mind our former evil deeds, the end whereof is this,
   that we might lament, be sorry, sigh, and pray for pardon, that so
   doing we might obtain the same by means of faith in the merits of Jesus
   Christ his dear Son. And further, that we, being humbled because of the
   evil that dwells in us, might become thankful for God's goodness and
   love, in continual watching and wariness to suppress the evil which
   lies in us, that it bring not forth fruit to death at any time. (James
   i.) This second advantage of the cross therefore we must not count to
   be a simple knowledge only, but a great gain of God's mercy, with
   wonderful, rich, and precious virtues of faith, repentance, remission
   of sins, humility, thankfulness, mortification, and diligence in doing
   good. Not that properly the cross works these things of itself, but
   because the cross is the mean and way by which God works the knowledge
   and feeling of these things in his children; as many, both testimonies
   and examples in the Scriptures, are easily found of them that
   diligently weigh what they read therein.

   To these two advantages of the cross, join the third of God's singular
   wisdom that it may be coupled with his justice and mercy. On this sort
   therefore let us conceive when we see the gospel of God and his church
   persecuted and troubled, as now it is with us, that because the great,
   learned, and wise men of the world use not their wisdom to love and
   serve God, though he opens himself manifestly by his visible creatures
   to natural wisdom and reason, (Rom. i.,) therefore God both justly
   infatuates and makes them foolish, giving them up to insensibleness
   especially herein; for on this manner they reason concerning the
   affliction which comes for the gospel: "If", say they "this were God's
   word, if these people were God's children, surely God would then bless
   and prosper them and their doctrine. But now since there is no doctrine
   so much hated, no people so much persecuted as they are, therefore it
   cannot be of God. Rather this is of God which our Queen and old bishops
   have professed, for how has God preserved them and kept them! What a
   notable victory has God given unto her, where it seemed impossible that
   things should have come to pass so as they have done! And did not the
   great captain confess his fault, that he was out of the way, and not of
   the faith which these gospellers profess? (The Duke of Northumberland
   the father of Lady Jane Grey, who opposed Queen Mary and, being
   condemned to die, professed to be a papist, editor.) How many are come
   again, from that which they professed to be God's word? The most part
   of this realm, notwithstanding the diligence of preachers to persuade
   them concerning this new learning, which now is persecuted, never
   consented to it in heart, as experience teaches. And what plagues have
   come upon this realm since this gospel, as they call it, came in
   amongst us? Before, we had plenty, but now there is nothing like as it
   was. Moreover, all the houses of the parliament have overthrown the
   laws made for the stablishing of this gospel and religion, and new laws
   are erected for the continuance of the contrary. How miraculously God
   confounds their doctrine, and confirms ours! For how was Wyat
   overthrown! How prosperously came in our King! How has God blessed our
   Queen with fruit of womb! (It was then supposed that Queen Mary was
   with child, editor.) How is the Pope's Holiness restored again to his
   right! All these things teach plainly that this their doctrine is not
   God's word." Thus reason the worldly wise, which see not God's wisdom;
   for else, if they considered that there was with us unthankfulness for
   the gospel, no amendment of life, but all kind of contempt of God, and
   that all kind of shameless sinning ensued the preaching of the gospel;
   they must needs see that God could not but chastise and correct; and as
   he let Satan loose, after he had bound him a certain time for
   unthankfulness of men, so he let these champions of Satan run abroad,
   by them to plague us for our unthankfulness. (Rev. xx.) Great was God's
   anger against Ahab, because he saved Benhadad, king of Syria, after God
   had given him into his hands, and afterwards it turned to his own
   destruction. (1 Kings, xx.) God would that double sorrow should have
   been repaid to them, because of the sorrow they did to the saints of
   God. Read the 18th of the Revelation.

   As for the victory given to the Queen's Highness, if men had any godly
   understanding, they might see many things in it. First, God has done it
   to win her heart to the gospel. Again, he has done it, as well because
   they that went against her put their trust in horses and power of men,
   and not in God, as because in their doing they sought not the
   propagation of God's gospel, which thing is now plainly seen. Therefore
   no marvel why God fought against them, seeing they were hypocrites, and
   under the cloak of the gospel would have debarred the Queen's Highness
   of her right, but God would not so cloak them. (Many of the most
   sincere followers of the truth assisted Queen Mary against Lady Jane,
   considering that she was rightful heir to the throne. She also promised
   that she would not oppose the protestant religion as established by
   Edward V1. Editor.)

   Now for the relenting, returning, and recanting of some, from that
   which they once professed or preached. Alas! who would wonder at it?
   for they never came to the gospel, but for commodity and gain's sake,
   and now for gain they leave it. The multitude, is no good argument to
   move a wise man; for who knows not how to love this world better than
   heaven, and themselves better than their neighbours? "Wide is the gate,
   says Christ, (Matt. vii.,) and broad is the way that leads to
   destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; but strait is the
   gate and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that
   find it." All the whole multitude cried out upon Jesus, Crucify him,
   Crucify him, but they were not to be believed because they were the
   bigger part. All Chaldea followed still their false gods, Abraham alone
   followed the true God. (Gen. xii.) And where they say that greater
   plagues are fallen upon the realm, in poverty and such other things,
   than before, it is no argument to move others, except such as love
   their swine better than Christ, (Matt. viii.;) for the devil chiefly
   desires his seat to be in religion. If it is there, then he will meddle
   with nothing we have, all shall be quiet enough; but if he be raised
   (driven, editor) thence, then will he beg leave to have at our swine.
   Read Matt. viii. of the Gergesites. As long as with us he had the
   ruling of religion, which now he has gotten again, then was he Robin
   Goodfellow, he would do no hurt: but when he was tumbled out of his
   throne by preaching of the gospel, then he ranged about as he has done,
   but secretly. Finally, effectual he has not been, but in the children
   of unbelief. (Eph. ii.) Them indeed has he stirred up to be covetous,
   oppressors, blasphemers, usurers, whoremongers, thieves, murderers,
   tyrants, and yet perchance he suffers them to profess the gospel, the
   more thereby to hinder it, and cause it to be slandered. How many now
   appear to have been true gospellers? As for the parliament and statutes
   thereof, no man of wisdom can think otherwise, but that, look what the
   rulers will, the same must there be enacted; for it goes not in those
   houses by the better part, but by the bigger part. And it is a common
   saying, and no less true, that the greater part overcomes the better;
   so they did in condemning Christ, not regarding the counsel of
   Nicodemus. (John vii.) So they did also in many general councils; but
   all wise men know that acts of parliament are not for God's law in
   respect of God's law, but in respect of the people. Now what we are God
   knows, and all the world is more pleased a great deal, to have the
   devil's decrees than God's religion, so great is our contempt of it.
   And therefore justly for our sins (as Job says) God has set hypocrites
   to reign over us, which can no more abide God's true religion, than the
   owl the light, or bleared eyes the bright sun; for it will have them to
   do their duties, and walk in diligent doing of the works of their
   vocation. If God's word had place, bishops could not play chancellors
   and idle prelates as they do; priests should be otherwise known than by
   their shaven crowns and tippets: but enough of this. As for miracles of
   success against Wyat and others, of the king's coming in, &c., I would
   men would consider there are two kinds of miracles, one to prepare and
   confirm men in the doctrine which they have received, and another to
   prove and try men how they have received it, and how they will stick
   unto it. Of the former kind, these are not miracles; but of the second,
   by this success given to the queen, God tries whether we will stick to
   his truth, simply for his truth sake, or no. This is a mighty illusion,
   which God sends to prove his people, and to deceive the hypocrites,
   which receive not God's truth simply, but in respect of gain, praise,
   estimation. Read how Ahab was deceived, 1 Kings xxii., 2 Thess. ii.,
   Deut. xiii.

   But I will now return to the third advantage coming by the cross. Here
   let us see the wisdom of God in making foolish the wisdom of the world,
   which knows little of man's corruption; how foul it is in the sight of
   God, and how it displeases him. Which knows little what the portion of
   God's people is in another world. Which knows little of the Pattern of
   Christians, Christ Jesus. Which knows little of the general judgment of
   God, the greater malice of Satan to God's people, and the price and
   estimation of the gospel; and therefore in the cross it sees not, as
   God's wisdom would we should see; namely, that God, in punishing them
   which sin least, would have his anger against sin seen most, and to be
   better considered and feared. In punishing his people here, he kindles
   their desire towards their celestial home. In punishing his servants in
   this life, he conforms and makes them like to Christ, that, as they are
   like in suffering, so shall they be in reigning. (Phil. i.) In
   punishing his church in the world, he gives a demonstration of his
   judgment which shall come on all men, when the godless shall there find
   rest, though now they are afflicted, and the wicked now wallowing in
   wealth shall be wrapped in woe and smart. In punishing the professors
   of his gospel in earth, he sets forth the malice of Satan against the
   gospel and his people; for the more confirming of their faith, and the
   gospel to be God's word indeed, and that they are God's people, for
   else the devil would let them alone. (Acts xvi.) In punishing the
   lovers of his truth more than others, which care not for it, he puts
   them in mind how they have not valued, as they should have done, the
   jewel of his word and gospel. Before such trial and experience came,
   perchance they thought they had believed and had faith, which now they
   see was but a lip-faith, a mock faith, or an opinion; all which things
   we see are occasions for us to take better heed by means of the cross.
   Therefore, thirdly, let us consider the cross to be commodious for us
   to learn God's wisdom, and what is man's foolishness, God's displeasure
   at sin, and desire to be with God, the conformity with Christ, the
   general judgment, the malice of Satan, hatred of sin, that the gospel
   is God's word, and how it is to be esteemed, &c. Thus much for this.

   Now will I, fourthly, briefly show you, that the cross or trouble is
   profitable for us to learn and behold better the providence, presence,
   and power of God, that all these may be coupled together as in a chain
   to hang about our necks, I mean God's justice, mercy, wisdom, power,
   presence, and providence. When all things are at rest, and men are not
   in trouble, then they commonly are forgetful of God, and attribute too
   much to their own wisdom, policy, providence, And diligence, as though
   they were the procurers of their own fortune, and workers of their own
   weal. But when the cross comes, and that in such sort as their wits,
   policies, and friends cannot help, though the wicked despair, run from
   God to saints, and such other unlawful means, yet the godly therein
   behold the presence, the providence, and power of God. For the
   Scripture teaches that all things come from God, both weal and woe, and
   that the same should be looked upon as God's work, although Satan, the
   devil, be often an instrument by whom God works justly and mercifully;
   justly to the wicked, and mercifully to the godly; as by the examples
   of wicked Saul and godly Job we may easily see God's work by Satan, his
   instrument in them both. The children of God, therefore, which before
   forget God in prosperity, now in adversity are awakened to see God in
   his work, and no more depend on their own forecast, power, friends,
   wisdom, riches, &;c., but learn to cast themselves on God's providence
   and power, whereby they are so preserved and governed, and very often
   miraculously delivered, that the very wicked cannot but see God's
   providence, presence, and power, in the cross and affliction of his
   children, as they (his children I mean) to their joy do feel, thereby
   learning to know God to be the governor of all things. He it is that
   gives peace, he it is that sends war, he gives plenty and poverty, he
   sets up and casts down, he brings to death and afterwards gives life.
   His presence is everywhere, his providence is within and without, his
   power is the pillar whereby the godly stand, and to it they lean, as no
   less able to set up than to cast down. (Isa. xiv., Hosea i., Luke i.
   Ps. cxxxix., 1 Pet. v.) Which the apostle saw in his afflictions, find
   therefore rejoiced greatly in them, that God's power might singularly
   be seen therein. (2 Cor. iv.) Concerning this, I might bring forth
   innumerable examples of the addiction of God's children, both in the
   Old and New Testament, wherein we may see how they felt God's presence,
   providence, and power, plentifully. But I will omit examples, because
   every one of us, that has been or is in trouble, cannot but by the same
   remember God's presence, which we feel by his hand upon us; his
   providence which leaves us not unprovided for, without any of our own
   provisions, and his power which both preserves us from many other
   evils, which else would come upon us, and also makes us able to bear
   more than we thought we could have done. So very often he delivers us
   by such means, as have been thought most foolish, and to have been
   little regarded; and therefore we shake off our sleep of security, and
   forgetting of God, our trust and shift are in our own policies, our
   hanging on men, or on our own power. So the cross, you see, is
   advantageous, fourthly, for to see God's presence, providence, and
   power, and our negligence, forgetfulness of God, security, self-love,
   trust, and confidence in ourselves, and that the things in this life
   are to be cast off, as the others are to be taken hold on. And this
   shall suffice for the commodities which come by the cross, wherethrough
   we may be in love with it for the commodities' sake, which at length we
   shall find, though at present in sense we feel them not. No castigation
   or punishment is sweet for the present instant, says the apostle, but
   afterward the end and work of the thing is otherwise. (Heb. xii.) As we
   see in medicines, the more wholesome they are, the more unpleasant is
   the taste thereof, as in pills, potions, and such like bitter stuff,
   yet we will, on the physician's word, drink them gladly for the benefit
   which comes of them. And, dearly beloved, although to lose life, and
   goods, or friends, for God's gospel sake seems a bitter and sour thing,
   yet in that our Physician, which cannot lie, Jesus Christ I mean, tells
   us, that it is very wholesome, howsoever it be loathsome, let us with
   good cheer take the cup at his hand, and drink it cheerfully. If the
   cup seem unpleasant, and the drink too bitter, let us put some sugar
   therein, even a piece of that which Moses cast into the bitter water,
   and made the same pleasant: (Exod. xv.) I mean an ounce, yea, a dram of
   Christ's afflictions and cross, which he suffered for us. (I Pet. iv.)
   If we call this to mind, and cast of them into our cup, considering
   what he was, what he suffered, of whom, for whom, to what end, and what
   came thereof, surely we cannot loath our medicine, but we shall wink
   and drink it lustily (heartily, editor). Lustily, therefore, drink the
   cup which Christ gives, and will give unto you, my good brethren and
   sisters; I mean, prepare yourselves to suffer whatever God will lay
   upon you for the confessing of his holy name. If not, because of these
   three things, that ye are not of the world, ye suffer not alone, your
   trouble shall not hurt you, yet for the commodities which come of the
   cross, I beseech you heartily to embrace it. The fight is but short,
   the joy is exceeding great. We must pray always; (Luke xviii.) then
   shall we undoubtedly be directed in all things by God's Holy Spirit,
   which Christ has promised to be our doctor, teacher, and comforter;
   and, therefore, we need not fear what man or devil can do unto us,
   either by false teaching or cruel persecution; for our Pastor is such a
   one that none can take his sheep out of his hands. John xiv. xv. xvi.

   Thus much, my dear brethren and sisters in our dear Lord and Saviour
   Jesus Christ, I thought good to write unto you for your comfort. From
   which, if ye, for fear of man, loss of goods, friends, or life, swerve
   or depart, then you depart and swerve from Christ, and so snare
   yourselves in Satan's sophistry to your utter subversion. Therefore, as
   St. Peter says, "Watch, be sober; for as a roaring lion, he seeks to
   devour you." Be strong in faith; that is, mammer not (hesitate not,
   editor), waver not in God's promises, but believe certainly that they
   pertain to you; that God is with you in trouble; that he will deliver
   you, and glorify you. (Heb. xiii., 1 Pet. ii. v., John x., Acts ii.)
   But yet see that you call upon him, specially, that you enter not into
   temptation, as he taught his disciples even at such time as he saw
   Satan desire to sift them, as now he has done to sift us. (Ps. xciii,
   Matt. xxvi., Luke xxii.) O dear Saviour, prevent him now as thou did
   then, with thy prayer, I beseech thee, and grant that our faith faint
   not, but strengthen us to confirm the weak, that they deny not thee and
   thy gospel, that they return not to their vomit, stumbling on those
   sins from which there is no recovery, causing thee to deny them before
   thy Father, making their latter end worse than the beginning, as was
   the case with Lot's wife, Judas Iscariot, Francis Spira, and many
   others. But rather strengthen them and us all in thy grace, and in
   those things which thy word teaches, that we may here hazard our life
   for thy sake, and so shall we be sure to save it, as if we seek to save
   it, we cannot but lose it; and that being lost, what profit can we
   have, if we win the whole world? (2 Pet. ii., Matt. x., Heb. vi. x.,
   Mark viii., Luke xi., Matt. vi.) Oh, set thou always before our eyes,
   not as reason does, this life, the pleasure of the same, death of the
   body, imprisonment, &c. but everlasting life, and those unspeakable
   joys which undoubtedly they shall have, which take up the cross and
   follow thee; and they must needs at length fall into eternal hell fire
   and destruction of soul and body for evermore, which are afraid for the
   hoar frost of adversity that man or the devil stirs up to stop or
   hinder us from going forwards our journey to heaven's bliss to which do
   thou bring us for thy name's sane. Amen.

   Your own in the Lord,

   John Bradford.

     __________________________________________________________________

A Short and Pithy Defence of the Doctrine of the Holy Election and
Predestination of God

   Gathered out of the first chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the
   Ephesians

   Addressed to a dear friend

   By John Bradford

   And treating briefly but most perfectly, godly, soundly, and pithily,
   of God's holy election, free grace, and mercy in Jesus Christ

   A letter written to a dear friend of his, wherein he treats briefly,
   but most perfectly, godly, soundly, and pithily, of God's holy
   election, free grace, and mercy in Jesus Christ.

   Dated October 22, 1554.

   Faith in God's election, I mean, to believe that we are in very deed
   the children of God through Christ, and shall be for ever inheritors of
   everlasting life through the grace alone of God our Father in the same
   Christ, is of all things which God requires of us, not only the
   principal, but also the whole sum. So that without this faith there is
   nothing we do that can please God. And therefore God first requires it
   by saying, I am the Lord thy God &c., (Exod. xx.;) that is, I remit thy
   sins, and give thee my Holy Spirit, and I will keep thee for ever. And
   our Saviour would have us persuaded of this when we come to pray, and
   therefore teaches, yea, he commands us to call God our Father, whose
   power were not infinite, as we profess in the first article of our
   belief, where we expressly call him our Almighty Father, if we doubt
   his final favour. And therefore I cannot but marvel at some men, who
   seem to be godly, and yet are in this behalf too malicious both to God
   and man. For what is more seemly to God than mercy, which is most
   magnified by the elect children of God? And what is more seemly for man
   than humility, which is not and cannot be truly, except in the elect of
   God; for they alone reckon nothing at all due to themselves but
   damnation, that their whole glory may be in God, only and for ever. But
   notwithstanding this, there are those who have gone about together, to
   set abroad enormities from the doctrine of God's most holy and
   comfortable election and predestination, although that doctrine has
   more advantages than all the whole world are able to conceive, much
   less to express. For what destroys enormities so much as it does? It
   overthrows the most pestilent papistical poison, the doubting of God's
   favour, which is the very dungeon of despair and contempt of God. It
   destroys the heathenish opinion of fortune (or chance, editor). It
   comforts most comfortably under the cross and casts down all
   cogitations, which would else cover us with sorrow and grief, by
   telling us that all things shall turn for the best. (Rom. viii.) It
   makes us modest, and puts away pride in prosperity, by pulling from men
   the thought of their meriting or deserving. It forces men to love, and
   carefully to labour for their brethren, utterly preventing the
   despising of any. It excites to piety, and is the greatest enemy of
   ungodliness that can be, by teaching us of what dignity we are, of what
   value even our bodies are, as temples of the Holy Ghost and members of
   Christ. It causes a real desire for our home in heaven, and so leads us
   to despise this world, and the things which this world values. It makes
   man wholly and continually be careful not for himself but for others,
   and for the things which are for God's glory. It helps very much to the
   true understanding of the scriptures, and preserves from errors, by
   causing us to know what is to be attributed to the law, to the gospel,
   to the ministry, to the vocal word (the spoken word, editor), to them
   Old Testament, to the New Testament, to the sacraments, to faith, to
   works, to prayer, to penance, to God, to man, &c. For by the Spirit of
   election we see and know Christ, in whom dwells all the riches and
   treasures of knowledge. It sets up Christ's kingdom, and entirely
   overthrows the wisdom, power, choice, and ability of man, that all
   glory may be given to God alone.

   But why do I try to reckon the advantages proceeding from the doctrine
   of God's election, for they are innumerable? This is the sum, that
   where a Christian man's life has respect to God, to man, and to
   himself, to live godly, justly, and soberly, all is grounded upon
   predestination in Christ. For who lives in a godly manner but he that
   believes? And who believes but such as are ordained to eternal life?
   (Acts xiii.) Who lives justly but such as love their neighbours? And
   whence springs this love but from God's election before the beginning
   of the world, that we might be blameless by love? Who lives soberly but
   such as are holy? And who are they but those alone who are endued with
   the spirit of sanctification, which is the seal of the election of us
   who believe? (Eph. i., 2 Cor. ii.)

   Wherefore, my dearly beloved in the Lord, I have undertaken to write
   something to you and for your sake in this matter, which I have sent
   you herewith, as well to be a help to you therein, as also to be a
   pledge of my anxious love and hearty desire which I have for your
   continuance in the truth, (wherein I trust you stand at present,) when
   I am dead and burned, as I fully expect as soon as God shall give leave
   to his enemies, for my benefit and endless joy in Christ. To Him, as to
   a most faithful Pastor, from the bottom of my heart I commend and
   bequeath you, beseeching him to watch over you night and day as over
   one of his poor lambs, and to keep you out of the claws of the lion,
   and the mouth of the wolves, to his glory and your eternal joy and
   comfort in him. Amen.

   There is neither virtue nor vice to be considered according to any
   outward action, nor according to the will and wisdom of man, but
   according to the will of God. Whatsoever is conformable thereto is
   virtue, and the action that springs thereof is laudable and good,
   however otherwise it appear to the eyes and reason of man, as was the
   lifting up of Abraham's hand to have slain his son. (Gen. xxii.)
   Whatever is not conformable to the will of God, is vice, and the action
   springing thereof is to be disallowed and taken for evil; and that so
   much the more and the greater evil, by how much it is not consonant and
   agreeing to God's will, although it seems far otherwise to man's
   wisdom, as was Peter's wish of making three tabernacles, (Matt. xvii.)
   and the request of some who would have had fire to have come down from
   heaven from a zeal to God, &c. (Luke ix.)

   Now the will of God is only known as it is set forth in his word;
   therefore according to it must vice and virtue, good and be judged; and
   not according to the judgment, wisdom, reason, and collection of any
   man, or of the whole world, if all the angels in heaven should take
   their part.

   But this word of God, which is written in the canonical books of the
   Bible, plainly sets forth unto us, that God has of his own mercy and
   good will, and to the praise of his grace and glory in Christ, elected
   some and not all, whom he has predestinated unto everlasting life in
   the same Christ; and in his time calls them, justifies them and
   glorifies them, so that they shall never perish and err to damnation
   finally.

   Therefore to affirm, teach, and preach this doctrine has in it no hurt,
   no vice, no evil; much less then has it any enormity (as some affirm)
   to the eyes and spirit of them which are guided, and will be, by the
   word of God.

   That God, the eternal Father of mercies, before the beginning of the
   world, has of his own mercy and good will, and to the praise of his
   grace and glory, elected in Christ some, and not all of the posterity
   of Adam, whom he has predestinated unto eternal life, and calls them in
   his time, justifies them, and glorifies them, so that they shall never
   perish or err to damnation finally; that this proposition is true, and
   according to God's plain and manifest word, by the help of his Holy
   Spirit which in the name of Jesus Christ I humbly beseech his mercy
   plenteously to give to me at this present and for every to the
   sanctification of his holy name; is what by the help. I say, of his
   Holy Spirit, I trust so evidently to declare, that no man of God shall
   be able by the word of God ever to impugn it, much less to confute it.

   In the first chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, they apostle says
   thus: "Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has
   blessed us with all manner of blessings in heavenly things by Christ;
   according as he has elected or chosen us in him before the foundation
   of the world was laid, that we should be holy and without blame before
   him through love; and has predestinated us (or ordained us) through
   Jesus Christ, to be heirs unto himself, according to the good pleasure
   of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has
   made us accepted in the Beloved, by whom we have received redemption
   through his blood, and the forgiveness of our eight, according to the
   riches of his grace. Which grace he has shed on us abundantly in all
   wisdom and understanding, and has opened unto us the mystery of his
   will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in himself, to
   have it declared when the time was full come, that he might gather
   together all things by (or in) Christ, as well the things that are in
   heaven, as the things that are on earth, even in (or by) him. By (or
   in) whom we are made heirs, being thereto predestinated, according to
   the purpose of Him who works all things according to the decree (or
   counsel) of his own will, that we which hoped before you in Christ,
   should be unto the praise of his glory; in whom ye also hoped after
   that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; wherein
   ye also believing, were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise which is
   the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption (or full fruition)
   of the purchased possession unto the praise of his glory."

   These are the words of Paul, which I have faithfully translated
   according to the very text in the Greek, as by the judgment of all that
   are learned, I desire to be tried out of which words of Paul we may
   well perceive everything affirmed in my proposition, as I will give
   occasion plainly to them that will to see it.

   First, the apostle shows that the cause of God's election is of his
   good will, in saying, that it is through his love whereby we are holy
   and without blame, also 'according to the good pleasure of his will,
   according to his good pleasure purposed in himself, according to his
   purpose which works all things after the counsel of his own will.'

   Secondly, the apostle plainly shows, that election was before the
   beginning of the world, in saying, that we were 'chosen before the
   foundation of the world' was laid; and afterwards in calling it 'the
   mystery of his will purposed with himself in time to be declared.'

   Thirdly, the apostle so flatly and plainly sets forth that election is
   in Christ, that I need not here repeat it. 'We (says he) are chosen in
   him; we are heirs by him; we are accepted by him; we are gathered
   together in him,' &c.

   Fourthly, that election is of some of Adam's posterity, and not of all;
   we may plainly see, if we consider, that he makes the true
   demonstration of it, believing, hoping, and having the earnest of the
   Spirit. 'In whom ye hoped (says he) after ye heard the word,' &c.; in
   whom ye believed, were sealed up, &c. Again, in attributing to the
   elect forgiveness of sins, holiness, blameless living, being in Christ,
   &c. 'That we should be holy, says he, &;c. we have received forgiveness
   of sin', &c. Who sees not that these are not common to all men? 'All
   men have not faith,' says Paul, 2 Thess. iii. 'None believed (says
   Luke) but such as were ordained to eternal life' (Acts xiii.;) none
   believe but such as 'are born of God;' (I John v.;) none believe truly
   but such as heave good hearts, and keep God's seed, to bring forth
   fruits by patience. (Matt. xiii.)

   So that it is plain (faith being a demonstration of God's election to
   them that are of years of discretion) that all men are not elect,
   because all men believe not; for 'he that believes in the Lord, shall
   be as Mount Sion,' (Psalm cxxv.) that is, he shall never be removed;
   for if he be removed, that is, finally perish, surely he never truly
   believed. But why go I about to light a candle in the clear sun-light,
   when our Saviour plainly says that all are not chosen, but only few?
   'Many are called, (says he, Matt. xx.) but few are chosen.' And in the
   second chapter to the Ephesians the apostle plainly says, that the
   great riches of God's mercies, through his exceeding great love has
   saved them, before their parents and many other Gentiles, which were
   excluded from Christ, and strangers from the promise, hopeless,
   godless, &c. Wherethrough we may be occasioned to cry, Oh! the depths
   of the judgments of God, (Rom. ii.) who is just in all his doings, and
   holy in all his works, extending his mercy after his good pleasure and
   will over all his works. (Psalm cxlv.)

   Fifthly, that God has predestinated these, who are the elect unto
   everlasting life in Christ, the apostle also declares in the words
   before written, in saying, 'And has predestinated us through Jesus
   Christ to be heirs unto himself' Again, 'By him (says he) ye are made
   heirs, and predestinated to the praise of his glory.' So says the
   apostle, (Rom. viii.) 'Whom he has predestinated, them he has
   predestinated to be like fashioned unto the shape of his Son.' And
   Christ therefore says, 'Rejoice in this, your names are written in
   heaven.' (Luke x.)

   Sixthly, that the end of election is to the praise of God's glory and
   grace, the apostle shows in saying, we are predestinated to be holy and
   without blame before God, &c.; in saying, we are predestinated to the
   glory of his grace', and in also, 'unto the praise of his glory, so
   that nothing can be more manifest.

   Seventhly, that predestination is not without vocation in God's time,
   and justification, the apostle here teaches in bringing us to the
   consideration of hearing the word of truth, believing and receiving the
   Holy Spirit, remission of sins, &c. "In whom" (says he) "ye have hoped,
   after that ye heard the word of truth," &c. Again, "By whom ye have
   redemption, that is, remission of sins, through the shedding of his
   blood," &c. also "He has in his full time declared the mystery of his
   will," &c. Unto the Romans the apostle shows it most manifestly, in
   saying, 'whom he has predestinated, them he calls, whom he calls, them
   he justifies;' whereby we may see that predestination or election is
   not universal or of all, for all are not justified.

   Eighthly, and last of all, the apostle here also very plainly shows,
   that election is so certain, that the elect and predestinate to eternal
   life shall never finally perish or err to damnation, in saying, that
   they are predestinate to the praise of God's grace. He says not, to the
   praise of his justice, to the praise of his wisdom, to the praise of
   his power, although he might most truly say so; but he says, 'to the
   praise of his grace,' which were not grace, if there were any respect
   at all of works on our behalf; for then were grace not grace. (Rom.
   xii.) If there should be any condemnation of the elect and predestinate
   to eternal life, it must needs be because of their sins; but where
   would be the praise of God's grace then, which is the end of God's
   election? Shall we not by this means make God's election without an
   end, and so without a head, and so no election at all, as some would
   have it further than they elect themselves? Let such fear they shall
   not find the benefit of God's election, because they seek it as the
   Israelites did, and not as the elect, which not only find it, but also
   obtain it. (Rom. xi.) The others are blinded, as it is written, God has
   given them the spirit of unquietness, eyes that they should not see,
   and ears that they should not hear, even to this day, &c. (Psalm lxix.)
   Again, he shows the certainly of salvation to them that are elected in
   saying, that they are accepted in the Beloved, once accepted and
   beloved in Christ, and ever beloved; for whom he loves, he loves to the
   end. (John xiii.) And God's gifts are such that he cannot repent him of
   them, (Rom. xi.;) and therefore, says Christ, "I know whom I have
   chosen," attributing to election the cause of final perseverance. By
   which Judas was seen not to be elected to eternal life, although he was
   elected to the office of an apostle, as Saul was elected to the office
   of a king: which kind of election is to be discerned (distinguished,
   editor) in reading the scriptures, from this kind of election which I
   speak of now, that is, from election to eternal life in Christ.
   Thirdly, he shows the certainty of the salvation of the elect, by
   calling them heirs. For if we are heirs of God, then are we
   fellow-heirs with Christ, to be afflicted and glorified with Christ,
   (Rom. viii.;) and therefore says he, 'according to the decree of his
   own will.' Lo! he calls it a decree or counsel, Which shall stand; as
   Isaiah says, 'the counsel of the Lord shall stand.' (Isa. xlvi.)
   Fourthly, he shows this certainty, by saying, that 'they are elect and
   predestinated to the praise of God's glory, which we should more care
   for, than for the salvation of all the world.' This glory of the Lord
   is set forth, as well in them that perish, and are reprobates, as in
   the elect: and therefore St. John, bringing in the place of Isaiah,
   speaking of the reprobate, says, (John xli.) that Isaiah spoke that
   when he saw the glory of the Lord. This glory of the Lord to be set
   forth by us, is a great mercy and benefit of God: I am assured, that if
   the very devils and reprobates did not repine hereat, but were thankful
   that they might be ministers in any point to set forth God's glory; I
   am assured (I say) that they should find no hell nor torments: their
   hell and torments come of the love they have to themselves, and of the
   malice, envy, and hatred them have against God and his glory. Let them
   tremble and fear, that may not away with (who cannot endure, editor)
   the glory of the Lord, in election and reprobation.

   Let not their eyes be evil, because God is good, and does good to whom
   it pleases him. (Rom. ix.) He does wrong to no man, nor can do, for
   then he were not righteous, and so no God. He cannot condemn the just,
   for then were he untrue, because his word is contrary; he cannot
   condemn the penitent and believer, for that were against his promise.
   Let us, therefore, labour, study, cry, and pray for repentance and
   faith; and then we cannot be damned, because we are the blessed of the
   Father before all worlds; and therefore we believe, therefore we
   repent. (Matt. xxv.) And forasmuch as it pertains to us who are within,
   to see and to speak of those things which are given unto us of God in
   Christ, (1 Cor. ii.,) let us labour hereabouts, and leave them that are
   without to the Lord, who will judge them in his time. (1 Cor. v.) The
   apostle prayed for the Ephesians, for no other wisdom and revelation
   from God than that whereby they might know God, (Eph. i.) and have
   their minds illuminated to see what they should hope for by their
   vocation, and how rich the glory of his inheritance is in his saints.
   Further than this I think it unseemly for us to search, until we have
   sought out how rich God's goodness is, and will be to us his children
   which we can never do fully; but the more we go thereabout, and the
   more we taste his goodness, the more we shall love him, and loath all
   things that displease him. This, I say, let us do, and not be too busy
   in searching the majesty and glory of God, or in nourishing in anywise
   the doubting of our salvation, whereunto we are ready enough, and the
   devil goes about nothing else so much as that; for by it we are dull to
   do good to others, we are so careful for ourselves. By it we are more
   dull to do good to ourselves, because we stand in doubt whether it
   profits us or not; by it we dishonour God, either in making him as
   though he were not true, or else as though our salvation came not only
   and altogether from him, but hanged partly on ourselves; by it the
   devil will bring men at length to despair and hatred of God. Doubt once
   of the salvation, and continue to do so, and surely he will ask no
   more. It was the first thing wherewith he tempted Christ: "If thou be
   the Son of God, &c. (Matt. iv.) It is the first and principal dart that
   he casts at God's elect; but as he prevailed not against Christ, no
   more shall he prevail against any of his members, for they have the
   shield of faith, which quenches his fiery darts. (Eph. vi.) They praise
   God night and day, (Luke xviii.;) how then should they perish? The
   angels of the Lord pitch their tents round about them, (Ps. xxxiv.,)
   how then should Satan prevail. They are borne in the hands of the
   angels, lest they should hurt their feet at any stone; God has given
   commandment to his angels over them, (Ps. xci.;) the angels are
   ministers unto them, (Heb. i.;) their names are written in the book of
   life, and therefore Christ bade them rejoice, (Luke x.,) as Paul does
   the Philippians, in the fourth chapter, for nothing shall separate them
   from the love wherewith God loves them in Christ Jesus, (Rom. viii.,)
   who says, that it is impossible for them to err finally to damnation,
   (Matt. xxiv.,) for he is their light to illumine their darkness, (Ps.
   xviii.;) they are given to him to keep, and he is faithful over all
   God's children. He says he will keep them so that they shall never
   perish. (John vi. x.) After they believe, they are entered already into
   everlasting life, (Heb. iii.,) Christ has set them there already, (John
   v. vi.;) he has committed them into his Father's hand by prayer, which
   we know is sure, (John xvii. Heb. v.;) and therefore neither death,
   hell, devils, nor all power, sins, nor mischief, shall ever pull us out
   of our Head's hands, (Rom. viii., John x.,) whose members we are; and
   therefore receiving of his Spirit, as we do, we cannot but bring forth
   the fruits thereof, though now and then the flesh fail us. But the
   Lord, even our Lord, be praised, who is stronger in us than he which is
   in the world. (1 John iv.) He always puts under his hand, that we lie
   not still as the reprobates, whose piety is as the morning dew, (Hosea
   vi.,) soon come, and soon gone, and therefore they cannot continue to
   the end. Cannot! no, they will not if they could, because they hate God
   and his glory, and therefore hate all them that seek it and set it
   forth; whereas the elect love all men, and seek to do all men good in
   God, suspending their judgments of others, that they may stand or fall
   to the Lord, and not to them, (Rom. xiv.)

   If the matter of election and predestination be so fully set forth to
   God's glory, and to the comfort of his church out of this one place of
   Paul to the Ephesians, how may we suppose this matter is set forth in
   the whole body and books of the canonical Scripture, whereto I had
   rather send thee, good reader, with this candle-light which I have now
   given thee, than in a matter so manifest make more ado than needs,

   John Bradford.

     __________________________________________________________________

A Brief Summary of the Doctrine of Election and Predestination

   God's foresight is not the cause of sin, or excusable necessity to him
   that sins; the damned therefore have not nor shall have any excuse,
   because God foreseeing their condemnation, or through their own sin,
   did not draw them, as he does his elect, unto Christ. But as the elect
   have cause to thank God for ever for his great mercies in Christ, so
   the others have cause to lament their own wilfulness, sin, and
   contemning of Christ, which is the cause of their reprobation, and
   wherein we should look upon reprobation as the goodness of God in
   Christ is the cause of our election and salvation, wherein we should
   look upon God's election. He that will look upon God or any thing in
   God, simply and barely as it is in God, the same shall be stark blind.
   Who can see God's goodness, as it is in God? Who can see his justice,
   as it is in him? If therefore thou wilt look upon his goodness, not
   only look upon his world, but also upon his word; even so if thou wilt
   look upon his justice, do the like. Then shalt thou see that election
   is not to be looked on but in Christ nor reprobation but in sin. When
   the second cause is sufficient, should not we think that they are too
   curious that will run to search the first cause, further than God gives
   them leave by his word? which first cause, because they cannot
   comprehend, therefore they deny it. God be merciful to us for his
   name's sake, and give us to love and to live his truth, to seek peace
   and pursue it; because God of his goodness, for the comfort of his
   children and certainty of their salvation, opens unto them in some
   degree the first cause of their salvation, that is, his goodness before
   the beginning of the world to be looked upon in Christ; a man may not
   therefore be so bold as to wade so in condemnation further than God
   reveals it. And forasmuch as he has not revealed condemnation except in
   sin, therefore let us not look on it otherwise. Seek to be delivered
   from sin, and fear not reprobation; but it thou wilt not, thou shalt
   find no excuse in the last day. Say not that thou art not warned.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:26   [2]3   [3]4   [4]4   [5]8   [6]12   [7]12   [8]13   [9]19
   [10]19   [11]22

   Exodus

   [12]2   [13]7   [14]14   [15]15   [16]20   [17]32   [18]34

   Numbers

   [19]14   [20]14

   Deuteronomy

   [21]4   [22]6   [23]13

   1 Samuel

   [24]16

   1 Kings

   [25]18   [26]22   [27]22   [28]22   [29]22

   2 Kings

   [30]2

   Job

   [31]7   [32]14   [33]15   [34]25

   Psalms

   [35]1   [36]5   [37]9   [38]17   [39]18   [40]32   [41]33   [42]34
   [43]44   [44]51   [45]63   [46]69   [47]73   [48]75   [49]84   [50]90
   [51]91   [52]91   [53]120   [54]125   [55]130   [56]130   [57]139
   [58]145

   Isaiah

   [59]8   [60]13   [61]14   [62]14   [63]22   [64]43   [65]43   [66]46
   [67]60

   Jeremiah

   [68]7   [69]17   [70]20   [71]31

   Ezekiel

   [72]9   [73]33

   Daniel

   [74]3   [75]11:38

   Hosea

   [76]1   [77]6

   Amos

   [78]7

   Malachi

   [79]3

   Matthew

   [80]1   [81]4   [82]4   [83]4   [84]5   [85]6   [86]6   [87]7   [88]7
   [89]7   [90]7   [91]8   [92]8   [93]8   [94]8   [95]10   [96]10
   [97]11   [98]13   [99]13   [100]17   [101]17   [102]20   [103]22
   [104]24   [105]25   [106]25   [107]25   [108]25   [109]26   [110]26
   [111]26   [112]28

   Mark

   [113]8   [114]12   [115]14

   Luke

   [116]1   [117]1   [118]2   [119]5   [120]6   [121]9   [122]9
   [123]10   [124]10   [125]10   [126]11   [127]12   [128]12   [129]12
   [130]16   [131]17   [132]17   [133]18   [134]18   [135]18   [136]21
   [137]22   [138]22

   John

   [139]3   [140]3   [141]5   [142]6   [143]7   [144]9   [145]10
   [146]10   [147]12   [148]13   [149]14   [150]14   [151]14   [152]16
   [153]17   [154]17   [155]41

   Acts

   [156]2   [157]13   [158]13   [159]16

   Romans

   [160]1   [161]2   [162]4   [163]6   [164]6   [165]6   [166]7   [167]7
   [168]8   [169]8   [170]8   [171]8   [172]8   [173]8   [174]8   [175]8
   [176]8   [177]9   [178]9   [179]10   [180]11   [181]11   [182]12
   [183]14

   1 Corinthians

   [184]2   [185]2   [186]2   [187]2   [188]2   [189]4   [190]5
   [191]10   [192]10   [193]10   [194]11   [195]13   [196]15   [197]15
   [198]15   [199]15

   2 Corinthians

   [200]2   [201]2   [202]4   [203]4   [204]5   [205]7

   Galatians

   [206]3   [207]5

   Ephesians

   [208]1   [209]1   [210]2   [211]6

   Philippians

   [212]1   [213]1   [214]2   [215]3   [216]3   [217]3

   Colossians

   [218]3   [219]3

   1 Thessalonians

   [220]4   [221]4

   2 Thessalonians

   [222]2   [223]3

   1 Timothy

   [224]1   [225]5

   2 Timothy

   [226]2

   Titus

   [227]3

   Hebrews

   [228]1   [229]2   [230]3   [231]5   [232]5   [233]6   [234]9
   [235]10   [236]11   [237]11   [238]12   [239]12   [240]13   [241]13

   James

   [242]1   [243]4   [244]4

   1 Peter

   [245]2   [246]2   [247]4   [248]4   [249]4   [250]5   [251]5

   1 John

   [252]1   [253]1   [254]3   [255]4   [256]4   [257]5   [258]8

   Revelation

   [259]2   [260]3   [261]4   [262]7   [263]7   [264]12   [265]13
   [266]20   [267]21   [268]21   [269]22
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#ii-p34.1
   2. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p4.3
   3. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p6.5
   4. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p9.1
   5. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p14.2
   6. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p9.2
   7. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p18.2
   8. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p14.4
   9. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=0#ii-p86.1
  10. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v-p3.1
  11. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=0#vi-p10.1
  12. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p6.6
  13. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii-p9.2
  14. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p9.3
  15. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v-p20.8
  16. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=0#vi-p7.1
  17. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=0#i-p3.3
  18. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iv-p23.1
  19. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=0#ii-p51.1
  20. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=0#ii-p86.2
  21. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=0#ii-p13.3
  22. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=0#ii-p12.1
  23. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p18.9
  24. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v-p9.4
  25. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii-p6.1
  26. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p4.29
  27. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p4.20
  28. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p9.5
  29. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p18.7
  30. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p9.8
  31. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p5.3
  32. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv-p19.1
  33. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=0#ii-p45.1
  34. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iv-p16.2
  35. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p13.3
  36. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv-p21.1
  37. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v-p5.4
  38. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v-p4.2
  39. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=0#vi-p26.15
  40. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=0#ii-p81.1
  41. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=0#v-p4.26
  42. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=0#vi-p26.9
  43. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=0#v-p8.3
  44. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#v-p14.1
  45. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=0#iv-p14.3
  46. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=0#vi-p25.3
  47. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#v-p4.15
  48. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=0#v-p3.4
  49. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=0#iv-p14.1
  50. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=0#iv-p11.3
  51. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=0#iv-p14.2
  52. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=0#vi-p26.10
  53. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=0#v-p4.28
  54. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=0#vi-p21.1
  55. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=0#iv-p16.3
  56. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=0#iv-p18.4
  57. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#v-p20.4
  58. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=0#vi-p21.4
  59. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p9.7
  60. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p11.5
  61. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p13.2
  62. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p20.1
  63. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p4.13
  64. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=0#ii-p16.1
  65. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=0#iv-p17.1
  66. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=0#vi-p25.7
  67. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=0#iv-p15.6
  68. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=0#i-p3.1
  69. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v-p14.3
  70. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v-p9.6
  71. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=0#ii-p25.1
  72. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v-p4.10
  73. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=0#iv-p17.2
  74. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p4.17
  75. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=38#iii-p20.1
  76. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p20.2
  77. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi-p26.24
  78. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=0#i-p3.2
  79. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p4.24
  80. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p17.14
  81. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#ii-p2.1
  82. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p4.16
  83. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi-p26.6
  84. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p4.11
  85. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=0#ii-p13.1
  86. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v-p21.11
  87. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p88.1
  88. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p97.1
  89. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p7.2
  90. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p18.1
  91. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p4.18
  92. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p4.19
  93. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p18.3
  94. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p18.4
  95. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v-p13.1
  96. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v-p21.7
  97. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iv-p17.5
  98. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p11.2
  99. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi-p20.4
 100. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv-p15.1
 101. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#vi-p10.2
 102. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=0#vi-p21.2
 103. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=0#ii-p12.2
 104. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#vi-p26.14
 105. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iv-p14.7
 106. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#v-p6.4
 107. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#v-p7.3
 108. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#vi-p26.2
 109. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iii-p9.1
 110. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iii-p10.1
 111. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#v-p21.5
 112. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=0#v-p4.6
 113. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p21.9
 114. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=0#ii-p12.3
 115. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii-p10.2
 116. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p18.2
 117. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p20.3
 118. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p6.2
 119. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv-p17.7
 120. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v-p4.9
 121. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v-p3.2
 122. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=0#vi-p10.3
 123. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#ii-p12.4
 124. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi-p22.2
 125. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi-p26.12
 126. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v-p21.10
 127. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv-p19.2
 128. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p4.23
 129. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p4.25
 130. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v-p11.3
 131. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=0#ii-p13.2
 132. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv-p17.12
 133. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=0#i-p7.1
 134. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=0#v-p20.10
 135. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=0#vi-p26.8
 136. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iv-p19.3
 137. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii-p10.3
 138. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p21.6
 139. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p17.3
 140. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p17.6
 141. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi-p26.18
 142. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi-p26.16
 143. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p18.6
 144. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v-p6.3
 145. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi-p26.22
 146. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v-p21.3
 147. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv-p18.3
 148. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi-p25.4
 149. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p4.1
 150. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p6.2
 151. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p20.11
 152. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v-p3.6
 153. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv-p17.8
 154. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#vi-p26.19
 155. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=41&scrV=0#vi-p25.8
 156. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p21.4
 157. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi-p8.1
 158. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi-p20.2
 159. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v-p19.2
 160. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p16.1
 161. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p21.3
 162. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii-p35.1
 163. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii-p43.2
 164. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv-p23.3
 165. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v-p4.21
 166. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p31.1
 167. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p31.2
 168. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv-p14.4
 169. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv-p17.15
 170. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vi-p26.21
 171. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p8.2
 172. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v-p9.10
 173. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vi-p7.2
 174. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vi-p22.1
 175. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vi-p25.6
 176. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vi-p26.13
 177. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v-p4.7
 178. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#vi-p26.1
 179. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv-p17.16
 180. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p25.2
 181. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p25.5
 182. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi-p25.1
 183. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=0#vi-p26.25
 184. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii-p43.1
 185. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p10.1
 186. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p15.4
 187. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p11.4
 188. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p26.3
 189. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p9.9
 190. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi-p26.4
 191. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii-p8.1
 192. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii-p11.1
 193. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii-p16.1
 194. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii-p10.4
 195. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv-p23.2
 196. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv-p15.2
 197. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv-p18.1
 198. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv-p22.2
 199. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v-p4.12
 200. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p8.5
 201. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p8.3
 202. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p4.3
 203. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p20.6
 204. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv-p18.5
 205. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p18.1
 206. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii-p16.2
 207. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p13.5
 208. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p8.2
 209. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p26.5
 210. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p18.5
 211. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi-p26.7
 212. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p6.1
 213. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p19.1
 214. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p17.4
 215. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p14.6
 216. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p22.1
 217. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p8.1
 218. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p4.2
 219. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p4.22
 220. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv-p17.17
 221. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p11.1
 222. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p18.8
 223. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi-p20.1
 224. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p17.10
 225. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv-p4.1
 226. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p8.4
 227. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=0#ii-p101.1
 228. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p26.11
 229. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=0#ii-p16.2
 230. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi-p26.17
 231. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv-p17.9
 232. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi-p26.20
 233. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v-p21.8
 234. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv-p17.11
 235. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=0#ii-p88.2
 236. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=0#i-p2.1
 237. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v-p4.5
 238. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p13.4
 239. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p20.7
 240. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p5.1
 241. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p21.1
 242. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p15.1
 243. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv-p11.1
 244. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p5.5
 245. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p4.27
 246. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p21.2
 247. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p3.5
 248. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p6.1
 249. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p20.9
 250. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p7.1
 251. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p20.5
 252. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p16.1
 253. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p17.13
 254. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv-p15.3
 255. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#ii-p12.5
 256. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi-p26.23
 257. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi-p20.3
 258. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv-p11.2
 259. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=0#ii-p46.1
 260. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p4.14
 261. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv-p15.5
 262. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p5.2
 263. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv-p14.8
 264. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p4.4
 265. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v-p4.8
 266. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v-p16.2
 267. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iv-p15.7
 268. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=0#v-p3.3
 269. file:///ccel/b/bradford/sertract/cache/sertract.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iv-p14.5
