     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A Fair and Impartial Testimony...Against the Backslidings,
                  Corruptions, Divisions, and Prevailing Evils...
      Creator(s): Willison, John (1680-1750)
   CCEL Subjects: All; History;
      LC Call no: BX9071
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Presbyterianism. Calvinistic Methodism
     __________________________________________________________________

   A

   FAIR AND IMPARTIAL TESTIMONY

   Essayed

   In Name Of A Number of

   Ministers, Elders, and Christian People Of

   THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND

   Unto The Laudable

   PRINCIPLES, WRESTLINGS & ATTAINMENTS

   OF THAT CHURCH;

   and Against the Backslidings, Corruptions,

   Divisions, and Prevailing Evils,

   Both Of

   FORMER & PRESENT TIMES

   And Namely

   THE DEFECTIONS OF THE

   Established Church;

   Of The

   Nobility, Gentry, Commons, Seceders,

   Episcopalians, Etc.

   Containing

   A BRIEF HISTORICAL DEDUCTION OF THE

   chief occurrences in this church

   from her beginning to the year 1744,

   WITH REMARKS;

   and humble pleadings with our mother

   church, to exert herself

   to

   stop defection, and promote reformation.

   attested & adhered unto by sundry ministers.

   By the Rev. JOHN WILLISON,

   Minister of the Gospel at Dundee, Scotland,

   Psal. ci 3. I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not
   cleave to me.

   Isa. xliii. 10. Ye are my Witnesses saith the Lord.

   Ezek. xliii. 11. Shew them the form of the house, and write it in their
   sight.

   Isa. lviii. 1. Shew the house of Jacob their sins.

   PITTSBURGH:

   published by zadok cramer and sold at his

   bookstore, market street.

   from the press of cramer and spear--1808
     __________________________________________________________________

                             Willison's Testimony:

Prefatory Statement by the Transcriber

   The original title of Mr. Willison's Testimony is transcribed below
   following this preface in its entirety. The title states that the
   Testimony is a "Fair and Impartial Testimony." As such, Mr. Willison
   presents an account of the events that took place in the history of the
   Church of Scotland. Not only does he write of the events that took
   place between the men involved, he also inserts proclamations of praise
   to God and alludes to the Lord's providential care over His Church. Mr.
   Willison demonstrates a highly practical understanding of God's
   providence as he demonstrates the infallibility of God's word in
   connection with history. He applies the eternal truths of the Holy Writ
   to the events that took place in a most appropriate manner. Also, as
   Mr. Willison recounts the sins of the Church, he not only exposes those
   who promoted error, but also demonstrates that those who stood for
   truth had a tendency to sin in a way peculiar to individuals who strive
   to maintain purity in doctrine. The reader may note that the parallels
   between the Church of Scotland then and the Reformed and Presbyterian
   Churches of today seem strikingly similar. There is nothing new under
   the sun.

   Concerning the transcribed version certain changes have been made.
   These changes are minor and were made primarily for ease of reading.
   They are as follows. In the original text, references made to a king
   such as Charles I would have a period after the "I." (ie. king Charles
   I. did so and so...) . The period has been eliminated after such
   references so that the text reads "king Charles I did so and so..." in
   order to prevent the appearance of a sentence ending in mid sentence.
   Also, all hyphenations placed in hyphenated words have been eliminated
   and the words kept in tact. Another change was made with quoted data.
   The original text placed quoted data with quotation marks at the
   beginning of each line. If a quote was longer than one line, each line
   would begin with a " mark. These multiple quotation marks have been
   removed and modern methods for quoting data have been used in their
   place. In addition, archaic spellings have not been changed so there
   are words that appear misspelled according to modern spellings.
   Finally, when archaic words or words peculiar to Scottish language are
   used, definitions in brackets often follow. These definitions were
   derived from Webster's New Universal Unabridged Dictionary, 2^nd ed.,
   (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983). The scanned transcribed version of
   the text below may still have errors.

   The overall layout of the book is as it was originally printed. In
   chronological order, the reader will find the Title Page, Preface,
   Testimony, Advertisement, Adherence, Postscript, Contents, Postscript
   and a list of Subscribers Names. In addition, the transcriber has added
   a Subject Index in the Appendix. The reader will please note that the
   Contents and Subject Index in the Appendix are found at the end of the
   book. Page numbers for the Contents of the book, Preface, Testimony
   etc., can be found listed in the Subject Index.

   Ron Creech, Transcriber.
     __________________________________________________________________

THE

PREFACE.

   THOUGH I be far less fit for framing a Testimony to the principles,
   wrestlings and attainments of this church, and against the corruptions,
   defections and evils of the times, than many of my brethren; yet being
   encouraged by some whom I highly valued to undertake it, and finding
   none else inclined to it, I have essayed it through Divine strength,
   hoping to see a witnessing Body appear within this Church, as well as
   without it, at least some who would desire to testify against the evils
   of the day with just zeal, impartiality and meekness.

   No sooner I set my face to it, but I saw it to be a matter of great
   difficulty to steer a straight course, without swerving to the right or
   left hand, in these reeling and shaking times, when such different
   opinions are vented, provocations are given, calumnies are spread, and
   men's passions are stirred on each side, so that even the meekest and
   wisest are ready to stagger: I found also the difficulty increase, from
   the divided sentiment of godly ministers with respect to some
   particular occurrences, and the strong inclination of many live at
   ease, enjoy quiet, and even to sit down Issacar like and couch under
   the burden, when hopes of relief does not appear. These things greatly
   discouraged me to proceed in the design.

   But when I daily weighed and considered the growing dangers of the
   church, the backsliding disposition that still prevailed, and the
   unsuccessfulness of all other methods to recover her from it such as
   Dissents, Protests, Instructions, Representations, Petitions,
   Separations, Secessions, &c.g and that the only mean now left to be
   tried for giving check to corruption and exciting reformation, seemed
   to be that of an honest Testimony of some within the church: I
   determined at length to go on through all difficulties and
   discouragements, to prepare and publish the following Essay, with a
   sincere intention to preserve my Mother church, and promote her
   interests: looking to Heaven for a blessing on it, that it may be of
   use to excite judicatories to put a stop to some evils, and reform some
   things amiss: And though it should have little effect on the present
   backsliding age, yet hoping it may be useful to, the rising generation
   when God shall send a general revival of true Christianity in the land;
   at such a time the subscribers of this testimony will continue, when
   dead, thus to speak, to the glory of the ever living Redeemer.

   I considered also within myself, that our old suffering ministers were
   all gone off the stage, and many other worthy brethren were going time
   to time, and that I myself get frequent warnings to prepare for going:
   and at the same time, that numbers of eminent good men drop into the
   silent grave, without leaving any testimony behind them; so that in a
   short time it may be called in question what their mind was concerning
   the principles and attainments of our fathers, and the corruptions of
   present and former times; and if I continued to linger a little longer,
   this would be my own fate also. Wherefore I resolved to expose this
   Essay, and myself likewise, to the cenure of the world: and though I
   should be charged with mean and selfish views in it, as affecting
   Singularity, a Name, Applause from some, &c. if the Lord call me to
   bear reproach in carrying on a good design, why should I not submit to
   it? Surely it may be thought that one of my age should be dead to these
   vanities, and that it is high time for me to be seeking the approbation
   of my great Judge, more than that of all the world. May I ever mind
   this!

   Quest.. It is like it may be asked, "What warrant have ye for emitting
   such a Testimony?"

   Answ. The reasons and grounds of it seem so plain both from Scripture
   and sound reason, that we may adventure to submit them to all thinking
   persons to judge of them.

   I. The servants of God, and especially ministers of the gospel, are
   frequently in Scripture called his Witnesses; in regard they are called
   to give testimony to his truths and ways, and to bear witness against
   what is prejudicial or contrary thereunto, Rev. xi. 3, 7. Luke xxiv.
   48. John v. 33. and xv. 27. Acts i. 8. and xxii. 15, 18. and xxvi. 19.
   It is by such faithful witness hearing that we must hold fast the
   truths of God when ready to be plucked from us, and to contend for the
   faith which he hath delivered to his saints, Rev. iii. 11. Jude verse
   3. And in this way we are to wrestle with and overcome truth's
   adversaries, Rev. xii. 11. They overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and
   the word of their testimony. The character which God gives his servants
   three times in the compass of a few verses should make very deep
   impression upon us, Isa. xliii. 10, 12. and xliv. 8. Ye are my
   witnesses, saith the Lord. And it is in that capacity he calls and
   requires us to confess Christ before men, to bear witness to Christ and
   to his truths, to stand fast is the faith, to quit ourselves like men,
   to be strong, to be steadfast, tobe zealous and valiant for the truth,
   to be faithful unto death.--To contend earnestly for the faith and set
   ourselves for the defence of the gospel.--To plead with our Mother; to
   keep the charge of the Lord, and the charge of his sanctuary; to keep
   that which is committed to our, trust; to be clean who bear the vessels
   of the Lord, and not to touch the unclean thing.--To save ourselves
   from an untoward generation: to keep our garments clean and unspotted
   from the world, to hate the work of them that turn aside, that it may
   not cleave to us; to keep ourselves pure, and not to be partakers of
   other mens sins; to flee from sin, and deliver every man his own soul;
   to abhor what is evil, to cleave unto the Lord and to that which is
   good; to keep ourselves from the accursed thing.--To be watchmen to the
   house of Israel, and give them warning from God; to cry aloud and not
   spare, to shew the house of Jacob their sins; to reprove the works of
   darkness; not to suffer sin upon our brother; to be pure from the blood
   of all men, and not to shun to declare all the counsel of God.--Now
   these multiplied Scripture texts and Divine precepts afford us clear
   and plain warrant to make an open appearance and declaration for our
   Lord Jesus Christ, and for his truths and ways when injured; and
   against the evils and corruptions of the times, especially when they
   are avowed and infectious, and like to infect more and more.

   II. Writing and leaving a testimony behind us to true religion, and
   against error and corruption, is necessary and useful for the
   instruction, conviction, and confirmation both of the present and
   future generations, and a very proper mean for handing down God's
   truths and institutions pure from age to age; which is a debt that one
   generation owes to another, as God declares in his word; Psal. lxxviii.
   5, 6, 7. He established a testimony in, Jacob, and appointed a law in
   Israel, which he commanded our fathers that they should make them known
   to their children; that the generation to come might know them, even
   the children which should be born, who should arise and declare them to
   their children: That they might set their hope in God, and not forget
   the works of Cod, but keep his commandments. Psal. cxlv. 4. One
   generation shall praise thy works to another and shall declare thy
   mighty acts. And according to Psal. cii. 18. God's works of grace and
   mercy are to be written for the generations to come, that the people
   which are to be created may praise the Lord. And we are enjoined, Psal.
   xlviii. 13. to walk about Zion, to tell her towers, mark her bulwarks
   and palaces, viz. the institutions and ornaments of the gospel church,
   that we may shew them to the generation following. And we are
   appointed, Ezek. xliii. 11. to shew to the house of Israel the form and
   fashion of the house of God, with the ordinances and laws thereof, and
   to write it in their sight, that they may keep them and do them. All
   these do plainly demonstrate our Scripture warrant for leaving such
   written testimonies behind us.

   III. Writing and emitting faithful testimonies for God and his ways, is
   necessary and seasonable especially in times of corruption and
   backsliding, even when true religion is in danger. In such times Christ
   doth kindly accept and reward our open confessing of him and his truths
   before men, Rev. ii. 2. Matth. x. 32. And, on the other hand, he
   severely threatens our conniving at error and impiety, and not bearing
   testimony against them when they abound, Rev. ii. 14, 15, 16. Now, is
   not the backsliding day in which we live a proper season for such open
   confessions and faithful testimonies, when errors of all kinds are
   tolerate, approven truths are run down, and manifold corruptions
   prevail, to the dishonour of God and our holy religion; and when
   applications to judicatories for redress are unsuccessful? Surely it
   must be in such a time as this, that God calls his servants and
   witnesses to rise up for him (by faithful testimonies) against the
   evil-doers, and stand up for him against the workers of iniquity, Psal.
   xciv. 16.

   Object. Some perhaps will say, "The corruptions and grievances of the
   times are not so great as some are ready to make them."

   Answ. No doubt some do aggravate them beyond what is true and just.
   But, if what these say be fact, who use to speak within bounds, viz. 1.
   That a spirit of infidelity and error greatly prevails in the land, and
   open attacks are made upon the holy Scriptures and the Christian
   religion.--2. That a free toleration is given to all kinds of error,
   Arminian, Socinian, Arian, Popish, Deistical, &c. which are spreading
   more.--3. That sundry of the clergy are suspected of, and charged more
   than formerly, not only with looseness and immoralities in their lives,
   but also with laxness and unsoundness in their principles; and some of
   these are allowed to possess eminent posts in colleges, and even to
   teach divinity, and train up young men for the holy ministry.--4. That
   many of these have no regard to act 7^th assembly 1736 with respect to
   evangelical preaching, but take up with legal doctrine, and a sort of
   heathenish morality, instead of preaching Christ to sinners, which
   ought to be the main business of every gospel minister.--5. That many
   of them give great encouragement to patronage, that woful usurpation
   over the church of God, when they are under no necessity from the law
   to do it.--6. That gross intrusions are continued upon Christian
   congregations, who are thereby spoiled of their right to call their own
   pastors, contrary to the word of God and our known principles.--7. That
   there are now most unreasonable divisions, ill grounded and
   unscriptural separations, among sound and godly Presbyterians; contrary
   to Christ's royal law of love, and precepts of keeping the unity of the
   Spirit in the bond of peace.--8. That there are strange liberties taken
   by many (of whom better things might have been expected) in reproaching
   the work of God's holy Spirit, in awakening, convincing, and bringing
   lost sinners home to himself.--9. That the Episcopal clergy are
   forsaking the Protestant cause, licking up old Popish errors and
   superstitions which their fathers cast out, and sliding gradually back
   again to Rome----Now, if these things be true (as many alledge with too
   much ground) Christ's witnesses have a plain call from him to stand up
   against these defections by faithful testimonies, and to give free
   warning of the evil and danger of them before it be too late.

   IV. A written subscribed testimony seems necessary in obedience to the
   Ninth Commandment, for preserving and clearing the names and characters
   of honest ministers and elders in times of defection, and for
   vindicating them from the common charge of the corruptions and wrong
   steps of the societies whereof they are members. As they are often
   loaded unjustly with these evils, so their giving a subscribed
   testimony against them is a proper way to wipe off aspersions from
   their names while they live, to prevent blackning of their memories
   when dead, and also to yield them much inward peace when dying.
   Wherefore in my humble opinion, the call seems to be pretty clear to
   them who desire to, keep their garments unspotted, and to hate the work
   of them that turn aside, that it may not cleave to them, and who would
   embalm their names to posterity as witnesses for God in an evil time,
   to declare their minds by joining in such a testimony as this, and
   thereby exoner their consciences with respect to the backsliding and
   defections under which they have been long groaning. And whatsoever
   their hands finds to do in this matter, it is fit they do it without
   loss of time, seeing their standing is so slippery every day upon the
   brink of the grave.

   V. Emitting testimonies in time of defection hath been the approven
   practice of God's worthies in former times. They judged their giving
   written testimonies against growing errors and corruptions to be the
   lifting up, a banner for truth, and the proper means to stop the
   current of defection, and to excite and plead with their Mother to use
   her best endeavours for that effect.--We have still extant such
   faithful testimonies given by sundry ministers in the years 1658 and
   1659, when a toleration was granted by law to the sectaries and errors
   which then prevailed: and namely, that famous testimony drawn up
   against these errors, and to the doctrine, worship, discipline, and
   government of

   this church, subscribed by Mr. Samuel Rutherford, Mr. James Wedderburn,
   Mr. James Guthrie, Mr. Alexander Moncrieff, Mr. Thomas Lundie, and many
   others.--Likewise a testimony against toleration by the presbytery of
   Edinburgh, 5^th October, 1659.--One by the ministers of Lancashire, 3^d
   March, 1648.--One by Mr. George Gillespie, two days before his
   death.--One by the ministers of London, 14^th December, 1647.--One by
   Mr. Rutherford on his death-bed, February, 1661.--One by, Dr. Horneck
   against stageplays, &c. And, lastly, what are all the dying speeches
   which our martyrs have left written behind them, but so many
   testimonies to the truths and ways of God, and against the errors and
   corruptions of their times? And these testimonies, however much
   despised by the world, God hath blessed as means for continuing truth
   and gospel purity among us to this day. And who knows but the Testimony
   now essayed in imitation of the foresaid worthies, may likewise be of
   use for preserving truth, and exciting reformation, when many of the
   present backsliding generation are laid in the dust? A new turn of
   affairs, and a general revival, may yet come; (The Lord himself hasten
   it!) Now it will be highly useful at such a time, for the generation to
   know something of the sentiments and practices of ancient wrestlers
   against corruption. Were there no testimonies of this kind, both the
   knowledge of truth, and the sense of duty and of sin in sundry cases,
   would be lost to the rising ages, towards whom we of the present age
   are indispensibly bound to act a kind and faithful part, viz. to give
   them just information.

   Object. It may be alledged, "That the dissents and contendings of
   honest ministers, recorded in the books of synods and presbyteries, and
   other judicatories, are sufficient to inform after ages."

   Answ. These Testimonies commonly lye dormant in church-records, and are
   little known in the world: and frequently these, registers are quite
   lost, by their going from hand to hand, or by the death of their
   keepers; which indeed is a very great loss to after ages. Were all the
   testimonies of ministers and judicatories relating to patronages and
   accepting of presentations published, they might be of very great use;
   and particularly the acts of synods thereanant [with reference to the
   acts of synods], mentioned p. 54. of the Testimony. The synods of
   Aberdeen, Ross, Angus, Perth, Fife, &c. they made acts of that kind,
   severals of which I have seen, which well deserve, to be published. The
   substance of them being comprehended in the act of the synod of Fife, I
   shall insert it here.

     Coupar, April 2^nd 1735. The synod of Fife taking into their serious
     consideration, that patronages, with power of presenting men to take
     the oversight of souls, is a manifest encroachment upon the rights
     and liberties of the church of Christ, which the judicatories and
     faithful members of this church from its reformation have always
     complained of, and struggled against, as what deprives Christian
     congregations of that interest they ought to have in calling their
     own pastors, and which is claimed and asserted by the assemblies of
     this church. And further considering, that some do accept of
     presentations before any call from the vacant congregations, and
     without the advice and consent of the presbytery of the bounds, and
     sometimes even before the parishioners have occasion to hear them,
     or shew their inclinations to them; and adhere to their
     presentations notwithstanding the aversion of the congregations, and
     thereby give great offence, in shewing so little regard to the
     weighty ends of a gospel-ministry, the glory of the great and chief
     Shepherd, and the edification of his flock, and in affording too
     much occasion to people to look on them as seeking more a living to
     themselves than to serve the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore the synod
     of Fife do hereby give warning to all ministers and preachers of the
     gospel within their bounds, of the evil and danger of such undue
     acceptance of presentations; earnestly exhorting and admonishing to
     beware thereof, as they would not mar the edification of Christ's
     flock, and continue this heavy grievance upon this church, and
     expose themselves to the just censure of its judicatories. And, to
     the intent this admonition may, be the more regarded, the synod
     appoints a copy thereof to be recorded in all the presbytery-books
     within that bounds; and the presbyteries, at their first meeting
     after the minutes of the synod come to their hands, cause read the
     same judicially, and also give copies thereof to all the ministers
     and preachers within their bounds, and likewise such students of
     divinity as may be presently under their trials, or hereafter may be
     taken on trials by them; and that hereafter, before they enter any
     upon trials either for preaching the gospel, or for the holy
     ministry, they endeavour to understand their sentiments anent
     [regarding] presentations being a grievance to this church, and
     their resolution to observe the recommendation of this act.--

   But it must be told with deep regret, that these acts of synods, not
   being supported by superior judicatories, came soon to be disregarded,
   and so the door of patronage is still kept open, whereby a corrupt
   ministry enters into the church: May the Lord in mercy shut that door!
   Alas, how sad and mournful a thing is it, that ministers and preachers
   have no pity on this once famous church, which is already defaced, and
   corrupted and likely to be corrupted more and more, by patronage and
   presentations; when it is plainly in their power to deliver their
   Mother church from this woful corruption and bondage! Oh what hard and
   cruel hearts must many ministers and preachers now have!

   There, is one thing to be lamented, which tends to bring in a set of
   clergy, who have no scruple to encourage patronage, intrusions, error
   and looseness; namely, the planting of our universities with masters,
   who are either suspected as to their principles or morals, or who have
   little zeal for orthodoxy or piety. When such men are appointed to be
   heads of colleges, professors of sciences, languages, or divinity, for
   training up of young men for the ministry; what is to be expected from
   the students, under their care, but that many of them will be leavened
   with bad principles and inclinations? And how can better masters in
   colleges or professors of divinity be looked for, while these are
   chosen by statesmen, magistrates, or regents, severals of whom have no
   real concern for Christianity, but may be even tinctured with error or
   infidelity? Alas! whilst matters stand thus with us, if private
   measures be not taken by friends of the church to get sound and pious
   men to teach divinity besides these, in colleges, this church may soon
   be overrun with corruption, looseness and error of all sorts; which I
   pray the Lord in mercy to prevent.

   Some, may object, "Why do ye insist so much against patronage, seeing
   this was in the church in former times, of the presbytery, and now
   accepting of presentations is become common and fashionable, and the
   judicatories connive at it?"

   Answ. 1. Our circumstances now differ vastly from theirs in former
   times. Why? In former times the law laid them under a necessity of
   entering to churches by the patron's leave, there being no other way of
   entry; but now we are under no such necessity, there being a gospel
   door still left open to us.--In former times they were never delivered
   from patronage nor, sensible of the happiness of freedom from it.--but
   we have been set at liberty, and known the happiness of it.--They did
   not voluntarily submit to patronage after they were freed from it; but
   this, alas, is what we are doing: we have chosen this bondage, and
   subjected ourselves to it without any necessity from the law; so that
   our compilers with patronage are far more inexcusable than these in
   former times; our misery now is undeniable from ourselves, we are
   plainly self destroyers. O that our help may come from God in Christ,
   who even pities them who destroy themselves!

   2. However common the accepting of presentations be at this time, the
   accepter's sin is not lessened thereby, nor is he the safer from the
   wrath of God. A just God hath common punishments for common sinners:
   witness the flood that he brought upon a world of sinners at once. The
   accepter makes himself directly a partner with the patron in his sinful
   usurpation over the church of God, and becomes in some respects more
   guilty than he; as is evident from the Testimony, p. 51 and 52.--Now if
   this practice be sinful (as certainly it is) the commonness of it will
   not at all loose us from, obedience to God's command, that injoins us
   to hate and abhor that which is evil, and as God's witnesses to bear
   our testimony against it. Surely the commonness of this evil is one
   ground of the Lord's controversy with this church and land for which we
   ought to fast and mourn.

   3. As to the church's conniving at these acceptances, I heartily bewail
   it: Alas! the fear of man hath brought them into this snare, as is
   observed in the Testimony, p. 51. But, whatever be the temptation, the
   word of God holds it as a sin in any church to bear with these members
   who are evil, or do evil, without duty testifying against the evil,
   yea, and censuring these who are impenitent and obstinate in an evil
   course. Wherefore I am afraid that our keeping silence so much at this
   sinful connivance, may come to involve us into the guilt of it. O what
   need have we to be humbled under a sense of this and other
   shortcomings, and to cry with the Psalmist, Who can understand his
   errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults. May the Lord bring the
   whole church, and every member of it to a sense of what is sin, and
   what is duty, in this matter!--As for my part, I must declare my
   opinion, That all these who are erroneous, immoral, intruders,
   supporters of patronage, and spoilers of Christian congregations of the
   rights which Christ hath purchased for them, ought to be testified
   against, and dealt with to bring them to repentance; and, if they
   remain impenitent and obstinate they ought to be purged out of the
   church.--And, if they still be connived at in the church
   notwithstanding of impenitence, I cannot but look upon the society as
   dangerous, infectious and hurtful. Likewise I must own, that the word
   of God makes it the duty of these who would keep their garments clean,
   to mark them, avoid them, and turn away from them, at least as to
   imitate fellowship and familiarity; for, if we should continue familiar
   with them, we will be ready to lose that abhorrence of their evil
   courses which God commands, and also to encourage and harden them in
   them. Wherefore it seems needful for these who would keep conscience
   while attending judicatories where such members are, that they protest
   or declare that their presence ought not to be constructed as giving
   any sort of countenance or encouragement to their evil courses, but
   rather as designed to testify against them, stop and prevent them, and
   to excite and promote reformation as much as in their power.

   I make no question but sundry will be offended with this plain dealing,
   and especially these who would fain be at ease in Zion, though in a
   time of grievous provocations and backslidings, and of the Lord's
   judgments both inflicted and impending: but if I know my own heart, it
   is truly conscience not humour, love to the church not hatred, that
   prompt me to this plainness. I see no way to put an end to the Lord's
   controversy with us, but by a sincere turning to God in Christ, in the
   way of faith, repentance and reformation. Now, if we would behave as
   true penitents, make peace with an offended God, we must fall in with
   the revealed will of God in every thing: we must be far from pleading
   for sin, bearing with or conniving at it; that we must forsake sin,
   yea, hate and abhor what is evil, reprove the works of darkness, and
   have no fellowship with them. This being the express will of God to us,
   how can we think he will be it Peace with us, until we sincerely fall
   with it! I acknowledge it is not easy to keep up the impressions of
   sin's evil, and a due abhorrence of it, when sin turns common and
   fashionable; it is not easy to keep clean garments when the examples of
   sin are always before our eyes, and especialy when we see these who are
   reported pious drawn into it; but these things should weigh but little
   with us, when we see it is the express will of God that they who bear
   the vessels of the Lord must be Clean, must keep themselves pure, and
   not so much as touch the unclean thing; and these who, would take the
   kingdom, must do violence to their carnal ease and interest, when they,
   interfere with the will and glory of God. These considerations have
   moved me to use this plainness, and to join in the following Testimony
   against sin; and that not only keep myself pure, but also to preserve
   others, if possible, from the prevailing sins and evils of the day,
   which are more infectious and dangerous than, any plague whatsoever:
   and, this I think is the greatest act of charity that can be done to
   the precious souls of men.

   The common Objection against emitting this or the like Testimony is,
   "That it may have bad consequences, make new divisions and distinctions
   in the church, give advantage to her adversaries, g&c.g"

   Ans. 1. The subscribers of this Testimony testify against the
   ill-grounded divisions and unscriptural separations among Presbyterians
   which now prevail; and they design not to alter their respects or
   conduct towards other godly ministers, who may not be clear about every
   thing contained in this Testimony, seeing they never intended it as the
   badge of a party, or a term of communion either ministerial or
   Christian, but only to be an exoneration to conscience, a witness
   against corruption, and a prompter to reformation.

   2. This argument, taken from the fear of division, strikes, equally
   against all testimonies whatsoever, against these emitted by our
   ancient worthies in times of defection, against the representation of
   the 42 ministers in the year 1732, and against all dissents and
   protestations in judicatories: for it may be pretended, that these
   testimonies or publick appearances tend also to make divisions in the
   church: nay, the same argument may be made use of against our giving a
   testimony against Prelacy, or the English service, or any gross error,
   were they coming into the church.

   3. We must neglect present duty for fear of bad consequences which
   possibly may never happen; especially when we evidently see that the
   neglect will have far worse consequences.--In my view, by our omitting
   to give a testimony against error and corruption when it is called for,
   and all to prevent the evil of division which is uncertain; we bring on
   evils far greater and more certain, viz. the loss of truth and purity,
   and the sinful neglect of duty, both to God, and the generations
   present and to come. We see that great man, Luther, reckoned the loss
   of any of God's truths to be the greatest of evils; Ruat calum (said
   he) potius quam una mica veritatis pereat. And holy David says, Psal.
   cxix. 72. The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold
   and silver.

   4. We ought to observe the order laid down in that Divine precept,
   Ezek. viii. 19. Love the truth and peace; where the Spirit of God gives
   truth to the precedence of peace. Peace indeed is a thing very lovely
   in itself, but truth is far more amiable and precious, and must never
   be sacrificed to preserve peace. Union or peace is no real blessing to
   a church, if she be in a state of lukewarmness, or sliding back into
   corruption or error. Peace, in such a state, is rather a judgment than
   a mercy.

   5. A most lamentable division and schism broke in amongst us a few
   years ago, when no testimony was in the field. Nay, in all probability,
   if a free and faithful testimony had been essayed by a great body of
   ministers sometime before it happened, instead of making a schism, it
   had prevented one, and might also have stopt judicatories from going
   such lengths as they have done.

   6. As to adversaries getting advantage by this Testimony; the
   subscribers, as they had no such view, so they expect no such event,
   but rather the contrary, viz. that they will lose by it. But, whatever
   happen, if truth and holiness get any advantage by it, as is honestly
   designed; that gain will countervail any other damage.

   But it is in vain to multiply answers to some, who will by no arguments
   be reconciled to a fair and honest testimony to truth, when the stream
   of opposition is strong against it. I now see by the discouragements I
   have met with in this attempt, that these who will be faithful to the
   truth, must be valiant for it also, and not daunted by the fear of
   faces, power or numbers of these who oppose it, or who shift appearing
   for it. It is one of the characters of God's servants, which he takes
   pleasure in, to be valiant for the truth upon the earth, especially
   when it is run down, Jer. ix. 3. And indeed it is sometimes run down
   with such violence, that there is no lifting up a testimony for it,
   without something of this Christian valour. It is truly afflicting to
   me, to find that there are so many of my brethren whom I love and
   esteem, who privately own they are of the same mind with the following
   testimony concerning the defections and corruptions of the times, and
   yet have not the resolution to declare this under their hand to the
   world. I would be very loth [loath] to say they are of these whom the
   Scripture calls the Fearful, because of the society I see them classed
   with, Rev. xxi. 8. But I have freedom to say, that the present
   dangerous state of this church, of the truths of God, and of true
   Christianity, in this day of backsliding, is such, as requires more
   courage and resolution for preserving true religion, and reviving a
   work of reformation, than what the most part of good men appear at this
   time to be possessed of. May the Lord himself spirit and qualify men
   for his own work!

   As I join with the Testimony in other things, so especially in the
   humble pleadings with our Mother, with which it concludes; intreating
   that she would call all ranks to lay to heart the sins abounding and
   judgments impending, and to set about extraordinary fasting,
   humiliation, prayer, repentance and reformation. The present dangerous
   situation these nations are in from the combination of cruel Popish
   adversaries, who have destroyed other Protestant churches, and
   multitudes of their fellow-creatures, doth loudly, call upon us to
   these duties. Very lately we were like to have been surprised with a
   formidable invasion from France, when unprovided for it; but the Lord
   of Hosts, in his astonishing mercy, pitied our naked defenceless
   condition, stept in himself, and fought for us; he caused his winds and
   stormy seas to oppose the enemy and dash many of them in pieces, and so
   brake the attempt for that time: Surely our deliverance about the end
   of February last 1744, by God's own immediate hand, together with
   others of the same kind, should not be forgot by us. But though he hath
   hereby allowed us a further breathing time, and space to repent, our
   danger is not over; for now France as well as Spain have declared war
   against us. Now the "kings of the earth do set themselves, and the
   princes take counsel together, against the Lord," and these Protestant
   nations. Now there is a more formidable conjunction of Popish powers
   against us, than ever we saw before. Now France, Spain, Rome, Naples,
   Sicily, &c. these cruel and bloody nations, seem all to be combined
   against our Protestant king, and his royal family (whom God long
   preserve) seeking and plotting how to destroy them, together with our
   religion, laws, and liberties; and, instead thereof, to set up among us
   a Popish Pretender, an arbitrary government, and a blasphemous,
   idolatrous and bloody religion. And may not the numerous hosts of these
   nations, and the cruelty of a Popish party, wherever they get the upper
   hand of Protestants, as manifested in the dreadful burnings in queen
   Mary's reign the inquisition in Spain and Italy, the massacres in
   Ireland, in Paris, and other towns of France; I say, may not these
   alarm us, and sufficiently convince us of our danger, if the Lord
   permit them, for our sins to plot and effectuate a new invasion upon
   us? These days wherein we live, are surely perilous times upon sundry
   accounts, and call us not only to join in fervent prayer to God for
   mercy mid help for Christ's sake, and to be deeply humbled for, and to
   mourn over, the procuring causes of God's wrath; but also to bear free
   and open testimony against these evils which are the Achans in our
   camp, and Jonah's under deck, that raise such terrible storms against
   this poor church and land. It cannot but make deep impression, when
   sometimes we call to mind the fore-thoughts and predictions of several
   of God's worthies in this land, from scaffolds, and also from the
   pulpit and press, that "God would at length proceed to terrible
   judgments, in resentment of his controversy with covenant-breaking
   Scotland, before the return of his wonted glory and presence in the
   sanctuary; yea, that our land should be made to swim with blood for the
   blood of God's saints that hath been shed therein." Now, the oftner
   that God delivers us from Popish enemies, and the longer we
   unthankfully abuse and misimprove God's mercies and deliverances, our
   guilt and danger still become the greater. As the cup of our iniquity
   fills up, so doth the cup of God's wrath proportionably.

   Ought not then these awful dispensations to move and quicken us to act
   a faithful part, both for God's glory and our own safety, even to pray,
   dissent, declare and testify, against these evils which we cannot stop?
   Were we helped to do this sincerely, we might hope, through our
   Redeemer's mediation, that they would not be charged upon us in the day
   of count and rekoning, and that we should even be hid in the day of the
   Lord's anger. For we find the angel of the covenant doth hold the
   winds, until the servants of the living God be sealed for preservation,
   in a time of danger: nay, an upright witnessing remnant might, through
   Divine mercy, be the happy means of preserving the whole land from the
   invasion of cruel and bloody enemies, and of getting the poor decayed
   church of Scotland interested in that promise, Jer. xxx. 11. " I am
   with thee, to save thee: and though I make a full end of all nations
   about thee, yet I will not make a full end of thee; but I will correct
   thee in measure, and not leave thee altogether unpunished." May the
   Lord himself direct ministers and others to proper measures for turning
   away the fierceness of God's anger from us; and open the eyes of men to
   discern the true grounds and causes, of God's controversy with the
   land! And if it should please the Lord to bless the following testimony
   for promoting these ends, in any measure, yea, though it were but to
   convince one minister or preacher of the evil of intrusions, of
   supporting patronage, and of the neglect of preaching Christ, it would
   contribute to support me, under all the, discouragements I have met
   with in making the Essay to lift up a testimony against these evils.
   That the mighty Lord, who can accomplish great things by small means,
   may succeed this honest design, is the prayer of

   Jo. Willison
     __________________________________________________________________

   A

   FAIR AND IMPARTIAL

   TESTIMONY,

   ESSAYED IN THE NAME OF

   A NUMBER OF MINISTERS, ELDERS
   AND CHRISTIAN PEOPLE OF THE
   CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.

   ACCORDING to ancient historians, our gracious God was pleased to visit
   Scotland very early with his glorious gospel, by means of some
   preachers and other Christians, who were forced to flee to Scotland to
   be out of the reach of Roman cruelty under the second persecution
   raised by the emperor Domitian about the year of our Lord 95, which was
   before the death of the apostle John; where they propagated the
   knowledge of Jesus Christ, which at length conquered Pagan darkness and
   idolatry so far, that in the beginning of the third century, about the
   year 203, king Donald I, did publicly, profess the faith of Jesus
   Christ; and he himself, his queen, his family, and diverse of' the
   nobles, were solemly baptized. After which, the king used his best
   endeavours to root out idolatry and heathenish superstition from his
   dominions, and to settle a gospel ministry in every corner thereof.
   But, this religious king being much hindered in his good designs by his
   continual wars with the Romans under the emperor Severus, this blessed
   work was afterwards greatly neglected by following princes until the
   reign of king Crathilinth, who about the year 277 set about the
   glorious work of advancing Christianity after the example of king
   Donald the first Christian king, but was greatly hindered by the
   heathenish priests named Druids, called so (as some think) because of
   their sacrificing groves under oaks. These idolatrous priests had got
   great interest and credit among the people, by reason of their
   sense-pleasing worship, and of their having drawn into their hands the
   determining of civil affairs; wherefore the people reckoned them so
   necessary, that they knew not how to live without them. But the Lord in
   mercy seconded the intentions of the good king, by sending several
   worthy men, both ministers and private Christians, from the south parts
   of Britain, and other parts of the Roman empire, who were obliged to
   flee in the time of the ninth persecution under Aurelius, and of the
   tenth under Dioclesian, from the terrible slaughter then made among the
   Christians. And these retiring to Scotland for refuge, as others had
   done long before them, were very helpful in turning the people from
   idolatry.

   King Crathilinth, finding among these Refugees many men of eminent
   piety and learning, did kindly entertain them, and employ them in
   opposing the Druids, and further settling of Christianity through his
   kingdom. These holy men being settled in several places of the land,
   and choosing retirement from all civil and worldly affairs, and giving
   up themselves wholly to the service of God in the ministerial work were
   called Culdees, or Cultores Dei. These Culdees, through the divine
   blessing, got the better of the Druids, and were great instruments of
   advancing true piety and Christianity in Scotland? so that from these
   uttermost parts of the earth were songs heard, even glory to Jesus
   Christ the righteous: and thus were accomplished in part tile ancient
   promises made to our Redeemer, That the heathen should be given to him
   as his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
   possession; that the isles should wait for his law, and their kings
   bring presents to him; that he should be the confidence of the ends of
   the earth, and of them that are afar of upon the sea.

   These blessed instruments, the Culdees, were strict in their lives, and
   in governing the church of Christ. They allowed no higher order among
   them than presbyters or parochial bishops, and so continued for many
   years, until Paladius was sent thither by pope Celestine about the year
   452, who by his subtile insinuations did gain so far upon the simple
   people, as to bring them to consent to a change of the government of
   the church into prelacy, and he himself became the chief Prelate among
   them. Both the historians of our own and other nations, such as Fordun,
   Boethius, John Major,

   Buchanan, Sir Thomas Craig, Prosper, Baronius, Beda, Baleus, g&c.g do
   all agree that the Scots for several hundred years after Christ, were
   taught and governed by priests and monks without bishops, and that
   Paladius was the first bishop or prelate that ever Scotland saw. John
   of Fordun in his Scots Chronicle, lib. 3 cap. 8. Saith, "Before the
   incoming of Paladius, the Scots had for teachers of the faith and
   ministers of the sacraments, presbyters only, or monks, following the
   rites and customs of the primitive church." And who questioned but the
   Scots were as sincere Christians, their ministers as real ministers,
   and their sacraments as true sacraments all these 400 years, as they
   were in after ages? Yea, Baleus is his history of the Britons, cent.
   14. cap. 6. saith more, Ante Paladium Scoti, g&c.g

     Before Paladius came, the Scots had their bishops and ministers,
     according to the ministry of the word of God, chosen by the suffrage
     of the people, after the custom those of Asia; but these things did
     not please the Romans, who hated the Asiatics.

   So that we see the ancient Scots maintained presbytery, without either
   prelacy or patronage, till the Romans or church of Rome introduced
   both. And surely the Scots have still good reason to be zealous for
   their ancient church government and privileges, which they long
   enjoyed, in opposition to these Romish corruptions.

   But Paladius having got our government changed, and our acquaintance
   made with Rome, then the mistress of the world; the church fell into a
   decaying condition, and popish corruptions increased more and more,
   till at length gross darkness overspread this whole land, as well as
   other nations; under which she lay for many ages (for what we read)
   until the year 1494, in the reign of king James IV when the Lollards of
   Kyle, to the number of thirty persons, were summoned before the king
   and his council for holding many of the protestant articles of faith,
   though they were dismissed at that time. So that God had his witnesses
   in Scotland, who bore testimony to his truths, against the errors and
   idolatries of Rome, even in the darkest times.

   Not many years after, that eminent man, Mr. Patrick Hamilton abbot of
   Fern, went abroad to the university of Wittemberg, where he became
   acquainted with Luther and Melanchton, and made great progress in
   learning and in the knowlege of Christ . . . [This section of the text
   from which this transcription was made has about thirty words either
   missing or not legible.] at St. Andrews in the year 1327...[This
   section of the text from which this transcription was made has about
   three words either missing or not legible.] wisdom of God, tended much
   to the spreading of the truth: for many, enquiring into the cause of
   this burning, came afterwards to the knowledge and profession of the
   truth; so that it spread more and more through the land, in spite of
   all that enemies could do against it. Likewise Paul Craw was condemned
   to be burnt at St. Andrews, in the year 1431, for maintaining the
   doctrine of John Wickliff and John Huss.

   It is most remarkable, that, after the burning of Mr. Hamilton, the
   favourers of the truth increased to many thousands; and God was pleased
   to raise up other famous instruments for spreading the light and
   carrying on his work, such as masters George Wishart, John Rough, John
   Knox, John Willock, Mr. Craig, John Erskine of Dun, and many others.
   These polished shafts God was pleased so to endow and furnish with
   gifts, graces, and zeal for God and his truths, and some of them with a
   prophetical spirit, that their adversaries were not able to resist the
   wisdom and spirit by which they spake; and multitudes of all ranks were
   by them converted to the Lord: so that in spite of all the power and
   policy of the popish clergy assisted by our rulers, and all the fiery
   persecution which they raised against the professors of the gospel, the
   Lord was pleased with a high hand to ransom this land from popish
   tyranny, idolatry and superstition; so that the pope's authority was
   abolished in Scotland by the parliament, the reformation established,
   and a sound Confession of Faith approven in the year 1560. This was the
   doing of the Lord and most wondrous in our Eyes!

   The great rule and pattern of reformation, which our reformers
   observed, was the word of God, and the practice of the apostolic
   churches therein recorded, into which they made very narrow and
   impartial enquiry, their searches being attended with earnest prayers
   to God for the light and teaching of his Spirit, and communication of
   counsels with divines of other nations. After all which travel, they
   came to agree upon a platform of church government and discipline, in a
   due subordination of kirk sessions, presbyteries and synods unto
   general assemblies; as appears from our books of discipline, which were
   very early received and approven by the general assemblies of this
   church.

   Though the civil powers, after the year 1560, were favourable to the
   reformation; yet our reformers had great and long struggling with many
   who were addicted to prelacy, and several popish errors and
   superstitions: but it pleased the Lord so far to countenance and help
   them, that a National Covenant was framed and entered into for the
   support of the reformation. This covenant was at first subscribed by
   the king and his household in the year 1580, and afterwards by persons
   of all ranks in the year 1581, and again by all sorts of persons in the
   year 1590; and afterwards presbyterian government and all the pieces of
   reformation then attained unto, were solemnly ratified by king and
   parliament in the year 1592. Only the grievance of patronage, under
   which the church was groaning, was not yet removed.

   Here we must take occasion to adore the distinguishing goodness of God
   to this poor nation of Scotland, in bowing and inclining the hearts of
   the whole nation, as the heart of man, to enter into a solemn national
   covenant with God; even the hearts of our king, our nobles, barons,
   gentlemen, citizens, ministers, and professors of all ranks, to make a
   national surrender of themselves and their posterity to the Lord; and
   to bind both themselves, and them, to cleave to his truths and
   ordinances, and promote religion and reformation in their stations. Our
   histories inform us how this national covenant was afterwards renewed
   in this early period by our general assemblies, synods, presbyteries
   and particular parishes, and remarkably attended with much of the
   Lord's presence and countenance, and great outpourings of his Spirit;
   at which occasions there were to be seen floods of tears flowing from
   melting hearts and weeping eyes. Calderwood, in his history, tells us
   of a wonderful day of this sort at the reviewing of the covenant by the
   general Assembly at Edinburgh, in the little kirk, upon the 30th March
   1596, Mr. John Davidson minister of Salt Prestoun presiding as the
   chief actor; likewise of another such day at the renewing of the
   covenant by the Synod of Fife at Dunfermline that same year, where Mr.
   James Melvil, minister at Kilrenny was moderator and chief actor. Also
   synods and presbyteries elsewhere had previous melting seasons, when
   about this work, which proved a special time of reviving to the work of
   God through the whole land. In this period the church of Scotland
   enjoyed very glorious days of the Son of man, and was honoured with
   large testimonies from divines of other churches: For the great pitch
   of reformation she had attained unto, she was called Philadelphia, and
   the morning-star of the reformation.

   But these bright times did not long continue, clouds did soon arise:
   For king James VI having the view of succeeding to the crown of
   England, and desirous to gratify the prelatists there, did, contrary to
   his solemn declarations and engagements, begin to make incroachments
   upon the church and her liberties, about the years 1597 and 1598; and
   continuing so to do, there followed a long course of defection in this
   church, for about the space of forty years; during which time, prelacy
   that bitter weed was introduced into the government, superstition and
   popish ceremonies into the worship, and Arminian and Popish errors
   crept into the doctrine. The king, for accomplishing his designs, got
   several packt assemblies convened, as these at Linlithgow in the years
   1606 and 1608, that at Glasgow 1610, that at Aberdeen 1616, that at St.
   Andrews 1617, and that at Perth 1618, wherein, one way or other, he got
   several corruptions approven, and particular the Five Articles of
   Perth: prelates were set up, unlawful oaths exacted of intrants into
   the ministry; several popish ceremonies, with a service-book, and book
   of canons, were imposed upon the church, and many sinfully complied
   therewith; whereby the church's beauty was miserably sullied, and the
   land greatly polluted.

   Yet, during this time of grievous backsliding from a covenanted
   reformation, it pleased the Lord to raise up several worthies,
   ministers and professors of religion, to bear testimony to the
   doctrine, worship, government and discipline of this church, and to
   Christ's right of headship over her and her judicatories, and to his
   power to institute her laws and ordinances, in opposition to the
   incroachments then made upon the same: upon which account divers
   pastors were arraigned before the council the high commission, and
   Diocesan synods; some were deprived of their churches and benefices,
   some were banished, some confined, and others imprisoned, and some were
   sentenced to death: likewise, several gentlemen and magistrates were
   sorely persecuted by the domineering prelates, for not conforming to
   the courses of defection. As for these faithful witnesses, who were
   suffered to live in their own land, severals of them went up and down
   in much poverty and affliction, teaching and confirming the people of
   God, waiting for God's returning in mercy to his oppressed church and
   people. Nevertheless, in this dark hour, the Lord gave testimony to his
   word in the mouths of his persecuted servants, through several comers
   of the land, by accompanying it with more than ordinary power and
   success; particularly in the year 1625 and afterwards, at Stewartown,
   Irvine, and many other places of the west of Scotland. A famous
   instance of that power was given at the solemn communion celebrated at
   the kirk of Shots the 20^th June 1630, which proved a most remarkable
   sowing of seed through Clidesdale to the glory of free grace.

   Afterwards, when the night seemed to be darkest, and the prelates in
   the height of their power and pride, competing with the nobles for all
   kinds of civil offices, and honours, and when corruptions in doctrine,
   worship and government were like to advance more and more; the Lord was
   pleased to look through the cloud with pity to this distressed church,
   in the year 1637, and to appear for her relief, first by animating
   severals of the common people of Edinburgh to oppose the reading of the
   new service-book there; and also at the same time exciting several
   honest ministers and professors in other parts of the nation to present
   supplications to the council, in September 1637, against pressing the
   Liturgy and canons upon them. But these, after several expresses to and
   from court, being at last refused, and new orders given for the use of
   the aforesaid books; a great number of all, ranks, nobility, gentry,
   ministers, g&c.g convened at Edinburgh in February 1638, where, after
   serious deliberation and prayer to God, they resolved upon reviving and
   renewing of the national covenant, which had almost been buried for
   forty years before. This they drew up and subscribed with some
   additions and, explications suitable to their present circumstances,
   and sent copies thereof through the land, which, being read in
   churches, was heartily embraced, sworn, and subscribed by all ranks,
   with many tears and great joy so that the whole land, great and small
   (a very few excepted) without any compulsion from church or state, did
   in a few months voluntarily and cheerfully, return to their ancient
   principles, and subject themselves to the oath of God for reformation;
   and this they did when both the court and prelates were enraged against
   them for it. But the Lord from heaven did remarkably countenance them
   with the extraordinary manifestations of his presence, and downpouring
   of his Spirit, both upon Judicatories and the worshipping Assemblies of
   his people, which proved as life from the dead to a poor, withered,
   backslidden church.

   Nay (which is wonderful) things ripened so fast for reformation, that,
   in November 1638, a free and lawful, general assembly, indicted by the
   king, convened at Glasgow, the very place where prelacy was restored in
   the year 1610. There the general assembly, (notwithstanding of the
   former backslidings of the Ministry) came to agree with wonderful
   harmony, to condemn and annul six pretended corrupt assemblies who had
   changed the government and corrupted the worship of this church,
   together with the high commission court, the service book, the book of
   canons, and the book of ordination, as also the unlawful oaths imposed
   upon intrants into the ministry: they likewise deposed and
   excommunicated the Prelates (except two) for oppression and gross
   scandals. They approved the national covenant, and declared Prelacy
   with the five articles of Perth to be adjured by it; and made sundry
   other worthy acts for purging the church, and promoting reformation and
   appointed the time of their next meeting, for carrying on what was so
   happily begun. And though the Prelates with their abettors made great
   opposition to their godly intentions, yea, run to court, and stirred up
   the king to make war against Scotland; yet the Lord was pleased so to
   countenance his servants and people, that the begun reformation was
   carried on, and at last ratified both by king and parliament in July
   1641. Thereby Prelacy was abolished, and Presbytery established by law;
   and the king being personally present, he for himself and his
   successors promised in verbo principis never to come on the contrary of
   that settlement; which occasioned great joy through all the land, and
   was followed with much of the Lord's power and presence in his
   ordinances: So that the land, that formerly was like a wilderness, was
   now by the divine blessing turned into a fruitful field.

   The Lord having thus prospered the nation of Scotland in her reforming
   work, her neighbours in England professed a desire to join with them
   for carrying on the like work of reformation through the whole three
   kingdoms; and the English parliament sent their commissioners to
   Scotland for that effect. And accordingly there was a solemn league and
   covenant agreed upon, and sworn in the year 1643, for maintaining,
   advancing, and carrying on a work of reformation in the three kingdoms
   of Scotland, England, and Ireland. In this covenant, all ranks engaging
   bound themselves to personal reformation, and in their several stations
   to endeavour national reformation; to preserve the protestant religion,
   abolish Popery, Prelacy, superstition, schism, profaneness, an
   whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine and the power of
   godliness; and to endeavour to bring the three kingdoms to the nearest
   conjunction and uniformity in religion, as to doctrine, worship and
   government, according to the word of God, and the example of the best
   reformed churches; that so they and their posterity after them might as
   brethren live in faith and love that the Lord might be one, and his
   name one through the three kingdoms.--This indeed was a glorious
   design, had the English parliament and people been truly and heartily
   sincere in it, as the Scots nation both parliament and general assembly
   were, who with one voice approved and swore this covenant themselves,
   and did recommend it to all others through the land, who generally
   received it with great enlargements of heart and expressions of
   gladness, as they had done the national covenant in the year 1638. It
   is true, the parliament of England took the covenant, as did the city
   of London, the Westminster assembly and many others in England, though
   there were but few of them who seemed to mind it much afterwards. Some
   good things indeed were thereupon done; for in consequence of this
   covenant, and the uniformity in religion engaged unto therein, the
   English hierarchy and liturgy were laid aside for a time, our present
   confession of faith was agreed upon by the assembly of divines at
   Westminster with commissioners from this church, together with the
   larger and shorter catechisms, the directory for worship, with a
   directory for church government, church-censures, and ordination of
   ministers. As all these were agreed upon by the Westminster assembly as
   a part of the covenanted uniformity in religion which was to be settled
   through the three kingdoms, so they were received after examination,
   and approven by our general assemblies and parliaments in Scotland. It
   is true, there were several acts and ordinances of the English
   parliament for establishing these in England: but they took little
   effect, because of the opposition which was made to the form of
   Presbyterial government by the Independents and Sectaries there.

   Notwithstanding of this defection in England, the nation and church of
   Scotland pursued reformation according to their covenant engagements,
   and got several laws enacted both by church and state for carrying on
   the same: and particularly they got an excellent act past by the
   Parliament, for abolishing the patronages of kirks, which is worthy to
   be written in letters of gold, a part whereof we shall here transcribe.

     At Edinburgh, March " 9th 1649. The estates of Parliament being
     sensible of the great obligation that lies upon them by the national
     covenant, and by the solemn league and covenant, and by many
     deliverances and mercies from God, and by the late solemn engagement
     unto duties, to preserve the, doctrine, and maintain and vindicate
     the liberties of the kirk of Scotland, and to advance the work of
     reformation therein to the utmost of their power: and considering
     that patronages and presentations of kirks is all evil and bondage
     under which the Lord's people and ministers of this land have long
     groaned, and that it hath no warrant in God's word, but is founded
     only on the common law, and is a custom Popish, and brought into the
     kirk in time of ignorance and superstition; and that the same is
     contrary to the second book of discipline, in which, upon solid and
     good ground, it is reckoned among abuses that are desired to be
     reformed, and unto several acts of general assemblies; and that it
     is prejudicial to the liberty of the people, and planting of kirks,
     and unto the free calling and entry of ministers unto their charge:
     and the said estates, being willing and desirous to promote and
     advance the reformation foresaid, that every thing in the house of
     God may be ordered according to his word and commandment; do
     therefore from the sense of the former obligations, and upon the
     former grounds and reasons, discharge for ever hereafter all
     patronages and presentations of kirks, whither belonging to the
     king, or to any laick [lay] patron, Presbyteries, or others within
     this kingdom, as being unlawful and unwarrantable by God's word, and
     contrary to the doctrine and liberties of this kirk.

   Afterwards they say,

     --And it is further declared and ordained, That if any presentation
     shall hereafter be given, procured or received, that the same is
     null and of none effect; and that it is lawful for Presbyteries to
     reject the same, and to refuse to admit any to trials thereupon;
     and, notwithstanding thereof, to proceed to the planting of the
     kirk, upon the suit and calling or with the consent of the
     congregation, on whom none is to be obtruded against their will,
     g&c.g

   --By which excellent act it is evident, that our reforming nobility and
   gentry, many whereof were Patrons themselves, looked upon themselves as
   under strong obligations, both from the Word of God and their covenant
   engagements, to abolish patronages, and restore the liberty of
   congregations in calling of their ministers.

   Thus our reforming ancestors were helped to many excellent things from
   1638 to 1650 for promoting reformation in the land, though at the same
   time (it must be owned) they were not free of mistakes and wrong steps
   in their management.--There is no period here, the church can be said
   to be without spot or wrinkle.

   After this a mournful scene opened by breaking division that entered
   into the church, which ended to stop the progress of reformation-work,
   and make way at length for restoring Prelacy. This was occasioned by
   some ensnaring questions put to the commission in December 1650 by the
   king and parliament (which they had better declined to answer)
   concerning the admission of persons into places of public trust civil
   and military, who formerly had been opposers of the covenanted
   reformation, upon their making public profession of their repentance;
   these who were for admitting them being called public resolutioners,
   and these against it being called protestors. There were many eminently
   good and great men upon both sides, and some as eminent who joined
   neither side. The point seemed narrow for the church to carry the
   difference to such a height as to suspend and depose one another upon
   it as they did, according as parties had the upper hand in Synods and
   Presbyteries: for Cromwell the usurper would not then allow them to
   meet in general assemblies, by which the division possibly might have
   been healed. But this fatal division looked like a judicial stroke from
   heaven upon the church for their other sins: the Lord's judgments are a
   great deep. Possibly there might be too great compliances in this
   matter with court-measures, and the hurnours of great men, as there
   were afterwards in the matter of indulgences, tolerations, and other
   ensnaring things brought in by the court upon the church. It is
   certain, that the greatest number of the strict and zealous ministers
   were on the protestors' side, who afterwards made a noble stand against
   Prelacy. And it appeared afterwards, the protestors' fears which they
   expressed, that these men, when taken into places of trust, would soon
   act the old game, were but too well founded. It must also be
   acknowledged, that though the most part of the public resolutioners
   submitted to Prelacy, yet several worthy men among them did not, and
   were exposed to sufferings for it as well as others.

   At the time of the breaking out of these fatal divisions among us, an
   army of Sectaries under Cromwell invaded and oppressed us. These
   Sectaries had grown to such a height in the English army, that they
   invaded the parliament of England their masters, put away the house of
   peers, modeled the house of commons according to their pleasure, and
   erected a new court called the high court of justice, before which they
   impanelled king Charles I and violently took away his life, January
   30th 1649; against which our commissioners both from church and state
   in Scotland, then at London, did protest, and were therefore hardly
   used. Immediately thereupon Scotland proclaimed his son Charles II
   their king, and out of conscience to their covenant sent for him, and
   crowned him at Scoon, where he solemnly swore the covenant, January
   1^st 1651. All which drew down the wrath of the Sectarian army upon us,
   who invaded the land, shed much blood, conquered us, and kept us in
   bondage ten years. During which time a sinful toleration of Sectarian
   errors was granted, by Cromwell and his council in Scotland, which
   brought in great looseness both in principle arid practice; which
   toleration was faithfully witnessed against both by the Presbytery of
   Edinburgh, and a good number of ministers in the provinces of Perth and
   Fife, as appears by their testimonies published in the year 1659.

   Soon after this the yoke of the oppressor was broken, and the king
   peaceably restored in the year 1660, to the joy of the whole land, who
   thereupon expected good days both to church and state. (And, alas, the
   most part went to dreadful excess in jollity and drunkenness upon this
   event.) But, ah! soon was their joy turned to mourning, soon was their
   oppression in conscience doubled, the late glorious work of reformation
   razed, and all its carved work broke down with axes and hammers, as it
   were, all at once. For king Charles II after his restoration having
   called a parliament in England, they restored abjured Prelacy with the
   service book and ceremonies, which had been laid aside: whereupon about
   two thousand ministers there, who could not in conscience conform
   thereunto, were cast out at Bartholomew day, August 24^th 1662.--He
   likewise called a parliament in Scotland who in the years 1661 and
   1662, removed all the legal securities of the church of Scotland, and
   work of reformation therein. By that unparalleled act recissory, they
   annulled all the parliaments which had met from 1640 to 1651; they
   asserted the king's supremacy in all causes civil and ecclesiastic, and
   declared all meetings and assemblies, leagues and covenants without the
   king's authority to be unlawful and unwarrantable, and devolved the
   power of settling the government of the church upon the king; they
   declared the national covenant, as sworn in the year 1638, and the
   solemn league and covenant to be unlawful oaths, and all men to be free
   from the obligation of them; and they declared all that was done from
   1638 to 1650, in prosecution of a covenanted reformation, to be
   rebellious and treasonable.

   The king's prerogative and supremacy in church affairs being thus
   screwed up, he by proclamation declared his royal pleasure to be for
   restoring the government of the church by archbishops and bishops, as
   it was exercised in the year 1637. In the mean time Mr. James Sharp
   minister at Craill, (who had formerly been intrusted to act for the
   church, but now betrayed her) went to London with other three
   ministers, and were consecrated bishops in the Prelatic sense, having
   first been ordained deacons, and after that Presbyters, according to
   the form of the church of England. (This the Prelates set up by king
   James VI would not submit to.) Thereafter these, returning from London
   to Edinburgh, consecrated the rest of the bishops. Then they all took
   their seats in Parliament, where they got new acts made in their
   favours, commanding all ministers to obey them, and attend their
   Diocesan meetings. A little before this, the meetings of Synods,
   Presbyteries and kirk sessions had been discharged by the privy
   council, until they should be authorized by the bishops, who were soon
   to enter upon the government of their respective sees: Whereupon, at
   the time of the meeting of provincial synods in April thereafter,
   several noblemen and gentlemen were sent to raise them by force. It is
   to be regretted, that synods at this time so readily dismissed, and
   that Presbyteries and kirk-sessions were deserted also, without any
   suitable testimony or remonstrance against these fearful encroachments
   and alterations.

   One thing that contributed much to hinder any joint testimony, and to
   strike terror into many, was the severe treatment which some faithful
   ministers met with, when essaying a testimony of this sort: For Mr.
   James Guthrie minister at Sterling, with some few other ministers,
   having met in a private house in Edinburgh, soon after the king's
   return, to draw up a supplication to him, wherein, after congratulating
   his return, they humbly put him in mind of his oaths unto and covenants
   with God, for maintaining the true Protestant religion as established
   by acts of parliament and general assembly, g&c.g for this they were
   apprehended and imprisoned 23^rd August 1660, and all such meetings and
   petitions were discharged as seditious. And, to strike the greater
   terror, Mr. James Guthrie was indicted before the parliament of high
   treason; and, being singularly faithful and zealous for carrying on
   reformation, he was condemned to die, and his head to be set upon one
   of the ports of the city of Edinburgh. He was accordingly executed the
   first of June 1661, and his head set up on the Nether bow port, which
   continued there till the revolution, as a public witness against the
   woful defections of a cruel perfidious generation. Likewise the worthy
   and renowned marquis of Argy II was five days before executed upon the
   same account, and his head set up upon the tolbooth of Edinburgh, to
   the great reproach of the nation: and sometime after Lord Waristoun
   suffered in the same manner; three eminently great and good men, who
   died with the resolution and Christianity of the ancient martyrs. Now,
   what could be expected from a reign and a government, whose foundation
   was laid in cruelty, and soaked with the precious blood of God's
   saints?

   After this the parliament and council went on in their cruel and
   persecuting designs against faithful ministers who would not conform to
   antiscriptural Prelacy, take presentations from Patrons, and collations
   from bishops, and also take an oath to the king, which they called an
   oath of allegiance, wherein they behoved to own his supremacy in all
   causes civil and ecclesiastic: some of these ministers they banished
   out of all his majesty's dominions: these generally went to Holland,
   and were kindly received there. Besides these, several hundreds were
   summarily ordered to leave their churches, and remove from their
   congregations: With which orders (it must be owned) they did too easily
   comply upon proclamations by the council, before they were thrust out
   by force; thereby leaving their poor flocks to corrupt teachers that
   were afterwards thrust in upon them, and not giving a due testimony
   against such a tyrannical act and encroachment upon the spiritual
   kingly power and headship of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only
   Lord of our ministry, and of the exercise thereof. Likewise, by an act
   of parliament, all the subjects were required to attend these who were
   thrust into their parishes, and other conformists, in their meetings
   for worship and that in acknowledgment of, and hearty compliance with
   his majesty's government ecclesiastic; which indeed the far greatest
   part did, whereby all degrees of persons through the land were
   miserably involved in the breach of the covenant, and defections of the
   time. Nay, the wickedness of this period came to such a pitch, that our
   national covenant, and the solemn league, were ordered by public
   authority to be most ignominiously burnt at several market-crosses, to
   the fearful dishonoring of the great tremendous God, with whom these
   covenants were made.

   After some time silence, the ejected ministers began to be convinced it
   was their duty to preach the gospel, at the earnest desire of their
   people, who declined to hear the curates who were thrust in upon them,
   though sorely harassed for it: and that they ought to preach,
   notwithstanding the prohibitions of the magistrate, especially when
   they saw what sort of men were thrust in upon the people. At first they
   had worship only in private houses in the most peaceable and harmless
   manner; but the cruel prelates and rulers would not bear with any such
   meetings; so that at length, by their severities, they were driven from
   houses to the fields for more safety. But still severer laws were made
   against all such meetings, whether in the houses or fields. Nay, they
   came even to that height to enact, Charles II Par. 2. Sess. 2. 1670,
   "That if any man shall preach or pray in the fields, or in any house,
   where there shall be more hearers than the house contains, so as some
   of them be without doors, he shall be punished with death and
   confiscation of goods." So that, by this terrible law, two or three
   hearkening at honest men's doors or windows in time of family-worship,
   [t]hough posted there out of malice or mere curiosity, did expose the
   worshippers of God to a cruel death. These and such like laws tended to
   banish family-worship out of the land, and were too successful that
   way. Likewise severe punishments were enacted against the hearers of
   ejected ministers, and these who did not hear the parish-ministers, or
   employed others to baptize their children. And they proceeded to
   incredible barbarities against Non-conformists, both ministers and
   people. Yet, in these cruel persecuting times, the Lord gave testimony
   to the word of his grace, and blessed his ordinances (though prohibited
   by men) with very remarkable success; and the more pains the
   persecuting Prelates and their instruments were at to suppress these
   assemblies, the more numerous they grew, and the parish-churches were
   the more deserted.

   When methods of force and cruelty could not prevail to stop these
   assemblies, they fell upon more crafty ways, by granting indulgence to
   some of the ejected ministers to preach in vacant churches, under
   certain limitations: such as, Their being confined within their
   parishes, and not encouraging these of other congregations to resort to
   them; their forbearing to lecture before sermon; their not preaching in
   church-yards; their not admitting ministers who were not indulged to
   assist them, g&c.g This indulgence, and prescribing rules to ministers,
   being ordered by the king and his council by virtue of his ecclesiastic
   supremacy, now established by law, was on the magistrate's part a
   sinful incroachment upon Christ's headship over his church. And though
   poor harassed ministers might be glad of any little breathing time for
   the exercise of their ministry in the midst of heavy sufferings, yet,
   if any of them did accept of the magistrate's indulgence upon the
   conditions and restrictions prescribed, they cannot be justified
   therein--But for these worthy ministers who left all for Christ and
   their conscience, and suffered greatly for not complying with Prelacy,
   and other defections of their time, and who always refused that they
   accepted the indulgence upon the terms of the king and council (though
   they preached in the churches they assigned) neither did observe these
   terms while they enjoyed the benefit, and were afterwards turned out
   again upon that account; it were hard to charge them with approving of
   the king's usurped supremacy: Though, at the same time, we wish they
   had given a more full and explicit testimony against the Erastian
   incroachments of the magistrate, than we can learn they did. Yet
   notwithstanding hereof, God was pleased to glorify his sovereign grace
   in giving remarkable success to the labours and ministry of these
   indulged in churches, as well as these who preached in the fields,
   betwixt whom there continued much love and peace for many years; until
   once some began to condemn the indulged so far, as to preach up
   separation from them; upon which followed very sad and mournful
   divisions among the people of God, even while under violent
   persecution, the fruits whereof continue to this very day.

   At this time many conscience-debauching oaths, declarations and bonds
   were imposed upon the people of this land, for engaging them to own the
   king's supremacy over all persons, and in all causes; to renounce our
   covenants, with defensive arms, and all the former steps taken for
   carrying on reformation. Among others, that self contradictory oath of
   the Test was imposed, and made a handle for persecuting many of all
   ranks and stations. They who refused these oaths, and did not conform
   to Prelacy as required, were exposed to the greatest cruelties, being
   put to wander about in deserts and mountains, and to lodge in dens and
   caves of the earth. Multitudes were banished their native country; many
   suffered long imprisonment, and that in the most miserable and
   unheathful places; others were fined and spoiled of their goods, and
   many pillaged and plundered by merciless soldiers and barbarous
   Highlanders let loose upon them; husbands were exorbitantly fined, and
   entirely ruined, for their wives absenting from the parish-churches,
   though it was not in their power to help it; preaching, praying, or
   even hearing at meetings not authorised by law, was made death: Yea,
   refusing to witness against these guilty of the crimes of preaching,
   praying, or hearing, was also punishable with death. Simple conversing
   with persons forfeited or intercommuned, though our nearest relations,
   husbands, wives, parents, children, &c. or the giving them any supply
   when starving, or the not revealing the giving or demanding of it, was
   declared treason; so that men were exposed to a cruel death for pure
   acts of charity. The privy council in those days assumed a
   parliamentary power, and made acts and laws even more bloody than those
   of the parliament: And though these were most cruel and barbarous in
   themselves, yet they were often more barbarously put in execution; so
   that this poor land became a miserable field of blood, cruelty and
   defection. Many of all ranks, noblemen, gentlemen, ministers, citizens,
   and commons, had their blood shed on scaffolds, as if they had been the
   greatest malefactors, and their heads and members set up on pinnacles
   to the view of the world. Many were tortured with boots, thumbkins
   [thumbscrew], fire matches, &c. to force them to discover their secret
   thoughts of state matters, accuse themselves or others, and answer such
   questions as judges pleased to ask at them. To such a height of cruelty
   and tyranny were things carried, that full power was given to merciless
   soldiers both to be judges and executioners of innocent people; so that
   in time of peace, without any witnesses or form of law, they cut off
   many in the open fields and high ways, and dragged severals out of
   their houses, and murdered them, if they did not take such oaths or
   answer such questions as they put to them; and sometimes would not give
   them so much time, before killing them, as to pray to God for mercy.
   Thus was the land soaked with blood, for the planting and growth of the
   bitter root of Prelacy therein. Ah! have we not cause to fear that the
   Lord plead a controversy with us, as he did with Judah many years
   after, for the sins of Manasseh, and the innocent blood that he shed,
   which (it is said) the Lord would not pardon? 2 Kings xxiv. 3, 4. O
   that the land were purged from it!

   After king Charles's death, king James a professed Papist, succeeded to
   him in the year 1685, when not only our civil liberties, but the
   Protestant religion, was ready to be sacrificed; for he was admitted to
   the government without taking the coronation-oath, which binds the king
   to maintain it: And our parliament, when they met, made an officer of
   duty to the king, wherein they openly declare for the king's absolute
   power and authority, and promise to give him entire obedience without
   reserve. This engagement surely was blasphemous, being only proper to
   the sovereign majesty of God. Upon such encouragement the king took
   upon him by virtue of his absolute power and prerogative royal, to
   dispense with laws at his pleasure, and, particularly to suspend all
   penal laws against Papists, and to allow them the free exercise of
   their religion. Sometime after, viz. 28^th June 1687, he by his
   proclamation suspended all penal and sanguinary [bloodthirsty] laws
   made against other Nonconformists, viz. Presbyterians: and gave them
   leave to worship God in their own way in houses, injoining them to take
   care that nothing by preached or taught among them that might any wise
   tend to alienate the hearts of his people from him or his government;
   and to signify to the next magistrate what places they make use of,
   with the names of the preachers. Presbyterian ministers did generally
   accept of this liberty, and these who were abroad returned home, and
   got meeting houses fitted up for them, and multitudes flocked to attend
   their ministry, and found it remarkably blessed to them. This
   toleration indeed proceeded from a vile spring, viz. the king's
   absolute dispensing power; yet, Divine Providence made use of it,
   contrary to the design of the granter, as a mean to bring home the
   banished, and prepare the way for the happy revolution that soon
   followed upon it. There is in the proclamation an injunction upon
   ministers to preach nothing that tended to alienate the hearts of the
   subjects from the king and his government. If the meaning of that was,
   that, in their sermons they should give no testimony against Popery or
   the toleration of it, it was sinful in any minister to comply with it:
   But we ought in charity to believe that these faithful ministers, who
   had long given proof, by their sufferings, of their zeal for Christ and
   his cause, had no regard to the injunction in that sense, but
   exonerated their consciences in testifying against the errors and
   corruptions of the day, and for which some were imprisoned at that
   time. No doubt those who had been long oppressed in their consciences,
   had their blood mingled with their sacrifices, and wanted ordinances,
   would be glad of a breathing time to serve the Lord. But, alas, we have
   it to regret, that in every thing we offend, and come short of the
   glory of God. Ah! we and our fathers have sinned, and we have great
   cause to be deeply humbled both for their sins and our own.

   But behold how the mercy of God appeared for us, after innumerable
   provocations, and when all ranks had made fearful defections from God
   and their engagements to him. And after this church had lien under
   oppression for near twenty eight years, and Popery was far advanced,
   and the civil power in the hands of Papists, and there was but little
   wanting to accomplish the ruin both of our civil and religious
   liberties; the mighty Lord stept in, and in made a wonderful appearance
   for us, by sending over the Prince of Orange (afterwards proclaimed
   king) in November 1688, to rescue us from Popery and tyranny, and that
   at a time after several attempts for our relief had misgiven, and the
   hearts of all true Protestants were beginning to faint within them, and
   the Popish faction had a numerous army to support them. Yet now, when
   God's time was come, our deliverance was brought about with great
   facility, through the wonderful working and concurrence of Divine
   Providence: So that it was not our own arm, but the Lord's right hand,
   that wrought this salvation for us; a salvation never to be forgotten
   by the friends of religion and liberty.--In particular, the church of
   Scotland ought always to commemorate the glorious deliverance and
   revolution in 1688, whereby she was raised out of the dust, and to be
   thankful to the great God the Author thereof, and to have a savoury
   remembrance of the name of king William the happy instrument of it
   under God. Since which time the Lord has granted her fifty five years
   freedom from persecution, and peaceable enjoyment of gospel-ordinances
   and church judicatories, such as she never had since the reformation.
   Though, alas! we must acknowledge with shame, that we have not improven
   such noble opportunities for God and his glory, as we ought to have
   done.

   The Prince of Orange having, in his declaration for Scotland, shewn a
   great concern for our religious and civil liberties, and for the
   persecuted Presbyterians in Scotland, whose sufferings he was well
   informed of by our refugees in Holland from time to time; the
   Presbyterian ministers met and addressed him, congratulating his
   arrival in Britain, and thanking him for his declaration; wherein they
   complain of the overturning of Presbyterian government which was
   generally received as of Divine right, and of the establishing of
   Prelacy contrary to solemn engagements. When the prince came to the
   throne, and had the government in his hands, he acted agreeably to his
   declaration; And though he did not all for us we could have wished, yet
   we have good ground to be assured of king William's hearty inclination
   to serve the church of Scotland, and his willingness to have done much
   more for her than he did.--But it was our, unhappiness, as well as his,
   that he had a Prelatic church in England to manage and gratify among
   whom the Scots Prelatists wanted not abundance of friends to agent
   daily for them: These Proved great clogs and hindrances to the king's
   gracious intentions: yet notwithstanding he did a great deal to raise
   up a poor sinking church from imminent ruin, which we ought never to
   forget.

   Through the encouragement of his declaration, and call to our states, a
   convention of states met at Edinburgh in April 1689, who formed a claim
   of right, setting forth the grievances and privileges of the nation,
   and among the rest declaring, That "Prelacy, and the superiority of any
   office in the church above Presbyters, is and hath been a great and
   insupportable grievance and trouble to this nation, and contrary to the
   inclinations of the generality of the people ever since the reformation
   (they having reformed from Popery by Presbyters) and therefore ought to
   be abolished." And the said convention being afterward turned into a
   parliament, the king and queen, with their advice and consent, in July
   1689, did formally abolish Prelacy, and rescind all acts and statutes
   formerly past in favour of it.--There was also the draught of an act
   brought in, and twice read in parliament, for excluding all these from
   places of public trust, who had a share in the oppressions of the
   former reigns; but the more zealous part in the parliament had not
   strength to carry it, and therefore it was dropt, to the great
   prejudice of both church and state.--The earls Melvill, Crawfurd, and
   several others, were very friendly to Presbyterians: yet they could not
   this session of Parliament carry an act for restoring Presbyterian
   government, partly because several leading members were either inclined
   to Episcopacy, or pretended to dread the tyranny of Presbytery; and
   partly because the enemies of this church had so much interest in
   severals about the king to cast remora's in the way.--Yet a good many
   episcopal minister were by the council turned out of their churches for
   not praying for king William and queen Mary, and for other acts of
   disloyalty.

   Next year, April 1690, an act of parliament was past for restoring all
   the surviving Presbyterian ministers to their churches, who had been
   thrust from them since. January 1661 for not conforming to Prelacy and
   the courses of the time. Likewise they rescinded the act for the king's
   supremacy in ecclesiastick causes.--June 7th 1690, they past an act for
   received among us, after it was read in their presence: also they
   established Presbyterian government and discipline, as it was settled
   by 14th act, James VI Parl. 12. 1592. except that part of it relating
   to patronages; they rescinded many acts which were made against
   Presbytery, and for Prelacy, and for the five articles of Perth, the
   test, &c. and appointed the first meeting of the general assembly to
   be, in October 1690. It is to be observed, that, in the act
   establishing Presbyterian government, they establish it, not only as
   agreeable to the inclinations of the people as in the claim of right,
   but also as agreeable to the word of God, and most conducive to the
   advancement of true piety and godliness. And by that act they expressly
   rescind all other acts; laws, statutes and proclamations, in so far as
   they are contrary to, or inconsitent [sic] with, the Protestant
   religion and Presbyterian government now established; which includes
   all the unrighteous acts of the late reigns against the church. By
   their 23^rd act they abolished patronages, and gave liberty to parishes
   to call their own ministers--By act 27^th and 28^th, they rescinded the
   persecuting laws of the former period; whereby men's consciences were
   delivered from the thraldom of ensnaring oaths, and of attending any
   worship against their light.--Likewise they past an act for rescinding
   the fines and forfeitures of the former reigns; which was a public
   condemnation of the oppression and cruelty thereof.--Surely then we
   must own that these were not small things which king William and his
   parliament did for this poor church when lying in the dust. Some at a
   distance may make light of them, because every thing was not done they
   would have had; but surely Christians of solid judgment, and these who
   groaned so long under the heavy bondage and sufferings of those times,
   were made to acknowledge with thankfulness, that it was the Lord's
   right hand that turned again the captivity of our Zion. Our restored
   captives were then surprised with their liberty; they were like men
   that dreamed, amazed at the works of the Lord, and obliged to say, The
   Lord hath done great things for us.

   In consequence of the act of parliament, the first general assembly met
   at Edinburgh October 16^th 1690, after about forty years interruption,
   where was a great gathering of old banished suffering ministers, who
   had survived the long storm of persecution that lay upon this tossed
   afflicted church. These ministers had several general meetings before
   this: in one of them they agreed that the first day of the Assembly's
   meeting should be kept as a day of solemn fasting and humiliation,
   which was observed accordingly by prayer and preaching both before and
   after noon, their majesties high commissioner Lord Carmichael joining
   with them in that good work. Afterwards king William's letter to the
   Assembly was presented, in which he expresses his affection to them,
   but presses calmness and moderation in their proceedings in very strong
   terms; yea tells them, that his authority should never be a tool to
   their irregular passions.--In answer to this letter, the Assembly say,

     They received his letter with all the joy and thankfulness that the
     rising and shinning again of the royal favour upon this long
     afflicted and distressed church could possibly inspire.--The God of
     love, the Prince of Peace with all the providences that have gone
     over us, and circumstances that we are under, as well as your
     majesty's obliging pleasure, require of its a calm and peaceable
     procedure. And if after the violence for conscience sake, that we
     have suffered and so much detested, and these grievous abuses of
     authority in the late reigns, (whereby, through some men's irregular
     passion, we have so sadly smarted) we ourselves should lapse into
     the same errors, we should certainly prove the most unjust towards
     God, foolish towards ourselves, and ungrate towards your majesty, of
     all men upon earth.

   Afterwards they say, "Desiring in all things to approve ourselves unto
   God, as the true disciples of Jesus Christ, who, though most zealous
   against all corruptions in his church, was most gentle towards the
   persons of all men."--But, notwithstanding of all this moderation of
   the Assembly, the Prelatical party raised great clamours against them
   at court, and through England, for their severity.--But, as the
   Assembly observe in their foresaid answer to the king--"Great
   revolutions of this nature must be attended with occasions of
   complaint; and even the worst of men are ready to cry out of wrong for
   their justest deservings."

   This assembly was much concerned, to get Presbyterians united among
   themselves, who, under the late persecution had been wofully divided by
   means of the indulgences and toleration granted by the civil
   government: and to compass this design, they received into fellowship
   with this church and her judicatories, three ministers, Masters
   Linning, Shields, and Boyd, who had carried the point of separation on
   the foresaid accounts to too great a height; but now promised to live
   in union with, and subjection to, the judicatories of the church for
   the future; having at the same time given in a long paper for the
   exoneration of their consciences, bearing testimony to what they judged
   right, and against what they took to be wrong. These three ministers
   afterwards proved eminently useful in the church and in the
   judicatories, and contributed greatly to heal the schism that was among
   us.

   This church having been long overwhelmed with ruins, this assembly 1690
   had much work to do, to remove some of the rubbish, and establish some
   order: They had civil rulers urging a coalition with, or comprehension
   of, many of them; they had rents among themselves to heal, and many
   other difficulties to grapple with. Amidst all these they did a great
   many good things, such as appointing all ministers, elders and
   probationers to subscribe the Confession of Faith; making acts for
   keeping the Lord's day, and for applying the parliament to alter
   markets from Saturdays and Mondays, for erecting schools in the
   Highlands, providing them with Irish Bibles, for rescinding the
   sentences past by the publick resolutioners and protestors against one
   another. They appointed large committees or commissions for visiting
   several parts of the national church, with instructions how to manage;
   they also appointed two of their number to repair to London, to wait
   upon the king concerning the affair of this church. And for further
   healing of their rents, turning away the wrath of God, and imploring
   his mercy, they appointed a national fast to be observed on the second
   Thursday of January thereafter: In the causes whereof, they enumerate a
   great many sins of the land, both in the former land present times;
   such as,

     Ingratitude for mercies treacherous dealing with God,
     unsteadfastness in his covenant, falling from their first love, open
     defection of all ranks from the ways of God, by horrid immoralities,
     and sacrificing the interest of Christ and privileges of his church
     to the will and lusts of men, introducing Prelacy, imposing and,
     taking unlawfull oaths, shedding innocent blood, the general
     fainting under the late persecutions and even of eminent ministers,
     by either yielding to the defections and evils of the time, or not
     giving seasonable and necessary testimony against them; ignorance
     and neglect of Christ, and of living by faith on him; contempt of
     the gospel, and barrenness under it; want of holiness and piety
     towards God, and of love and charity towards men; the most part
     being, more ready to censure the sins of others, than to repent of
     their own.

   These and a great many other evils they mention as a ground of fasting.
   It has indeed been complained of, that the hints given of some of these
   evils are too general. No doubt, if the drawing of the act had been put
   in some hands, these had been more particularly and fully expressed,
   and the Assembly would not have scrupled to have approven the act in
   that shape. It is wished the act had been more full and explicit with
   respect to the shedding of the blood of God's saints and martyrs under
   prelacy, the king's ecclesiastic supremacy then advanced to a most
   blasphemous height, the self-contradictory oath of the abominable test,
   and the fearful indignities done to our covenants, which we find
   mentioned by subsequent assemblies, and for which their is cause of
   mourning and humiliation to this day. Likewise we wish they had done
   more to retrieve the honour of these broken and burnt Covenants, by
   openly asserting the lawfulness and obligation of them, and applying to
   the civil powers for their concurrence to renew them, or rather of one
   made up of both, with accommodation to their times and circumstances.
   No doubt they were well apprised of the opposition that would be made
   to such a motion, as they found made to other such designs, and
   particularly to that of purging the church, and keeping out of
   judicatories these who were enemies to it; in which they met with
   strenuous opposition from statesmen and great men in power, and even
   from the throne itself; as appears from two letters from the king to
   the commission of assembly 1690, and his letter to assembly 1692,
   wherein he presses strongly their uniting with the Episcopal ministers
   then in churches. His commissioner the earl of Lothian seconded the
   king's letter; and because they fell not in with it, he said he had
   orders to dissolve the Assembly, which he did, without naming a diet
   for another.

   And here we cannot but observe the noble spirit and disposition of the
   Assembly 1692, which they shewed upon that occasion. The moderator Mr.
   William Crichton, in his speech to the commissioner, delivered himself
   as follows:

     May it please your grace, this Assembly, and all the members of this
     national church are under the greatest obligations possible to his
     majesty: and, if his majesty's commands to us had been in any or all
     our concerns, in the world, we would have laid our hands upon our
     mouth and been silent; but they being for a dissolution of this
     assembly without indicting another to a certain day, therefore
     having been moderator to this assembly, I in their name, they
     adhering to me, humbly crave leave to declare, that the office
     bearers in the house of God have a spiritual intrinsic power from
     Jesus Christ, the only Head of his church, to meet in assembly about
     the affairs thereof, the necessity of the same being first
     represented to the magistrate; and further I humbly crave, that the
     dissolution of this assembly, without indicting a new one to a
     certain day, may not be to the prejudice of our yearly general
     assemblies granted us by the laws of the kingdom.

   Here the members rose up, and with one voice declared their adherence
   to what the moderator had said. Whereupon the moderator turning himself
   to the assembly, as if he was to pray, the members by a general cry
   pressed to name a diet for the next general assembly. The moderator
   thereupon said, That, if they pleased, the next general assembly might
   meet here at Edinburgh upon the third Wednesday of August 1693 years.
   And the members did again with one voice declare their approbation
   whereof.--Wherefore these who knew the difficulties our ancestors had
   then to struggle with, will rather be inclined to pity than censure
   them, and to bless God that helped them to do so well; though still it
   must be owned, it would have been much for the church's exoneration,
   that matters had been more plainly and closely laid to the door of the
   state, that the world might have seen, where the stop was.

   Nevertheless, by that wonderful Revolution, all persecution was stopt,
   and the church enjoyed the freedom of gospel ordinances; the Lord gave
   large testimony to the word of his grace, and there were great days of
   the Son of man in many places of the land, and multitudes of souls were
   brought in to Jesus Christ their Saviour. Likewise judicatories did
   many good things some of which we shall instance.

   The general assembly, in the years 1694, 1697,1698, and subsequent
   years shewed great zeal for suppressing profaneness and immorality, by
   making many acts to that purpose, and by applying to the parliament to
   concur with them by the civil authority; who were pleased to revive
   former acts, and make several excellent new acts in that end, which the
   assembly appointed to be read, together with their own acts, frequently
   from the pulpits. Likewise it was the care and business of the general
   assembly for many years to get the North and Highlands supplied and
   planted with proper ministers; they sent diverse committees of the most
   experienced ministers to purge and plant the North, and transported
   many of the best ministers of the South to that country.

   These first assemblies, and severals since, have made strict laws with
   respect to licensing preachers, not only about their learning,
   orthodoxy and prudence; but have appointed presbyteries

     to make narrow inquiry into their moral character and piety, and
     what sense and impressions they have of religion upon their own
     souls; and they declare that such as are esteemed to be vain,
     imprudent, proud, or worldly minded, by the generality of sober
     intelligent persons who converse with them, shall be kept back from
     that sacred work.

   Happy were it for the church, if these excellent rules were strictly
   observed by all the presbyteries of this church.

   They made acts against the atheistical opinions of the Deists and
   others. They condemned the errors of Madam Bourignon, and deposed Dr.
   Garden for espousing them. They strictly appointed all ministers and
   preachers to subscribe the Confession of Faith. And for preserving of
   truth, and for preventing the corrupting of youth with error and
   immorality, they appointed all schoolmasters, chaplains and governors
   of youth to subscribe the Confession of Faith: and these who do not so,
   or are guilty of negligence, error or immorality, they appointed
   presbyters to apply to magistrates, heritors, &c. to get them removed
   from their offices.--They also enacted, That these who should receive
   licence or ordination from any of the late prelates, should be
   incapable of ministerial communion with this church, till they gave
   evidence of their repentance.

   They made excellent barrier acts, for preventing all innovations in our
   doctrine, worship, or government, by appointing that all these acts
   which are to be binding rules and constitutions to the church, shall
   first be proposed as overtures to the assembly, and be transmitted by
   them to the several presbyteries of this church, that they may send
   their opinions or consent to the next assembly, who may then pass the
   same into acts, if the more general opinion of the church, thus had,
   agree thereunto.--They made many acts and frequent applications to the
   government for suppressing and preventing the growth of popery; and
   encouraged students and preachers having Irish, that they might be
   useful in those parts; and do still continue to send such to assist the
   ministers where popery abounds, by preaching catechising, and
   instructing of the people, for counteracting the trafficking priests
   among them: in which design our sovereigns now concur by their yearly
   bounty of a thousand pounds sterling.--Also the assembly have been at
   great pains to get schools erected in every parish through the land,
   and appoint ministers to see that none be suffered to neglect the
   teaching of their children to read, and that the poor be taught upon
   charity.

   The commission of assembly 1690, according to their instructions, sent
   four worthy ministers, Masters Shields, Boreland, Stobo, and Dalgliesh,
   with the Scots colony to America; and one great design was for
   propagating the gospel and converting the Heathen in those parts. The
   assembly 1700 appointed a national fast, and one special ground was for
   their success. Of which they acquainted them by a letter, in which they
   directed them, upon their landing and settling in America, "to keep a
   day with all the people for solemn prayer and fasting, bewailing former
   sins, renewing baptismal engagements, and with the greatest seriousness
   dedicating themselves and the land unto the Lord." The assembly 1704
   set on foot that noble project of propagating Christian knowledge in
   the Highlands, Islands, and foreign parts of the world, by erecting
   charity schools and otherwise, which they began by a voluntary
   subscription and contribution through the nation, instructing their
   commission to encourage and carry on the said design, which was done
   from time to time, until they obtained letters patent from the
   sovereign, anno 1709, for erecting the subscribers into a society and
   corporation for managing that affair; and many collections have our
   assemblies appointed for that blessed design, whereby, and by donations
   from pious persons both at home and abroad to the society, their stock
   is greatly increased, and they are now enabled to maintain above 130
   charity schools in our Highlands and Islands at home, besides several
   missionaries in America, for propagating Christianity among the
   Heathen. And we have certain information of the happy success of these
   schools at home; thousands of ignorant and barbarous people have been
   civilized and reformed, and many of them, we hope, have become truly
   religious. Likewise the assembly have been at great pains to get new
   impressions of the Bible in Irish, and also to get the Psalms,
   Confession of Faith, Larger and Shorter Catechisms translated into
   Irish, and dispersed through the Highlands; and by the help of piously
   disposed persons, both in this and our neighbour nation, they have got
   to the number of 80 libraries settled in particular places through the
   Highlands and Islands. And what reason have we and all Scotsmen to give
   thanks to God for directing, countenancing and prospering this noble
   design so far in our land?--They also established an excellent form of
   process in church judicatories with relation to scandals and censures,
   by act 11. Ass. 1707; likewise an useful method for ministerial
   visitation of families, by act 10. Ass. 1708.

   These, and many other good things, have our old suffering ministers and
   our general assembly been instruments, under God, to set on foot and
   promote, since the revolution; for which we desire always to offer up
   our hearty thanksgiving and praises to Almighty God, for helping them
   so far in advancing of our holy religion.

   It has been indeed complained by some, that after the revolution they
   did not pass distinct recissory acts, for Christ's headship over his
   church, the Divine right of Presbytery, the church's intrinsic power,
   the obligation of our covenants, &c.--No doubt it might be some stop to
   them, that the magistrate entertained a jealous eye then upon the
   church, with respect to these points, lest they should have carried
   matters to too great heights against those who differed from them; and
   therefore the king and parliament, parl. 1. sess. 2. rescinded all the
   old acts in favour of the church which enjoined civil pains upon their
   sentences of excommunication. Yet notwithstanding, we wish they had
   done more, if possible, for asserting these principles which they held,
   than they did, immediately after the revolution. Had they foreseen what
   a handle their not doing it would have given to some to promote a
   separation from this church, we persuade ourselves they would have
   essayed to have done more. These old sufferers indeed might reckon that
   the world was sufficiently apprised of their principles with respect to
   the foresaid points, and that no man would question them, seeing they
   had hazarded the loss of all things for adhering to them; for it was
   upon that very account they were cast out of their houses and
   benefices, imprisoned, fined, banished, and hunted as partridges in the
   mountains. And although they past not distinct Assertory Acts with
   respect to these points, yet we have plain declarations of their mind
   about them in several public acts and deeds. It was upon their
   solicitation that the parliament, June 7 1690, past an act for
   establishing Presbyterian government among us, as being agreeable to
   the word of God; and at the same time ratified our Confession of Faith,
   and inserted it verbatim in their public records, in which Confession
   it is expressly asserted, chap. 30. sect. 1, 2. The Lord Jesus, as King
   and Head of his church, hath therein appointed a government in the hand
   of church officers, distinct from the civil magistrate. To these
   officers, the keys of the kingdom of heaven are committed, &c. And
   chap. 26. sect. 6, There is no head of the church but the Lord Jesus
   Christ. And chap. 23. sect. 3. The civil magistrate may not assume to
   himself the administration of the word and sacraments, or the power of
   the keys of the kingdom of heaven, &c.--Likewise they rescinded the act
   for the king's supremacy in church affairs.--Our first, assembly, by
   many acts, have, approven our Confession with all the aforesaid
   articles, and appointed all the members of this church to adhere
   thereto; also ministers, elders, and intrants to the ministry, are
   bound to make solemn profession thereof, and subscribe the same; and
   parents at baptism are daily required to train up their children
   according to it.

   Likewise the moderators of all our assemblies, at the close of every
   assembly, do publicly assert, and declare before the king's high
   commissioner, that as the assembly met in the name of our Lord Jesus
   Christ the only King and Head of his church, so they part in the same
   name; and also they named the diet of the next assembly.--And when the
   commissioner dissolved the assembly 1692 abruptly, without naming a
   diet for another; the moderator did in his face, with consent of the
   whole assembly, remonstrate against it, and declare, That the
   office-bearers in the house of God have a spiritual intrinsic power
   from Jesus Christ, the only Head of his church, to meet in assemblies
   about the affairs thereof; and he named a diet for another assembly.
   All this is recorded in the assembly's books. In like manner did the
   assembly remonstrate, when dissolved in the year 1703. And the very
   next assembly 1704, in their answer to the queen's letter, do plainly
   tell her, that they were now again met in a national assembly in the
   name Of our Lord Jesus Christ. Also, they approved the several
   synod-books through Scotland, which had Assertory Acts recorded in
   them, for Christ's Headship, the Divine right of Presbytery, the
   church's intrinsic power, &c. To prevent which approbation, was the
   reason (as then generally believed) why the commissioner dissolved the
   preceding assembly. Again, the assembly 1705, in their 7^th act
   concerning Mr.. Hepburn, do assert in plain words, that the Lord Jesus
   Christ is the alone King and Head of, the church. And Ass. 1707, act
   11, declare, that our Lord Jesus Christ hath instituted a government,
   and governors ecclesiastical in his house, with power to meet for the
   order and government thereof.--And as for the Divine right of
   Presbytery, the assembly 1711 do expressly declare for it in their
   10^th act, when they appoint all intrants to the ministry, both when
   licensed and ordained, to subscribe and declare, not only that our
   Confession of Faith and purity of worship are founded upon the word of
   God, but also that the Presbyterian government and discipline of this
   church are founded upon the word of God, and agreeable thereto; and
   also solemnly to engage that that they will firmly and constantly
   adhere to the said doctrine and worship, and to the utmost of their
   power, in their station, assert, maintain will defend the discipline
   and Presbyterian government of this, church, by kirk-sessions,
   presbyteries, provincial synods, and general assemblies, during all the
   days of their lives. Whereby all ministers and preachers do plainly
   renew our covenants.--And that ministers in former Years were of the
   same mind appears by the church's declaration by their commission in
   the year 1698, published in their Seasonable Admonition, p. 5. in which
   they say, We do believe and own that Jesus Christ is the only Head and
   King of his church: and that he hath instituted in his church, officers
   and ordinances, order and government, and not left it to the will of
   man, magistrate or church, to alter at their pleasure. And we believe
   this government is neither prelatical nor congregational, but
   presbyterian, which now, through the mercy of God, is established
   amongst us; and believe we have a better foundation for this our
   church-government, than the inclination of the people, or laws of men,
   g&c.g And that commission's whole actings and conclusions were ratified
   and approven by Ass. 1699, act 12.--Besides all which, our assemblies
   and commissions have frequently owned the obligation of our covenants
   by mentioning the breaches of them among our causes of fasting. Ass.
   1700, act 5. they lament our continued unfaithfulness to God,
   notwithstanding of our solemn covenants and engagements to the
   contrary. Again, Ass. 1701, act 9. they say, Our sins are the more
   aggravated, that they are against so many solemn repeated vows and
   engagements, and covenants with our God, which have been openly
   violated and broken by persons of all ranks, and treated with public
   contempt, indignities and affronts, g&c.g--We bless God, that has
   determined our church to own these truths so openly, over the belly of
   all their difficulties and discouragements; and we desire heartily to
   join with them in declaring for the Headship of our Lord Jesus Christ
   over his church, in opposition to the pope, magistrate or any other;
   likewise for the spiritual intrinsic power of the church to chuse
   [choose] her officers, meet in her judicatories, inflict censures, and
   govern the church, in opposition to all Erastian opinions or practices
   promoted by any party or person whatsoever; as also for the Divine
   right of Presbyterian government in the church, in opposition to
   Prelacy, independency, &c. and for the lasting obligation of our
   covenants, seeing they bind us to nothing but what we are antecedently
   bound to by the Scriptures of truth.

   Thus the church of Scotland continued owning and adhering to her
   ancient principles and doctrines, and using means to promote religion
   through the land for many years after the revolution, without any
   visible declension. But, alas! her degeneracy and defection hath of
   late years become too visible; and our union with England in 1707 may
   be looked upon as the chief source thereof, next to the corruption of
   our hearts. When this transaction came to be laid before the Scots
   parliament in 1706, the nation was most intent about it, not knowing
   the nature or articles, whether it was a federal or incorporating
   union: but when it was seen to be the latter, and the majority of the
   house disposed to agree to it, both the church and the body of the
   people were vastly uneasy, great numbers of addresses came up against
   it, and insurrections were much feared. The commission by appointment
   sat during the whole session, and was exceeding numerous; members
   attending by turns. They presented three addresses to the parliament,
   the first was for an unalterable security of the established religion,
   to the people of this land and all succeeding generations, so far as
   human laws can go. To satisfy them, the parliament enacted, That the
   establishment of the doctrine, worship, discipline and Presbyterian
   government of this church should be held as an unalterable, fundamental
   and, essential condition of the union of the two kingdoms, if
   concluded. This seemed to quiet many, reckoning the security of the
   church not so precarious and uncertain, when thus established by the
   mutual agreement of both parliaments in a solemn treaty of union, that
   when settled by acts of the Scots parliament only; for the faith of the
   English in keeping treaties was at this time much spoken of. But the
   most part of the church continued still averse to an incorporating
   union, and their coming under the jurisdiction of a British parliament,
   in which the English members, being prelatical would be ten to one of
   Scots members wherefore the commission presented a second address,
   declaring this aversion. They indeed met with great opposition from
   noblemen and gentlemen, elders in the commission, who had views of
   temporal offices and advantages from court by being for the union; yet
   they represented the grievances the church and her members might fall
   under by the union, such as oaths, tests and impositions inconsistent
   with their principles. And in their address they plainly testified
   against the subjecting of this nation to a British parliament, in which
   twenty six prelates would be constituent members and legislators; For
   (say they) it is contrary to our known principles and covenants, that
   any churchman should bear civil offices, or have power in the
   commonwealth. To this they got no answer, save a clause put in the act
   for securing the church, that no oath, test or subscription shall ever
   be imposed within the bounds of this church and kingdom contrary to our
   Presbyterian establishment. By which (it is to be regreted) the
   parliament neither shewed regard to the principles of Scotsmen when out
   of the kingdom, nor to the obligation of our covenants: nay, they
   proceeded to worse afterwards, by declaring that the parliament of
   England might provide for the security of the church of England within
   the bounds of that kingdom, as they should think expedient; whereby
   they consented to the securing of the prelacy and ceremonies of that
   church as a fundamental of the union. This being both against the word
   of God and our solemn league, we have cause to mourn over it as a
   national breach of covenant, in some respect; though it is a mercy the
   church was helped to remonstrate against it; for the commission when
   informed of it, presently presented a third address (though greatly
   opposed) craving that there might be no such stipulation or consent for
   the establishment of the hierarchy and ceremonies, as they would not
   involve themselves and the nation in guilt, &c. From all which it is
   evident, that this church did remonstrate against making an union with
   England upon terms not consistent with our ancient covenant union with
   that kingdom: for the ensuing assembly 1707 approved the commission in
   what they did.

   But, notwithstanding of the church's remonstrance against this union
   and the foresaid sinful stipulation, it was concluded and ratified by
   both parliaments; but it doth not appear that this memorable
   transaction has been followed with the special blessings of heaven,
   seeing it hath brought on very much sin, and many growing evils upon
   this poor land, to the dishonour of God, and decay of true Christianity
   among us. For after the union, when our correspondence and
   communication with the English was greatly increased, the Lord's day
   began to be profaned after their example, and other immoralities much
   to abound, and the societies for reformation of manners to dwindle
   away. Likewise our nobility and gentry have been since that period
   giving up gradually with family religion, and the very form of
   Godliness, and falling into a looser way of living; for many of them
   since the union do either dwell or spend much time in England, whereby
   they learn many of their vices and evil customs; they are either
   reconciled to the English hierarchy and worship, or live much in the
   neglect of all public worship; and, being there under the inspection of
   no parish-minister they and their families get leave to live as they
   list: and, when they come down to Scotland, they get many to follow
   their loose examples. Also, since the union, public oaths are
   prodigiously multiplied, in qualifying men for offices, in collecting
   and paying of taxes; and manifold perjuries are thereby committed, and
   particularly by custom-house oaths, and running of goods, which also
   opens a door to many other sins. And hereby Atheism, Deism and
   infidelity have made progress in the land.

   Likewise soon after the union, the English service and ceremonies were
   set up in several places, and afterwards the parliament gave a
   toleration for it, and the body of the Episcopal clergy embraced that
   worship, though their ancestors had always supposed it heretofore. Yea,
   by this law, almost all errors are tolerated; and now even the Popish
   worship is kept openly, and connived at.--A superstitious form of
   swearing was soon introduced; from England, by laying the hand on and
   kissing the gospels. The sacramental test, and conformity to the
   liturgy and ceremonies, is imposed upon the members of this church
   while serving the king in England and Ireland. Likewise many other
   incroachments are made upon the government, rights and privileges of
   this church by the toleration act, and by the act for restoring
   patronages, by the act for a vacation of the lords of session and other
   courts in the end of December, whereby the keeping of holy days is
   encouraged; and lastly, by refusing access to the house of peers,
   unless the address be directed to the lords spiritual. And all these
   grievances are brought upon us, notwithstanding of our security by the
   union-act, and the English faith so much talked of. From all which we
   may conclude, That as our union with England was made upon sinful
   terms, so in the event it hath proven a great judgment upon this land
   and church. Alas! we have been perfidious to God, and no wonder though
   men should be left to prove perfidious to us.

   Very soon did Scotland feel the bitter effects of the union; for, in
   the view of its being concluded, several of the Episcopal clergy began
   to set up the English service in meeting houses, hoping to find more
   countenance and support from England on this account. This way of
   worship was wholly new and strange, and could never find place in
   Scotland before. Wherefore the general assembly 1707, that met soon
   after the conclusion of the union, gave an honest testimony against
   this new worship, by their 15th act, intituled, Act against innovations
   in the worship of God; wherein they say, The purity of Divine worship,
   and uniformity therein, hath been the great happiness of this church
   ever since her reformation; and that the introduction of these
   innovations was not so much as once attempted, even during the late
   prelacy; that they are dangerous to this church, and manifestly
   contrary to our own known principle, viz. that the assembly moved with
   zeal for the glory of God, and the purity and uniformity of his
   worship, doth discharge the practice of all such innovations of Divine
   worship within this church; and doth require and obtest [supplicate]
   all the ministers of this church, especially these in whose bounds any
   such innovations are, or may happen to be, to represent to their people
   the evil thereof, and seriously to exhort them to beware of them, &c.
   And they appoint the commission to use all proper means for suppressing
   such innovations. Which the commission did, as appears by their act 5th
   August 1709, which they ordained to be read in all the churches through
   Scotland. But the more the church opposed this new worship (as they
   judged they were warranted to do by the laws of the land) the more
   forward were their enemies to set it up, and at length got the
   parliament to espouse their cause.

   Likewise, soon after the union, gross profanation of the Lord's day
   began to abound, by traveling, carrying goods, driving cattle, and
   other abuses on that holy day; as appears from the 12th act of ass.
   1708. For preventing whereof, the assembly in that act appointed each
   presbytery to send some of their number to attend the lords of
   justiciary [judicial officer] at their first circuit that falls to be
   in their bounds, and to represent to their lordships the profanation of
   the Lord's day by the foresaid wicked and sinful practices. And the
   general assembly did seriously recommend to the lords of justiciary to
   take effectual course to restrain and punish the foresaid abuses;
   which, the assembly say, they will acknowledge as a singular service
   done to God and his church. Also they enjoin all ministers to represent
   to their profile, among whom such practices are, the great hazard their
   immortal souls are in by such courses; and also to proceed not only
   with ecclesiastic censures against sabbath breakers, but also to apply
   to justices of peace and other magistrates in their bounds, to execute
   the laws against them.--But our commerce with England still increasing,
   the profanation of the Lord's day among us is come to a great height,
   in spite of all the church hath done against it.

   But, our sins and provocations against God being highly aggravated; as
   a just punishment upon us, God was pleased to let loose our enemies in
   the British parliament to bring in a bill, which they got past into a
   law, for allowing those of the Episcopal clergy the use of the English
   liturgy in Scotland, containing some grievous clauses in it against the
   just and legal rights of the established church. While the bill was in
   dependence March 1712, the commission met and addressed the queen, in
   which they gave free and faithful testimony against the said bill,
   which the assembly that met in May 1712 did unanimously approve; and,
   as a token of it, did insert their address in their books, and print it
   with their acts. In it, they say,

     The church of Christ in Scotland is in hazard of sad alterations and
     innovations, inconsistent with and contrary to that happy
     establishment, secured to us by the laws of both of God and the
     realm; by the said bill.--If the matters in question did only relate
     to our own case and better accommodation, we should patiently bear
     the same: but when we see the glory of God, and the power and purity
     of our holy religion, and of the ordinances of Jesus Christ in this
     church, so much concerned, we cannot but hope that your majesty will
     allow us to plead our just right, &c.--

   Afterwards they plead the several acts of parliament for settling and
   securing the worship, discipline and government of this church, with
   her rights and privileges; all which acts were ratified by the
   parliaments of both kingdoms in the treaty of union, and declared to be
   a fundamental, essential and unalterable condition of the said treaty
   of union in all time coming. It is observable, after their pleading the
   5th act parl. 1690, which allows the Presbyterian ministers and elders
   to have power to try and purge out all insufficient, negligent,
   scandalous and erroneous ministers by due course of ecclesiastical
   process and censures, and likewise to redress all other church
   disorders;--They add, By which act it is evident, that Presbyterian
   church government being thus established, the ministers and elders of
   this church have all the powers committed by our Lord and Master to his
   ministers and officers, to watch over the flock, and to guard against
   all usurpers and intruders.--Afterwards they add, We cannot but express
   our astonishing surprise and deep affection to hear of such a bill,
   offered for such a large and almost boundless toleration, not only
   threatening the overthrow of this church, but giving a large licence
   almost to all errors and blasphemies, and throwing up all good
   discipline, to the dishonour of God, and the scandal and ruin of the
   true Christian religion, and the infallible disturbance of the quiet,
   and to the confusion of this church and nation.--And therefore we do in
   all humility, but with the greatest earnestness, beseech, nay obtest
   your majesty, by the same mercy of God that restored this church, and
   raised your majesty to the throne, to interpose for the relief of this
   church, and the maintenance of the present establishment, against such
   a manifest and ruining incroachment.--The church being most earnest to
   oppose this toleration and other grievances then coming upon the
   church, they sent three of their number, Masters Carstares, Blackwall,
   and Baillie, to London, to present this and others of their petitions,
   and to agent the church's cause: but, notwithstanding of all that this
   and other acts were past against the church; all Episcopal ministers
   were allowed to preach, pray, administer the sacraments, and marry,
   without any other caveat that appears for their doctrine save that that
   they shall not deny, in their preaching or writing, the doctrine of the
   blessed Trinity. They are not by that act obliged to satisfy the
   church, or any person or society, concerning their belief of the
   doctrine of the Trinity; it is enough if they do not openly impugn it:
   so that there is a liberty given to the most erroneous or scandalous
   men to preach and dispense sacraments, without being accountable to
   any.

   We do here join with the church in testifying against such a boundless
   toleration, as being contrary to the word of God, and the practice of
   reforming magistrates and churches therein commended: as in 2 Chron.
   xxxiv. 33. Rev. ii. 2. and to these texts wherein such a toleration is
   reproved, as Rev. ii. 14, 15, 20. as also it is contrary to our
   Confession of Faith, chap. 23. and to our Larger Catechism upon the 2nd
   commandment.

   At the same time there was another distressing bill presented in the
   parliament for restoring of patronages, and repealing the act 1690,
   which gave liberty to parishes to call their own ministers.--This also
   carried against the church, notwithstanding of the common's address,
   which was in like manner approven by the assembly. In this address they
   plead and assert, That

     the act 1690, abolishing patronages, is a part of our Presbyterian
     constitution, ratified by the acts of parliament of both kingdoms in
     the treaty of union, and declared to be unalterable: That, from our
     first reformation from Popery, patronages have still been reckoned a
     yoke and burden upon this church; and this is declared by the first
     and second books of Discipline: that the restoring of them will
     inevitably obstruct the work of the gospel, and create great
     disorders and disquiet in this church and nation; and that there is
     one known abuse attending patronages, viz. the laying a foundation
     for Simoniacal pactions betwixt patrons and those presented by them.

   Though this did not avail to stop the bill, yet it was a plain
   testimony from the church against Patronages; which we cannot but
   approve and adhere to.

   Likewise we approve of that noble testimony which the general assembly
   gave against both the toleration, and patronages, May 14^th 1715, when
   they approved a memorial concerning them, which they appointed to be
   sent to the duke of Montrose principal secretary of state, most humbly
   entreatng him to lay it before the king, viz. King George I. The tenor
   of it is as follows:

     The church of Scotland, being restored at the happy revolution, was
     by the claim of right, and acts of parliament following thereupon,
     established in its doctrine, worship discipline and government; and,
     that this legal constitution and establishment might be unalterably
     secured, it was declared to be a fundamental and essential condition
     of the union, and accordingly ratified in the parliaments of both
     kingdoms. But the zeal of the established church of Scotland for,
     and their steady adherence to, the Protestant succession, did expose
     them to the resentments of a disaffected party. And now they account
     themselves aggrieved by some acts past in the parliament of Great
     Britain; as 1mo, By the act granting such a large and almost
     boundless toleration to these of the Episcopal persuasion in
     Scotland, while the liberty allowed to Protestant Dissenters in
     England (who had always given the most satisfying proofs of their
     undoubted zeal and good affection to the Protestant succession) was
     retrenched. And though the church of Scotland hath an equal security
     in a legal establishment with that of England, yet there is a vast
     inequality as to the toleration of the respective Dissenters. In
     Scotland the toleration doth not restrain the desseminating the most
     dangerous errors, by requiring a Confession of Faith, or
     subscription to the doctrinal articles of the established church, as
     is required of Dissenters in England: it also weakeneth the
     discipline of the church against "the scandalous and profane; by
     withdrawing the concurrence of the civil magistrate. It is also an
     inequality and hardship upon the established church of Scotland,
     that these of her communion who are employed in his majesty's
     service in England or Ireland, should be obliged to join in
     communion and conformity to the church of England; whereas
     conformity to this church is not required (nor do we plead that it
     should be) of members of the church of England, when called to serve
     his majesty in Scotland, who here enjoy the full liberty of
     Dissenters without molestation; and the common and equal privileges
     of the subjects of the united kingdom, stipulated by the union, do
     claim the same liberty to the members of the church of Scotland,
     when employed in his majesty's service in England and Ireland.

     2do, By the act restoring the power of presentation to patrons, the
     legally established constitution of this church was altered in a
     very important point: and while it appears equitable in itself, and
     agreeable to the liberty of Christians and a free people, to have
     interest in the choice of these to whom they intrust the care of
     their souls, is an hardship to be imposed upon in so tender a point,
     and that frequently, by patrons who have no property nor residence
     in the parishes; and this besides the snares of Simoniacal pactions
     [a "Simoniacal paction" is the buying or selling of ecclesiastical
     pardons, offices, or emoluments via an agreement or bargain.], and
     the many troubles and contests arising from the power of patronages,
     and the abuses thereof, by disaffected patrons putting their power
     into other hands, who as effectually serve their purposes; by
     patrons competing for the right of presentation in the same parish;
     and by frequently presenting ministers settled in eminent posts to
     mean and small parishes, to elude the planting thereof: By all
     which, parishes are often kept long vacant, to the great hindrance
     of the progress of the gospel.

   Although the church of Scotland was brought under the distress enough
   by the toleration and patronages, yet, to add to it, the oath of
   abjuration was also imposed upon the ministers thereof in the year
   1712. This occasioned a great question among them, and much writing
   upon it, whether the conditions or qualifications required of the
   successor to the crown, in the act so of parliament settling the
   succession, of which this is on that he must join in communion with the
   church of England, be understood as any part of the oath, or not? These
   who were not clear to take it, apprehended these conditions might be
   reckoned a part of the oath, because in it they were to swear to
   maintain the succession AS entailed by such acts of parliament, in
   which these conditions were contained. Others again understood these
   conditions as no part of the oath, seeing when the oath was first
   framed in the English parliament in the year 1701, and a clause was
   offered to be added to it for maintaining the church of England, it was
   rejected, because the Dissenters could not take it: and at the union
   the parliament had expressly exeemed these of this church from all
   oaths inconsistent with their principles: and consequently, that the AS
   in the oath was not reduplicative upon the qualifications of the
   successor, but merely indicative, as only pointing out the act wherein
   the succession was settled, and the illustrious family and persons on
   whom it was entailed failing the heirs of king William, queen Anne and
   her heirs, g&c.g And therefore they understood that the oath brought
   them under no other obligation, but to allegiance to the sovereign, and
   to an engagement against a Popish pretender, and to the succession in
   the Protestant line: and, to prevent mistakes and misrepresentations
   they might be liable to in this matter, they resolved to give in
   written declarations to this purpose upon instrument, at taking of the
   oath, which generally they did. At this time the commission addressed
   the queen (as also did the assembly) in favours of these who still
   scrupled at the oath, as if the AS in it did some way refer to the
   conditions required of the successor, that such might be favourably
   dealt with, as her loyal subjects. As also they petitioned her, that
   their declarations of loyalty to the queen, their renouncing the
   Pretender, and engagements to support the succession to the crown in
   the Protestant line in the family of Hanover, as contained in their
   address, might be accepted by her as their sense of the said oath,
   without respect to the condition scrupled at.--In answer thereto, the
   queen, in her letter to the assembly, declared that the address of the
   commission did so much manifest their loyalty to her, and their true
   concern for the succession in the Protestant line by law established,
   that it could not but be acceptable. This answer did very much confirm
   these who judged that the AS in the oath did not reduplicate upon the
   qualifications of the successor, and gave freedom to many to take it.

   After king George I came to the throne, and understood our difficulties
   by the representation of assembly 1715, and former addresses, he
   interposed for the relief of these who scrupled at the oath, and got
   the parliament to turn the AS into WHICH, as also to declare that the
   oath was not meant to oblige his majesty's subjects in Scotland to any
   thing inconsistent with their church establishment according to law.
   This removed the scruples of many; but nevertheless there were not a
   few worthy ministers who remained uneasy and scrupulous upon account
   there was still mention, made in the oath of the act of parliament that
   required the conditions of the successor, and therefore wanted to have
   it wholly taken out of the oath. Which, upon application, the king was
   so good as to grant, by an act of parliament in the 5^th year of his
   reign.--Thus did the Lord in his mercy settle the great commotions that
   were in the church by reason of that oath, and extricate her out of
   some of her difficulties; yea, so far, that the most strict and zealous
   ministers in Scotland were brought to declare both from the pulpit and
   the press, that the embracing or refusing the oath of abjuration did
   not afford the least ground for separation.

   It is remarkable, that in the midst of all these grievances and
   pressures which the church groaned under, the Lord did not suffer her
   to sink.--The times indeed became very cloudy and dark; the church's
   friends were turned out of place, and her enemies were exalted in
   power; Jacobites were put in places of highest trust, and many of them
   became so insolent, as to maltreat and abuse the ministers of the
   gospel, and sometimes to cause burn at market-crosses the acts of
   synods for fasts, because in them they appointed prayers to be made for
   maintaining the Protestant succession, and for defeating the designs
   and plots then forming for overturning it, and for bringing in a Popish
   Pretender. Yet even then the Lord inspired the commission with courage
   and resolution to emit their famous seasonable warning at their meeting
   19^th August 1713, which was read from the pulpits; wherein they obtest
   all good Protestants and lovers of their country to look to themselves,
   that they be not deluded by the subtile devices of a Jacobite party,
   who would bring us under the yoke of a Popish Pretender.--Here the
   commission mention their artifices at large; one whereof is, They with
   great appearance of zeal, espouse and promote the English liturgy
   through the land, though neither they nor their fathers would receive
   it heretofore; and at the same they omit all, the prayers for queen
   Anne and princess Sophia.--Likewise they make a great outcry,
   especially in distant places, of their having suffered grievous
   persecutions because of their being of the Episcopal persuasion though
   withhout ground. Blessed be God (say they) we ran appeal to the
   consciences of all who know our conduct, that we have never since the
   late happy revolution in the least returned the severities, and
   unparalleled cruelties, which we met with when they had the ascendant;
   and which we from their present temper, as well as from their former
   behaviour may reasonably conclude they want nothing but power to renew
   against the ministers and members of this church.--Wherefore they,
   seriously obtest and beseech all ranks of persons to humble themselves
   deeply under the many sad causes and tokens of the Lord's anger, and
   turn to him with all their hearts, and flee to the blood of sprinkling
   for reconciliation, and pray earnestly to God to disappoint the designs
   and hopes of a Popish and Jacobite party, preserve the Protestant
   succession in the house of Hanover, sanctify the troubles which have
   afflicted our Zion, and turn us from all these sins which have procured
   them, &c.

   And glory be to a prayer hearing God, who soon blasted all the
   Jacobites' plots and hopes, and made the Protestant succession take
   place, by the accession of K. George I within less than a year, to the
   of this poor oppressed church, and of all true Protestants.

   Towards the end of the queen's reign the Jacobites turned so uppish,
   that they encouraged Episcopal ministers to intrude into vacant
   churches, and ministers and preachers who were sent to preach in them
   were rabbled. They and their preachers did publicly solemnize the
   Pretender's birth day, set up bonfires, drink his health as king before
   great multitudes, and confusion to all the Presbyterians. But upon the
   accession of king George I these riots and insults were suppressed, and
   the laws and good order began again to take place. The church
   represented her grievances from the laws lately made; but the breaking
   out of the rebellion in 1715 put a stop to designs of that sort for a
   time. Until then, there were a good number of Episcopal ministers
   continued in churches through the North; but they, joining with others
   in that rebellion, were soon afterwards turned out. The Lord was
   pleased again to pity us, and work a great deliverance for us: for
   though the Jacobite and Popish party rose of a sudden, and gathered
   together in great numbers, threatening to carry all before them, to cut
   off our sovereign king George and all the friends of the Protestant
   succession, attacked the king's forces, and killed many; yet the Lord
   soon brake all their measures, poured shame upon their attempt, and
   made many of them flee their native country: so that in a wonderful
   manner God delivered us from the bloody sword, and the cruel designs of
   Papists and Jacobites, and restored peace in all our borders, in the
   year 1716.

   It might have been expected, that such astonishing mercies and
   deliverances would have produced humility and thankfulness to God, have
   led us to repentance and reformation, and have animated our zeal for
   God and his truths, and our activity to get the church's grievances
   redressed, when such a fit opportunity seemed to offer.--But, alas! we
   became unthankful to God, and soon for got his goodness; we turned
   secure and confident under king George's protection and favour, and
   began to lose that zeal for preserving the purity of doctrine and
   worship, for suppressing error and immorality, and for the advancement
   of religion and godliness, which former assemblies manifested. Now our
   old zealous suffering ministers were generally gone off the stage, and
   a woeful lukewarmeness and indifferency began to seize upon the
   following generation.

   At this time there was a great noise of Mr. John Simson, Professor of
   Divinity at Glasgow, his venting and teaching Arminian doctrine and
   gross errors. The worthy Mr. James Webster, one of the ministers of
   Edinburgh, having conversed with him thereupon, was the first that
   complained of him: And he was therefore appointed to process him before
   the presbytery of Glasgow; though it seems hard that Mr. Webster should
   have been burthened with an affair which was the common cause of the
   church. But Mr. Webster's appeal, the libel he gave in against Mr.
   Simson, and Mr. Simson's answer thereto, came before the assembly 1716,
   who remitted the same to a committee to consider the whole process, and
   to make a full and distinct report to the next assembly. In Mr.
   Simson's answer to this libel, and his letters to Mr. Rowan, there were
   found several very dangerous errors, contrary to the word of God, and
   our Confession of Faith and Catechisms; such as,

     That there is nothing to be admitted in religion, but what is
     consonant to reason.-- That regard to our own happiness in the
     enjoyment of God ought to be our chief motive in serving him; and
     that our glorifying God is subordinate to it.--That the Heathen may
     know by the light of nature, that there is a remedy for sin
     provided; and if they would pray sincerely for the discovery of the
     way of salvation, God would grant it to them.--That if men would
     with diligence, sincerity and faith use the means for obtaining
     saving grace, God has promised to grant it: and that the using of
     the means in the foresaid manner is not above the reach of our
     natural powers.--That there was no proper covenant made with Adam
     for himself and his posterity; and that he was not our federal
     head.--That it is inconsistent with God's justice and goodness to
     create souls wanting original righteousness; and that the souls of
     infants since the fall are created pure and holy.--That it is
     probable there are more of mankind saved than damned; And it is more
     than probable that baptized infants, dying in infancy are all
     saved.--That there is no sinning in hell after the last judgment,'
     &c.

   All which erroneous scheme of doctrine is fully refuted and exposed by
   the reverend Mr. John Flint and Mr. John M'Claren, both ministers of
   Edinburgh, in two different books, the one written in Latin, and the
   other in English, to which Mr. Simson never offered any reply.--Mr.
   Simson, when before the assembly and their committee, declared his
   adherence to our Confession of Faith, and studied to put senses upon
   his doctrine to make it seem to agree therewith, and made use of very
   subtile distinctions for that end: but such hath been the zeal
   sometimes of our assemblies against error and for purity of doctrine,
   that they would have had no great difficulty to have agreed that Mr.
   Simson, or any man that vented or taught such doctrine as above, was
   not fit to be continued a professor of divinity, to instruct and train
   up young men for the holy ministry.--But, when his process came to be
   finished by assembly 1717, there were so many members in it, who either
   had been his scholars, or were his relations, comrades or
   acquaintances, who stood up for saving him, that the assembly were
   brought to dismiss him with a very gentle censure, by their 9^th act;
   wherein they only say,

     He hath given offence, and hath vented some opinions not necessary
     to be taught in divinity, and that hath given more occasions to
     strife, than to the promoting of edification: That he hath used some
     expressions that bear and are used by adversaries in a bad and sound
     sense, though he doth disown that unsound sense. And, for answering
     more satisfyingly, (as he supposeth) the cavils and objections of
     adversaries, he hath adopted some hypothesis different from what we
     commonly used among orthodox divines, that are not evidently founded
     on Scripture, and tend to attribute too much to natural reason, and
     the power of corrupt nature; which undue advancement of reason and
     nature is always to the disparagement of revelation and efficacious
     free grace. The general assembly, for the reasons above mentioned,
     prohibits and discharges the said Mr. John Simson to use such
     expressions, or to teach, preach, or otherwise vent such opinions,
     propositions, or hypothesis as foresaid.

   But, as a just rebuke upon the assembly for their lenity, Mr. Simson
   persisted in his unsound doctrine, contemned their sentence, and still
   went on in a course of error, till in a few years he is arraigned
   before the assembly for Arianism.

   About this time there arose debates and great noise, as if some
   ministers were bringing in a new scheme of doctrine, because in their
   sermons they disused and censured several old approven words and
   phrases as too legal, and affected some new modes of speaking; and
   because they recommended to their people an old book called the Marrow
   of modern Divinity.--This book was laid before the assembly 1620, as
   containing gross Antimonian [Antinomian] errors; and several passages
   and propositions being excerpted from it by a committee, the assembly
   proceeded in a hurry to pass a condemnatory act against them all in
   cumulo; and, among the rest, they condemned as erroneous two
   propositions, viz. That believers are altogether set free from the law
   as a covenant of works;--And that they are set free both from the
   commanding and condemning, power of the covenant of works. Which two
   are surly sound and orthodox propositions in themselves.--Likewise that
   same assembly, by another act, recommended to ministers to insist in
   preaching several doctrines, and among others,--the necessity of a holy
   life in order to the obtaining of everlasting happiness. This certainly
   was very ill worded, however sound their meaning was.

   Although there were several stumbling and unjustifiable expressions in
   that book called the Marrow, g&c.g yet before the assembly had
   proceeded to pass their acts concerning them, it had been their wisdom,
   to have first remitted them (as in other cases) to the consideration of
   Presbyteries; which happy step would have prevented the oversight or
   mistakes of the assembly aforementioned, and consequently the Twelve
   brethrens' representation against the foresaid acts, given in to the
   assembly 1721, which was once likely to have landed in a schism. But it
   must be owned, that, when the assembly 1722 came to review and explain
   these hasty acts past in 1720, they did justice to truth, and declared
   their minds, concerning, the acts and propositions quarrelled, in very
   sound and orthodox terms.--And particularly, as to the necessity of
   holiness for obtaining everlasting happiness, they declare the
   expression is meant of obtaining the enjoyment and possession, of
   everlasting happiness, but not of the right and title to it, which
   (they say) all justified persons have already attained, viz. through
   the imputation of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Thus peace and
   truth were preserved in the church at that time.

   No doubt it had been much for the interest of truth, as well as the
   honour of our assemblies, that they had manifested as much zeal against
   other erroneous books which have been published or recommended before
   or since that time by other ministers of this church, and some of them
   far more dangerous than the Marrow, such as Dr. Whitchcot's sermons,
   &c. Oh that our ancient and trite zeal for truth and purity, and
   against all kind of error and corruption, were again happily revived in
   the land!--But, alas! how little ground have we in an ordinary way to
   expect any national reviving or reformation in the church and land,
   while the flood gates of error and corruption are still kept wide open
   by the laws for the Toleration and Patronages?

   In consequence of applications to the king by the church, some
   amendments were made upon these laws by the parliament in 1719; As,
   1mo, They discharged any person to preach or pray in any Episcopal
   meeting house in Scotland, that did not pray for king George, and take
   the abjuration oath, under the pain of six months imprisonment, and
   having the meeting house shut up. This act, had it been executed, would
   have put a stop to many of the erroneous Jacobite preachers; but not
   being executed against them, they still went on in disseminating many
   popish errors through the land.

   2do, The parliament enacted, That presentations given by patrons to
   vacant churches shall be effect, if the person presented do not accept
   or declare his willingness to accept of the presentation given him.--By
   which act the parliament put it (as it were) in the church's power to
   ease herself of the great grievance of patronage; which was ground of
   joy to many: for, at that time, it was generally thought that this
   limitation was equivalent to plain repealing of the patronage act, and
   that no Presbyterian would ever expressly declare his accepting of a
   presentation, or go so far to approve or comply with patronage, which
   Presbyterians had always declared heavy yoke and burden on the church
   of God. And accordingly there was no man that presumed to take, accept
   or make use of a presentation to a church for several years after this
   act was past; and so the church was easy, and continued to settle
   vacant churches upon the call of congregations, without any molestation
   from patrons.

   During this lucid interval, the church seemed to turn secure, as if she
   feared no danger from the acceptance of presentations; and therefore
   was at no pains to shut or bar the door against such acceptances. Had
   this been done, the church was effectually delivered by the foresaid
   favourable act from the yoke of patronage. Now was the proper juncture
   for our assemblies to have made a new declaration, in corroboration of
   what former assemblies had done, concerning the woful corruption and
   evil consequences of patronage; and to have warned all the members of
   this church of the evil of encouraging or promoting the same, and
   particularly all ministers and preachers of the sin and danger of
   complying with this corruption, by accepting of presentations;
   especially seeing there was no law requiring it as necessary, but, by
   the late act of parliament, an open door was left for their entering
   into churches in a gospel way, if they pleased to chuse and accept of
   it. No doubt, if things had been set in such clear light by our general
   assemblies, the authority of the church would have restrained these
   woful acceptances.--But, alas! while the church slept, the enemy was
   busy sowing his tares, and prompting some to devise subtile conditional
   acceptances, wherein they might disapprove of patronages, and declare
   for Presbyterian principles with respect to the people's rights, and
   yet, in the mean time, take such hold of the stipend presented to, that
   another could not make a legal title to it. When this was complained of
   to superior judicatories, some leading men, alas! were found to
   patronize these accepters, till at length they proceeded to the most
   open and barefaced acceptances. For these practices indeed some
   preachers were censured and silenced, but they were reponed [replaced]
   by superior courts; whereby at length acceptances went on without
   controul. So that, by such defections, the yoke of patronage is faster
   wreathed upon the church than ever, and her condition under it more
   lamentable than in any former period: for informer times all honest men
   groaned under patronage as a burden; and though they were presented by
   patrons to churches, yet they neither said nor wrote any thing in
   favour of the patron's deed, but silently submitted the presbyteries
   proceeding to their settlement, when they had parishes concurring in
   it: but, alas! By such active written acceptances as now in use, the
   whole church shall in process of time be involved in approving of
   patronages, in such away as was never done by the church of Scotland
   since the reformation.

   Wherefore we judge it the duty of all the lovers of truth and purity in
   the church of God, to bear open testimony against the yoke of
   patronage, and the acceptance of presentations, as we herebv desire to
   do, especially seeing they have been productive of such dreadful evils
   in this church of late years.

   It is well known that the church of Scotland hath ever since her
   reformation remonstrated against patronages, and asserts in her 2^nd
   book of Discipline, chap. 12. That patronages have flowed from the
   pope, and the corruption of the canon law; and the intruding of persons
   this way into churches, hath no ground in the word of God, but is
   contrary thereto, &c.--Likewise the parliament 1649, in their act
   abolishing patronage, do say, It is an evil and bondage under which the
   Lord's people and ministers have long groaned; and that it is a custom
   popish, brought into the church in times of ignorance and superstition;
   and that it is contrary to the 2^nd book of Discipline, &c.--Also the
   assemblies 1712 and 1715 give plain testimonies against patronages to
   the same purpose, and assert, That they lay a foundation for Simoniacal
   pactions, and many other evils. To these testimonies we do adhere, and
   likewise shall add some further reasons against patronages;

   1mo, Patronages are neither agreeable to the rules of God's word, nor
   to the apostolical practice: seeing it is evident from the word, that
   it was only the church herself, with her officers, that exercised the
   power of nominating and electing ministers and officers to the church,
   according to the authority derived to them from Christ their Head and
   Founder, Acts i. 15--vi. 2--viii. 14.--xiii. 3.--xiv. 23.--xvi. 9--1
   John iv. 1--2 John 10. So that a patron's right of nominating the
   officers of the church, is nothing but a manifest usurpation over the
   church of God.

   2do, Patronage is also contrary to the practice of the primitive and
   purest ages of the church, and was not known in the church until true
   religion and Christianity began to decline, and then it came in
   gradually with other Popish corruptions and abuses. We find Cyprian,
   Athanasius, the apostolical constitutions, with many ancient councils
   and fathers, declaring in the plainest terms for the free liberty and
   power of the church to chuse her own pastors, without any extrinsic
   influence whatsomever [whatsoever].

   3tio, As it is disagreeable to Scripture and antiquity, so it is
   contrary to reason, and to the interest and safety of the church, that
   the power of chusing her pastors should at anytime be lodged in the
   hands of heretics and profane men, as frequently the right of patronage
   is, being conveyed to them with their earthly inheritances. Can there
   be any thing more unreasonable and absurd than that the power of
   chusing officers to the church, should fall into the hands of the
   declared enemies of the church! or that this power, which is a
   spiritual and ecclesiastical privilege, should be conveyed, disponed
   [given to another], sold, or bought with money, like other civil rights
   or heritages, and so be lodged frequently with infidels and the worst
   of men.

   4to, For patrons to impose ministers upon Christian congregations, is a
   plain incroachment upon the natural rights of mankind, and upon the
   laws of free societies; as much as it would be for them to impose
   physicians and lawyers upon societies, to take care of their bodies or
   estates. The churches of Christ are as free societies as any in the
   world, having their liberties from Christ to chuse their own pastors;
   and ought not to be brought in bondage to any in this matter.

   5to, It is cruel imposition to oblige societies of men, who duly value
   their immortal souls, and would place them under proper spiritual
   guides, to intrust the edification, comfort, and eternal concerns of
   these precious souls, to the care of patrons; many, whereof are
   indifferent about the concerns of their own souls, being negligent,
   erroneous or profane; and so are not like to be much concerned to chuse
   proper pastors to take inspection of the souls of others. How can
   serious Christians be easy who it be that chuse their pastors, or these
   who know that patrons cannot secure them against the bad consequences
   of a wrong choice, nor be responsible for their souls at the great day.

   Lastly, Patronage by long experience has been found to be an open door
   for a corrupt ministry to enter into the church; and this is sadly
   exemplified in these churches where this corruption doth reign without
   controul.

   Upon all which accounts, we judge it our duty to hear testimony against
   the usurpation of patronage, as most sinful in itself, and injurious to
   the church of God; and to pray that God may open the eyes of all
   patrons, that they may be convinced and repent of it, and cease from in
   oppressing Christ's church any more.

   And as we bear testimony against patrons and their usurpation, so we
   judge ourselves bound to testify against all these who encourage and
   voluntarily comply with this Sinful usurpation, and particularly by
   accepting or declaring their willingness to accept of presentations
   from patrons, which, alas! is now become the common practice; and,
   being so common and general, both preachers and people are like to lose
   all sense of the evil of it.--But that these acceptances are sinful,
   and provoking to a holy God, is evident from these considerations:

   1mo, If a patron be guilty of a sinful usurpation over the church of
   God, in spoiling her of the right she hath from Christ to chuse her own
   officers (as certainly he is) then the accepter of a presentation doth
   become partner with the patron in his sin, by homologating [approving
   of] his usurped power, and strengthning him in it. Now, the scripture
   expressly forbids us to be partakers of other mens' sins

   2do, As the law now stands, the accepter is more guilty of robbing the
   church of her right than the patron is: for the legislature have been
   so tender of the church by their act 1719, as to put it absolutely in
   the power of ministers and preachers to accept or reject the usurpation
   of patronage as they please; so that a patron can give no trouble to
   the church, if he be not encouraged and assisted in it by an accepter.
   His presentation would be but like a dead serpent, altogether lifeless
   and harmless to the church, if an accepter did not come and inspire it
   with life, and put a sting in it. Though patronage be a grievous
   usurpation and burden on the church, yet it is now so limited and tied
   up in Scotland by law, that the church would not feel the burden of it,
   if it were not pulled down upon her by accepting presentees; so that
   now the accepters are properly the oppressors of the church of Christ.
   If Christ condemns the Pharisees for binding heavy burdens, grievous to
   be borne, and laying them upon other mens' shoulders; how condemnable
   must accepters of presentations be, who bind such a grievous burden as
   patronage on the shoulders of Christ's church?

   3tio, The minister or preacher, who accepts of a presentation, doth not
   only bring sin upon himself, by oppressing the church, and spoiling her
   of her just right; but also takes the ready way to encourage and harden
   a patron in his guilt and sinful usurpation, and to obstruct his
   conviction, repentance and reformation: for he will readily think that
   his conscience needs not be more strait-laced than theirs, who should
   inform his. Wherefore we earnestly wish and pray, that God would bring
   accepters, with their advisers and supporters, calmly to consider what
   a sinful hand they have in ensnaring patrons in a corrupt course and in
   hardening them in their usurpation over the church of God.

   4to, This way of accepting presentations doth open a door to many sad
   evils, such as Simoniacal pactions and intrigues, unchristian
   contentions and divisions in judicatories, oppressive concussions in
   parishes, vexatious prosecutions and appeals, and many scandalous
   intrusions into churches, to the great discredit of religion, and
   reproach of the ministerial character: hereby congregations are robbed
   of their just rights to call their own ministers, and very often
   Christ's flock is scattered and broken in pieces, the godly are
   grieved, and the wicked hardened: hereby ordinances come to be
   neglected, the Lord's day profaned, ignorance and vice encouraged, and
   church-discipline weakened. Yea, this pernicious practice has given
   occasion to many violent settlements, and to a wofull schism in the
   church, to the deposing of several worthy ministers, and to the
   discouragement of many pious students and preachers from serving the
   church: so that our accepters have need to consider how they will
   answer for all these direful consequences of their practice, and
   whether the commonness of it will excuse the sinfulness of it; O that
   we could look to God, who only can open their eyes!

   5to, Accepters of presentations, act contrary to the known principles
   of Presbyterians, and to their own engagements; and so are chargeable
   with sad defection and breach of faith. Our second book of Discipline,
   which is sworn to in our national covenant, declares patronages to be
   contrary to the word of God, chap. 12. And it was the general opinion
   of this church in the year 1719, that accepting of presentations was
   inconsistent with Presbyterian principles, and with the rights and
   rules of this church, which all ministers and preachers oblige
   themselves to maintain; upon which account, none adventured to meddle
   with them for a good many years thereafter. In our opinion, they act
   contrary to their engagements which they come under by the assembly's
   formula 1711; wherein they subscribe and promise, that they will never
   directly or indirectly endeavour the prejudice or subversion of the
   discipline and government of this church, but that they will to the
   utmost of their power maintain and support the same. Now, it was still
   reckoned a branch of our discipline and government, for parishes to
   have the liberty of free elections, and for Presbyteries to have access
   to free moderations in the calling of ministers. And it is visible to
   all, that accepters of presentations do stop and hinder this free
   liberty and access, contrary to their engagements by the formula, and
   also by the national covenant.

   6to, Seeing it is notour [well known] that the design of accepting,
   presentations is to secure the stipend to the presentee, so as another
   cannot have a title to it; it is plain that the accepter doth hereby
   invert the order, which Christ hath appointed in his church, viz.--That
   a minister's right to maintenance should be consequential to his
   ordination to the ministry: whereas, by the method he takes, he would
   make a minister's ordination to the ministry consequential to his
   having a right to the maintenance; which is contrary to Christ's stated
   order, and the nature of things.

   7mo, By accepting presentations, ministers do sadly prejudge the
   success of the gospel and their own ministry, by offending and
   stumbling the parishes concerned, besides many others, at their
   conduct. And is it any wonder though a parish he offended with a man
   for going about to secure a title to their stipend, before they have
   access to know him, or shew any inclination for him; and for his
   binding the yoke of patronage upon them, and spoiling them of their
   just right of chusing their own pastor; and for hindering them to get
   another worthy pastor whom they dearly love? What must they think of a
   man that tells a reclaiming parish by word or deed, I'll be your
   minister in spite of your teeth, I'll have the charge of your souls
   whether ye will or not; and, if ye refuse ordinances and means of
   salvation from me, ye shall have none? Nay, come of your souls what
   will, though they should perish in a state of ignorance and prejudice,
   I'll possess the kirk, manse and benefice, and hold out another
   minister from you. Have they not too good ground to suspect such a man,
   of earthly-mindedness, greed of filthy lucre, or of being more
   concerned for his own things, than for the, things of jesus Christ, and
   the salvation of their souls? Which apprehensions are sufficient to
   stuff the breasts of people with prejudice against him at his entry,
   and to blast his ministrations to them for many years thereafter. For
   it is no wonder, though they think such language or practice is not
   like that of one who sincerely designs to advance Christ's kingdom, and
   win souls to him, as a faithful minister ought to do; but rather of one
   that hath base worldly ends in view! The language of a pastor, whom
   Christ sends, is that in 2 Cor. xii. 14. I seek not yours, but you;
   whereas that of an accepter seems to be the very reverse, I seek not
   you, but yours.

   8vo, It increaseth the prejudice of many against such accepters, when
   they see there is no necessity for their accepting of presentations.
   Indeed, if there were no coming to a church or stipend but by the
   Patron's right, something might be said to alleviate the crime: but at
   present there is no necessity from the law to accept of them; nay, on
   the contrary, the law leaves an open door, by which ministers and
   preachers may have an orderly gospel access, both to churches and
   benefices, without having any dealing with Patrons at all, if they
   would but exercise a little patience till six months elapse. Now, how
   can people think charitably of these who refuse to enter by the safe
   gospel-door, and chuse, rather to climb up by the window of
   presentations and violence, when they cannot but see their so doing
   tends to blast their own ministry, and bring a, heavy yoke on their
   mother-church, after she was in effect freed of it by the tenderness of
   the legislature in 1719? Now, seeing these acceptances were
   unnecessary, and of the most pernicious consequence to the church and
   the interest of the gospel, it cannot but be surprising that our
   general assemblies were at so little pains to discourage or prevent
   them, when it might have been easily done at the beginning. We find
   indeed that the assembly 1724, referred it to their commission, to
   think of an overture thereanent [concerning or in reference to
   anything], and lay it before the next assembly; but it doth not appear
   that there was any more done, notwithstanding of repeated instructions
   from Presbyteries concerning the same. We know no reason can be
   assigned for the assembly's indolence in this matter, but their
   pusillanimity [cowardice], or sinful fearfulness of offending the
   government: but this fear of man hath brought a woeful snare upon the
   poor church. Several synods indeed shewed a willingness to restrain
   these acceptances but, Presentees knowing where to have recourse, their
   acts were soon disregarded. At first one or two probationers began to
   mint at accepting presentations; but the outcry against them was so
   great, that they soon retracted, and past from them again. But sometime
   after, when Principal George Chalmers adventured to accept a
   presentation to the church of Old-Machir, several young men took
   courage and followed his example; and though at first they qualified
   their acceptances with having the peoples' consent, yet they would not
   retract them after the people shewed their aversion to them; which
   occasioned many intrusions and violent settlements through several
   places of the church, contrary to our known principles, these
   intrusions came gradually into the church, but were act commonly
   practised, nor countenanced by superior courts, till after the year
   1728. For we find the assembly 1725, after a great struggle about
   calling a minster to Aberdeen, appointing, that besides the voting of
   the magistrates, town-council and elders in the call, the inclination
   of heads of families shall be consulted about it. And the assembly 1725
   censured the commission for proceeding to transport Mr. James Chalmers
   from Dyke to Aberdeen, without having due regard to the inclinations of
   the people of that city, who opposed his call. But, alas! our
   assemblies did not continue long in such a dispostion; for they and
   their commission began soon afterwards to pay more regard to patrons
   and heritors in planting of churches, though few of these were hearers,
   than they did to the whole body of the people that attended ordinances.
   The crown having the patronage of most of the churches of Scotland,
   this melancholy turn of affairs was thought to be brought about by
   strong court influence, and by the activity of several leading
   ministers, who had their dependence upon or expectations from that
   airth [probably "direction"]. These began to vent themselves in
   judicatories against the rights of the Christian people and to assert
   that there were no stated rules nor directions in Scripture about the
   calling of ministers, or who should be the electors. Some of them wrote
   pamphlets against the peoples' rights, pretending to answer the
   Scripture-arguments for them; and maintained that the clergy or
   judicatories were the proper electors. These were sufficiently answered
   by Mr. Currie, Mr. Hill and others; but their opponents had the
   ascendant in judicatories, and carried things there as they pleased.

   At this time the church of Scotland was in a most lamentable condition,
   and the wrath of the Almighty seemed to be kindled against her, in
   letting loose many adversaries at once to attack and destroy her: for
   at the same time we find her many ways dreadfully tossed and shaken: as
   by patronages, and intrusions pushed on by the court and great men;--By
   Independent schemes and constitutions of churches zealously promoted by
   Mr. Glas and Mr. Archbald;--By Arian errors taught and propagated by
   Professor Simson;--By many gross errors vented by others, both
   Presbyterian and Episcopal;--And by legal sermons and moral harangues
   (to the neglect of preaching Christ) introduced by many of the young
   clergy. All these evils, working and fermenting through the land at
   once, occasioned dreadful shocks and convulsions in this national
   church, likely to rend her in many pieces. Yet, alas! We were not
   sensible of, nor suitably affected with our danger and misery, nor with
   the sins which were the procuring cause of all.--Turn us, O God of our
   salvation, and cause thine anger towards us to cease. Oh, wilt thou be
   angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine anger to all
   generations?--Whatever the Lord think fit to do with this backsliding
   church and land, we Judge it incumbent upon us to bear witness against
   the foresaid evils.

   As to the impugning and invading the rights which congregations have to
   chuse and call their own ministers, and the intrusions made upon them,
   which, alas! still continue to be practised; we shall give our reasons
   for testifying against them, and for the rights of the people. And the
   first and great reason is, because by the rule and pattern of God's
   word, and by the dictates of sound and sober reason, the Christian
   people have an unquestionable interest in the choice of these pastors
   to whom they are to intrust the care of their souls: and particularly,
   this right of the people is established by several passages of the Acts
   of the Apostles, a book intended to give us the apostolical practice
   and pattern in the settlement of the Christian church.

   1 mo, In Acts i. 13, 14, 15, &c. when the eleven apostles met for the
   choice of an apostle, the laity present with them, were allowed a share
   in the election of two, of which God did chuse one to fill the vacancy
   of the apostolical college. From which we infer, That ministers should
   much more consult them in the choice of ordinary pastors, who are to
   have the stated inspection of their souls, and that this condescension
   of the apostles to the people in this case, doth condemn their practice
   who violently impose ministers upon Christian congregations, while they
   are dissenting and reclaiming against them, and willing to receive
   others every way as fit for them. And we find our reformers and
   Protestant divines, such as Calvin, Beza, Junius, Zanchy, Chamier,
   Voetius, Amesius, Turretine, Cartwright, Calderwood, Gillespie,
   Forrester, Lauder, and many others, improving this passage for the,
   peoples' rights against Papists, Prelatists and patronages.

   2do, In Acts vi. the apostles called the multitude, or body of the
   disciples to the choice of first standing church-officers which they
   appointed, viz. the deacons for taking care of the poor; from which we
   infer, If the disciples have a right to chuse these officers who are to
   dispose of their charity, then much more these who are to oversee their
   souls. And if these apostles reckoned the people competent to judge who
   had the qualifications for deacons which they prescribe, viz. who were
   most eminent for honesty, wisdom, and the gifts of the Holy. Ghost;.
   why are they not competent to give their judgment of the like
   qualifications in those who are to be their pastors? The apostles being
   under immediate Divine direction, were abundantly capable to chuse
   these officers without the people; yet they will needs have them
   concurring in it, as a pattern to the church in their after chusing of
   church-officers. And it is observable, the apostles took this method,
   to silence the complaints among the people about providing for the
   poor. Which loudly calls upon judicatories to follow their example, in
   order to silence peoples' complaints of violent intrusions made upon
   them, contrary to the apostles practice and our acknowledged
   principles, to the great hindrance of the gospel and the edification of
   souls. Likewise we have the forecited Protestant divines concurring to
   improve this passage of the deacons for the peoples rights: and it
   might be expected that the ministers of the church of Scotland would
   not oppose them, or join with the Papists in this question.

   3tio, The apostles practice in the election of church-officers being
   sufficiently evident by the foresaid two instances, the sacred penman
   of the Acts insists no more upon this subject, save that he hints at
   their known practice in ordinations. Acts xiv. 23. In cur version it
   is, And when they had ordained them elders in every church. Now, the
   word here rendered ordained, is but half translated; for in the
   original it is Cheirotonesantes, which Erasmus renders cum suffragiis
   creassent; and Beza, agreeing with him, hath it per suffragia
   creassent: So that according to these learned men, and many others, the
   passage should have been rendered, When they had by suffrages appointed
   to them elders in every church. So it is in all old English
   translations, and so it was brought in by our last translators, until
   the version was committed by king James to some of the English bishops
   to be revised, who altered no less than fourteen passages of the New
   Testament, and this among the rest, to make them speak the language of
   the church of England; but the original language, being that of the
   Holy Ghost, is to be our rule. The word here is not Cheirothesia, which
   signifies the action of ministers in ordaining; but it is Cheiro tonia,
   which is expressive of the peoples act in electing of pastors, by
   stretching or lifting up the hand, as was the custom: and in this sense
   doth the apostle make use of the word Cheirotonia, and ascribe it to
   the people, 2 Cor. viii. 19.

   4to, The spoiling congregations of their right of calling their
   ministers, and imposing pastors upon them, is not only against the
   example of the apostles, but also contrary to the commands of our
   glorious Head, to our own prayers, and to the very spirit of the
   gospel. Doth not Christ enjoin us in his word to glorify him in all
   things, to do all to the glory of God, and to do all things to the
   edification of his people! to condescend to men of low estate, and to
   be gentle towards all men? Doth he not forbid us to exercise dominion
   over the church, to set at nought our brother, and rule over his people
   with rigour? Doth he not command all Christians to judge of what they
   hear, to try the spirits, to beware of false prophets? Are not all
   ministers and others bound to pray that God's name may be hallowed,
   that his kingdom may come, and that the whole earth may be filed with
   his glory? And do not they act the very reverse of these commands and
   prayers, who would in a magisterial way intrude ministers upon
   Christian congregations, and thereby stop the spreading of his gospel,
   the conversion of souls, and the increase of his kingdom upon earth?
   Are forced settlements agreeable to the meekness and gentleness of
   Christ our Master and Pattern? Or are they like the mild disposition
   and condescensions of the apostle Paul, who used the most tender, soft
   and condescending methods to advance the gospel among men, and was
   willing to become all things to all menfor their spiritual good? and,
   when he saw it needful to for the winning of their souls, he laid aside
   his authority, and fell to intreaties and beseechings with them, Rom.
   xii. 1. 2 Cor. v. 20.--x. 1. Philemon 9, 10. And observe what he says,
   I Thess. ii. 7, 11. We were gentle among you as a nurse cherisheth her
   children; And (saith he) we exhorted you as a father doth his children.
   Now, as a tender nurse or father will not impose any upon weak children
   to feed them at whom they have the greatest aversion, nor tell them
   that they shall have no food unless they take it from such hands; so
   neither ought judicatories to intrude pastors upon dissenting or
   reclaiming parishes. They pray for the spreading of Christ's glory and
   kingdom, and therefore should not counteract their prayers, as they
   manifestly do by violent settlements; for thus they lay the foundations
   of strong prejudices in peoples breasts against ministers and the
   success of the glorious gospel, and frequently drive people quite away
   from the gospel-net, to the great increase of ignorance and immorality.
   This course is directly against the Bible, that forbids us to give any
   occasion of stumbling or prejudice unto others, whereby their
   edification may be hindered, Rom. xiv. 13, 19, 21. Alas! people have
   naturally strong enough prejudices against the gospel itself, be the
   pastor never so acceptable; and what a pity it is that occasion should
   be given them to conceive prejudice also against the preacher of it?
   seeing thereby the strong holds of Satan are rendered more impregnable.
   For how can it be expected that a parish will be free of stumbling or
   prejudice against a man, that makes it his first business to obtain a
   right to their stipend, and will not part with it when they shew the
   utmost aversion to him, but gets himself viis & modis thurst [sic] in
   upon them? Will they not be ready to look upon him as an earthly-minded
   man, greedy of filthy lucre, that thrusts himself into the priest's
   office for a piece of bread, that seeks the fleece more than the flock,
   and minds his own things more than the things of Jesus Christ? Is not
   this the way to bring both the person and ministry of such a man into
   contempt among the people, to shut their ears against his admonitions,
   and render his labours among them unsuccessful? Whereas, should a
   minister come among a people by their call, he has a fair door opened
   to him to promote their salvation: they think themselves bound to
   attend his ministry, receive him into their houses, hearken to his
   counsels, and submit to his reproofs; and so the gospel hath free
   course among that people.

   5to, Seeing the right of Christians to judge for themselves in matters
   of religion, is undeniably secured to them both by the light of nature
   and of revelation; they must consequently have an interest in the
   choice of their teachers. For if a man may judge for himself concerning
   the schemes of doctrine and ways of salvation laid before him, and may
   prefer one to another; it must follow, that he hath also a right to
   judge who is fittest to instruct him according to it; otherwise he
   might fall into the hands of these who would lead him into schemes
   quite opposite to what he hath chosen. It is evident that both
   Scripture and reason allow men a judgment of discretion about the
   pastors to whom they are to commit the instructing, guiding, and
   edifying of their precious souls. That text is plain for it, in I John
   iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
   they be of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the
   world, Likewise that text, Mat. vii. 15, 16. Beware of false prophets,
   which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.
   Ye shall know them by their fruits. And that in 2 John, ver. 10. If
   there come any to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not.
   From all which texts it is evident, that Christians have right to judge
   concerning these who bring them true gospel doctrine, and whom they are
   to receive, and whom not. The Bereans are highly commended for their
   using this right, Acts xvii. 11. And Christ declares it to be the
   privilege of his people to distinguish the voice of a stranger or
   hireling from the voice of a true shepherd, and to flee from the one,
   and follow the other, John x. 4, 5.

   6to, The consent of parishes to the settlement of a minister is
   requisite to constitute the pastoral relation betwixt him and his
   flock, and the obligation of mutual offices and duties one to another.
   It was anciently a received maxim among Presbyterians, That the consent
   of the flock is as necessary to fix the pastoral relation, as the
   consent of the minister; seeing the tye is mutual and reciprocal.

   7mo, The apostles' example in ordaining pastors by the choice and
   consent of the people, was followed by the primitive church for many
   centuries after them, as Eusebius and others testify. And the learned
   Turretine, vol. 3. ques. 24. De jure vocationis, quotes many of the
   ancient fathers and councils as maintaining the peoples' right. And Mr.
   Petrie in his church history, pag. 63, 65. observes, That the church of
   Rome in the 7th century had not given up with this principle of
   Christianity. It hath been the fixed principle of this church, and of
   our reformers from the very dawning of the reformation, That
   congregations ought to have ministers settled among them with their own
   consent. This can be made evident from our books of discipline, and
   many acts of assemblies; and this is confirmed by assembly 1736, act
   14. Wherein in they declare, that it is and hath been since the
   reformation, the principle of this church, that no minister shall be
   intruded into any parish contrary to the will of the congregation; and
   therefore they seriously recommend to all the judicatories of this
   church, to have a due regard to the said principle in planting vacant
   congregations, as they regard the glory of God, and the edification of
   the body of Christ.--But it is to be regretted, that neither the
   ancient principles of this church, nor the recommendation of assembly,
   1736, are much regarded in the settlement of churches at this day, more
   than the Scriptural arguments aforementioned for the peoples' right. O
   how great ground hath this backsliding church to imitate that famous
   general assembly 1596, who made the thrusting of men into congregations
   one special cause of their keeping a day for solemn fasting and
   humiliation before the Lord! Likewise it is to be noticed, what they
   observe of these intruders, That they manifest thereafter, that they
   were not called of God. O that judicatories would keep in mind the
   apostle's warning against being Partakers of other mens' sins, by
   laying hands suddenly upon them; and would consider how far they may be
   accountable for these souls, who may perish in an ignorant and
   Christless condition during the scatterings and prejudices of
   congregations intruded upon! Surely that text hath an alarming sound to
   all concerned in intrusions, Jer. xxiii. 1, 2. Wo be unto the pastors
   that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pastures, saith the Lord.
   Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel, against the pastors that
   feed my people, Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and
   have not visited them; behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your
   doings, saith the Lord. Likewise the 34th chapter of Ezekiel hath some
   very awful things relative to this case. O that the Spirit of God would
   carry them home to the hearts of men, with such power and efficacy,
   that their eyes may be opened in time; so that intrusions, scatterings,
   and contempt of Christ's flock, may not issue in the destruction of
   vital religion, and of this once famous national church!

   This woful contempt and disregarding of the flock of Christ, by
   intruding pastors upon them, neglecting their petitions, and otherwise,
   could not but be very provoking to a holy God: wherefore he was pleased
   to visit this church with several awful rebukes, and particularly with
   violent attacks upon her beautiful constitution, running it down, and
   promoting Independent schemes of government, and setting up new models
   of congregational churches with new improvements. This was first
   attempted by Mr. John Glas minister at Tealing, and Mr. Francis
   Archbald minister of Guthrie.--After a while's more secret management,
   they came at length to vent their principles openly, and go about
   preaching them in the streets, fields, &c. and printed several
   pamphlets in favours of their new opinions. They found fault with our
   Confession of Faith and Formula, and refused to subscribe them.--They
   maintained, That there is no warrant for national churches under the
   New Testament, but only for congregational; That single congregations
   are not subject to any superior judicatory, nor censurable by them:
   That they may ordain their own pastors, and that all the members have
   right to govern. That the church of Israel was but a typical church,
   and their kings were ecclesiastical officers; That their national
   covenanting with God was typical, and not to be imitated by Christian
   nations. That our national covenanting was unwarrantable and is not
   obligatory on us; That our martyrs, who suffered for adhering to our
   covenants, were so far unenlightened. That, Christian magistrates have
   no more power in religious matters than others, and ought not to employ
   their power to advance religion, to make laws with penalties favours of
   it, nor to restrain or punish heretics or false teachers, nor to give
   encouragement to good Christians more than other good subjects; That
   the Christian religion ought not to be defended by arms; That the
   example of the reforming kings of Judah in punishing idolatry and false
   worship, or encouraging true religion, is not to be imitated. These and
   a great many other new and strange doctrines they spread; and would by
   no means be reclaimed, nor forbear venting them.--At length the church
   did process them both for their singular doctrines and practices. It
   was the opinion of many, that seeing they were both very pious men
   acting according to their light, and had been and might be further
   useful in the church, they should not be severely dealt with, but only
   brought under prohibitions and restraints; and if they could be engaged
   to stay with their own congregations, and no more to spread their new
   opinions, they might be connived at. Likewise many had greater sympathy
   with Mr. Archbald than with the other, in regard he was led off by him
   in his simplicity to these new things, neither did he vent himself so
   against our covenants as he did: but, seeing none of them would promise
   to forbear, they were both suspended; and, upon their contemning the
   church's sentence, they were afterward deposed. Yet the church shewed
   much regard to them both; for, sometime after, they took off the
   sentences, and reponed [replaced, restored] them both to the ministry
   in general, though not to their churches.--They did all they could to
   shake the established church-government, by setting up Independent
   churches in several places of the land, and ordaining several mechanics
   and illiterate persons to be their ministers: and they preached and
   wrote for Independencey: but their pamphlets are confuted, the Divine
   right of Presbytery established, and the absurdities of the Independent
   scheme laid open, by Mr. Aytone in his Original Constitution of the
   Christian church, and by several others: so that we need add no more to
   what is already written, but our approbation thereof.

   At the same very time the Lord was pleased to visit this church with a
   far more terrible rebuke, by permitting Professor Simson to vent Arian
   error's among his students at Glasgow, for which a process was
   commenced against him by the presbytery of Glasgow; and after some time
   it came to the assembly, and continued before them, assemblies 1727,
   1728 and 1729. And though the process was drawn out to a great length,
   by the extraordinary methods he took to defend himself; yet it must be
   acknowledged that all the three foresaid assemblies manifested their
   zeal and concern for the orthodox faith against any thing that tended
   to Arianism, as appears from the long process in print. At length the
   assembly found proven that Mr. Simson had denied the necessary
   existence of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the numerical oneness of the
   three Persons of the Trinity in substance or essence; and had utterred
   several other words derogatory to the supreme Deity of our Lord Jesus
   Christ. Notwithstanding the Professor still refused that he taught
   these opinions as he calls them (the assembly in their act calls them
   gross errors) and said, They were contrary to the sentiments of his
   mind; and, if he uttered such words, they must be only a slip of his
   tongue. He likewise came to give it under his hand that he disclaimed
   and renounced all these erroneous expressions, and made an orthodox
   confession of his faith concerning the glorious Trinity and the supreme
   Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, both before the Ass. 1728 and 1729. And
   whereas he had said that Christus est summus Deus, is to be taken cum
   grano salis; and that summus Deus, and the only true God, may be
   understood in a sense as including the Father's personal property, and
   so not applicable to the Son; he declared he was exceeding sorry for
   giving any offence by such ways of speaking, and said, That summus
   Deus, and the only true God, are equally applicable to the Father and
   the Son, and not in any lower sense to the Son than to the Father; and
   that he adhered to the truth of Christ's necessary existence, and the
   numerical oneness in essence of the blessed Trinity. But
   notwithstanding of all these renunciations and declarations (which came
   so very late) many in the assembly declared that he deserved
   deposition, because at the beginning of the process he refused to
   answer questions for clearing himself, and had neglected many
   opportunities for two years time of giving satisfaction to the
   judicatories as to the soundness of his faith concerning these
   important articles, when called upon to do it. But the assembly 1728,
   because of his confessions and orthodox declarations, and for other
   considerations, proceeded no further than to suspend him from preaching
   and teaching, and all exercise of any ecclesiastical power or function
   and delayed the finishing of the process till next assembly, that they
   might know the mind of Presbyteries concerning him.--When the assembly
   1729 met, he made a long moving speech before them, declaring his
   orthodoxy; which was printed. The assembly finished the affair, by
   confirming the sentence of suspension formerly past, and giving it as
   their judgment, "That it is not fit nor safe that he be further
   employed in teaching divinity, and instructing of youth designed for
   the holy ministry." The generality of Presbyteries, notwithstanding of
   his confessions and declarations, had sent up to this assembly their
   instructions for his deposition, with which they ought to have
   complied; especially seeing by a former process in the year 1717 he had
   been found teaching Arminian doctrine, which the assembly discharged
   him to do for the future: and yet, contrary to that prohibition, it was
   found proven by a committee of assembly, that he persisted to teach the
   foresaid doctrine. This the assembly knew very well, and might have
   called for that other process.--Some alledged, it would be better to
   keep it over his head undiscussed, to prevent after designs of reponing
   him to teach.--And some said, it would be safer for truth to bind up
   his pen by a suspension, and by keeping him under it, than by a
   deposition to provoke a man of his learning to make open attacks upon
   the most important truths of our holy religion. And it must be owned
   that he replied nothing to all that was written against him, but
   continued silent under the suspension for many years until the day of
   his death, without any motion or mint by any to get it taken off. It is
   desirable also to find the assembly, in their last act concerning him,
   expressing

     their thankfulness to God, for directing all the judicatories of
     this church which had this process under their consideration (which
     includes all the Presbyteries thereof ) so happily, that there hath
     not appeared the least difference of sentiment; but on the contrary,
     there hath been the most perfect and unanimous agreement among them,
     as to the doctrine of the glorious Trinity, and the proper supreme
     Deity of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, according as the same is
     revealed in the holy Scriptures, and contained in our Confession of
     Faith and Catechisms.

   It was much feared that the seeds of Arianism were sown in this church
   by Professor Simson and others: wherefore there were many excellent
   books written at this time against Arianism and Socinianism, and in
   defence of the foresaid doctrine of the glorious Trinity, and the
   proper supreme Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and, being so well
   written, we need add nothing, but join our testimony therewith, and
   pray that Arianism may never more set up its head in this land. Amen.

   Although God was thus visibly contending the judicatories of this
   church, for their disregarding his flock and remnant in the land; yet
   it is matter of deep regret, that, in stead of reforming they proceeded
   to greater heights in their arbitrary decisions relating to them: for
   in the, years 1729, 1730, 1731, and afterwards, we find the complaints
   of worthy ministers, elders, and bodies of Christian people, concerning
   intrusions upon congregations greatly increased; which occasioned many
   remonstrances, dissents and protestations in the assemblies,
   commissions, and inferior judicatories. In the assembly 1730, when the
   stream of violence began to run very high, many entered their dissents
   against the settlements of Sutton and Old Machir, but were denied
   liberty to record them; which made a great noise, and increased the
   ferment among the people, but, instead of yielding or doing any thing
   to quiet them, that assembly did summarily make an act, discharging the
   recording (as usual) of reasons of dissent against the determination of
   church-judicatories; without remitting the affair to presbyteries to
   know their mind about it, according to former acts of assembly.--There
   were several remonstrances and petitions presented by numbers of people
   to the synods of Merse and Lothian, but not regarded. Likewise they
   gave in a paper, signed and adhered to by great numbers, to assembly
   1731, complaining of violent settlements; but got no hearing.--All
   which proceedings did awaken many honest and zealous ministers to
   correspond and meet for drawing up a representation and petition to the
   assembly 1732, concerning the intrusions and other grievances; which
   was accordingly drawn up, signed and adhered to by 42 ministers and
   three elders; wherein: they expressed, not only their own sense of
   these evils but also the sense of many officers through the church, who
   had not access to sign the said paper. And seeing we think ourselves
   called to adhere to the honest testimony given therein against many of
   the evils of the present time, we shall, as an evidence of our
   approbation and adherence, briefly insert the contents of it in this
   our testimony.

   In their petition offered to the assembly 1732, they humbly move that
   the assembly should address the king and parliament concerning several
   grievances of this church, which they only can redress such as the
   imposing of the sacramental test, and conformity to the English liturgy
   mid ceremonies, upon the members of this church, when serving the king
   in England and Ireland: The, toleration established in Scotland,
   whereby error, superstition and profaneness are greatly encouraged, and
   church discipline weakened:--The establishing of patronages, subversive
   of the right of congregations to chuse their pastors:--The not
   receiving addresses from this church to the house of peers, because not
   directed to the Lords Spiritual:--The introducing from England into
   some courts in Scotland a new form of swearing, by laying the hands and
   kissing the gospels. Also, they represent, that notwithstanding it is
   the undeniable right of Christian congregations to have the free choice
   of their own pastors, and their call and consent is necessary to found
   the pastoral relation betwixt ministers and them, according to the word
   of God, our book of discipline, acts of the general assembly, and the
   concurring suffrages and unanswerable arguments of the most eminent
   divines both at home and abroad; yet many ministers have been imposed
   and forced upon Christian congregations when dissenting and reclaiming,
   and that especially by sentences of the commission, for several years
   past; and not only where presentations were insisted upon, but also
   where there was none, but the right fallen into the presbytery's hands.
   And the commission have appointed committees to try and ordain
   ministers for vacant congregations, not only without the concurrence of
   Presbyteries and synods concerned, who have best right, and are fittest
   to, Judge therein, but in direct opposition to their minds: and calls
   have been received, not moderated in Presbyteries, but attested only by
   notars public. Likewise the commission have repealed several sentences
   of synods, when they had but a scrimp quorum of ministers, much
   inferior in number to these who past them: and of late years especially
   in the years 1729, 1730 and 1731, there were many supernumerary elders
   named to be members of commissions, beyond the proportion allowed by
   acts of assembly, many, whereof reside at Edinburgh, and are brought in
   to vote upon occasions; and there is ground to question if they be
   qualified according to acts of assembly.--Wherefore, for remedying and
   preventing such intrusions, the they humbly move, that the assembly
   should repeal the commission's sentences appointing them, such as may
   come regularly before them; and discharge in time coming all
   settlements without the consent of elders and, Christian people and
   enact, that no call or subscriptions for ministers be sustained but
   such as are attested by order of Presbyteries, or verified before them
   or their committees; and, if the commission shall in time coming
   appoint committees to try or ordain ministers without consent of the
   congregation and Presbyteries immediately concerned, that the said
   committees shall be discharged to proceed, until the assembly give
   their judgment, in case the causes are sisted [summoned] before the
   assembly by complaint or protestation: and that appeals from sentences
   of synods be not referred in time coming to the determination of the
   commission, but reserved for the assembly's decision, unless it be
   provided that the sederunt [meeting of the court] of the commission
   judging there in be supernumerary to the synod in ministers as well as
   elders; it being disagreeable to our principles, that a greater number
   of ministers should be subjected to the authority of a lesser: and that
   the commission be better regulated both as to the number and
   qualifications of elders therein than at present: and that the assembly
   enact, at appointing of their commission, that if any of their actings
   shall be found contrary to the acts, constitutions and known principles
   of this church, that they shall not only be censured for the same, but
   their said acts shall also be reversed; and, if any protestation or
   complaint be entered against their sentences, it shall be sufficient to
   gist all parties concerned before the general assembly.--Also they
   plead, that the assembly may repeal the 7th act of assembly 1730,
   discharging the recording reasons of dissent, as being past irregularly
   without consulting Presbyteries, and which must prove a very heavy
   grievance to many, if it stand in force

   They complain likewise, that sonic judicatories who have testified
   their just displeasure against ministers and Probationers for their
   unworthy and offensive practice in accepting presentations contrary to
   our known principles, have been condemned by the commission for it. And
   therefore desire the assembly may give an effectual check to such
   dangerous practices, and that none be licensed or ordained that favour
   this course.--Also they complain of several innovations in the method
   and strain of preaching introduced of late by some preachers and young
   ministers, which are very offensive to many of God's people, and an
   obstruction to spiritual edification. And, though some former
   assemblies have referred it to their commissions to bring in an
   overture thereanent [in reference to], nothing is yet done; therefore
   they humbly move that the assembly may provide an antidote against
   these evils.--They also desire the assembly to emit a solemn warning
   against Professor Simson's errors, and others which are spread through
   the land, in order to prevent the infection of them.

   As to the act of assembly 1732, concerning the method of planting
   vacant churches (which was then but an overture) they shew their
   dislike to it, as it gives much power to Jacobite and disaffected
   heritors in the settling of parishes, which is not agreeable to the
   Scriptures and our known principles: but (say they) it cannot be turned
   to a standing act, unless the generality of presbyteries consent to it,
   which they hope is not to be expected in this case.

   Now, though the evils above complained of were manifest grievances, and
   the brethren's representation concerning them was drawn up in a humble
   and modest strain, and signed by 42 worthy ministers, and several of
   them old reverend fathers, and was presented in a dutiful manner
   according to order; yet it is to be regretted that it was not allowed
   so much as hearing by the assembly; which obliged the petitioners to
   protest, and published their paper to the world. Likewise there was a
   petition of the same nature from many hundreds of elders and Christian
   people given into that assembly, which had the same fate. This strange
   conduct of that and preceding assemblies towards many godly ministers
   and people, did exceedingly stumble many, lessen the regard which wont
   to be paid to general assemblies, and pave the way to the schism which
   soon followed upon it. Yet the assembly 1732 did not stop here, but
   proceeded to turn the overture anent [regarding] planting of churches
   into a standing act, tho' evidently disagreeable to the mind of
   presbyteries, and the general opinion of the church: which increased
   the ferment thro' the land to a higher pitch than ever. Alas! this was
   not like the conduct of our old suffering fathers, who dreaded a schism
   in the church like fire, and were careful to prevent and crush it at
   the first appearance. But when God hath a controversy with a church or
   people, and designs to bring a stroke upon them, he ordinarily leaves
   their leaders to infatuate measures, so as they have neither skill nor
   will to take any wise step to ward off the blow.

   That act of the ass. 1732 did greatly inflame this poor church for two
   or three years: but seeing at that time unanswerable arguments were
   brought against it in several pamphlets and sermons then published, to
   which we adhere, and seeing like wise it was repealed by a subsequent
   assembly, as contrary to the mind and rules of this church, and
   prejudicial to it; we shall not here insist much upon the evil of it.
   Only in regard there are many dissatisfied with the repealing of it,
   and alledge it was the same with the act of parliament 1690, for which
   the church had great regard for many years, we shall shew the manifest
   difference that is betwixt them, both in the words, and the sense which
   was put upon them.--The act 1690, runs thus;

     That in case of the vacancy of any particular church, and for
     supplying the same with a minister, the heritors of the said parish
     (being protestants) and the elders are to name and propose the
     person to the whole congregation, to be either approven or
     disapproven by them; and, if they disapprove, that the disapprovers
     give their reason, to the effect the affair may be cognosced
     [pronounced] upon by the presbytery of the bounds, at whose
     judgment, and by whose determination, the calling and entry of a
     particular minister is to be ordered and concluded.

   The act 1732 being notour, we shall not resume the words, but observe
   the difference in these things;--1mo, The act 1690 is by a civil court,
   the act 1732 by an ecclesiastical; and tho' it might be expected that
   the latter would in their acts keep closer by the rule of the word than
   the former, yet the act 1732 is more distant from that rule than the
   act of 1690, in regard the act 1732 tends more to spoil congregations
   of their rights, and countenance intrusions upon them, than the act
   1690 doth.--2do, By the act 1690, the heritors and elders are only
   impowered to name and propose a person to the whole congregation; but,
   by the act 1732, they are impowered to elect and call one to be
   minister of the parish.--3tio, According to act 1690, the election was
   not to be held as finished until the man was proposed to the
   congregation and their approbation had; and, if they disapproved, the
   affair was to stop as unfinished until the presbytery give their
   judgment whether to proceed further in it or not; but the act 1732
   holds the election as finished by the votes of the heritors and elders,
   and the man to be legally elected and called to be minister of the
   parish, before the consent of the people be asked.--4to, By the act
   1690, and another soon past after to explain it, all unqualified or
   disaffected heritors were excluded from voting; but, by act 1732, all
   heritors whatsomever, whether hearers or not, were allowed to vote, if
   they were not professed Papists: so that, in many parishes where the
   disaffected heritors were supernumerary to the other, they had power to
   thrust in a minister upon a well affected congregation.--5to, For what
   appears from the words of the act 1690, the heritors and elders might
   have acted as distinct bodies in the nomination, and the bone might
   have had a negative upon the other therein, and so the heritors'
   nomination would not be valid without the concurrence of the body of
   the elders; for by the act the man was to be named by the elders as
   well as by the heritors: but, by act 1732, it was expressly provided
   that the heritors and elders should elect in a conjunct body; so that,
   considering the superior number and influence of heritors in most
   places, ministers might be chosen where the eldership and whole body of
   the congregation reclaimed, as frequently has happen.--6to, The act
   1790 and the act 1732 differed prodigiously as to the sense and meaning
   put upon the words thereof. The execution of the act 1690 being
   intrusted to presbyteries, the sense they then put

   upon the approbation of the congregation, and the Reasons of the
   disapprovers, was far from the late sense put upon them: by their
   approbation the church then understood their judgment concerning the
   candidate's gifts of preaching and prayer, that they judged them
   suitable to their capacities, and adapted to their edification; and if
   the body of the congregation disapproved the man nominate, and gave for
   their reasons, that his gifts were not edifying to them, nor suited to
   their capacities, and that they could not in conscience consent to his
   being their minister: such reasons, given by a knowing well disposed
   people, were then judged sufficient to stop the affair, lay aside
   competing candidates, and to proceed to a new election. But, by the
   sense put upon the act 1732, no reasons or objections could be received
   but against the man's life or doctrine; and, if the people did not
   prove error or immorality against him by witnesses, they must receive
   him as their pastor: so that by this sense the people had no more
   interest or concern in the settlement of their pastor, than these of
   any other congregation; which is most absurd, and different from the
   sense of the act 1690.

   Our noble patriots at the revolution being sensible of the violent
   intrusions which had been made upon parishes under Prelacy and
   Patronage, they did in the year 1690 restore Presbyterian government,
   abolish patronages, and put the peoples' rights under the guardianship
   of Presbyteries, who then took special care of them, according to our
   known principles; so that their settlements gave general satisfaction.
   Our judicatories then understood the act 1690 as designed to deliver
   parishes from the intrusions made upon them under patronages, and to
   restore them to their primitive liberty according to the word of God.
   This is evident from the assembly 1712 their approving the commission's
   address to the queen against patronages, in which are these words:
   Whereby your majesty may plainly perceive the act 1690 abolishing
   patronages must be understood to be a part of our Presbyterian
   constitution, secured to us by the treaty of union for ever; and that
   the parliament 1690 was sincerely desirous only to restore the church
   to its just and primitive liberty in calling ministers in a way
   agreeable to the word of God. That this was the sense put upon the act
   1690, appears also from the form of calls then constantly made use of
   by the church, which is printed in our larger overtures, and runs thus:
   We the heritors and elders of the parish of __________ have agreed,
   with the advice and consent of the parishioners, to invite, call g&c.g
   No call could then be received without that clause, of the consent of
   the parishoners. No doubt the words of the act 1690 might have been
   perverted to the peoples' hart in some hands: but the church being
   allowed to explain and execute that act agreeably to their known
   principles as they then did; the people continued easy under it, as
   finding their rights safe, their consent always necessary, and no
   intrusions made upon them. This consent of the people, in settlements,
   hath been judged necessary by this church in all periods since the
   reformation.

   Obj. These who favour intrusions object,

     That, by act of ass., 1649, settlements might sometimes be made
     contrary to the inclinations of the majority of the people, if their
     dissent arose from causeless prejudices; and consequently that
     ministers might be settled against the mind of congregations, in
     case they had nothing to object against their life and doctrine.

   Ans. We must certainly understand and explain the act 1649 by the known
   principles and practice of the church at that time, and by the 2^nd
   book of Discipline, which the assembly 1649 and the whole church had
   several times sworn to in the national covenant. In that 2^nd book our
   church doth three or four times declare for the consent of the
   congregation as necessary in settling of ministers, as also against
   intruding any man upon them contrary to their will; and doth affirm,
   that this order of settlement is according to the word of God, and the
   practice of the apostolical and primitive kirk. And that famous
   assembly 1638, which abolished Prelacy and restored Presbytery, did
   explain the national covenant as binding us to maintain the 2nd book of
   discipline, December 8^th. Likewise the assembly did, within ten days
   after, expressly renew their declaration for the people's rights, by
   their act December 18^th, viz. That no person be intruded in any office
   of the kirk contrary to the will of the congregation to which they are
   appointed.--And that the Presbyterians of that period were of the same
   mind, appears from the 8^th act of parliament 1640, by which they
   restored to presbyteries the patronages of these parishes which the
   bishops had possessed, but with this salvo of the interest of the
   parishes, That they be settled upon the suit and calling of the
   congregations, according to the acts and practice of this church.--And
   from the assembly 1642 their act, August 3^d, for making lists of
   probationers for patrons to chuse upon; they appointed, that
   Presbyteries, with the consent of the most or best part of the
   congregation concerned, shall make up the list of six willing to
   accept.--And by the directory for the ordination of ministers, agreed
   upon by the assembly at Westminster, and approven by the general
   assembly 1645, the candidate is appointed to preach three several days,
   and to converse with the people among whom he is to serve, for the end
   that they may have trial of his gifts for their edification; and
   afterwards they were to signify their consent to the Presbytery as they
   found cause. From which it is evident, that church judicatories then
   allowed the people to judge of the suitableness of the candidate's
   gifts for their edification, and held their consent necessary to his
   ordination.--And that the assembly 1649 were of the same mind, is plain
   from their swearing to the 2^nd book of discipline, which declares so
   strongly for the consent of congregations in settlements, which surely
   they would be careful not to contradict by their act. They indeed
   lodged the election in the hands of the session; but at the same time
   appointed them to use all possible tenderness for obtaining harmony in
   the congregation, and to proceed to a new election in case the major
   part of the congregation dissented from their choice, if their dissent
   was not grounded on causeless prejudices. Now these elders, who were
   the electors being the representatives of the people, and the most
   eminent in the parish for piety and knowledge, would doubtless
   previously consult the inclinations of the better sort, particularly
   the communicants, who are properly the members of the congregation;
   and, if they found that the most knowing and religious part of the
   congregation was for the settlement, they might reckon that the
   causeless prejudices of others, not complete members of the
   congregation, were to be less regarded. We are firmly persuaded the
   church in that period were far from reckoning it a causeless prejudice
   against a man, if the most religious or knowing part of a congregation
   declared their dissent from the session's choice, because they found
   the preacher's gifts unsuitable for their edification; no, in that
   case, the session would have been appointed to make a new election. The
   people then were not confined to objections only against the life and
   doctrine of the candidate, but allowed to dissent from and object
   against the election itself, and give what reasons or grounds for it
   they thought proper; and, if the session could not satisfy them after
   all pains taken, they proceeded to a new election. All this appears
   from a known pamphlet, printed anno 1733, intituled, Account of the
   Method of electing a minister to the parish of Strathmiglo, in two
   instances in the years 1654 and 1655, in a letter to the minister
   there.--If it be asked, What is then to &gt;be meant by causeless
   prejudices mentioned in the act 1649? Ans. Any groundless or trifling
   objection against a man, because of his mean extract, low stature,
   bodily infirmity or blemish; or because of some groundless report, or
   the strictness of his walk, zeal for his principles, or the like: in
   which groundless prejudice the assembly might judge that ignorant and
   unreasonable people were not to be too much indulged; though at the
   same time they enjoin all possible tenderness in dealing with parishes
   to bring them to harmony, even then when a lesser part of the
   congregation dissent from the election without relevant objections.

   But, lastly, Seeing this objection from act 1649 is commonly brought to
   countenance the intruding of men who force themselves in upon
   reclaiming parishes, by accepting and holding fast by presentations; we
   take this occasion freely to own, that a congregation's offence against
   a man for evident tokens of earthly mindedness, greed of filthy lucre,
   and unconcernedness for the success of the gospel, is not a causeless
   prejudice; as for instance, when there is a gospel door open for
   preachers to get access to parishes, for a man to despise that door,
   and chuse rather to enter by the door of a presentation and violence,
   and thereby endeavour to thrust himself in upon a congregation against
   their will, secure a title to their stipend so as no man else can have
   it, keep fast his hold against all persuasions and intreaties, keep the
   people long without gospel ordinances, bind the heavy yoke of patronage
   upon their neck, and hinder them from getting a minister whom they love
   and desire; now, when a man acts so directly against the interest of
   the gospel, the advantage of precious souls, and his own professed
   principles and engagements; and when a congregation dissents from his
   settlement upon these grounds; we cannot say their dissent is grounded
   upon causeless prejudices: nay, they are so well grounded, that the day
   hath been, when church judicatories would have stopt their mouths who
   would be guilty of such things.

   Object. "Though it be wrong for preachers to take such methods, yet
   judicatories are under necessity by the law to settle them, or keep
   parishes vacant."--Ans. 1mo, Seeing intrusions into churches are
   contrary to Scripture, reason, and our professed principles, no laws or
   commands of men can oblige us to be accessary to them: for, seeing
   Christ commands us to do all for the edification of his flock, we must
   never act for its destruction, as intrusions manifestly are. Whenever
   human laws do clash with the Divine, it is indisputably better to obey
   God than man.

   2do, There is no law yet in being, that obligeth us to intrude men into
   churches: for though there be an act past in 1712 for restoring
   patronages, yet it doth expressly reserve to the Presbytery and church
   judicatories the power of judging of the Presentee's qualifications and
   fitness for the charge to which he is presented. Now, the power of
   judging of a man's qualifications must not be restricted to these which
   render him fit for the ministry in general, but must be extended to
   qualifications necessary to make him fit for being minister of the
   parish to which he is presented; because a man may be fit and qualified
   for one charge, that is not so for another. Now, if a Presbytery do
   find that a Presentee is incapable of answering the design of a
   gospel-minister to a parish, and is in no condition to instruct or
   edify their souls, by reason of his offending them, or their incurable
   aversion to hear him, or submit to his ministry; they may safely judge
   that such a man is not qualified nor fit to be settled in that parish,
   and therefore may set him aside. And if in case of an appeal, the
   assembly affirm the presbytery's sentence, the law is most express and
   clear, that the cause must take end as the assembly doth discern,
   according to act 7. parl. 1567, which act is confirmed by act 1. parl.
   1581; and this act is again ratified by act 1. parl. 1592, which act is
   ratified by act 5. parl. 1690, and stands still in force, being not
   only ratified by the union, but also confirmed by queen Anne's law in
   1712 for establishing patronages. And as the general assemblies of this
   church have been always before 1612 in Possession of the foresaid
   power, so well secured to them by law; so also, since that time their
   sentences concerning all presentations have been submitted to and held
   as final. From which it is evident, that judicatories are under no
   force by law to make intrusions or violent settlements. Why then should
   church-men, who ought to be guardians of the church's liberties, go
   about to destroy them by violent proceedings? Is it not soon enough for
   church courts to take such destructive courses, when the parliament
   makes new laws obliging them to it?

   But, to return to the state of the church anno 1732: this was a very
   critical time to her, and most afflicting to many of her best friends,
   by reason of the stretching of church authority; the intrusions made
   upon parishes; the disregarding of remonstrances and petitions of a
   godly remnant both of ministers upon many parishes: and the refusing to
   record ministers' dissents with their reasons against such deeds. These
   proceedings were grieving to the hearts of honest ministers, and
   provoked many to go to pulpits and testify against them, particularly
   at the opening of synods, and other occasions; and severals of them
   printed their sermons, as a testimony against these prevailing evils.
   Though this was very offensive to many of our leaders, and to the court
   chaplains (whose number was then increased) yet none was so much
   noticed as the reverend Mr. Ebenezer Erskine minister of Stirling,
   whose turn was to preach at the opening of the synod at Perth in
   October 1732. The synod judged him censurable, and appointed him to be
   rebuked for his sermon, because in it he had impugned the acts and
   proceedings of the assembly, and had used some strong expressions
   against the judicatories and ministers of this church, which they
   reckoned indecent. Upon which Mr. Erskine appealed to the assembly
   1733, who affirmed the synod's sentence, and rebuked him at their bar.
   Whereupon Mr. Erskine, with three other ministers, gave in a paper
   protesting against the assembly's sentence, viz. Mr. Wilson at Perth,
   Mr. Moncrieff at Abernethy, and Mr. Fisher at Kinclaven; and they all
   protested for liberty to testify against the act of assembly 1732, or
   the like defections. This protestation the assembly 1733 could not bear
   with.

   As it was very unwise in the synod to proceed against Mr. Erskine for
   his sermon in such a judicial manner, so it was in the assembly to
   resent the protestation as they did. Informer times such protestations
   were not reckoned so criminal as now. Mr. Hunter minister protested
   against the assembly at Edinburgh 1586, for relaxing Mr. Patrick
   Adamson from the sentence of excommunication without signs of
   repentance; and Mr. Andrew Melvill and Mr. Thomas Buchanan adhered to
   his protest, Mr. John Davidson minister at Prestonpans protested
   against the assembly at Dundee 1598, for allowing ministers to vote in
   parliament in name of the kirk, where the king was present. Mr. James
   Melvill protested against the assembly their meeting at Holy rood house
   1602, where the king was present. Mr. David Calderwood protested
   against assembly 1649, for enacting the directory for election of
   ministers. Yet none of all these were censured for their protestations:
   neither do the house of peers censure these who protest against their
   proceedings. Likewise, the Twelve brethren, who were rebuked by
   assembly 1720 for impugning the act of assembly 1720 against the
   Marrow, offered their protestations against the censure; as did Mr
   Gabriel Wilson against the admonition of assembly 1723: yet none of
   these were censured for their protestations. And doubtless it had been
   greatly for the interest and peace of the church, that assembly 1733
   had followed the example of their wise predecessors. But now their
   authority must be screwed up higher than at former times: wherefore the
   assembly, without hearing the four protesting ministers any further
   before them, did summarily proceed to appoint their commission in
   August thereafter to suspend them, if they did not retract their
   protestation, and show their sorrow for the same; and to proceed to a
   higher censure, if they disobeyed the said sentence.

   Accordingly the commission in August did suspend all the four brethren
   for adhering to their foresaid protestation. And, upon their acting
   contrary to the suspension, the commission in November determined to
   proceed presently to a higher censure against them, and would not delay
   it until March, though the assembly's act allowed it. This decision was
   carried only by Mr. Goudie the moderator his casting vote.--And it is
   to observed, the commission went on in this forward and hasty procedure
   against the four brethren, notwithstanding of the earnest applications
   and intercessions of many synods presbyteries, kirk sessions,
   magistrates and others through Scotland in their behalf, pleading that
   the commission might delay them, spare them, or deal tenderly with
   them. The sentence which the commission came to against the four
   protesting ministers was, to loose their relation from their respective
   parishes, and declare them no longer ministers of this church, and
   prohibit all ministers of this church to employ them. And they declared
   their charges vacant from the date of this sentence.

   As the judicatories at this time seemed to act with much heat and
   severity, in order to support or screw up their authority; so we must
   own that the four brethren seemed to shew no little humour and
   stiffness in opposing their authority, and despising their sentences:
   for they would give no ear to their friends, who dealt with them to
   show some subjection to the judicatories as to their fathers and
   superiors; and though they were just now abusing their church power,
   and unwarrantably provoking their children, yet some regard is to be
   shewn to their authority, even when so doing, as we to our natural
   parents, though correcting us in an arbitrary way; according to Heb.
   xii. 6.--As to Mr. Erskine, though he was contending for the truth,
   many of his friends wished that he had not used such asperity and
   tartness of expression about the ministers and judicatories of the
   church as he did; and many of the leading men in judicatories said,
   This was the only thing they quarreled in his sermon: but Mr. Erskine
   would make no acknowledgment or submission of any sort, though even Mr.
   Wilson and Mr. Moncrieff said in their reasons of dissent, that they do
   not pretend to justify his modes of expression in that sermon; and they
   grant that in several cases it is most proper to use soft and modest
   expressions in maintaining of truth.--We do not see that it would have
   been any loss to the truth the four brethren appeared for, that they
   had all shewed more respect to the supreme authority of the church in
   their conduct than they did; particularly, though they had forborn to
   protest, as they did in express words, against the sentence of the
   assembly as Unjust, and against and censure they should inflict on them
   as null and void of itself; and if, upon their being suspended, any
   minister or probationer should preach in their parishes, the same
   should be held as intrusion upon their charges. And as they protested,
   so they submitted not to the sentence for one day; though many worthy
   ministers have formerly submitted to unjust sentences of this sort, to
   shew their regard to the authority of lawful judicatories of a church,
   which they owned as a true church: and this is approven by the most
   orthodox and judicious divines of the Presbyterian persuasion. Again,
   the brethren had the more encouragement to have submitted for a time,
   that they had reason to expect the next assembly would take off the
   sentences, consider their complaints, and do them all manner of
   justice; and this they might have looked for, from the interposition of
   so many synods and presbyteries with the commission of their
   favours.--And though offended at them for their contemning the
   authority of the church, yet there was a great plurality in the
   assembly 1734 for restoring them to their charges and the communion of
   the church; and neither that nor any subsequent assembly did ever
   approve the commission who past the hard sentences against them.

   When the sentence of the commission in November 1733, loosing the
   relation of the four brethren from their charges was past; many
   protested against it, as did the four brethren themselves, who also
   appealed to the first free, faithful and reforming general assembly of
   the church of Scotland. Had they sisted [stayed the proceedings] here,
   they had done well! but they went a great deal further, by making
   secession from the judicatories of this church, and in a short time
   after constituting themselves into a distinct judicatory for licensing
   preachers, and ordaining ministers, wherever they should find
   encouragement. At the same time they protested they would still hold
   communion with all who were true Presbyterians, and groaned under, and
   wrestled against, the evils they had been complaining of. This was then
   their declared resolution, though, alas! they soon departed from it. At
   first they seemed to be determined to continue in ministerial communion
   with many worthy ministers they had been formerly intimate with, though
   these had not freedom to secede as they had done, nor go all their
   lengths: and Mr. Erskine, in his answers to the synod, owned that there
   was still a body of faithful ministers in the church of Scotland, with
   whom he did not reckon himself worthy to be compared. Which body had
   the truths contended for heart, together with the peace of the church,
   as well the four brethren. And, seeing the case was such, the brethren
   ought in justice to have communicated counsels with that faithful body
   of ministers, who were willing to meet with them at the ensuing
   assembly, before they had taken two such strong steps as their
   secession and constitution: which uncommon steps, they might easily
   see, tended greatly to affect that whole body, yea, even to divide and
   rend them asunder, together with the people who should adhere to them
   respectively, in case that faithful body should not have light to go
   into all the measures of the four brethren. Whatever thoughts the
   brethren might have about the union of the church in general, it might
   have been expected they would have shewed something of concern for the
   union of that faithful body of ministers, for whom they did then
   profess a great regard.--Moreover, since they had appealed for redress
   to the first faithful general assembly they should have delayed any
   such extraordinary steps until the meeting of the next assembly then
   approaching, and so have kept the matter entire until the whole case
   was laid before them; which the brethren themselves should have been
   ready to do. For, considering how sensibly touched the whole church was
   with their case, and what preparations were making for the approaching
   assembly, the brethren could not be sure but it might prove the
   reforming assembly they had appealed unto. O what dreadful calamities
   to the church might have been prevented, had the four brethren
   continued praying, and deliberating upon the foresaid two steps until
   the meeting of the assembly in May 1734; and not have so precipitantly
   seceded from the national church, and constituted themselves into an
   Anti presbytery, by which means, alas! they became too much engaged in
   honour to persist in their separation, whatever steps the assembly
   should take to redress their grievances; and we know not if there was
   an assembly since the revolution, more willing to do it than the
   assembly 1734, had the brethren applied to them for it, as they were
   urged by many to do.

   The whole church had been so much alarmed by the arbitrary proceedings
   of former years, and the present threatened confusions, that there came
   up to the assembly 1734 from all parts, and even the remotest, many
   pious and experienced ministers, with sincere intentions to have
   matters settled upon a better footing if possible. And, upon trial, the
   plurality of the assembly was found to be upon their side, to the great
   joy of the friends of peace and truth. Now, it would have exceedingly
   strengthened their hands in their good designs to redress grievances
   and advance reformation, if the four brethren had tabled their
   complaints before them, and represented what they would have the
   assembly to do for to satisfy them; but this they declined to do,
   though they were all in the town at the time. But notwithstanding of
   this discouragement from the brethren, and the mighty opposition of
   great men, ruling elders, who had a strong party in the house to
   support them; the assembly, in the short time they had, did all that
   was in their power to satisfy the friends of reformation, and to put a
   stop to violent settlements and the prevailing evils of the time; and
   they were zealously inclined to have done much more, if their time and
   the situation of their affairs could have allowed. Particularly, they
   renewed and strengthened the old acts of assembly, which were made to
   be barriers and fences of our constitutions against innovations such as
   these made by ass. 1639, ass. 1697, ass. 1700, and ass. 1705. And they
   rescinded the 7^th act of ass. 1730, which hindered members to testify
   against wrong deeds of judicatories, by recording their reasons of
   dissent; because the said act was not made according to the foresaid
   rules and barrier-acts. And, upon the same account, they repealed the
   8^th act of ass. 1732, anent [regarding] the method of planting vancant
   churches; and because it gave too much countenance to violent
   settlements, and too much power to disaffected heritors, and was
   unfavourable to the liberties of the people. They reversed the
   settlement of a minister made by the commission, at Auchtermuchty,
   against the will of the congregation, and of the Presbytery of the
   bounds; and by that decision they declared the commission's sentences
   reversible. Also they brought the commission under several new
   regulations, and discharged them to execute any settlements of churches
   when the presbytery or synod of the bounds declined to do it. They
   impowered their commission to address the king and parliament for
   relief from patronages; which they did, though in vain. Also they
   impowered the synod of Perth and StirIing to restore the four ejected
   brethren to their charges and the communion of this church; Which they
   did very soon after the assembly, without requiring any acknowledgments
   from them. And, to facilitate their return, the assembly sincerely
   designed in act for removing their apprehensions, that, by the late
   sentences past against them, they were laid under greater restraints
   than before as to their ministerial freedom in testifying against acts
   and deeds of the church: wherefore, for the satisfaction of the four
   brethren, and all others, the assembly made an act, declaring, That due
   and regular ministerial freedom is still left entire to all ministers.
   They also appointed a committee to draw up an overture for an act to
   give directions as to the right preaching of the gospel, and to
   restrain the legal preaching and moral harangues of many not so
   agreeable thereto. This had been several times attempted in former
   years, but still dropt, till now that the assembly formed and referred
   the overture to their commission to ripen it They also referred it to
   their commission to appoint a national fast, which had been long
   neglected, that all ranks might mourn for the prevailing evils and
   defections of the church and land; which they did immediately after the
   rising of the assembly. This ass. 1734 was a singularly faithful and
   reforming assembly, who did very much in a short time, against great
   opposition, to rectify what was wrong, and put matters upon a better
   footing.--They gave remarkable checks to violent settlements, and
   relief to several parishes oppressed by them; for at this assembly
   methods were concerted to get sealing ordinances to these persons who
   submitted not to them, from other ministers they chused to apply to. As
   this assembly turned out one minister violently settled, so they were
   ready to have cast out others, if complaints had been regularly tabled
   before them. Their time of sitting did not allow them to consider and
   provide remedies for every thing amiss, and particularly for that wrong
   act of ass. 1733, concerning the presbytery of Dunfermline and their
   behaviour toward the minister that was forcibly settled at Kinross,
   wherein the said assembly threaten high censures against these who
   refuse to own him as minister of Kinross, or who admit of any of that
   parish to sealing ordinances without his consent. This was plainly
   oppression, and a very high strain of church authority, to settle
   ministers contrary to the rules of the word and of the church, and then
   oblige presbyteries to receive them, and people to submit to them. But
   the assembly 1734 gave a seasonable check to such oppressive courses;
   and for the people of Kinross, it was afterward referred to the synod
   of Fife to do what was proper for their relief, who thereupon allowed
   them the benefit of church-privileges wherever they should think fit to
   ask them. And letters were written to presbyteries in other places, to
   indulge people in such circumstances in the like manner.

   Thus did the faithful body of ministers (of whom Mr. Ebenezer Erskine
   did speak) use their utmost strenuous endeavours in the assembly 1734,
   and in the meetings of their commission, and in after assemblies, to
   get the door opened, stumbling blocks removed, and the way paved for
   the return of their four brethren to communion with them as before.
   Yea, they got ministers sent up year after year to London, to solicit
   the king and parliament for relief from patronages. And when honest
   ministers were in this manner travelling, sweating, labouring and
   struggling, even above their strength, to get things that were wrong,
   reformed and rectified; it was extremely afflicting to them, that the
   four brethren, with whom they had formerly taken sweet counsel, would
   by no means return to their assistance, though invited and pressed to
   it; but, instead of that, would be still disparaging their actings, and
   misconstructing their most sincere intentions. Notwithstanding of this
   discouragement, they continued struggling, and doing all they were
   able, to promote reformation in the assembly 1735 and assembly 1736:
   still hoping the four brethren would bethink themselves, and cease from
   their dividing course. And though that honest body of ministers could
   not get all done which they designed, yet they got several good things
   carried; such as an act for better regulating the commission, and
   limiting their powers; an act against intrusion of ministers, and
   declaring it to be the principle of this church, That none should be
   intruded into any parish contrary to the will of the congregation. How
   happy were it if this act were observed, and the foresaid principle
   maintained and adhered unto! Some things also were done at this time
   for the relief of those parishes that had been intruded upon; and an
   excellent overture was agreed upon, with respect to evangelical
   preaching, which was transmitted to presbyteries, and their consent to
   it was obtained; so that after long dependence it was got enacted by
   assembly 1736, May 21^st, act 7^th, in which

     they recommend to ministers and preachers to warn their hearers
     against any thing that tends to Atheism, Deism, Arianism,
     Socinianism, Arminianism, Bourignianism, Popery, Superstition,
     Antinomianism, or any other errors: And that they insist in their
     sermons upon our sinful and lost estate by nature, the necessity of

   supernatural grace, and of faith in the righteousness of Christ,
   without which the best works cannot please God: And that they make it
   the great scope of their sermons to lead sinners from a covenant of
   works to a covenant of grace for life and salvation and from sin and
   self to precious Christ our Surety and Saviour.--And as they are to

     press the practice of all moral duties, so also to shew the nature
     and excellency of gospel holiness, without which no man can see the
     Lord: and, in order to attain it, they are to shew men the
     corruption and depravity of their nature by the fall, their natural
     impotence for, and aversion to, what is spiritually good; and to
     lead them to the true and only source of all grace and holiness,
     viz. Union with Christ by the holy Spirit's working faith in us, and
     renewing us more and more after the image of God: and that they must
     count all their best performances and attainments but loss and dung
     in point of justification before God, and to make it their it great
     desire only to be found in Christ their Surety, clothed in his
     righteousness, which is infinitely perfect and law-biding; and to
     make gospel

   subjects their main theme and study, &c. And they recommend to all
   professors of divinity, to use their best endeavours to have the
   students under their care well acquainted with the true method of
   preaching the gospel as directed by this act; and appoint presbyteries
   at their privy censures to enquire concerning the observation of this
   act.

   --This is a short abstract of that excellennt act, which godly
   ministers had been intent about for many years past, in order to give
   some check to the legal way of preaching, and the loose moral
   discourses of several preachers, to the neglect of the true preaching
   of Christ and him crucified, introduced by many of the younger
   clergy.--However long this act had been delayed, yet it was most
   seasonably past in 1736, when a little before there had been a great
   noise of Deism spreading among the students of divinity at Edinburgh;
   and one of them, Mr. William Nimmo, had delivered a discourse in the
   divinity-hall, March 1735, to the prejudice of the Christian
   revelation; for which he was extruded by the masters, and
   excommunicated by the presbytery of Edinburgh.

   But seeing there is no great reason to fear that the foresaid excellent
   act concerning preaching is but little noticed and observed by many,
   and that there is in this church and land very much of a legal or moral
   way of preaching, exclusive of Christ and to the neglect of the
   peculiar doctrines of Christianity; and seeing the church of God, and
   the souls of men, to be in the greatest danger from this airth: we
   judge it our duty to give plain and open testimony against this sort of
   preaching, and to declare for the true gospel way of preaching Christ
   and him crucified, which ought to be the great study of every gospel
   minister, as it was of the apostle Paul, I Cor. ii. 2.

   We grant that morality, or obedience to the moral law, is an excellent
   thing, and absolutely necessary to be studied by every true Christian,
   seeing God requires it, and without morality and true holiness no man
   can see the Lord; but then it must be preached, otherwise by a
   gospel-minister than by a moral philosopher: Why? It must flow from
   gospel-principles, be performed in a gospel-manner, and be pressed
   mainly, by gospel motives and arguments. But it must be sad indeed,
   when there is almost as little of Christ or an evangelical strain to be
   found in the sermons of Christian preachers, as in the discourses of
   Seneca, Plato, Socrates, or other Heathen moralists.

   This Christless way of preaching morality is an inlet to Deism and
   Infidelity: for, when men are accustomed to hear moral sermons with
   little of Christ in them, they are apt to think there is but little
   difference between them and the discourses of moral Heathens; and
   therefore they may be good enough, and win to heaven by their morality,
   without Christ or his righteousness.--O how natural it is for men to go
   about to establish a righteousness of their own, with a view to be
   saved by it, and to neglect that new righteousness which the eternal
   wisdom of God hath established as alone sufficient for it! And
   therefore they need often to be called, after their utmost lengths in
   moral attainments (which are but poor and wretched at best) to renounce
   them all, and go to the imputed righteousness of Christ, to wit, the
   obedience of his holy life, and his sufferings unto death, for
   justification and salvation.

   Morality is a desirable thing, when kept in its due place; but, when
   allowed to possess the place of Christ's righteousness, imputed to us,
   it is a soul-ruining thing, and the greatest hindrance of the soul's
   coming to Christ, and of its entering into heaven. God will have us
   come entirely off from the old bottom of a covenant of works, and from
   resting upon any thing done by us, or wrought in us for acceptance with
   God; and look only for attaining to it by believing on him whom God
   hath sent, and resting upon his righteousness only: nothing of ours
   must be added to it, otherwise we mar it. Though faith be required of
   us as the mean or instrument whereby we receive and apply Christ and
   his righteousness, and also true repentance and sincere obedience are
   required as evidences and fruits of our faith; yet neither faith,
   repentance or obedience, nor all of them together, are any part of our
   justifying righteousness in the sight of God, nor are they the
   foundation of our acceptance, or of our title to eternal life: Christ
   must be all our righteousness, or nothing. So that none must think to
   be saved partly by his own obedience, and partly by Christ's in order
   to make up his defects; but we must be saved wholly by the complete
   morality and obedience of Christ imputed to us. Our proud natures must
   be humbled and changed, and must be brought to submit to accept of an
   entire new clothing, instead of our own righteousness; for the glory of
   God will not allow the least place to this in our justification, he
   will have all boasting excluded for ever.

   Quest. "Seeing morality and the duties of the moral law are to be
   preached and pressed, in what manner then must we do it?"

   Ans. If we would do it in an evangelical strain, and with success, we
   must 1mo, Press duty as the natural and necessary fruit of faith in a
   crucified Christ, and love to him, who suffered thus to satisfy for our
   sins, and to purchase to us the image of God and holiness which we had
   lost: and therefore let us represent the love mid sufferings of Christ
   in a lively manner to our people, in order to leave them to abhor all
   known sin, and to love Christ that thus loved us, and live to him that
   died for us; and pray earnestly for the Spirit of regeneration and
   sanctification which he had purchased for us: and this is the most
   effectual way to promote morality and holiness among them.--2do We must
   set before the eyes of our people the attractive charms and beauties of
   a crucified Jesus in all his offices, that they may get a view of his
   glory, as the Chief among ten thousand, and altogether lovely, and as
   the Pearl of great Price; that so the Desire of all nations may come to
   be the desire of their hearts, and they may count all things but dung
   and loss in comparison of a crucified Christ. And as we must recommend
   to them to close with him as their Priest and sacrifice to atone for
   their sins, so also to subject themselves to him as the lovely King of
   Zion, whose government is easy, his service pleasant, his commandments
   not grievous, and his rewards to obedient subjects unspeakably great.
   The whole precepts of the moral law are the laws of this King; but, to
   all his willing subjects, he makes his yoke easy and his burden
   light.--3tio, We must enforce duties from a principle of love, and of
   gratitude to Christ for his love. It should not be so much authority,
   as grateful love to Christ, that should constrain us to live to his
   glory, to study holiness and constant obedience to his commands; and
   this we should do, as we should approve ourselves to be Christ's
   discipIes, and as we would enjoy communion with him here, and be
   accepted of him at his appearance to judgment.--4tio, We should direct
   our people to perform duties by the grace and strength of the Lord
   Jesus Christ our Head, Surety and Treasurer. We must be united to him
   by faith, as our Head of influences, and derive all our life and
   strength for duty out of his fulness. Alas! this direction is little
   minded by many of our moral preachers, whose discourses generally seem
   to proceed upon the supposition of the strength of our natural powers,
   as if we had no natural impotence or enmity to what is good, nor been
   at all disabled by the fall.--5tio, We must persuade men to leave sin,
   and perform duty, by the terrors of Christ's coming to judgment, and
   the wrath of the Lamb, that will then be intolerable to all who slight
   his grace and disobey his laws.--3tio, When we press duties, let us put
   our hearers in mind, that all our duties and good works have no worth
   or merit before God; they are not our justifying righteousness, nor can
   they come in any way to share in this matter with Christ's
   righteousness; they are only accepted of God through the merits and
   mediation of Jesus Christ: and that, after we have done all, we must
   say, we are but unprofitable servants; and our main desire is to be
   found in Christ, not having our own righteousness, which at best is but
   filthy rags, and can not be any skreen or covert to us before
   God.--7mo, Let us instruct our people, that through Christianity doth
   enforce morality by the strongest arguments, yet unregenerate morality
   will never please God. Till the heart be renewed, and the soul grafted
   in Christ the true Vine, the fruit will be always sour and unpleasant
   to God. A moral man, though he profess himself a Christian, is not
   really so, unless he be united to Christ, and look for daily influences
   from him to perform duties, and to the righteousness of Christ to cover
   him and all his duties; and be still saying, Though I could perform
   never so many duties, I should be lost and undone forever, if it were
   not for the righteousness and mediation of Christ my Surety and
   Saviour, in whom is all my hope and trust.-- For all true holiness and
   acceptable morality is the proper result of the soul's union with the
   holy Jesus our living Head, who is the first and immediate receptacle
   of the holy Spirit and of all sanctifying influences for the use of his
   members; and out of Christ's fulness we must by faith receive them for
   our sanctification.

   Let us make every subject we insist on point to Christ. If we discourse
   upon the attributes of God, let us consider them as they shine forth in
   Christ and his glorious undertaking;--If upon the blessings and
   promises of the gospel, let us consider them as the purchase of
   Christ's blood:--If upon the providence of God, let us mind that the
   administration is put in Christ's hands, and he is Head over all things
   for the church; If we exhort to repentance and mourning for sin, let us
   direct our hearers to look to him they have pierced;--If to prayer, let
   us direct them to look to Christ, by whom only they can have access and
   success in this duty.

   O how happy were it both for us and our hearers, if we did thus reduce
   every thing to Christ, and make him the main subject of all our
   sermons. and if the scope of them all were to persuade sinners to come
   to Christ, and all that profess him to live by faith on him, and make
   daily use of him! To this glorious person did all the prophets of the
   Old Testament give witness, and much more should all the ministers of
   the New.

   Now, this way of preaching is surely the most excellent and preferable
   to any other way; Why? 1mo, The preaching of Christ crucified is the
   mean which God hath appointed for gathering in elect sinners to
   himself, and to which he promises his blessing. Hence it is that Paul
   saith, God makes the preaching of the cross and of Christ crucified the
   Power of God to them that are called: and though natural men count this
   way of preaching foolishness, yet it pleases God by this way to save
   them that believe, 1 Cor. i. 18, 21, 24.

   2do, It was by this way of preaching among the Corinthians that the
   apostle Paul had such wonderful success in bringing them to Christ, 1
   Cor. ii. 2. it was when Peter preached a crucified Jesus and the
   peculiar doctrines of Christianity to the people, that the Holy Ghost
   fell on them, and converted multitudes of them; as Luke observes
   several times, Acts ii. 36, 37. Acts x. 40, 44. It was not when he was
   preaching morality that the Spirit descended and gave success to the
   word.--Also he observes, when these preachers from Cyprus preached the
   Lord Jesus to the people of Antioch, the hand of the Lord was with
   them, and a great number believed, and turned to the Lord, Acts xi. 20,
   21. 3tio, It is the preaching of a crucified Christ, that God in his
   wisdom hath pitched upon as the way to reform men from their vices, and
   to bring in virtue, godliness and good order into nations, cities and
   congregations. The Heathen philosophers and wise men had, for some
   thousands of years, tried all means which the powers of nature or
   reason could afford, to bring men to God and virtue, but in vain; for
   they remained still ignorant of God, and run further away from him into
   all abominable impieties.--Likewise in many places there are several
   masters of reason and eloquence, who excel in a sort of rational and
   moral way of preaching, exclusive of Christ; but what success have they
   in it for converting souls? Alas! their people still sink in vice and
   corruption; all their fine reasonings cannot change the perverse will
   of one sinner. They may, perhaps, entertain two or three, or a few of
   their audience, who have a taste of the beauties of fine reasoning; but
   the body of the congregation remain untouched and asleep, so that all
   they hear is lost to them. Surely the value and usefulness of things
   are to be reckoned from their capacity and fitness to answer the end
   they are designed for: now the end of preaching is to win souls to
   Christ, so that these sermons are the most excellent that serve this
   design most; and these, we see, are the sermons which are fullest of
   Christ.--Alas! Christless moral sermons bring few off from their vices
   to the practice of morality, and far fewer into Christ. Such a way of
   preaching is a longsome unsuccessful method to reclaim and reform the
   vicious: whereas the short and effectual way to reform sinners, and
   make them moral, is to preach Christ to them; if you bring them to
   Jesus, you turn them from all their sins, and make them moral at once,
   yea, inwardly holy, which is more. O then, let us preach Christ above
   all things!

   4to, If we look through the world, we will find it is only these
   ministers who preach Christ most, who have most success: and that the
   life and spirit of true religion rises or falls among a people,
   according as a crucified Redeemer is faithfully preached among them or
   not. And these acquainted with church-history observe, that when God is
   about to leave a people, and his glory to depart from his house, he
   usually gives them up to a lifeless and formal ministry, who neglect
   the preaching of Christ and the peculiar doctrines of the gospel, such
   as free justification by the righteousness of Christ, and inward
   regeneration by the Spirit of Christ; and do not inform their people
   that it is from a crucified Jesus the virtue must come for breaking the
   power of sin in the soul, and subduing it to God. No wonder our flocks
   look poor and lean, when we take no care to lead them into these green
   pastures of evangelical truths, but set before them the dry insipid
   stuff of a Heathenish morality, which can never feed them nor keep them
   in good liking! How can we expect assistance from Jesus Christ in our
   work, or the influences of his Spirit in preaching (upon which all our
   success depends) when we take no more notice of Christ in our sermons
   than the moral philosophers among the Heathens? Wo will be to this
   national church, if such a way of preaching shall prevail in it
   notwithstanding of the foresaid act of assembly, and a sound Confession
   of Faith, which all ministers subscribe to. God forbid that the church
   of Scotland become ever like the church of England in this respect, who
   subscribe to sound articles of doctrine, and never mind them more
   afterwards.

   Likewise, as by the word of God ministers are bound to separate between
   the precious and the vile, the clean and the unclean, the sincere and
   the formalist; so, by the foresaid act. 1736 concerning preaching, all
   ministers are appointed, in application of their sermons, to endeavour
   rightly to divide the word of truth, speaking distinctly to the various
   cases of their hearers, whether converted or unconverted, &c. Alas! it
   is to be feared, the making of this difference is too much neglected by
   many, both in dispensing the word and sacraments.

   These and several other good things did the assembly 1736, but it is to
   be regretted they were not steady and uniform in their proceedings;
   for, while they discouraged and stopt some intrusions, they encouraged
   others: and they gave no small occasion of offence by their management
   in the affair of Professor Campbell at St. Andrews, who had vented
   several dangerous errors in his writings, such as his Oratio Academica,
   his Enquiry into the original of moral Virtue, his Discourse concerning
   enthusiasm, g&c.g wherein he asserts,

     That men by their natural powers, without revelation, cannot find
     out the being of a God; That the law of nature is sufficient to
     guide rational minds to happiness; That self-love, interest, or
     pleasure, is the sole principle and motive of all virtuous and
     religious actions; That Christ's disciples had no notion of his
     Divinity before his resurrection, and before that they expected
     nothing from him but a worldly kingdom; and, during the interval
     between his death and resurrection, they looked on him as an
     impostor."

   Likewise, while speaking against Enthusiasts, he utters several things
   very disparaging and reproachful to the work of the holy Spirit upon
   the souls of the people of God. These errors were brought before the
   assembly 1735, who referred them to their commission; and they
   appointed a committee to consider them, and prepare their report to the
   next assembly. Mr. Campbell laboured to give in sound and orthodox
   explications of these his positions, which the committee brought before
   the assembly 1736, with their remark and censures upon them, and the
   recommendations they judged fit to be given him. The assembly, upon
   hearing Mr. Campbell at great length, were of opinion that the
   committee's examining and stating the matter as they had done, was
   sufficient to caution against the errors charged upon Mr. Campbell,
   without giving any judgment or formal sentence upon the committees
   report; only they recommended to him not to use doubtful expressions or
   propositions, which may lead his hearers or readers into error. This
   issue of the process many in the assembly and out of it were highly
   dissatisfied with, judging that Mr. Campbell did justly deserve a sharp
   rebuke for the many incautious and unsound expressions he hath in his
   writings, however orthodox his explications might be: and with these;
   we do heartily join. Though the assembly gave no judgment upon Mr.
   Campbell's positions or explications, yet severals would charge the
   assembly with adopting one of his errors; because, when he explained
   his positions concerning Self love he declared he meant no more but
   that our delight in the honour and glory of God was the chief motive of
   all virtuous and religious actions. Now (say they) this Delight is the
   same with Self-love or the desire of our own happiness, which is the
   error charged on him; yet the assembly dismissed him without
   quarrelling it. But this should be looked upon as a pure oversight in
   the assembly, through their not adverting to the import of the word
   DELIGHT, but taking delight in the glory of God, for the same with
   regard to the glory of God, because of their affinity. For when
   assembly 1737 was informed that severals had taken offence, as if the
   assembly 1736 had adopted some of Mr. Campbell's offensive expressions
   on the head of Self-love, they vindicated this church from that charge,
   by making an act, declaring that they do stedfastly adhere to the
   doctrine expressed in our standards on that head, particularly in the
   answers to that question in our Shorter and Larger Catechisms, What is
   the chief end of man?

   In the year 1735 there was an essay made by an unknown hand to alter
   our Shorter Catechism, which was printed at London under the title of
   the Assembly's Shorter Catechism revised, and rendered fitter for
   general use. The reviser casts it into such a mould, as to make it
   agree with Arian, Socinian, Popish, and Arminian schemes of doctrine.
   As soon as it was publicly known in Scotland, the commission took it
   under their consideration, as the synod of Lothian had done before
   them, and past an act condemning it, and gave warning about it to all
   the presbyteries in this church, that they might be on their guard
   against the spreading and infection thereof. And would to God that our
   assemblies had in like manner given plain and faithful warning to all
   the corners and members of this church against Professor Simson and
   Professor Campbell's errors, and others which have been vented and
   spread in this church, and shewn to them their inconsistency with the
   Word Of God, and our Confession of Faith and Catechisms!--May God in
   his infinite mercy revive our zeal for all the truths therein
   contained, and against all sorts of error opposite thereto!

   After all, it is to be regretted that the national church was not duly
   humbled by all these awful rebukes for her manifold defections and
   particularly for disregarding Christ's flock in settlements; neither
   did she amend her ways and doings, and turn to the Lord: wherefore we
   find the hand of the Lord stretched out against her still, and a new
   sharp trial carved out for her from an airth [probably "direction"]
   that none could have expected.--One Captain Porteous, that had been
   condemned to die for several murders, having obtained a reprieve by the
   interest of some great men, the mob rose up notwithstanding, and
   executed him at Edinburgh the 7^th of September 1736. The king and
   parliament resented this affront so highly, that they framed a strange
   and extraordinary act for discovering the actors: and because some of
   the church's enemies suggested, without all ground, that the Scots
   clergy, at least a sett of them, encouraged the people in such mobbish
   actions, they appointed all the ministers of Scotland to read the said
   act in time of divine service in their churches every first sabbath in
   the month for a whole year, beginning in August 1737: and the penalty
   for the first negIect of reading it was, that they shall be declared
   incapable of sitting or voting in any church judicatory; and this was
   to be executed against them by the civil judges in Scotland. The most
   part of ministers in many synods and presbyteries, though they scrupled
   not to condemn the outrageous insult of the mob as murder, yet they had
   not freedom to read the said act, because they judged the penalty
   foresaid to be properly a church censure, seeing by it ministers would
   be divested of the power of church government and discipline, which is
   given them by the Lord Jesus Christ the Head of the church, and is
   essential to their office as preaching or dispensing the sacrament.
   Now, for the civil magistrate to assume the power of the keys, or of
   inflicting church censures, which Christ hath put in the hands of his
   own officers, they judged a manifest incroachment upon Christ's
   Headship over his church, and contrary to the word of God and the
   Confession of Faith they had subscribed, chap. 30, par. 1, 2. and chap.
   23. 3. And for ministers to become the magistrate's heralds, to
   proclaim this law on the Lord's day, in such a solemn manner, would be
   an homologating [to approve or confirm officially] of this
   incroachment, and a consenting to this Erastian power of the
   magistrate. Likewise they judged, to approve or concur with a law so
   prejudicial to the doctrine and discipline of this church, as
   established by law civil and ecclesiastical, would be to give up with
   fundamental securities, and act contrary to the solemn engagements
   ministers come under to maintain the doctrine and discipline of this
   church, and do nothing prejudicial thereto.--Besides, they did not
   think it agreeable to the office of these, who were ambassadors of the
   gospel of peace, to become heralds or executors of this or any
   sanguinary law; especially when they apprehended there were several
   things in it inconsistent with justice and equity, besides the Erastian
   Penalty aforementioned. These and other arguments, set in a clear light
   in several pamphlets published at that time, determined us to join with
   these who bore testimony against the reading of the foresaid act, and
   to run the hazard of all its penalties. And we wish the light of all
   the ministers of Scotland had been the same with ours in this matter,
   which would have prevented much division and stumbling that different
   practices have occasioned.

   But yet we must do justice to these of a different light, so far as to
   own, that there were several pious and conscientious ministers who read
   this act, because of the quite different view they had of it from these
   who refused it; and seeing, by the tenor of their lives and actions, it
   appears they have acted uprightly and honestly in other matters, we are
   in charity bound to think they acted sincerely in this also. Their
   reasons for reading were; A sinful penalty in the act, should not
   hinder their reading those parts of the act which might be lawful; and
   they judged they were bound to read some parts of it, to warn their
   people of the danger of harboring or succoring the rioters.--And they
   did not look on the penalty scrupled at as any church censure, or
   Erastian incroachment upon Christ's Headship; and, as they judged, no
   more was meant by it, but that the non-readers should forfeit the
   magistrate's protection in sitting in church courts; and that the
   magistrate, without assuming the power of the keys, might, by his civil
   power as magistrate, exclude or render ministers incapable of sitting
   in church-courts, by confining or banishing them. And they sincerely
   declare, that, if they had thought their reading of that act had in the
   least wronged the Headship of the King of Zion, they would rather have
   suffered the loss of their stipends, or any thing else. Now, charity
   obligeth us to believe pious men to be ingenuous in such declarations.

   But, alas! notwithstanding of all these shaking dispensations, the
   church was not brought to a right sense of her sins and defections; and
   therefore the Lord's controversy with her was not at an end: for we
   find the assembly 1738 continuing in former steps, and giving new
   offence to many in the church, by another decision in a process of
   error. The magistrates and town-council of Edinburgh having chosen Mr.
   William Wishart a minister at London to be Principal of their college,
   and having got a call to him also to be one of the ministers of the
   city, the presbytery of Edinburgh refused to concur with the said caIl,
   and charged him with venting several erroneous propositions in two of
   his printed sermons with respect to the power and office of the
   magistrate in religious matters, the liberty of Christian subjects, the
   subscribing of Confessions, the education of children, the influence of
   arguments taken from the awe of future rewards and punishments, his
   excessive charity to Heathens and others who reject the gospel offers
   and institutions, and the sinful and corrupt state of all men from
   their birth, &c. This affair being brought by appeals to the general
   assembly, and Mr. Wishart having made his explications, and given in a
   subscribed declaration of his adhering to the Confession of Faith, and
   the particular articles of it which his propositions seemed to oppose,
   and also of his disclaiming all errors whatsomever (whether charged
   upon him in the presbytery's articles or not) that are contrary to the
   Confession of Faith, or any article of it; the assembly thereupon
   assoilzied [absolved] Mr. Wishart from the process against him, and
   also they sustained his call to, be one of the ministers of Edinburgh,
   and appointed the presbytery to admit him as such.

   Here we cannot but testify against such soft proceedings, whether in
   the case of Professor Campell, Dr. Wishart, or others processed for
   error; seeing we judge it far from being sufficient to terminate a
   process for error, or to vindicate persons accused of it that they
   explain their words into a sound and orthodox sense, though perhaps
   contrary to the obvious meaning of them, according to the plain and
   ordinary acceptation of words; or that they profess their adherence to
   our Confession Of Faith, and its articles, which their tenets are
   thought to contradict. For a heretic, when in hazard of censure, may
   make a shift to put an orthodox sense upon his words, if that will save
   him, though it should be quite contrary to the common sense and meaning
   of them; and he may declare his owning the words of our Confession of
   Faith, and yet affix a sense and meaning to them directly opposite to
   the known sentiments and doctrine of this church: so that it is plain,
   such a loose superficial way of managing a process for error, is not an
   effectual way to suppress it. Wherefore we think it further necessary
   for that end, that these who are processed for venting error or unsound
   propositions, should particularly and directly renounce the erroneous
   tenets and principles charged upon them, upon account of their words,
   and the unsound sense which they naturally convey; and that they be at
   least rebuked for departing from the form of sound words, contained in
   the word of God, and our standards, which are framed agreeable
   thereunto. We see it is God's express command concerning such men, Tit.
   I. 13. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the
   faith. Sharp rebukes preserve soundness, but easy absolutions encourage
   error. No sooner is Dr. Wishart assoilzied, but he falls a recommending
   and prefacing books of bad character, such as Dr. Whitchcot's sermons,
   that savour of Socinianism, as the reverend Mr. Bisset of Aberdeen
   makes appear in a letter he hath lately published. Ah! how low must the
   case of this poor church be, when the head of the most frequented
   college in Scodand recommends such books impune [not yet punished] for
   college-students and preachers to form upon!

   These and other proceedings of our assemblies, were very, gracious to
   many worthy ministers and others in this church; and the four
   succeeding brethren before mentioned, with other four, viz. Masters
   Nairn, R. Erskine, Mair, and Thomson, who afterwards joined them, took
   occasion from such actings to carry their secession and separation to
   very great heights, by licensing preachers, invading parishes, and
   preaching up separation every where; not sparing their best friends,
   nor these who dissented from the evils of the time, and took all
   regular methods to, testify against them; but charging the whole
   ministry with very black things. They also framed an Act and Testimony
   of many sheets, with very much of church authority in it, which they
   required all their followers to adhere to. Though we own there were
   many good things in it, yet there were also many mistakes in it, and
   misrepresentation of facts, very harsh and unsuitable expressions, and
   also bitter reflections against their brethren, and even our worthy
   forefathers, &c. These things being laid before the assembly, they
   appointed the ministers of the presbyteries and synods where the said
   brethren reside to be at all pains by conference, and other gentle
   means of persuasion to reclaim them; and to report their diligence to
   the commission, whom they impowered, if they should see cause, to take
   all proper steps to sist [stay] the said brethren before the assembly
   1739.--Accordingly these eight brethren were libeIled and cited to the
   said assembly, who all compeared [appeared in court] before them, in
   the capacity of a constitute judicatory; and, instead of answering to
   their libel, they by their moderator read an act of their court,
   condemning the judicatories of the national church as not being lawful
   courts of Christ, and declining all their authority and jurisdiction
   over them.--Upon which they withdrew, and attended the assembly no
   more. Whereupon the assembly past an act concerning them, declaring,
   That for their declinature, [declining] contempt, and schismatical
   courses contrary to their vows, and for the many groundless and
   calumnious reflections which they have cast on the church and her
   judicatories, they deserve deposition: but that they resolved to
   forbear them another year, to give them further time to bethink
   themselves and return to their duty; and they appointed them to be
   cited to the next assembly 1740.

   Being cited accordingly, and not comparing the ass. 1740 proceeded to
   depose the whole eight brethren. But there having been debates about
   wording the sentence, and different senses put on it, we must look to
   the words themselves, which are, They depose them from the office of
   the holy ministry, prohibiting them to exercise the same within this
   church. And we must say, we are sorry to see a sentence of this sort so
   ambiguous.--If these words, Within this church, be connected with the
   word Depose, as well as with the word Prohibit, they mean no more but
   that they depose them from being ministers of this church; and many who
   voted it say they meant no more: so that, in this sense, the sentence
   is only a loosing of their relation from the national church; which the
   brethren themselves had done in effect, by their secession from her, by
   their renouncing all her authority and jurisdiction, and refusing all
   communion with any of her ministers.--But, on the other hand, if the
   words, Within this Church, be not connected with the word Depose, then
   the assembly meant to depose them simpliciter from the office of the
   ministry itself: and in this sense many members understood the
   sentence; and therefore a good many voted against it, and dissented
   from it. For though they did not approve of their wild divisive
   practices, yet they had not the freedom to unminister them, seeing they
   looked upon them as pious orthodox Presbyterian ministers, who had been
   useful in the church, and might still be useful in preaching Christ to
   lost perishing sinners. And, if the sentence be taken up in
   this...,[unlegible word] we join with those who testified against it;
   in regard we think the world cannot easily spare any of these ministers
   who are upright and zealous in preaching a crucified Jesus to fallen
   men, especially at a time when Deism and dry moral discourses are like
   to thrust out true Christianity.--Neither do we think it was time for
   the church to proceed to censure the brethren, till once they had done
   all they could to remove the evils and redress the grievances which
   were the grounds of their separation, and thereby had made them
   inexcusable in their schism; which, alas! Is far from being done. And
   as for the brethren's licensing of preachers, which is one article of
   their libel, the assembly and commission might prevent that, if they
   pleased to observe our good rules, and particularly the 14^th act of
   ass. 1736 against intrusions; seeing it is manifest, that, by every new
   intrusion and forced settlement which they make, they give
   encouragement to the brethren to erect a new tent, and license a new
   preacher; and, till such time as they shall cease from the one, they
   cannot well expect the brethren will cease from the other.--And, with
   respect to several other parts and articles of their libel, we think
   them too general, and no ways so particular, nor duly laid, as ought to
   have been in a process of this kind; and some of the most material
   things charged against the brethren are left out. But as we cannot
   justify the assembly in their conduct, so neither can we vindicate the
   brethren in theirs. And seeing, we proposed in this performance to give
   a fail and impartial testimony against the defections and evils of the
   time, whether upon one side or another, we shall briefly mention some
   of our seceding brethren's defections and strayings from the good old
   paths; which they have been led into, partly by their own precipitancy
   and misguided zeal, and partly by the headstrong humours of their
   followers: Such as,

   1mo, Their unprecedented secession which they have made from their
   mother-church, and the lamentable schism they have begun and carried on
   with so much heat and uncharitableness, when they were under no
   necessity of going into any sinful terms of communion, and when they
   were joined with a body of faithful ministers who witnessed against the
   evils complained of, is well as they.--Our histories assure us, that
   such a schismatical course is contrary to what was the approven
   judgment and practice of our reforming ancestors for above an hundred
   years after our reformation from Popery, though sometimes they had
   greater provocation to it than our seceding brethren had.

   2do, They both seceded, and constituted themselves into a presbytery
   for the exercise of discipline and government through the whole
   national church, without ever consulting with their brethren, and
   fathers in it, whom they then owned to be a numerous body of faithful
   ministers: though they could not but foresee that the said body of
   ministers, with their flocks, would be much affected, nay distressed,
   shaken, perplexed, and rent, by such singular and extraordinary steps
   as they were taking.

   3tio, Their irreverend and disrespectful carriage towards their mother
   church, to whom they had solemnly vowed submission; as appears in their
   Declinature, wherein they disown all her authority and jurisdiction
   over them, and pronounce judicially a sentence of their newly erected
   presbytery against the general assembly, and all the other judicatories
   of the church, Finding and Declaring that they are not lawful courts of
   Christ; which sentence they presumed formally to intimate in face of
   the general assembly by their moderator, before many witnesses, May
   17^th 1739. They ought to have remembered, that the laws both of God
   and man do highly resent children's beating, cursing, or maltreating
   their mother, even when she is somewhat severe and out of her duty to
   them; and that it is necessary that zeal should be attended with
   meekness, courteousness, and humbleness of mind. Surely such a
   declinature, and such a sentence as theirs, would seem to import no
   less than the unchurching the whole church, and unministering her whole
   ministry, faithful body and all, as if they were all given up to some
   dreadful apostacy or fundamental errors. Now, we are pretty sure there
   are few judicious orthodox divines in the world that will adventure to
   unchurch the church of Scotland, or declare her no church of Christ,
   for all the faults she hath. They have owned others as the churches of
   Christ, who have been as corrupt as she, if not more. Nay, the glorious
   Head of the church, the best judge, hath owned some no less corrupt, as
   golden candlesticks, walked in them, and held communion with them; such
   as the church of Corinth, some of the churches of Asia, Galatia, and
   other places. And is it thank-worthy in any of the members to outrun
   the Head, or to be more forward to unchurch his churches, or to
   unminister his ministers, than he himself inclines to be?

   4to, We cannot justify the brethren in refusing to return to assist
   these whom they owned to be a body of faithful ministers, to promote a
   work of reformation; when by a surprising providence they had got the
   upper-hand in the assembly 1734, and were doing all they could to
   remove the evils they complained of, and had got the door opened for
   them, and the act 1732 repealed, which was the great occasion of their
   protesting and seceding; and were most willing to do every thing else
   in their power to satisfy them and all the friends of reformation. But
   after they had continued for two or three years to struggle even above
   their strength, and thereby had got many good things done, still hoping
   their brethren would return to their assistance; they were grievously
   discouraged when they saw them still bent upon their begun schism, so
   as to set at nought all they had been doing, and misconstruct their
   most honest designs; yea, they were at length so disheartened by their
   measures, that many of them gave over travelling, and attending the
   assemblies, who thereupon, alas! soon returned to their old bias. So
   that it is manifest the brethren's wilfulness in their dividing way,
   put a stop to a begun national reformation, which, if they had favoured
   and struck in with, might have been advanced very far through the
   blessing of God, and many dismal consequences of their schism
   prevented.

   5 to, We must disapprove the brethren in seceding not only from the
   church, but also from their old Christian temper and disposition, and
   from that royal law of love and charity which they once preached up:
   this appears in their excluding from, the room they once had in their
   charity and communion, all their old friends and acquaintances, though
   never so sound and pious, or willing to spend or be spent for Christ
   and souls, if they have not light to secede and join with them.
   Whatever esteem of them they had before, they must now no longer employ
   them, hear, them, nor preach for them. Now, why should they treat the
   body of faithful ministers, they once took sweet counsel with, as if
   they were gross apostates, when it is notour they continue the very
   same men they were before, when the brethren sat with them in
   judicatories? They still witness and contend for reformation
   principles, as well as they; they give testimony against licensing or
   ordaining corrupt men, and against all errors and intrusions; against
   countenancing patronages, and accepting presentations; against all
   incroachments made upon the rights of the church and Christian people,
   and upon the Headship of Christ over the church, against the preaching
   up a sort of Heathen morality, and the neglect of the true preaching of
   Christ and gospel holiness, &c.--Now, what must be the reason for the
   brethren's separating and departing from their old friends, as if they
   were become Papists or Mahometans? Is it a good reason, because they
   continue to witness against the evils of the time in the judicatories
   as they did before, and not in conjunction with the eight seceders? Why
   must it now become such a deadly sin for worthy men to go with Joseph
   and Nicodemus to backsliding judicatories to plead with their mother,
   to testify against corruptions, to do all they can to hold out English
   prelacy and ceremonies, and maintain the national establishment of
   presbytery, and a sound Confession of Faith, and to strive to do all
   the good in their power, while waiting for better times, when God will
   open the eyes of men to see the evil of their ways! Now, when honest
   men think these ends may be better answered by going to judicatories
   than by joining a few seceders, ought not their brethren to forbear
   them, and allow them the same place in their charity and communion they
   had before! 6tio, We cannot approve of their marking so narrowly the
   failings, mistakes, and wrong steps of their sincere godly brethren, as
   they do; and instead of covering and forgiving their weaknesses (as
   Christ enjoins) aggravating and magnifying them so, as to make every
   mistake a dangerous error and defection; and not only doing this in
   private conversation, but going to the pulpit, and proclaiming them at
   times of greatest concourse, such as sacrament occasions, which should
   be feasts of love and charity among Christians, and not engines of
   strife and debate. Such an uncharitable course we judge the ready way
   to mar the usefulness of many of Christ's faithful servants in his
   vineyard, tending both to break their ministry, and break their hearts
   at once; to scatter their poor flocks, and do great harm to many
   precious souls.

   7mo, Likewise we must witness against their exciting and stirring up
   poor people plainly and directly to leave their godly pastors, by whom
   many of them have been brought to Christ; and doing so at the very time
   while they are feeding and profitting under their ministry; and for no
   other reason but because these ministers have not freedom to join in
   their secession and testimony, &c. yea persuading the people to leave
   these, and come to them, as they would not fall under the curse of
   Meroz, &c. and doing this both when they preach at home, and when they
   invade the parishes or others abroad--We cannot but testify against
   such flock-scattering doctrine and practices, as most sinful; and judge
   it to be a counterfeiting of our Lord's words, He that despiseth you
   despiseth me, and also great cruelty to go and pluck weak children from
   the breasts, while sucking strength and nourishment from pure
   ordinances, and to tell them (as seceders do) that some few occasional
   meals, like their itinerant sermons, will be better for them; though
   perhaps they are not so good their daily fare. This doctrine tends to
   ruin souls, by fostering ignorance, error, infidelity, looseness,
   carnality, worldliness, Sabbath-breaking, and all sorts profanity
   through the land: for thus many thousands of ignorant Christless souls,
   if they obey them, must sit at home on the Lord's day, and live without
   the gospel, except when they get a transient sermon of this kind now
   and then from a seceder.

   8vo, We must also bear witness against the brethren their narrowing the
   terms both of ministerial and Christian communion, so as no reformed
   church ever did. 1. As to ministerial, they have come that length to
   refuse communion with the most strict and holy minister in Scotland, if
   he do not secede and approve of their long act and testimony,
   notwithstanding of the many visible blemishes that are in it.--And this
   they do in contradiction to their protestation at their first
   secession, Nov. 16. 1733, by which they profess still to hold communion
   with all true Presbyterians, who groan under the evils of the time, and
   wrestle against them: and again they say the same in their first
   testimony, page 95. But they continued short while in that moderate
   disposition; for they soon came to refuse communion with all ministers
   but these of their own presbytery.--2. As to Christian communion, they
   go a prodigious length in excommunicating from the Lord's table all who
   hear or communicate with any other ministers, although these ministers
   might possibly be the instruments of their conversion, and signally
   blessed to them; and men upon whom they can charge no defection or
   fault but their not seceding from the church, and acceding to their
   long testimony in all points. Surely, for men to prescribe such new
   terms of communion to god's children before they can get their bread,
   terms not appointed by the Head, is both to incroach upon the headship
   of Jesus Christ, and break in upon that article of our Creed, The
   communion of saints.

   9no, We must regret their casting slanders on their worthy ancestors,
   and on their mother church, in their Act and Testimony, and other
   papers emitted or adopted by them; particularly by alledging, that the
   assembly 1690 (which consisted of many confessors and old sufferers)
   made no particular acknowledgment of the backslidings of the land under
   prelacy;--and that they declared the perfidious prelates were not to be
   deposed for their treacherous defections.--That the parliament which
   met at that time imposed the oath of allegiance, to exclude the oath of
   the covenant.--That Professor Simson and Professor Campbell's errors,
   and these favoured by the assembly's Shorter Catechism revised, have
   overspread this church like a flood.--That the judicatories have
   overturned the foundations of the doctrine and government of Christ's
   church:--That they have subverted both her doctrine and worship:--That
   they have done what in them lay to pull the crown of Christ's
   head:--That they have refused to give him the glory of his supreme
   Deity, and involved themselves in denying the Son of God, which is one
   epecial mark of Antichrist:--That they have made sinful terms of
   communion, &c. For all which, see Testimony, first Edit. Pages 51, 53,
   59, 105, 109, 143, 144, 145, 148. besides others of their papers. These
   are but a swatch of the many false aspersions contained in their
   writings, besides these which they daily cast upon their brethren in
   their sermons. Alas! that brethren who are concerned for the same
   gospel interest, should take such methods to slander their own mother's
   sons, to discredit their persons, and blast their ministry; especially
   when God is pleased to countenance severals of them remarkably in their
   work! There are indeed many evils in the national church; but it is
   sinful to calumniate her, and make her defections greater than they
   are. But notwithstanding of all these extravagant steps and accusations
   of our seceding brethren, occasioned through their intemperate party
   zeal; we still have regard to severals of them, as good men upon the
   main, and useful preachers of a crucified Jesus; and upon that account
   we wish well to them; not doubting but they have as good title to our
   charity as the Donatists and Novatians of old, and the Brounists and
   M'Millantes of later years. And we pray God to incline their hearts to
   unite with other godly ministers. As we have thus endeavoured to give
   our impartial testimony against the defections and wrong steps of the
   national church, and likewise of these who have of late separated from
   her; so we do also bear our testimony against the defections of the
   Episcopal clergy in meeting houses through Scotland. Ah, how wofully
   have they degenerated from the principles and practice of their
   fathers! Of old their fathers did not differ much from the established
   church except in point of church government, their doctrine and worship
   being very much the same: but now they are generally said to be
   Arminian and erroneous in their doctrine.--And upon our incorporating
   union with England, and the Toleration in 1712, they changed their way
   of worship, and fell in with the English service and ceremonies which
   their fathers would never receive, and which many Presbyterian writers
   have refuted to excellent purpose. Though this was a very great and
   remarkable change in the Scots Episcopal clergy, yet now it appears to
   have been introductive to a greater: for, being strongly attached to
   Jacobite principles and a Popish Pretender, they were thereby induced
   to entertain favourabIe thoughts of other Popish superstitions and
   errors, which at length many of them began to vent and stand up for;
   such as, A middle state for souls after death, and prayers for the
   dead;--The making the sacrament of the Lord's supper a proper sacrifice
   or propitiatory oblation for sin, and mixing the sacramental wine with
   water; pleading for the necessity of absolution by a priest, and
   confession of sins to him, in order to the forgiveness of sin;--The
   anointing with oil in baptism and other cases;--The necessity of
   Episcopal ordination and baptsim to salvation; And the practice of
   bowing towards the altar, and at the name of Jesus, with other Popish
   practices, for which they have no foundation nor warrant in the Bible,
   but to the contrary. Wherefore they do not much encourage their people
   to read the Scriptures, unless it be with such commentaries as they
   recommend to them; telling them that they must only receive the sense
   and meaning of the Scriptures from the church or clergy, and they must
   have a special regard to ancient liturgies, fathers, councils,
   traditions, &c. And, because the English prayer book doth not favour
   some of their new usages, they would have some places of it altered, or
   a new liturgy composed. In the prayers for the church, they leave out
   the words in the English Liturgy, Church militant here in earth, to
   favour prayers for the dead; and also they begin to favour the Arians,
   by passing over the Athanasian Creed in their worship. These
   innovations have occasioned in several places very great divisions both
   among the clergy and people: but still the innovating clergy gain
   ground against these who are more orthodox: and when they find people
   offended, or ready to leave them, upon account of their innovations,
   they either deny them, or artfully palliate them, until they get the
   people (who are but too tractable) reconciled to them; and thus they
   are gradually drawing nearer to the superstitions and idolatry of Rome
   from time to time.--Yea, some of them begin to preface and recommend
   Popish books, which contain devotions and prayers to the virgin Mary,
   and to the saints, besides other errors. May the Lord stop their
   career, and preserve the land from an inundation of Poperry, that
   Antichristian, tyrannical, bloody, blasphemous, idolatrous and damnable
   religion!

   In such a time of general defection and degeneracy in this and other
   churches, when infidelity, error, superstition, lukewarmness, deadness,
   carnality, profaneness, schism and divisions were on the growing hand;
   what might have been expected from a holy and just God, thus dread
   fully provoked, but that he would remove our candlestick out of its
   place, or come against us with some desolating judgment? But, behold!
   instead thereof, God is pleased to glorify his sovereign mercy and free
   grace in pitying his forlorn remnant, and to arise and maintain his own
   cause, by pouring out his Spirit from on high in several parts, to
   renew the decayed face of the earth. Amazing goodness! when the enemy
   was coming in as an overflowing flood, and God in justice might have
   given us all up for prey to him, the Spirit of God was pleased to lift
   up a standard against him in a very surprising manner, for reviving his
   own work in many places through the world, and in this land in
   particular.

   In or about the years 1732 or 1733, the Lord was pleased to pour out
   his Spirit upon the people of Saltzburg in Germany, who were living in
   Popish darkness, in a most uncommon manner; so that above twenty
   thousand of them, merely by reading the Bible which they made a shift
   to get in their own language, were determined to throw off Popery, and
   embrace the reformed religion; yea, and to become so very zealous for
   the truth and gospel of Jesus Christ, as to be willing to suffer the
   loss of all things in the world, and actually to forsake their houses,
   lands, goods and relations, that they might enjoy the pure preaching of
   the gospel. And O with what earnestness and tears in their eyes did
   they beseech Protestant ministers to preach to them in the places where
   they (when banished from their own country) came in different bodies!
   For it pleased the Lord to stir up Protestant princes and states to
   receive them, and provide for them, in many different places.

   Near to the same time, or about the year 1735 or 1736, the Lord poured
   out his Spirit on many, in Moravia, another country in Germany, to
   enlighten them in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and inspire them with
   extraordinary zeal to propagate it to others; insomuch that Count
   Zinzendorf bishop of the Moravian church hath sent forth his
   missionaries to preach the gospel, not only in Germany and other parts
   of Europe, but in many places of the Heathen world, where they call the
   Indians, and the Negroes, the Hottentots and Greenlanders to the
   knowledge of a crucified Christ; and we are told of the great success
   of their ministry: and the Count himself travels and preaches in very
   many different and remote places; though it is matter of regret to hear
   that these zealous preachers of Christ are tainted with several errors;
   and so indeed were several of our reformers at the first. May the Lord
   purge them from all error whatsomever. Likewise, about the year 1736,
   there was a marvellous outpouring of the Spirit upon the people of
   Northampton in New England, and neighbouring places, where God
   displayed the riches of his grace and the power of his Spirit, in the
   wonderful conversion of several hundreds in a short time, under the
   ministry of Mr. Jonathan Edwards and others there. O how glorious was
   that work! as appears by the narrative then published of it.

   At the same very time the Lord was pleased to raise up and qualify a
   number of students at the college of Oxford, in our neighbour nation of
   England, to be instruments of much good, although not altogether purged
   from the corruptions of that land. They joined in a religious society,
   wherein they agreed upon certain methods and rules for spending their
   time in fasting, praying, communicating, visiting the sick and the
   prisoners, instructing the ignorant, &c. and hence they were called
   Methodists. And, being afterwards ordained to the ministry, they
   preached with great warmth, chusing subjects very much neglected in
   that church, such as the doctrines of grace, of justification by faith
   in the righteousness of Christ, of original sin and the corruption of
   our nature, of the nature and necessity of regeneration and the new
   birth, g&c.g These doctrines being new, they were much admired and
   followed wherever they preached: they used also a good deal of freedom
   in speaking against the loose and negligent clergy, for which they were
   at length denied the use of churches; whereupon they went and preached
   in the fields, in houses, and wherever they might have access,
   collecting money for erecting schools, hospitals, and other pious uses;
   travelling to many places, and preaching every day, and several times
   in one day, having many thousands to hear them, in London, Bristol,
   Gloucester, through Wales, and very many places in England. Many of
   their hearers were brought under great impressions, shedding tears, and
   crying out, What shall we do to be saved? And great changes were made
   upon very profligate persons, and upon severals who went to scoff and
   ridicule them. Also many of the clergy were quickened to their work by
   them. In the year 1740, Mr. Whitefield, one of the foresaid Methodists,
   went to New England, and Mr. Gilbert Tennent after him, where they
   preached some months, two or three times every day, with singular and
   extraordinary success, the people being greatly awakened, especially by
   Mr. Tennent's preaching; so that there followed a remarkable change
   upon their lives, and a wonderful revival and appearance of religion
   through all that country for several years. The like also was very
   observable in Pennsylvania, and the Jerseys, about the same time. It is
   to be regretted, that the work began to be much clouded by some zealous
   but imprudent ministers, and a set of illiterate exhorters, who went
   through the country preaching, and venting errors, and sometimes very
   rash censures against their brethren, and some of them pretending to
   visions, prophecy, and great attainments, and running into several
   extravagancies; upon which account some have endeavored to expose the
   whole work as Enthusiasm and Delusion. But it being Satan's ordinary
   way, when he sees Christ's kingdom advancing in a place, to exert
   himself to bring a reproach upon religion, by leading some zealous
   professors of it into errors and disorders; this can prove no more
   against the work in general, than the delusions of the Anabaptists and
   Fifth monarchy-men did against the reformation. But these clouds did
   not long continue. Likewise in the year 1740 and afterwards, in
   Scotland, even amidst our backslidings and divisions, in some parts
   promising tokens began to appear of a revival of Christianity: for in
   Edinburgh and elsewhere, some new praying societies were set up, and
   sundry students did associate with them, which gave hopes of a further
   reviving; and for this, many prayers were put up through the land, and
   that a good time before Mr. Whitefield came to Scotland, which was in
   the end of July 1741, where he abode some time, and preached many
   awakening sermons in Edinburgh, Glasgow and other places.

   In Cambuslang, a small parish four miles from Glasgow, there were
   several praying societies, who spent much time in prayers and wrestling
   with God (especially in February 1742) that he might pity them and the
   whole land, and pour out his Spirit upon them, as on other places. And
   the reverend Mr. William M'Culloch their minister, who frequently met
   with them, having at their desire (joined with others in the parish)
   set up a weekly sermon upon Thursday a little before, and preaching
   closely to them upon the nature and necessity of regeneration; it
   pleased the Lord, that, upon Thursday the 18^th of February 1742, the
   holy Spirit so wrought upon his hearers, that about fifty of them, with
   many attending them came into his house, under alarming apprehensions
   about the state of their souls, crying, What shall we do to be saved?
   The minister, being much affected with their case, spent that day and
   night with them, either separately or together, in exhortations,
   instructions, prayers, and singing psalms; being assisted in the work
   by some preachers and elders. And, the awakened and wounded people
   daily increasing, he was obliged to preach to and converse with them
   every day for a great many weeks thereafter; the people filling all the
   rooms of his house after sermon and, continuing in prayer and singing
   psalms in different companies till near midnight.--Many ministers came
   from other places to Mr. M'Culloch's assistance, with multitudes of
   people to hear the word, and to be witnesses of that very uncommon
   work; and there many of them felt the power of the word, and went home
   with the arrows of God sticking in their hearts; and great numbers of
   these convinced people attained also to a fair appearance of a hopeful
   outgate; having their minds filled with peace and joy in believing.
   This was a wonderful time at Cambuslang for many months in the year
   1742, and the pleasant fruits of it continued to appear both in that
   and the following years.--In Summer same year, viz. 1742, the work
   began to spread and appear remarkably in Kilsyth, Calder, Kirkintoloch,
   Campsie, Cumbernauld, Gargunnock, Baldernock, Muthil, and many other
   parishes; and even in Edinburgh and Glasgow there was a considerable
   revival in religion. In May 1742 there was published a narrative of the
   work at Cambuslang, attested by many; and soon after another narrative
   of the work at Kilsyth and parishes about it, continued in different
   parts, and published from time to time by the reverend Mr. James Robe.
   These narratives, being well attested, were spread and reprinted in
   America and different places of the world; they were translated into
   Dutch, and had several editions in Holland, and were well received by
   the ministers and divines there.

   The work indeed was very surprising and extraordinary, much resembling
   that which was in the last century at Stewartoun, Irvine, Kirk of Shots
   and other places, in the years 1625, 1626, and several years after,
   though in a very dismal backsliding time; and that work in Ireland,
   about Antrim, and the Six mile water, about the year 1628; of both
   which Mr. Robert Fleming, once minister at Cambuslang, gives account,
   in the Fulfilling of the Scriptures; as do Mr. Robert Blair and Mr.
   John Livingston in the manuscripts of their lives.--And, there being
   much said and written about this work in the West of Scotland, we have
   thought ourselves bound to enquire into the nature, fruits and
   evidences of it; and from what some of us have seen of that work, and
   hath been attested by the ministers immediately concerned, and others
   who have seen it, we judge ourselves warranted to give our testimony to
   it, as a glorious work of the Spirit of God, which he hath been pleased
   to send in his sovereign free mercy, in a time of great infidelity,
   formality and back sliding, to glorify his own name, by awakening,
   convincing, humbling, converting, comforting, reviving, strengthening
   and confirming many souls through the land; and our reasons for it are
   these; 1mo, The convictions and comforts of the people of Cambuslang,
   and other awakened parishes, have come to them in a scriptural way, by
   Christ's ordinances, and particularly the word preached, and passages
   of Scripture carried in upon their minds, suited to their cases and
   circumstances.--2do, The fruits and effects of that work in the
   people's lives and conversations, do evidence themselves to be from the
   holy Spirit, according to the Scripture account of these fruits; for
   these who formerly were blind and ignorant, have soon come to advance
   in the knowledge of Jesus Christ and Divine things; and the tongues
   which were dumb in the things of God, have soon learned to speak the
   language of Canaan.--They who formerly were given to cursing, swearing,
   drunkenness, Sabbath breaking, scoffing at sacred things, and other
   immoralities, have presently changed their course into sober living,
   godly conference, reading, praying, and singing psalms.--They who
   formerly were trusting to their own performances, attainments and
   self-righteousness, have presently renounced all these for the
   righteousness of Christ only, imputed to them for their justification
   before God.--They who formerly were glewed to the world, and to the
   love of sensual and sinful things, are made willing to part with all
   these for the love of Jesus Christ their Saviour, desiring earnestly to
   be conformed to him in his contempt of the world, self-denial, humility
   and holiness both in heart and life.--They who before thought it an
   unmanly thing to shed tears for sin, and piercing of Christ, have been
   made to mourn as for an only son, and be in bitterness as for a first
   born.--These who have been guilty of secret acts of injustice, have
   been filled with remorse for them, and made restitution to the persons
   injured or their children.--They who halted and mocked the people of
   God, have their hearts warmed with love to them, and account them the
   excellent ones of the earth.--They who before were contentious,
   malicious and revengeful, do presently drop their quarrels, forgive
   their enemies, wish well to their souls, and the salvation of all
   around them.--They who before minded only their own things, are highly
   concerned for the interests of Jesus Christ, and for the declarative
   glory of God in the world.--Swearers have dropt their oaths, and with
   reverence mention the name of God. And they who loved carnal company,
   merry jests, profane songs, and foolish talking, seek after the company
   of those who will join with them in prayer, praises, and talking about
   their soul-concerns.--They who before complained of nothing but bodily
   ailments, worldly losses, crosses, and disappointments, now complain
   mainly of unbelieving hearts and indwelling corruptions. They who
   before ascribed their virtues and good things to themselves, do now
   exalt Christ and free grace for every attainment, and in the whole of
   their salvation: and yet, while they ascribe all to free grace, the aim
   in Christ's strength at universal holiness, at the subduing of every
   sin, and the practice of every duty and good work, according to both
   the first and second table of the law, and make conscience of stational
   and relational duties as well as others.--Families that formerly were
   synagogues of Satan, are now temples where God is devoutly worshipped:
   and many of all ages and sexes do form themselves into little societies
   for prayer, praise, and religious discourse. And though tares are mixed
   among the wheat, and several hypocrites discovered, yet the body of the
   awakened persevere, as to what can be seen, in the ways of religion.

   Notwithstanding of all these gracious changes, which are clear
   evidences of the operations of the holy Spirit; yet this blessed work
   is mightily opposed and reproached, and that not only by atheistical
   and profane men, but even by many of those who have long been praying
   for the diffusion of the Spirit, and the coming of Christ's kingdom,
   particularly our seceding brethren, who have (alas!) preached, prayed
   and printed against this good work, and even kept fasts in all their
   meetings, for putting a stop to it, as a delusion and work of the
   devil, who hath transformed himself into an angel of light (as they
   say;) and have thereby given their followers very frightful notions of
   it, and stopt them from going near the places where they might have got
   full satisfaction: And also they have hindered many from giving praise
   to God for his wonderful goodness, and from praying for the continuance
   and spreading of the work. May the Lord lay all this to their hearts,
   but not to their charge! Their main quarrel with the work seems to be,
   that it is begun and carried on by the instrumentality of ministers of
   the national church, and some whom they judge accessory to the
   defections therein; and because it is attended with outcryings,
   trembling, falling down and fainting, in many of these who are
   awakened; which (they say) are not symptoms of a work of the Spirit.

   Concerning which we shall observe these few things;

   1mo, Our brethren had certainly acted much more the part of wise and
   unbiassed judges, if in obedience to Christ's commands to try the
   Spirit, and prove all things, they had used all proper means of
   enquiry, such as going themselves to the places conversing with the
   ministers, and with the subjects wrought upon, before they had
   pronounced a judicial sentence in such a weighty case, and intimated it
   from their pulpits; and not have proceeded to a decision so hastily
   upon hearsays, or the malicious reports of profane spirits, and these
   who were enemies of the work. They also had done wisely, to have waited
   some time to see the issue of the work before they had past such a
   terrible sentence upon it: for they might have remembered that it is
   not an easy thing for clergymen, after doing a bad thing, to own their
   mistake.

   2do, It cannot he denied but there have been many eminent godly
   ministers employed in promoting this work; and, though there had been
   some not so remarkable that way, we must not find fault with a holy
   sovereign God for making use of what instruments he pleases. Our
   brethren cannot but know that it is a most provoking sin to limit the
   Holy one of Israel, who frequently thinks fit to employ mean and
   despised instruments to do his work, that so he may stain the pride of
   our glory, and shew that he is not beholden to any.

   3to, We are grieved in our very hearts that our brethren adventured
   upon such a daring step, as by a judicial sentence to ascribe to the
   devil such a gracious Godlike work, as that before described; when they
   cannot bring an instance from Scripture, or any other history, of the
   Devil's being permitted to work in the like manner before. Surely it
   may make us tremble to think what kind of sin it must be to make the
   devil the reprover of sin, and minister of righteousness, and so to
   assign the office and work of the Holy Ghost to that wicked one! Doth
   it not Iook like a fearful limiting of God, for a few men to act as if
   they would confine the holy Spirit's workings to themselves, and give
   up the ministry of all their brethren through the Island to the devil?
   As Jesus Christ himself, so his ministers, Moses, John Baptist, the
   apostles Peter and Paul, were of quite different tempers and
   dispositions; they rejoiced to see the Spirit poured down upon others,
   and to see Christ preached, sinners brought in to him, and his kingdom
   enlarged, whoever were the instruments of it.

   4to, As for the effects of this work upon the bodies of some of the
   awakened, such as outcrying, trembling, falling down, or fainting;
   these are not at all new in this land; for many instances of such like
   symptoms in persons under piercing convictions of sin, or under
   ravishing views of Christ, can be given, even since our happy
   Revolution, as well as in former times; as is evident from Messieurs
   Robe, Currie and Webster's writings on this subject. And yet we hear
   not of any heretofore ascribing the work in these people to the devil,
   nor condemning it as contrary to Scripture, upon account of these
   symptoms: No; for the Scripture gives frequent instances of such
   impressions made on the body, by the great inward exercise and concern
   of the mind.--The sharp convictions of the three thousand, Acts ii.
   brought them great agonies, being pricked as with a sword in their
   hearts, and forced to cry out, and say to the apostles, Men and
   brethren, what shall we do? The auditory being great, they must have
   cried in such a manner that the apostles heard them; for Peter was
   forced to cry aloud, that they might hear him, Acts ii. 14.--So Paul,
   when he was thoroughly convinced of his sin of persecuting Christ, and
   the wrath due to him for it, he was seized with trembling and
   astonishment, and fell to the ground, Acts ix.4,6.--Also the jailor,
   when awakened to see his sinful and lost state under wrath trembled and
   fell down, saying, What must I do to be saved? Acts xvi. 29, 30. And it
   appears to have been usual in the apostles' days for sinners to fall
   down before God, when they were first convinced, and got the secret
   wickedness of their heart laid open to them by the Word, I Cor. xiv.
   24, 25. Even that great man, Felix, was made to tremble under his
   conviction of sin and apprehension of wrath, while Paul preached to
   him, Acts xxiv. 25. And that mighty king, Belshazzar, was strangly
   affected when he saw the hand-writing on the wall, which he took to be
   a presage of wrath against him, Dan. v. 6. His countenance was changed,
   his joints loosed, and his knees smote one against another. A view of
   the wrath of a sin-revenging God, is enough to throw the stoutest
   sinner into the most terrible disorder, and to overwhelm all his senses
   and faculties. We see Baruch, when in danger of the wrath of man, was
   so overwhelmed with grief, that he fainted under it, and cries out,
   Jer. xiv. 3. Wo is me now, for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow:
   I fainted in my sighing, and had no rest. And how much more would he
   have been distressed with the immediate views and approaches of the
   wrath of God; for, Who knoweth the power of his anger? Job, when under
   the apprehension of God being his enemy, and his terrors pursuing him,
   he was so little master of himself, that he stood up, and cried in the
   congregation, Job xxx. 15--28. King David says, he roared by reason of
   the disquiteness of his heart, Psal. xxxviii. 8. Nay he had such
   impressions of the wrath of God upon his soul, that they made all his
   flesh to tremble, Psal. cxix. 120. My flesh trembleth for fear of thee,
   and I am afraid of they judgments. Heman saith, While I suffer they
   terrors, I am distracted, Psal. lxxxviii. 15. We see also how the
   prophet Habakkuk, was seized with the greatest bodily distress, with
   quivering of lips, and trembling over all his body, at the view of
   approaching wrath, Hab. iii. 16.--Again, it ought to be remembered,
   that God hath told us, that in the New Testament days he would pour out
   his Spirit upon people in such a manner, that they should look upon him
   they pierced by their sins, and mourn, and be in bitterness, as parents
   for an only son or first born. Now, it is well known that some parents
   will not only cry out bitterly, but also faint, upon such occasions;
   nay, some will be brought to such agonies and faintings by the mere
   apprehension and prospect of man's wrath and of temporal difficulties:
   and have they not much greater cause for them, who get a clear and
   manifest discovery of the heinous guilt of their sins, and of the wrath
   of an angry God hanging over them? Who can paint forth the distress of
   these poor creatures, whose spirits are wounded by the amazing
   apprehensions of God's wrath for sin, and the fearful expectations of
   judgments and fiery indignation, without having view of relief?--Such a
   wise man as Solomon would not have been surprised to see such persons
   tremble, cry out, or faint; for, saith he, A wounded spirit who can
   bear! Prov. xviii. 14.

   We read also in Scripture of persons fainting upon other occasions.
   Jacob fainted for joy, when he heard that his son was alive and highly
   exalted; so Daniel, after singular manifestations from God, fainted and
   was sick certain days, Dan. viii. 27. and x. 8, 9. And the apostle
   John, when he saw the Lord in his glory, fell at his feet as a dead
   man. So it is no wonder that a poor soul that was like to sink in
   despair under a sense of sin and wrath, when coming out of this plunge
   to a surprising view of Christ's mercy, loveliness and fulness, should
   in like manner be overwhelmed and faint for love and joy.--Wherefore it
   is our duty to put favourable constructions upon the various cases of
   awakened and exercised souls, when thereby, they are thrown into
   extasies, faintings, or bodily distresses. The holy Spirit is a free
   sovereign agent; and, in times of large effusions, he may, for his own
   wise ends, take an uncommon latitude in his way of dealing with
   sinners, for bringing them in to Christ. And as their discoveries of
   sin and wrath, and the commotion in their affections, prove very
   different; so the impressions upon their bodies in must be either less
   or more, and exceeding various, according to the measure and degree of
   inward exercise and concern of their minds; for as their sorrow for
   piercing Christ by their sins is compared to that of parents for an
   only son, which admits of many different degrees, and produceth very
   different effects in different persons; so it must be reasonable in any
   to require instances in Scripture for every minute circumstance of the
   innumerable various cases of persons brought in to Christ; for then the
   Spirit of God must have enlarged the Scriptures into very many
   different volumes, which had not been convenient for us. If we read the
   accounts given us of the conversions of Augustine, Luther, Junius,
   Beza, Latimer, Bolton, Professor Halyburton and many other eminent
   saints, we will find particular circumstances in them for which no
   Scripture precedent can be shewn; but no wise man will say upon that
   account, that the work in them was delusive or diabolical. But let some
   object what they will against the conversions in the West, because of
   the outward impressions attending them in severals (for in many the
   changes are wrought without any noise at all;) It is our judgment, if
   these bitter throes and agonies of some, have a merciful issue in
   landing them in Jesus Christ and true holiness, as it is visible they
   do in the most part; then there is great matter of praise whatever way
   the Lord take for awakening and humbling them before-hand.--But seeing
   worthy Mr. Edwards of Northhampton hath written two treaties concerning
   this extraordinary work of the Spirit of God, and hath taken notice of
   all the prejudices and objections of adversaries, we judge it
   unnecessary to add any more to what he hath written so fully and to
   such excellent purpose.--May the Lord, by new showers from above,
   continue, revive, increase, and spread this blessed work through the
   land and all corners of the earth! Amen and Amen.

   That we may draw to a conclusion, we shall briefly sum up the principal
   sins, errors, evils and defections in the church and land, which we
   think ourselves bound to lament and mourn over, declare, warn, and bear
   testimony against, in order to promote reformation, and healing in the
   land: for although God, in his boundless sovereignty and rich grace, be
   pleased in a backsliding time to grant some remarkable reviving to his
   work in paticular corners, to shew his willingness to return to his
   ancient dwelling place; yet we despair of any general reviving or
   national reformation, until we are made sensible of public sins, errors
   and defections, as well as these of a more private nature. Wherefore we
   desire to be humbled for, declare and testify against, all doctrines
   and practices which are opposite to the Bible, and to our Confession of
   Faith, Larger and Shorter Catechisms, Directories for Worship and
   Church government, which we judge drawn out of, and founded upon the
   Scriptures of truth.

   And particularly, against all Deistical and Socinian errors, and
   doctrines, which tend to decry the necessity of supernatural
   revelation, and cry up the sufficiency of reason or the light of nature
   to guide men to eternal happiness.

   And against all Arian errors, and these doctrines which any ways
   disparage the Christian revelation, or derogate from the scheme of
   salvation through the mediation and righteousness of Jesus Christ our
   only Saviour;--Or from the doctrine of the glorious Trinity, and the
   oneness of the Godhead; Or from Christ's true supreme Deity, his self
   existence, necessary existence, independence, and equality with the
   Father;--Or from the true Deity of the Holy Ghost, and his equality
   with the Father and the Son;--Or from the truth of Christ's manhood,
   and of his Priestly office, and the necessity of his death as a real
   and proper sacrifice to satisfy Divine justice for our sins.

   All Popish errors, idolatry and superstition, maintained either by
   professed Papists, or by Protestants who are making advances towards
   Popery, by pleading for middle state for souls departed; prayers for
   the dead; the Eucharist's being a proper sacrifice for sin; the
   necessity of confessing sin to the priest, and of the priest's
   absolution in order to the forgiveness of sin; of mixing the
   sacramental wine with water;--Of bowing to the altar, to the East, and
   at the name of Jesus; of kneeling at the sacrament, observing saints'
   days and uninstituted festivals, and putting them on a level with the
   Lord's day; the cross in baptism, the organ in praise, the reading of
   prayers, and other human inventions in God's worship and service.

   All Pelagian and Arminian doctrines, which derogate from God's
   efficacious free grace in saving sinners, or put in the power of man's
   own free will or natural abilities to repent, believe, or convert
   himself; and make a necessary connection betwixt a man's moral
   seriousness and his obtaining of saving grace.--Also all these
   doctrines which tend to exalt self, or any ways place it in God's room;
   and these which make self love, and the desire of our own happiness,
   the proper spring and principle of all virtuous and religious actions.

   The magistrate's assuming the power of the keys, and all Erastian
   incroachments upon the intrinsic power of the church, or upon Christ's
   headship and supremacy over her.--The granting an almost boundless
   toleration to all sects, errors, heresies and innovations.--The
   imposing the sacramental test upon others civil and military when out
   of Scotland, as a necessary qualification for there offices; whereby
   the holy sacrament is much debased and profaned.--The multiplying of
   oaths without necessity; introducing the new form of swearing by
   kissing the gospels, the Yule-vacance, the repealing of the laws
   against witchcraft, &c.

   The imposing the yoke of patronage upon the church, and spoiling
   Christian congregations of their right to chuse their own pastors, and
   obtruding pastors upon them.--As also the practice of these ministers
   or preachers, who contribute to encourage, strengthen or bind the yoke
   of patronage upon the church, by allowing their friends to apply to
   patrons and procure presentations for them; or by accepting these
   presentations, and cleaving to them when obtained.--And the practice of
   these ministers or judicatories, who encourage or support these
   Accepters in this pernicious course, or who obtrude them or any other
   persons upon parishes against their consent. The denying the lawfulness
   or obligation of our national covenant engagements, the warrantableness
   of national churches, Confession of Faith, subordination of church
   judicatories one to another; the maintaining the independency of single
   congregations upon any superior church-judicatory; the lodging the
   power of the keys, not in the hands of church-officers, but in the
   community of the faithful.

   The prosecuting or censuring of ministers for preaching or protesting
   against any of the evils or defections of the time, such as the
   despising of Christ's flock, making intrusions upon them, incroaching
   upon the rights and liberties of the church, or Christ's Headship over
   her, &c. The neglect and unfrequent administration of the Lord's
   supper, and the abuse and profanation of it by admitting ignorant or
   ungodly persons to it. As also the neglect of appointing national
   fasts, and days for humiliation and extraordinary prayer, in a time of
   national defections, and of abounding sins and provocations, when many
   spiritual judgments are inflicted, and other great judgments are
   impending over us. And, when such fasts come to be appointed, alas!
   what an aversion is there to a particular condescendence of the sins
   and defections which are the true cause of the Lord's controversy with
   the land!

   Likewise we judge ourselves bound to bewail, lament, and witness
   against, all these God-dishonouring sins and evils which universally
   abound and prevail among all ranks and sorts of men; such as ignorance
   and forgetfulness of God their Creator and Preserver; Atheism,
   infidelity, and enmity to God; ingratitude to God for mercies; putting
   the creatures, the world and self in the room of God; consulting with
   necromancers, wizards and charmers; ascribing our mercies to fortune or
   second causes, rather than to God. Self love, self-seeking, unbelief,
   distrust of God, hatred of him and of his image in others. Pride,
   presumption, carnal security, loving pleasures more than God.
   Restraining of prayer before God in secret; neglect of family worship;
   tempting God by neglecting means, using unlawful means, and trusting in
   lawful means. Superstition and false worship; giddiness and
   unsettledness in religion, and drinking in error. Mean and low thoughts
   of Christ, and of the infinite love of God in providing Christ to be a
   Surety and Sacrifice for us. Contempt of the glorious gospel, and the
   glad tidings it brings and men's unfruitfulness under it. Not receiving
   and loving of Jesus Christ; not relying on Christ as all our hope; not
   making use of Christ in all his offices; not rejoicing in Christ and
   him crucified. Men's resting upon their duties and frames for
   acceptance with God: their joining something of their own with Christ's
   righteousness for their justification before God, and not accounting
   all things loss and dung for Christ, that they may be found in him, not
   having their own righteousness, which is nothing but filthy
   rags.--Grieving of the holy Spirit, sinning him away from ordinances;
   not lamenting the withdrawing of the Spirit, nor wrestling for his
   return. Opposing and reproaching the work of the Spirit in awakening
   and convincing sinners; calling it Enthusiasm, delusion, or ascribing
   it to Satan. Blind and intemperate zeal; discontent and impatience
   under the dispensations of Divine Providence. Backslidings from God,
   and the decay of the life and power of godliness. Setting our
   affections upon earthly enjoyments and sensual satisfactions; and
   neglecting these things wherein our chief happiness doth consist,
   namely, the enjoying of God, and communion with him.--Our unthankful
   forgetting of the many signal deliverances which God hath wrought for
   his church and land; and our unthankfulness for and abuse of the
   valuable mercies we still enjoy, such as health, peace, plenty; freedom
   from pestilence, sword and famine; and the continuance of the gospel
   and pure ordinances with us.--Our minding our own things, more than the
   things of Jesus Christ. Our little praying for the coming of Christ's
   kingdom, and for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem.

   Our neglecting the ordinances of God's appointment, careless attending
   upon them, and not regarding them as trysting-places [meeting-places]
   for meeting with God, and as means of communion with him. Our being
   wise above what is written, and advancing men's devices before Divine
   appointments. Our resting upon outward attending of ordinances, and a
   name to live, without the new birth, and a work of grace in our
   souls.--Our contenting ourselves with man's teaching, without the
   teachings and influences of the Spirit with the Word. Our being little
   affected or afflicted with the blasting of ordinances, and the
   suspending of the Spirit's influences.--Our unworthy communicating, and
   formal approaches to God, at his holy table; neglecting due
   preparation, by self examination, secret humiliation, renewing covenant
   with God, and wrestling with him for his presence. Our loosing soon the
   impressions of Christ's sufferings, his precious blood, and matchless
   love, set forth in that ordinance; and not living answerably thereto.
   Our putting our hearing, praying, communicating, charitable acts, just
   dealing or moral honesty in the room of glorious Christ, who alone is
   the Lord our righteousness.

   We also lament and witness against the abounding profanation of God's
   holy name, by the irreverend use of it in common discourse, by formal
   and hypocritical addresses to him, by customary and rash swearing,
   cursing, blaspheming, perjury, swearing falsely in matters of trade or
   taxes, bribing, and tempting others to do so. By perfidious dealing
   with God, in breaking both national and personal covenants, sacramental
   vows, and sickbed resolutions.--Decay of zeal for maintaining of truth,
   purity and piety, in opposition to abounding error, superstition and
   profanity. The profaning and abusing of God's titles, attributes,
   ordinances, Scriptures, servants and providences; by many scoffing at
   sacred things, jesting upon the Scriptures, mocking the professors of
   religion, misconstructing God's providences, wresting and misapplying
   his word to favour their corrupt sentiments and practices; vain
   jangling and disputing about smaller points, and taking up their
   thoughts and time therewith, to the neglecting and eating out the life
   of religion. Slighting, aspersing and reviling many of God's faithful
   servants, thereby marring the success of their ministry, and scattering
   their flocks, to the prejudice and ruin of many precious souls.--Many
   taking up a profession of greater strictness in religion than others,
   while strangers to humiliation for sin, regeneration, heart-holiness,
   tenderness of walk, humbleness of mind, meekness, and the true spirit
   of Christianity. Alas! many are so puffed up with pride, vanity, self
   conceit, and contempt of others, that they cast out of their charity
   and communion every one that agrees not to their sentiments and
   practices in all respects, though some of these have more evident marks
   of the image of God upon them than they themselves! And many are hereby
   tempted to infidelity, even to mock, hate, and cast off all religion,
   because of the divisions among the professors of it.--Ah! many
   professed Christians shew a great propension to exalt natural reason,
   and decry supernatural revelation; to magnify the religion of nature,
   and disparage the religion of Jesus! to ascribe such to man's freewill
   and natural powers, and overlook the free grace of God, and preventing
   work of his Spirit.--Many speak more of their own moral performances,
   than of Christ's imputed righteousness; and seem to regard Christ more
   as a pattern than as a propitiation; exalt their natural powers and
   self righteousness, through ignorance of the righteousness of God; cry
   up the preaching of morality, while they themselves remain immoral, and
   ignorant of their own corrupt natural estate, and of the nature and
   necessity of regeneration. Alas! There is ground to fear that many
   outwardly assent to our Confession of Faith, who scarcely read it,
   consider it, or believe it; and it is to be feared that severals, even
   preachers, may come to subscribe it, as these of the church of England
   do their 39 articles, rather as vinculum pacis, than as vinculum
   veritatis.

   We also bewail and testify against the profanation of the Lord's day
   which sadly abounds, as being a nursery of, and an inlet to, all manner
   of sin and corruption: by many speaking their own words on this day,
   and discoursing of worldly affairs and business;--By many doing their
   own works, such as unnecessary pieces of servile labour, or travelling
   about worldly business;--By many finding their own pleasures, by idle
   walking, needless visits, and other worldly diversions and
   recreations:--While in the mean time few make conscience of setting
   apart and spending this day as a day of sacred rest, according to its
   institution, for entertaining serious thoughts of the works of God and
   redeeming love, for attending religious worship without distractions,
   for promoting spirituality and heavenly mindedness, for holding
   communion with God through Jesus Christ, and for loosing their hearts
   from the world, and preparing for death and heaven. Alas! many, instead
   of such exercises, do dedicate this holy day to profanity; and, in
   place of serving God the Author of it, they serve the devil and their
   lusts upon it, by gaming, drinking, swearing, uncleanness, filthy
   speeches, jesting upon sacred things, and reproaching the devout
   worshippers of God! And so they go faster to hell upon the Lord's day,
   than upon any other day of the week.

   We likewise bewail and testify against the stational and relational
   sins which abound in the land, among parents and children, masters and
   servants, husbands and wives, magistrates and subjects, ministers and
   people; superiors, inferiors and equals. Alas! many superiors are
   guilty of contempt of their inferiors, of proud and imperious carriage
   towards them, of oppressing them, or ruling them with rigour, of
   discouraging them from what is good, and encouraging them to what is
   evil.--Many inferiors are guilty of despising their superiors envying
   their situation, disobedience to their commands and counsels, and not
   imitating their good examples; and particularly many children are thus
   dreadfully guilty with respect to their godly parents.--And, among
   equals, there is little brotherly love, mutual esteem and good offices
   to be seen; but, instead thereof, very much appears hatred, anger,
   malice, envy, evil-speaking, reproaching and backbiting, and also of
   tempting and encouraging one another to sin.--Ah! Many parents forget
   their engagements at baptism, and neglect to instruct and pray for
   their children, to admonish and reprove them when needful, and either
   do not correct them at all, or do it unduly, provoking them to
   wrath.--Oh! many heads of families neglect family religion, prayer,
   praises, and catechising of children and servants, and requiring an
   account of the sermons they hear; or at best they perform family prayer
   and other duties in a cold and formal manner. Oh how many have no more
   care of the souls of their families than if they had none! They seek
   only their own things, pursuing the business of a present animal life,
   and not the things of Jesus Christ, or what concerns their spiritual or
   eternal life!--And many who have formerly come a good length, and kept
   good order in their families, have sadly declined, lost their wonted
   liveliness and spirituality in God's service, and let their duties
   dwindle away into a dead formality, contenting themselves with external
   performances, ordinances and communions, without any communion with God
   in them.

   We must also regret the untenderness and looseness of the walk and
   conduct of some in the ministry, whereby not a few are tempted to abhor
   the offerings of the Lord; and a Gallio like indifferency in others
   about the public interest of Christ, if it go well with their own
   private affairs. And few, alas! are lamenting after a departing God,
   and searching into, or mourning for, the causes as they ought, or
   wrestling for a returning God, and a returning glory. Many preachers
   are running unsent, and using means to thrust themselves into the
   vineyard, not waiting for God's call, nor regarding the prayers or
   inclinations of his people; and who in their sermons generally confine
   themselves to subjects of natural religion and moral virtue, and
   neglect the doctrines of Christ and the Spirit, the peculiar glories of
   Christianity; and do not preach the absolute freeness of grace through
   Christ, as the spring of a sinner's justification and
   salvation.--Likewise, not a few ministers and Christians want love and
   due forbearance to others who differ from them in some lesser matters;
   entertain harsh thoughts, and break out into uncharitable censures, and
   severe reflections one against another, to the hindrance of that sweet
   fellowship and social prayer which they should have together, and to
   the taking them off in a great measure from the vitals and essentials
   of religion, and from pure ordinances, which God continues still to
   own.

   We lament the malicious and revengeful thoughts of many, and the
   frequent sallies of their ungoverned passions, which sometimes break
   out into provoking language and acts of violence, and even into
   bloodshed and murders; and often the law is not dully executed against
   murderers.

   We testify against the prevailling sins of tippling, [habitual drinking
   of alcoholic beverages] drunkenness, gluttony, chambering, wantonness,
   fornication, adultery, unnatural lusts, and all sorts of uncleanness,
   wanton gestures, obscene talk, immodest apparel, lascivious songs and
   dancings, lottery games, balls, assemblies, and stage-plays, which,
   however fashionable they may be, we look upon as unbecoming the
   gravity, seriousness, faith and hope of true Christians, who profess to
   place all their happiness in the enjoyment of God, and to be careful
   abstain from all appearance of evil, and wait for the coming of their
   Lord and Saviour from heaven.

   Likewise, we bear witness against the prevailing evils, of stealing,
   robbing, extortion, defrauding, prodigality, simony, bribery, running
   of goods, men's using unlawful occupations, living above their incomes,
   undertaking vexatious law suits, pleading for causes manifestly
   unjust;--Lying, slandering, spreading evil reports, aggravating smaller
   faults, rash censuring, suborning false witnesses, backbiting,
   scolding, scoffing, misconstructing the actions, words or intentions of
   others:--Men's discontent with their lot and condition in the world:
   envying or grieving at the prosperity or credit of their neighbours
   being glad at their adversity, miscarriage, or disgrace; coveting or
   entertaining inordinate motions and affections to these things which
   belong to their neighbours.

   Moreover we bewail and testify against all the foresaid sins, evils and
   defections of the land, as bring highly aggravated in the sight of God,
   being committed against clear light, the Spirit's strivings, manifold
   warnings, alluring mercies, solemn covenants, and wonderful
   deliverances;--against great pains taken by God upon the land to
   reclaim and reform them, such as reproofs, challenges, exhortations,
   expostulations, invitations, promises, threatenings and lesser
   judgments.--And these our sins and defections have been long continued
   in, until very many are become secure, senseless, and hardened in them,
   nay, even bold and impudent, so far as to avow and justify them, to
   despise admonitions, and mock at reproofs. Likewise they are turned
   very universal; all, ranks and degrees of persons are involved in the
   guilt of them, rich and poor, great and small, nobility, gentry,
   magistrates, ministers, commons, &c. Alas! our nobility and persons of
   distinction, who once appeared with zeal for God's truths, and for
   advancing reformation, are sadly degenerated, and generally corrupted,
   either with erroneous principles, or vicious practices. Our commons,
   many of them are destroyed with ignorance, profanity, or
   earthly-mindedness. Our professors of religion, alas! carnality and
   formality prevail among them, and lively piety is like to dwindle away.
   Oh how desperate doth our case appear when under such terrible
   aggravations of guilt! How ripe do we seem to be for desolating
   strokes, and sweeping judgments! What cause have we to look out for
   them every day, and to fear and tremble before a holy, just, and
   provoked God! according to these awful texts of Scripture, 2 Chron.
   xxxvi. 15, 16, Isa. xxii. 12. &c. Jer. vi. 15--viii. 12.--xi. 10,
   11.--xxii. 7, 8, 9. Amos.viii. 2, 3. &c. Micah iii. 11, 12. Hos. xiii.
   5, 6, 7. which is very applicable to our case.

   But is there no hope in Israel concerning this thing? Is there not balm
   in Gilead? Is there not a Physician there? Is there not virtue in
   Christ's blood for the most desperate cases that churches can be in? Oh
   if ministers and people were applying to him by faith, there would be
   hope. Should we not then plead with our mother to consider her
   defections from God, and to be deeply humbled and mourn for them, and
   to turn from them to the Lord by true repentance and reformation, and
   to pray and plead his promises of mercy through Jesus Christ, such as
   that in Jer. iii. 22. Return, ye backslidden children, and I will heal
   your backslidings!--We have very lately had a surprising evidence of
   the Lord's willingness to return and heal us; what a wonderful step has
   he made towards it, by pouring out his Spirit upon several
   congregations of the land! O what encouragement doth this give the
   whole land to apply to him for mercy, and to set about reformation!
   particularly to our general assemblies and all inferior judicatories to
   go but and meet a merciful returning God, who, has no delight in our
   ruin, and that in the way of faith, humiliation and prayer; essaying
   sincerely to do all in their power to remove the grounds of the Lord's
   controversy, redress grievances, amend what is wrong, and take every
   stumbling-block out of the way of serious well meaning people, which is
   improven as an occasion of our lamentable divisions. For these ends,
   let us humbly plead with our Mother.

   I. In as much as the church is and ought to be the pillar and ground of
   the truth, and her judicatories are bound to assert, maintain and
   defend every one of God's truths when attacked by adversaries, to
   transmit them in their purity to posterity, and to give their testimony
   and approbation to them, for upholding them against those teachers who
   would overturn them; and seeing all the members of the judicatories in
   this church have subscribed our Confession of Faith, and profess to
   adhere to the truths therein, we humbly plead that they may shew more
   concern for the support of these truths than has been done of late
   years. It is to be regretted, that not only the Episcopal clergy, but
   several ministers of this church, have taught and vented errors, and
   recommended erroneous books; and some of them have been arraigned
   before the general assembly, as Professor Simson, Professor Campbell,
   and Dr. Wishart; and though we are far from thinking that this church
   hath adopted or homologated [approved] any of their errors, yet many
   well-wishers of the church are of opinion they were not sufficiently
   animadverted upon, but too easily dismissed, which may give
   encouragement to others to spread error. And the therefore we beg leave
   to plead, that the general assembly would in the most proper manner
   testify their abhorrence of these errors whereof the foresaid persons
   were accused, and these Popish errors which the Episcopal clergy are
   introducing, and other errors which are propagated through the island;
   and give warning to all the ministers and members of this church to
   guard against them, and study to prevent the infection of them: and
   particularly these errors which strike against the doctrine of the
   glorious Trinity, and the oneness of the Godhead; or against the
   supreme Deity of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; or against
   the doctrines of free grace, in our justification and salvation; and of
   the glory of God being the chief spring and motive of virtue and
   religion.--And also, that the assembly would declare, that it is not
   sufficient to assoilzie [absolve] any man processed for error, that he
   profess his adherence to our Confession of Faith, or explain his words
   into a sense consistent with it; but that he expressly renounce these
   errors which are charged upon him from his words, according to the
   plain and obvious sense of them.

   II. We would also plead, That though the precious doctrines of the
   supremacy and headship of our Lord Jesus Christ over his church, and
   the church's intrinsic power derived from him, are well asserted in our
   Confession of Faith, Larger Catechism, Form of Church government
   approved by assembly 1645, Form of Process 1707, and other public deeds
   of this church, agreeably to the holy Scriptures; yet, in regard some
   things have been done both of old and of late which appear not so
   agreeable to these excellent principles, that the assembly would
   declare their detestation of every thing, whether in sentiment or
   practice, that is inconsistent with Christ's Headship, and the church's
   intrinsic power, asserted in our Confession of Faith, particularly
   chap. xxx. Sec. 1, 2. in these words; The Lord Jesus Christ, as King
   and head of his church hath therein appointed a government in the hand
   of church officers, distinct from the civil magistrate. To these
   officers the keys of the kingdom of heaven are committed, &c.

   III. We must likewise plead with our Mother to cleave closely to our
   reformation principles, and carry always towards the grievance of
   patronage as a sinful usurpation upon the church of God, as the church
   hath frequently declared both of old and of late. And although we know
   there hath been laudable endeavours used by this church to be freed
   from this usurpation, such is the commission's address in the year
   1712, approved by the next assembly; the memorial of assembly 1715; the
   commission's sending ministers to London in 1717 to seek relief from
   it; and also the commission 1734, and again the assembly 1735, sending
   commissioners with addresses for repealing the patronage act; and, when
   all these endeavours proved unsuccessful, the assembly 1736 did, by
   their solemn and deliberate resolution, printed to the world, give it
   as their judgment that it was still most just and fit, upon the first
   favourable occasion, to apply for redress of this grievance; and did
   record their weighty grounds and reasons for it: and also the said
   assembly 1736, act 14. did assert our principles against intrusions,
   and homologate [approve] our standards and former good acts of assembly
   relative thereto:--Yet we cannot but lament, that notwithstanding all
   these deeds, there are many ministers and preachers who still encourage
   and strengthen the usurpation of patronage, and chuse settlements by
   presentations rather than by gospel-calls, for which the law still
   leaves an open door. And the judicatories connive at this their
   unaccountable practice, and even obtrude severals of them upon
   reluctant congregations, capable and willing to make a right choice for
   themselves; which has occasioned a dismal scattering of the flock of
   Christ, and miserable animosities, disorders, and distractions in many
   places of the land to the great hinderance of the gospel. For remedying
   whereof, it is humbly proposed, 1mo, That the general assembly would
   declare, that Presbyterians having free access to moderate in calls to
   vacant parishes, and congregations having freedom to chuse their
   ministers, is a part of the discipline and government of this church,
   which by the Formula 1711 all ministers and preachers are bound to
   support and maintain, and to do nothing directly or indirectly to the
   prejudice thereof, as it is there worded.--2do, That the assembly would
   discharge all ministers and preachers to take measures to obtrude
   themselves or others upon congregations against their will, by
   presentations or any other way; and to declare, if any, by his
   accepting of or adhering to a presentation, shall stand in the way of a
   Presbytery's free moderation, or of a parish's free election, he shall
   be looked upon as a deserter of the principles of this church, and
   treated as guilty of contravening his solemn engagements by the said
   Formula and otherwise. 3tio, That the assembly would enforce the 14^th
   act of assembly 1736 against intrusions, and take care in all
   settlements, and in all acts which may be framed concerning them, to
   maintain our principles, and the just rights of Christian
   congregations; and expressly discharge all inferior judicatories to
   plant any parish contrary to the mind of the eldership and Christian
   people, with certification; seeing their is no ground to expect that
   the great ends of a gospel ministry can be obtained in such forced
   settlements.--4to, That the assembly would enjoin all judicatories and
   ministers to have a due regard to all the members of Christ's flock,
   and to all serious praying Christians, and not to despise those of them
   who are poor and mean in the world, but to esteem and put honour upon
   them, and seek an interest in their prayers, and have a great regard to
   their inclinations in planting parishes: and in all decisions about
   settlements, and cases wherein the glory of God and good of souls are
   highly concerned, to guard against the fear of man, which brings a
   snare. And to be ware of all such lax managements, or untender steps,
   as may drive good men from judicatories or the communion of the
   church.--5to, That the assembly take care that all concerned in calling
   of ministers have freedom to act, without any compulsion or undue
   influence.--6to, That the assembly order that congregations who have
   been aggrieved by the settlement of ministers without their consent,
   shall be treated with compassion and lenity; and to fall upon methods
   to transport or remove such ministers from them, when parishes cannot
   be brought to submit to them.--7mo, That the assembly appoint, that all
   appeals from the sentences of synods be only to the general assembly;
   and, if there be any of them which the assembly cannot overtake, that
   they be referred to the commission to be judged by them at their
   meeting immediately after the assembly, when their diets are numerous;
   it not being agreeable to Presbyterian principles and parity, that a
   great number of ministers should be subjected to the authority and
   judgment of a lesser.--8vo, That Presbyteries be strictly enjoined to
   be most careful and conscientious in licensing men to preach the
   gospel, and in observing the many good acts of assembly thereanent [in
   reference to]; and that both presbyteries and synods shall enquire, not
   only into their literature, but also into their sense and savour of
   true godliness, and into their acquaintance with the true godliness,
   and into their acquaintance with the true gospel-scheme of
   justification, and the way of making use of Christ, and living by faith
   upon him, and with the work of the Spirit upon their souls, and
   experimental religion; and also enquire into their sentiments
   concerning patronage and other grievances of the church: And that
   presbyteries recommend none to synods or other presbyteries to be
   entered upon trials, but such as they can safely attest in terms of
   these acts and rules.--9no, That the assembly declare, that as it is
   the duty of ministers, so they are still at full freedom, to testify in
   a becoming manner, and upon proper occasions, against the prevailing
   corruptions of the times, and even against what is wrong in the acts
   and proceedings of church judicatories.--10mo, That presbyteries be
   enjoined to be strictly conscientious in attesting ruling elders who
   are to sit in assemblies or commissions, and particularly that they be
   qualified in terms of the 9^th act of assembly 1722, as their
   attestation is appointed to bear; and that every presbytery shall cause
   read the said act every time before they either choose or attest any
   elder.--11mo, That the assembly make more narrow enquiry into the right
   and warrant which colleges and royal burghs have to choose ministers or
   elders to sit in the general assembly.

   IV. We humbly plead, that national fasts and thanksgivings may be more
   frequently appointed, when God in his providence calls unto them; and
   that no occasion be given to any to say that the church has resigned
   her power into the hands of the magistrate. And seeing at this time
   there is a manifest growth of infidelity, error and impiety; of
   defections, gross sins and abominations; of Contempt of God, perjuries,
   and unnecessary multiplying of oaths; of woful divisions, breaches, and
   want of brotherly love and Christian charity; besides grieving of the
   Holy Spirit, and manifold spiritual plagues every where abounding; and
   also the terrible judgments of the sword and plague raging in other
   nations, which may very soon reach us; all which are visible tokens of
   the Lord's anger and indignation gone out against us, and call us
   loudly to mourning and humiliation before the Lord; Wherefore we think
   it our duty to plead with all humility, that the general assembly would
   lay these things to heart, and appoint a solemn national fast to be
   religiously observed because of them; and that they would be more
   particular than heretofore, in enumerating the grounds and causes of
   the said fast, namely, Our own and our forefathers sins and defections,
   by covenant-breaking, and treacherous dealing with God, and the fearful
   indignities done to our solemn covenants in the late times, taken
   notice of by the assembly 1701; the blasphemous advancing the
   magistrate's supremacy over the house of God; the imposing and taking
   of sinful oaths, especially the self-contradictory Test; the shedding
   the blood of god's servants and people for not complying with the civil
   course of these times; the Erastian encroachments made upon the
   Headship of Christ, and the rights and privileges of his church; the
   encouragement which is given to all manner of errors; our backsliding
   from reformation principles, the intrusions made upon congregations,
   and the scattering of the Lord's flock; the abounding of all manner of
   profanity and immorality, Atheism and blasphemy, especially in our
   armies and fleets, which, alas! Are so great and avowed in them, that
   instead of serving as hedge and defence to us, their sins may provoke
   the Lord to bring desolating strokes both on them and us. These, and
   many other sins, evils and defections before mentioned and witnessed
   against in this Testimony (to which we refer) may very fitly be brought
   in among the clauses of a national fast, seeing they greatly abound in
   the land; and especially that sin which may be reckoned the source of
   all the rest, namely, the undervaluing of redeeming love, and slighting
   of the Lord Jesus Christ offered to us in the gospel, and our woful
   misimprovement of the means of grace, and walking unanswerably to them.

   V. As we think ourselves bound thus to plead with our mother, to put
   away her sins and provocations, and put a stop to all her defections;
   so we think it our duty to plead with her to deliberate upon, and take
   the most proper and effectual methods for reviving the power of
   godliness, and the practice of gospel holiness; and particularly that
   our general assemblies, when they meet, would set apart diets for these
   ends, and would also recommend it warmly to synods, presbyteries, kirk
   sessions, and private Christians to consult together for promoting
   religion and godliness in the bounds where they live, and to have their
   set times of meeting for spiritual conference, fasting, prayer and
   wrestling for the down pouring of the Spirit upon the whole church and
   land, for awakening, convincing, converting and reforming a secure and
   sinful people; and at these meetings to quicken, excite and exhort one
   another to all religious duties and Christian offices, looking
   earnestly to the Lord for his Spirit's influence and special blessing
   upon all these means and endeavours, and continuing still in the use of
   means, waiting for a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit, until at
   length the whole land arrive at the happy frame and disposition of our
   forefathers, when they with one consent renewed covenant with God, and
   dedicated themselves and their posterity unto the Lord. And that they
   recommend it especially to the ministers to be exemplary and actively
   instrumental in such religious projects and designs among their people,
   and even to travail in birth till Christ be formed in their souls; and
   carefully to observe the direction of the 7^th act of assembly 1736,
   concerning the preaching of Christ and regeneration to them, and
   pressing morality in a gospel-strain; and in their ministrations to
   make a difference betwixt the precious and the vile, between humble,
   praying circumspect Christians, and formal professors; to honour them
   that fear the Lord, though they be poor; to speak well of them, support
   their characters against enemies and scoffers, and carry with them
   greater familiarity to them than others.

   O how pleasant and desirable a sight would it be to see ministers,
   elders and Christians joining in such noble designs and endeavours!
   What a promising token of good would it be, if all the ministers and
   members of this church were setting about wrestling and prayer for the
   Lord's returning unto us by his Spirit, and endeavouring a personal and
   general reformation of all that is wrong among us, and in this way
   studying to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, with all
   lowliness, meekness and long suffering, forbearing one another in love!
   These things, if gone into, we hope would tend to the glory of God, the
   honour and welfare of this church, the credit of the holy ministry, the
   edification and comfort of the Lord's people, and the healing of our
   present miserable rents and breaches.
     __________________________________________________________________

ADVERTISEMENT.

   IT is fit the Reader should know, that the preceding Testimony was
   signed and sent to the press before the assembly 1744; otherwise some
   occurrencies, which have made some noise since that time, had been
   noticed in it, some of which I shall mention in a Postscript after the
   Adherence and subscriptions subjoined to this Testimony.

   Likewise it is proper to acquaint the Reader, (lest he be surprised
   with the paucity of the subscribers) that there were not very many who
   had opportunity to see and peruse the Testimony before it was
   published; and a great part of these who did see it, though they agreed
   to the scope and substance of it, in regard it contained their
   sentiments, yet they thought not proper to subscribe it upon some
   prudential considerations, which (with all submission) I cannot say
   have the same weight with me as with them. Yet at the same time l am
   bound in justice to own, that sundry of these are persons whom I highly
   value, and reckon to be real friends of truth and reformation as well
   as others. Wherefore, when I found things turn out in this manner, and
   not as I expected, I desisted from asking more subscriptions to this
   Testimony, which (as told in the Preface and in the Adherence) was not
   designed to be the badge of a party, or a term of communion.--But if
   any now, upon seeing and considering this Testimony when published,
   with the reasons for it, shall incline to join with it, and send their
   subscriptions to the Printer, with such form of Adherence, Exceptions
   or Amendments, as they think proper, they shall be taken in, and
   justice done them in a second Edition, if it be called for.

   As for these who have willingly offered their subscriptions to this
   Essay, I could not warrantably suppress them, though few, without their
   own consent. God may countenance the honest mints of a small number
   when he thinks fit. Wherefore I shall annex them here, with the form of
   Adherence which they agreed unto.
     __________________________________________________________________

ADHERENCE.

   WE, whose names are underwritten, having seen and considered the above
   Paper, called, A Fair and Impartial Testimony, &c. do hereby declare,
   That we think the scope and intention of it good, and that it doth
   express the sentiments of many ministers, elders and Christian people
   of the church of Scotland, concerning the principles, wrestlings and
   attainments of the said church, and concerning the defections,
   corruptions and evils therein mentioned. And in regard the said
   testimony seems to be drawn up with impartiality, plainness, and
   uprightness of design, not to be the badge a party, or a term of
   communion; but a banner for truth, a prompter to reformation, and the
   means of healing breaches: we humbly judge it needful and seasonable in
   this day of Backsliding and Division; hoping it may be useful for
   maintaining and preserving truth, purity and godliness in the present
   age, and for transmitting the same to posterity; and that it will
   either be some check to the progress of corruption, or a standing
   witness against it. Wherefore we join with the said Testimony in
   witnessing for the truhs, and against the evils therein, specified; and
   in pleading with our Mother to exert herself to stop Defection, and
   essay Reformation. And have subscribed these presents.

   Jo. Willison, M.A. Minister at Dundee.

   Jo. Gillies, M.A. Minister at Carraldstone.

   Jo. Row, M.A. Minister at Navare and Lethnot.

   Ja. Small, M.A. Minister at Carmylie.

   Dav. Blair, M.A. Minister at Brechin.

   Geo. Aitken, M.A. Minister at Montrose.

   Geo. Lyon, M.A. Minister at Longforgan.

   Geo. Marr, M.A. Minister at Murrose.

   George Peter, Elder.

   Gideon Rutherford, Elder.
     __________________________________________________________________

POSTSCRIPT.

   THE reason why some late occurrences are not noticed in the Testimony
   was given before.--Wherefore I must now add a word relating to some of
   them. And, 1^st, concerning Mr. Leechman's sermon on prayer, first
   published last year, which was quarrelled by the presbytery of Glasgow,
   and brought before the synod, and afterwards to the assembly this year
   1744. Had Mr. Leechman written what he saith in that sermon by way of a
   letter to a Deist or an enemy to prayer, in order to prove the
   reasonableness and advantages of prayer, it might have passed without
   observation: But for a preacher of Christ to deliver such a sermon to a
   Christian audience, that perhaps never heard him before, and might
   never hear him again, and to publish it too, in this form, to the whole
   world, is to me very surprising and offensive. For when he proposes to
   teach his Christian hearers and readers the nature of prayer, he
   presents God as the object of it merely as our Creator, without any
   relation to Jesus Christ the only Mediator betwixt God and man: he
   never speaks of God as upon a throne of grace, nor of the merit,
   satisfaction, or intercession of Christ, through which prayer call only
   be offered acceptably to God, more than the old Heathens; nor speaks he
   of the influence or assistance of the Holy Spirit, by which the duty is
   to be performed.--The disposition of mind which he chiefly recommends
   to his hearers, for acceptance with God, is all assured trust and
   confidence in the mercy and goodness of their Creator, without once
   telling them through all the sermon (which is long) of the channel
   through which God's mercy and goodness doth flow to men, or that he is
   a consuming Fire to sinners out of Christ. Nay, without noticing the
   Scripture account of the conveyance of Divine mercy, he asserts that
   these who pray, trusting in their Creator's mercy, shall be heard and
   accepted. See sermon, 2d edit. P. 7, 8, 10, 42.--I know it is said,
   that the preacher, notwithstanding these defects, is orthodox; and that
   he made sound declarations for the truth before the judicatories.--But
   in my humble opinion, let his after declarations when in hazard of
   censure be never so sound, yet the foresaid omissions in a printed
   sermon are so very culpable, and such a bad example to students of
   divinity in one that is their teacher, that the sermon ought to have
   been disapproven, the preacher admonished, all preachers warned against
   such a Christless way of preaching, and a warm recommendation given
   them to observe the 7^th act of assembly concerning Evangelical
   preaching: Nay, the presbytery of Glasgow deserve thanks for the pains
   they had taken to enquire into that sermon, in obedience to the said
   act of assembly, which enjoins all preachers to have special regard and
   eye to Christ in all their sermons, and presbyteries to see that they
   do it. Oh how worthless, lifeless, sapless and fruitless must all our
   preachings and prayers be, if precious Christ be left out of them!--Mr.
   Leechman's sermon is one instance, among many, to shew how too well
   grounded these fears are, which are expressed in the Testimony, p. 143,
   that the said act of assembly is but little regarded, and that the
   numbers are increasing of these who preach moral duties without
   relation to Christ, through whose strength all our duties are to be
   performed, and through whose righteousness they must be accepted.--And
   alas! it seems to portend little good to this poor church, when men so
   little versant in the Christian mediatory scheme, or so unaccustomed to
   evangelical preaching and teaching, are made professors of divinity,
   and intrusted with the education of young men for the holy ministry.
   Neither doth it bode well, when men, as soon as they acquire some title
   to a Professor's chair by the choice of a patron, or of laicks [people
   in distinction of clergy] of any sort, do straightway demit [resign]
   their pastoral charge, and push on their own translation to the chair,
   without any call or concurrence from the church--As that was not the
   practice of former times, so it looks too like the disallowed practice
   of these Prophets who ran before they were sent, Jer. xxiii. 21. A
   running, alas! that greatly abounds in this day! May the Lord in mercy
   put a stop to it!

   Another thing I must here notice: there is something dropt in the
   Testimony, p. 89. in favour of the 7^th act of assembly 1722, relating
   to the Marrow, &c. which act I see is heavily charged by the Associate
   Presbytery in their act concerning the doctrine of grace, which I had
   not occasion to read before the Testimony was sent to the press. I have
   now again read over the assembly's act, and upon second thoughts I
   shall not say it is so well worded as could be wished, or that the word
   causality is fit to be used in asserting the necessity of holiness to
   salvation: but I truly believe the meaning of the assembly of 1772 was
   sound, and their intention good, viz. to disapprove every opinion or
   expression that tended any way to slacken our obligation to the study
   of holiness; and the brethren have not just ground for their harsh
   censure of that assembly, because of their saying, in explaining the
   necessity of holiness for obtaining everlasting happiness, that it is
   to be meant only of obtaining the enjoyment and possession of
   happiness, and not of the right and title to it; and that it is
   dangerous to assert that holy obedience is not a federal or conditional
   mean, nor has any kind of causality in order to the obtaining of glory,
   as it seems to exclude all usefulness and influence of holy obedience,
   in order of means towards possession of heaven.--This last clause of
   the assembly's words doth plainly limit the sense in which they
   disapprove the foresaid assertion, viz. in so far as they seem to
   exclude the usefulness of holiness in order of means to salvation. Yet
   the brethren, without noticing that explanatory clause, do in their act
   concerning the doctrine of grace, published this year, declare that the
   assembly 1722, by their said 7^th act, have opened a wide door to
   Arminian and Socinian errors to overflow the church and land.--It is
   surprising that this heavy charge against that assembly has lien
   dormant for 22 years, until the most part of that assembly are in their
   graves; and that they did not openly complain of it at passing the act,
   but submitted and lived quietly in the communion of the church for many
   years hereafter. It is uncharitable to charge that assembly with
   holding opinions contrary to the doctrine of grace, when, in the very
   act they attack, the assembly profess a close adherence to our
   standards with respect to the doctrine of grace. And, from their own
   words, we have all reason to conclude they really did so, and that they
   held that Believers have complete salvation and happiness, both as to
   the title to it and possession of it, only through Christ and his
   purchase; and that their holiness here, which is a part of their begun
   salvation, is also a part of Christ's purchase, as well as eternal
   glory; seeing it is Christ that recovers the lost image of God to us,
   and restores that which he took not away. And that they held, that no
   believer hath any thing in himself, or of his own doing, to rest upon
   or glory in; but that he owes all to Christ, who has obtained the whole
   of our salvation, and every part and degree of it, by his blood and
   merit. That they held all this, is evident from several places of the
   said act of assembly 1722, wherein they assert, according to our
   standards, that "God in the covenant of grace freely offers to a sinner
   life and salvation by Jesus Christ, and promises and gives his holy
   Spirit to all the elect, to make them able and willing to believe and
   give holy obedience."--Also they assert,

     That God justifies us freely, not for any thing wrought in us or
     done by us, but for Christ's sake alone: not by imputing faith
     itself, the act of believing, or any other evangelical obedience, to
     us as our righteousness; but by imputing the obedience and
     satisfaction of Christ unto us only.

     That our repentance doth not make any satisfaction for sin, nor is
     any cause of the pardon thereof: That our best works can't any way
     merit eternal life: that it is a precious gospel truth, that
     believers are free from the law as it is covenant of works, so as
     thereby they are neither justified nor condemned, &c.

   From these and several other expressions of assembly 1722, we may
   justly conclude, that their meaning in the expressions quarrelled was
   sound, and they intended no hurt to the doctrine of grace: that they
   did not mean that a believer's holiness hath any causal influence or
   virtue to purchase heaven; but that it is necessary in order of means
   (as they speak) towards the possession of it, in regard that God
   requires holiness in every believer, as the means of preparing, and
   making him meet for possessing heaven. So that the assembly's sense is
   plainly this, That as Christ's righteousness is necessary in the way of
   merit and purchase for obtaining the believer's right and title to
   heaven, so holiness in a believer (which also Christ hath purchased) is
   necessary in the way of preparation and meetness for qualifying him for
   the possession of heaven. Now, we see, it is God himself that makes it
   so necessary, by fixing an inseparable connection betwixt holiness and
   happiness, declaring, Heb. xii. 14. that without holiness no man shall
   see the Lord. Wherefore, that our brethren after all this should pass
   such a severe censure against the assembly's doctrine, as opening a
   wide door for Arminian and Socinian errors, is very unjust and
   unbecoming the duty of children to their mother.--And it is yet more
   so, for them to assert (as they do in the same place, p. 41. without
   any proof for it) that Arminian and Socinian errors have actually
   overflown this church like a flood; whereas they may see a late act of
   assembly, as well as older acts, condemning all Arminian and Socinian
   errors, viz. act 7^th assembly 1736.--Had they charged some members of
   the church with such errors, the fault had been less; but to assert
   that a flood of Arminian and Socinian errors do overflow the church
   herself, as if all were covered with them, is a charge most terrible
   and shocking! I scarce have any words to answer to it, except to regret
   that any of the reverend and dear brethren, whom I must still regard,
   should allow themselves to go on in such a Latitudinarian way of
   speaking and calumniating their brethren. Some may think to excuse
   themselves, that it is from zeal for a good cause, and a design to
   promote the interest of Christ, that they speak so reproachfully of
   other ministers: but let such remember what Job said to his three
   friends when they took the same course, Job xiii. 7. Will you speak
   wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? After all, however
   ill-grounded this charge be, yet, seeing it comes from a body of men
   within the land, the church is called to take some course to vindicate
   herself and her doctrine, though it were no more but to maintain her
   credit among foreign churches. Surely such a bold charge from our
   brethren, with other considerations should at length rouse us, and
   prevail with the general assembly to fall in with the desire of many
   ministers and presbyteries, to give a testimony against these errors
   which abound in the land, to declare their abhorrence of them, and to
   give warning to all the ministers, preachers, and members of this
   church, to guard carefully against them, and against every appearance
   or approach of error.

   There is not room here to notice any other thing in the brethren's act
   concerning the doctrine of grace, in which though there be many
   precious truths, yet there are also some assertions too loose,
   unguarded, and even bordering too near the doctrine called Antinomian;
   which should be carefully avoided, as well as that called Neonomian.
   But notwithstanding of all these uncharitable sallies, unguarded
   assertions, and extravagant heights, which our brethren's desire to
   support their interest against the established church may drive them to
   at present; there is ground to expect, that, after calm and cool
   thinking, they will not approve themselves in these things, but will
   come at length to a more charitable temper, and shew regard to others
   whom they see to be sound in the faith, and zealous for the doctrine of
   grace as well as themselves. And considering our brethren's great
   resolution, and their zeal for the purity of doctrine, I would fain
   hope God will yet honour them to be useful for maintaining his truths,
   and make them a witnessing remnant for Calvinist principles, and the
   doctrine of grace, against all kinds of Pelagian and Arminian errors,
   which this backsliding age seem too much inclined to fall in with. Upon
   which account I still wish well to them.

   There is also joined with the foresaid act, another act for renewing
   the covenant's national and solemn league, with a new covenant of the
   brethren's framing, in which some things might be noticed: not that I
   quarrel the duty itself; No: I approve of covenanting work, whether it
   be national, presbyterial or congregational, when rightly managed and
   gone about; and I pray earnestly for a covenanting frame and
   disposition to the whole land. I likewise own, there are several
   excellent things in the brethren's covenant, which we are all bound to
   by the word of God and our national engagements; and also in their
   Confession of Sins, there are many evils enumerate, which all ranks
   amongst us ought to be deeply humbled for before the Lord: but, alas!
   they have marred their Confession, by throwing into it several things
   which either are doubtful, or else plain mistakes or falsehoods; and
   yet all these must be confessed and condemned as sins and evils, as if
   they were the most plain and undoubted facts, and that by a solemn
   oath: For their confession of sins (which is very long) is adopted and
   sworn to in their covenant. Yea, the Associate Brethren have carried
   this matter to a prodigious height, by making an act, dated at
   Edinburgh, February 14^th 1744, wherein they agree and determine, that
   the swearing the foresaid covenant shall be the term of ministerial
   communion with them, and likewise the term of Christian communion to
   the people, with respect to their partaking of the seals of God's
   covenant.--A surprising act indeed! This new oath and covenant of
   theirs is called in it, not a term but the term of Christian communion,
   as if it were the only qualification for admission required, and as if
   it answered for the want of others; and indeed there is not another
   qualification besides swearing this covenant mentioned in their act.
   Now, by this act, let a man be never so well qualified according to the
   terms Christ hath determined in his word, yet, if he have not freedom
   to go in to this term of the brethren's making, he must be excluded
   both from ministerial and Christian communion; that is, he must neither
   be owned as a minister of Christ, nor allowed any of the Children's
   bread, so far as their authority can go. Wherefore I cannot but testify
   against this act, as framing new terms and conditions of access to the
   benefits of Christ's purchase, for which the framers have no warrant in
   God's word; and therefore it must be a manifest usurpation and
   encroachment upon the Headship of the King of Zion, and an infringement
   upon that precious article of our Creed, the Communion of Saints; which
   is too much for any judicatory or power on earth to adventure upon.
   Though the foresaid oath were in things indifferent or lawful, yet it
   were unwarrantable to impose it as a term of communion, but much more
   when it is in things sinful, doubtful or false.

   Ques. How do you make it appear that the brethren's new oath and
   covenant (which they make the term of communion) is in itself sinful?

   Ans. Because by this oath they adopt and approve a Confession of sins
   prefixed to it, and swear by the great name of the Lord our God, with
   their right hand lifted up to the Lord, that they shall testify against
   the evils named in that confession, sundry of which are false in fact,
   calumnious, unjust and uncharitable; and yet, by the foresaid solemn
   oath, the takers own them to be real, just and true. As for instance,
   they swear that the general assembly dismissed Professor Simson without
   any censure or express testimony against his errors, p. 104. which is
   false.--Also, they swear that the taking the oath of abjuration is a
   national sin, p. 103. which they cannot make out. They swear that
   assembly 1736 adopted Professor Campbell's error against self love, p.
   106. which is false. They swear that assembly 1738 condemned the
   brethren's testimony in bulk, p. 107. which is not fact.--They swear
   that assembly 1739 condemned their Declinature, as containing nothing
   but groundless prejudices, p. 107. Which is not fact.--They swear that
   the kind reception of Mr. Whitefield hath increased the sins of the
   land, and is a denying any particular form of church-government as
   being of Divine institution, p. 109. which is false. They swear that a
   scheme is now laid for uniting parties of all denominations in
   church-communion, in away destructive of any testimony for Christ's
   declarative glory, p. 110. which they can never make appear. They swear
   that the blessed work in the West of Scotland is a delusion, p. 110.
   though it hath been demonstrate to have the plain Scripture tokens of a
   glorious work of the Spirit of God.--They also by their oath condemn
   all the old persecuted Presbyterian ministers, who accepted of the
   liberty of preaching the gospel, under king James's toleration, as
   involving the land in henious guilt:--Which is a most rash and
   uncharitable censure of these worthies, who were honoured to be great
   sufferers for truth, were men of eminent piety and tenderness of
   conscience, were signally owned of God in their ministry during that
   liberty, and never saw cause to repent of their accepting of it to
   their dying hour. And now, after these glorified saints and sufferers
   have for many years been triumphing before the throne of the Lamb, a
   heavy blot and slur must be cast upon their memory by a solemn oath;
   and they, who have not freedom to join in that calumnious oath, must be
   denied Christian communion: This indeed seems to be an act exceeding
   hard and tyrannical. Alas! there are thousands who are appointed to
   swear this oath, and the things above mentioned, besides many other
   things in it, who cannot say they know any thing of the truth of them
   from their own proper knowledge, but only have them by hearsay or by
   information from others: and yet they must swear to the truth of them
   as fully as if they had been eye or ear-witnesses of them, or had read
   all the histories concerning them. Now, what is this but to make people
   swear rashly or inconsiderately, or upon implicit faith? which is
   contrary to the Bible, that requires us to swear in truth, judgment,
   and righteousness, Jer. iv. 2. and also contrary to our Confession of
   Faith, which declareth, chap. 22. That whosoever taketh an oath, must
   avouch nothing therein, but that he is fully persuaded is the truth. O
   that God in mercy would open the eyes of those who impose this oath,
   and these who are drawn in or intend to take it, that they may bethink
   themselves, repent, and proceed no further! For because of swearing the
   land mourneth already, and there is no need to add to the grounds of
   this mourning.

   Likewise, in the foresaid oath and covenant, there are some things
   ambiguous, obscure and doubtful, which great numbers of the takers know
   not the meaning of, and so cannot swear them in judgment and
   righteousness; as for instance, when they abjure Independency and
   Latitudinary Tenets, these are words very general, dark and dubious, to
   which the imposers may affix any meaning they think proper. Now, seeing
   it is commonly granted that the words of an oath ought to be very clear
   and plain, and these which are dubious may be refused; what a cruel
   thing must it be to excommunicate all these sincere Christians and
   tender consciences who may scruple to swear either to or against what
   they know not! I am sure, there are many valuable ministers of Jesus
   Christ, and precious sons of Zion, whom Christ doth honour and admit to
   near communion with himself, who will not adventure to swear such an
   oath; and will our brethren, notwithstanding, take it on them to reject
   them as earthen pitchers, and refuse all communion with them? Oh, where
   have they their Master's warrant to act so, or to exclude his redeemed
   ones from his table, and the food he hath provided for them, for
   refusing an oath of their framing, containing so many things false,
   uncharitable and dark? when in the mean time these excluded persons
   appear evidently to be the Friends of Christ, whom he himself invites
   most heartily, saying to them, Cant. v. 1.--Eat, O friends; drink, yea,
   drink abundantly, O beloved.

   I acknowledge that our brethren appear and declare for many things
   valuable and excellent, for which I wish there were a true universal
   zeal throughout the land; but, when they mix so many other things
   choking with these in their Testimonies and Covenants, how can they
   expect that people of tender consciences should swallow them. Nay, by
   this way they give occasion to many to slight and speak evil of the
   precious things they stand up for.--My reverend brethren may believe
   (if they please) that I write not these things with any ill will
   against them, but out of love to them and others, to prevent more sin
   in the land, and to bring them, if possible, to a more moderate,
   charitable and Christ like temper, that they may be willing to break
   down these partition walls they are setting up between themselves and
   others of Christ's ministers and people. O how lamentable a thing is
   it, that orthodox and zealous preachers of Christ should be carried
   away to such extravagant heights, by the intemperate zeal and
   headstrong humours of others who join with them! that they should go
   about this manner to divide and distract the flock of Christ, and to
   rend and tear the members of his body one from another; yea, and to
   rear up partition walls in the midst of his church so high, that these
   upon one side cannot get over them to hold communion with the other! Is
   this good service to the Lord Jesus Christ! Is this the way to promote
   his cause and interest in the world? Is this the way to heal breaches
   and promote union among the true friends and lovers of Christ, which he
   makes the duty of all faithful gospel Ministers? Is not our glorious
   Master the prince of Peace? Hath he not said, Blessed are the peace
   makers? Was it not he that prayed for the union and peace of his
   church? Was it not he that recommended peace to us, and enjoined us to
   pray for the peace of Jerusalem? Let none mistake me, as if I were for
   peace on any terms; for they may see by the foregoing Testimony I am
   for truth as well as peace, and desire through grace to be zealous for
   both.

   Some, who have seen this Testimony, object, That it is not impartial
   with respect to Mr. Whitefield's success while he was in Scotland. The
   plain truth is, several things were said relative to it, where he is
   mentioned, p. 176, which were dropped to gratify some of the
   subscribers, who were not then satisfied as to the facts narrated. But,
   since that time I am well informed of the lasting good effects of his
   ministry upon not a few in and about Edinburgh and elsewhere, who once
   were careless and profane, but now are wonderfully changed and
   reformed, and still living as becometh Christians, persevering in the
   ways of the Lord; though at the same time I know no reason to make him
   the instrument of that extraordinary work at Cambulslang, Kilsyth and
   other places, but to ascribe it, under God, to the ministry of their
   own worthy pastors, whom God made instrumental both to begin and carry
   on that work a good time before Mr. Whitefield came to preach at any of
   these places. But seeing God hath honoured Mr. Whitefield's ministry in
   other nations and countries (though ordained a minister of the church
   of England) and also had opened his eyes so far, as to become Calvinist
   and sound in the doctrine of grace, and to witness against several
   corruptions of the English church, for which he was persecuted and
   under process; and seeing he had conformed to us in doctrine and
   worship, professed to lye open to instruction as to our constitution
   and government, and was come at length to assert openly Christ to be
   the King and Head of his church, and that the church of Scotland was
   the best constitute national church in the world; and also had wrote
   and said some other things that gave ground to hope that his eyes might
   soon be opened to see the evil of Prelacy; and in the mean time he was
   most indefatigable in preaching Christ to sinners, and remarkably owned
   of God in his ministry: To have refused a kind reception to a stranger
   and persecuted man, in such circumstances when he came among us, had
   neither been charitable nor generous. Now, for the brethren to make
   this reception such a sin, that none can be admitted to baptism or the
   Lord's supper without condemning it by a solemn oath, is most
   surprising; especially considering they were the first themselves who
   recommended him to the people of Scotland, and that in very strong
   terms! Surely it becomes us to be silent, and adore the sovereignty of
   the great God, in employing whom he will to promote his interest and
   kingdom in the world. If God think fit to make use of Mr. Whitefield or
   other Methodists to turn sinners from their evil ways, to seek after a
   Saviour, and God through him, we should not oppose it, but let them
   alone, lest haply we be found fighting against God. We must not limit
   an Agent that is infinitely wise and sovereign in his actings, who may
   raise up the instruments of his glory from churches and societies he
   pleases, and sometimes glorifies his free grace the more by bringing
   them from these airths it could have been least expected. And
   frequently God doth honour and employ some to awaken, convince, convert
   and reclaim sinners from their evil ways, who yet remain unenlightened
   all their days as to several points of truth themselves: witness Luther
   and many of our reformers. To confine an infinitely sovereign Lord to
   our ways and means of working in advancing his kingdom, is it sin most
   grieving and provoking unto God.--He makes it one of his greatest
   quarrels with his professing people in the wilderness, that they
   tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel, Psal. lxxviii. 41. It
   is fit then that we lay our hands upon our mouths, and adore him that
   doth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
   inhabitants of the earth: And none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
   what dost thou? Dan. iv. 35.

   I doubt not but some may quarrel me and this Testimony, for making too
   free with the Associate Brethren: but they may see I have been as plain
   and free with others, and even with the established church, relating to
   things I judge wrong; and this seemed to be necessary to render the
   Testimony the more impartial. But, after all, when I look inward, and
   view the sins of my own heart, and the sad corruption of my nature,
   besides outward defects; I have reason to blush and be ashamed to take
   notice of the sins and failings of others; and even to lie in the dust,
   and cry, Unclean, unclean; and with much self-abhorrence to look
   towards the blood of Jesus, that cleanseth us from all sin. May the
   holy Spirit apply it to me and the whole land!

   I shall now conclude with my interest wishes and prayers,

     that the Lord may excite a praying remnant, to wrestle and be
     importunate with him for sparing mercy to these guilty nations; and
     that he would revive a covenanted work of reformation through
     Britain and Ireland, and the dominions thereto belonging, from which
     these lands have wofully departed; and uphold and encourage all who
     breathe after reformation, and the coming of Christ's kingdom in the
     world; and even countenance more and more these instruments who,
     according to the light given them, labour with earnestness to awaken
     perishing sinners from their lost natural estate, to flee to a
     crucified Jesus for safety from sin and wrath; and, wherein any of
     them remain unenlightened, that the Lord would send out his light
     and truth, to lead them, and graciously deliver them from all
     mistakes, errors and corruptions whatsomever: That what they see
     not, the Father of lights may teach them, that so they may be
     honoured more and more to bring multitudes from following sinful
     courses, to the ways of true religion and gospel-holiness; and from
     resting on their own righteousness, or a form of godliness, to come
     and embrace him who is the Lord our Righteousness, and follow him
     whithersoever he goeth.

   And particularly,

     That the Lord would come and revive his work in Scotland, that once
     was famous through all the churches, and esteemed one of the most
     bright and shining, Candlesticks of Christ in the world, but now
     under a lamentable decay of zeal for pure religion and reformation;
     and that he would cause us remember with godly sorrow from whence we
     have fallen, repent, and do our first works.--That he would pity
     these who, Gallio-like, are indifferent and unconcerned about our
     defections, and the grounds of the Lord's controversy which he is
     pleading with the land, and awaken these who are at ease in Zion, in
     such a time, and would fain sit down, Issachar-like, and couch under
     the burden.--That he would come suddenly to his temple, even in a
     national way, and sit as a Refiner and Purifier of silver, and
     purify the sons of Levi, and cast out buyers and sellers out of his
     house.--That he would in mercy shut that door whereby a corrupt
     ministry enters into the church, and raise up a faithful, zealous
     and reforming ministry through the land, and make all ranks among us
     concerned to attain to the reforming spirits and dispositions of our
     fathers.--Oh! when shall we come their length in reformation!

     That the Lord would help us to bless him for his astonishing
     kindness to this land, in such a backsliding, withering and decaying
     time, in vouchsafing to water several spots of his vineyard here and
     there with the refreshing rain of his Spirit: And that he would
     continue, increase, and spread the shower, until the whole garden be
     watered; that so our dry ground may become a green pasture, and our
     wilderness blossom as the rose.--That in his free mercy he would
     forgive our ingratitude for former kindness, preserve us from the
     errors, power and cruelty of Papists, and avert these black clouds
     of wrath which now threaten us; and that, instead of pouring out the
     vials of indignation on us which we deserve, he would pour out a
     spirit of repentance and reformation upon all degrees of men from
     the highest to the lowest.--That amidst the reelings, shakings,
     backslidings and divisions of these times, he would preserve pure
     religion, and support all these who desire to cleave to the Lord
     Jesus, love him in sincerity, and witness for his truths and
     ways;--That he would encourage them under all their discouragements,
     and keep them from being carried down the stream of defection with
     others.--That he would unite the hearts and minds of all that desire
     honestly to witness against the evils of the day, and help them to
     temper their zeal with knowledge, wisdom and meekness; and
     graciously forgive all these who fail in this respect, rectify their
     mistakes, and honour them to be instruments of his glory in the
     land.

   This is and shall be the earnest prayer of

   Jo. Willison.

   July 9^th, 1744.

   This Adherence to this Testimony was signed at Hespieshaw in
   Teviotdale, on the 26^th of July 1744, by

   Tho. Hardie, Elder.
     __________________________________________________________________

POSTSCRIPT.

   Containing Remarks upon Mr. Leechman's sermon, and upon the Acts of the
   Associate Presbytery, concerning the doctrine of grace, and the
   renewing of the Covenants; and upon their act anent [regarding] the
   terms of Ministerial and Christian Communion, February fourteen, 1744.
   Together with some Observations relating to Mr. Whitefield's success
   while he was in Scotland. And, lastly, Some concluding wishes and
   ejaculations for pity to these lands, and for the revival reformation
   and true Christianity therein.

   FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.

   STATE OF PENSYLVANIA.

   Allegheny County.

   Rev. Jas. Graham

   Thomas Sans

   Thos. Ross

   Ino. Johnston, esq.

   Moses Dunsmore

   John Hughey

   Matthew Simson

   Jas. M'Elroy

   Johen Cole

   Henry Morrow

   John Irwin

   Robert Cunningham

   Ino. Cole

   Samuel Gray

   Thos. Tidball

   Jas. Cubbage

   Andrew M'Brinty

   Wm. Tidball, jr.

   John Given, jr.

   Jacob Cantreberry

   Samuel Davis, jr.

   Wm. Fife, sen.

   John Fife

   John Gilfillan

   Jas. M'Clelland

   Wm. Cochran

   John Morrow, sen.

   John Reed

   Wm. Denniston

   Adam Johnston

   James Kiddo

   Wm. Gazzam

   Wm. Lemon

   Rev. Ino. M'Clain, 25 cop.

   James B. Clow

   Daniel M'Entosh

   Samuel Purvis

   Robt. Patterson

   Benjamin Coe

   George Simers

   Ezekiel Miller

   George Lasely

   Elias Thomas

   Rev. Abraham Boyd

   Thos. White

   Samuel Hale Dearborn

   James Anderson.

   Armstrong County.

   John Boyd

   James Barr

   Timothy Lennington

   Adam Maxwell

   William Freeman

   Charles M'Elatohy

   George Ross

   George Long

   James Hill

   Ebenezer Davise

   Joseph Shields

   Thomas Hindman

   Thomas Feails

   David Hall

   David Reed

   James Clark

   James Emmit

   John M'Kean

   Neal Murry

   James Mathias, Jun.

   Thomas Johnston

   Thomas Taylor

   Samuel Orr

   Manasseh Coyle

   James Mathias, Sen.

   Hannah Barr

   Thomas Guthrie

   Harman Skiles

   Thomas Watson

   Robert M'Garraugh

   Alexander Guthrie

   John Wilkins

   John Wilson

   Henry Girts

   Beaver County.

   Rev. Nicholas Pittenger

   John Beer

   George M'Kean

   Robert Bovard

   George Delworth

   Thomas Rodgers

   Joshua Hartshorn

   Joseph Delworth

   Robert Semple

   Benjamin Eakright

   John Cory

   James Gorrel

   William Foulk

   John Kinney

   Benjamin Craig

   John Eakens

   Andrew Johnston

   Thomas Ramsey

   Thomas Taylor

   Thomas Dunlap

   Robert Clark

   William Epsy

   Daniel Hayden

   Joseph Hanna

   Daniel Kirkpatrick

   Caldwell Semple

   Thomas Hunter

   James Hamilton

   Thomas Hamilton

   James Louthan

   Oliver Mitchel

   Robert Johnston

   Alexander Hanna

   John Martin

   John Sharp

   William Scott

   David Potter, Esq.

   Thomas Barr

   Rev. Thos. E. Hughes

   William Hammond

   John Glasgow

   Wm. B. Laughlan

   Wm. Hartford

   James Hartford

   Alexander Carson

   Joseph Glenn

   John Walker

   James Amberson

   Rev. George Scott

   John Core

   Martha Cross

   Henry Singleton

   Robert Miller

   Robert Duck

   Hugh Cowan

   George Belif

   Hugh M'Cullough

   Hugh Skillin

   Thomas Sweney

   Samuel Searight

   James Ewing

   James Cummins

   David Gordon

   Butler County.

   Samuel Withrow

   James Hardy

   Samuel Porter

   Ephraim Harris

   James Shields

   David Bell

   Ambrose Kennedy

   Hugh Gilleland

   Robert M'Candless

   James Critchlow

   James Parks

   Joseph M'Ferran

   Robert Stewart

   John Kerr

   Robert Stewart, Sen.

   Samuel Stewart

   Ephraim Hunter

   Thomas Brandon

   William Sharp

   Maden Christy

   Rev. Alexander Cook, 16 copies.

   Washington County.

   Rev. Thomas Marquis, 24 copies.

   Abraham Scott

   Hugh Scott

   Hugh Scott

   Polly Warnock

   James Scott

   George Vaneman

   Rev. Andrew Gwin

   James Dawson

   Samuel Kerr

   Thornas Pamer

   Andrew Vaneman

   Rev. John M'Millian, 35 Copies.

   Rev. John Anderson, 12 copies

   Michael Law

   John Park

   John Hoge

   John Moor

   Alexander Bailey

   Edward Moore

   Wm. Flannagen

   Matthew Norris

   Hugh M'Candles

   Rev. J. Patterson

   Samuel Fleming

   James Justus

   Robert Coventry

   John Huston

   James Armstrong

   John Galloway

   Adam Armstrong

   Chistopher Carothers

   James Ewing

   John Kennedy

   Benjamin Crawford

   Elisha Macurdy

   James Dornon

   James Lee

   Thomas Hays

   Charles Provines

   Samuel M'Farlen

   George Adams

   Jane Glass

   Thomas Miller

   Hugh Gaston

   Hugh Montgomery

   David Lyle

   George Miller

   Simon Elliott

   William Lee

   Andiony M'Hory

   Fayette County.

   Rev. James Guthrie

   Dr. Benj. Stevens

   David Young

   Joseph Morrison, Esq.

   Enoch French

   William Hamilton

   Jacob Victor

   John P. Allen

   Andrew Lytle

   John Rogers

   Hugh Thompson

   Andrew Watts

   Samuel Finley

   William Crag

   James Allen

   Col. Joseph Torrence

   James Torrence

   William Espy

   Matthew Gaut, Esq.

   Robert Hutcheson

   Oliver Montgomery

   William Chain

   George Stewart

   Thomas Litle

   James M'Cormick

   Robert Smith, Esq.

   James Goudie

   John A. Cooley

   William Cunningham

   Joseph Hutcheson

   Charles Porter, Esq.

   Robert Baird

   James Miller

   Charles M'Clean

   James Veach

   William Rose

   Patrick Moore

   Richard Noble

   James Cunningham

   John Porter

   Aaron Torrence

   Nathaniel Breading

   Elijah Coleman

   Edward Randolph

   John M'Clean

   Abraham Littell

   Freeman Lewis

   Westmoreland County.

   Joseph Trimble

   Charles Stewart

   Hugh Love

   Jacob Haymaker

   Rev. Wm. Swan, 20 copies.

   Rev. Mr. Porter, 20 copies.

   Wm. G. Turner

   Rev. Wm. Wylie, 8 copies.

   Mercer County.

   Cyrus Riggs

   Price Dille

   Amos Robins

   David Condict

   Alexander M'Cracken

   Linkon Axtell

   David Axtell.

   Venango County.

   William Cooper

   John Gordon

   James Allen

   William Johnston

   John Martin

   Samuel Cooper

   James Adams

   James Scott

   David Blair.

   Indian County.

   John Ewing, 30 copies

   Adams County

   Rev. Wm. Paxton.

   Joseph M'Ginly

   Robert Harper

   Matthew Longwell

   Rev. D. M'Conaughy

   Samuel Knox, M.D.

   James Gallicher

   John M'Rankins

   Emmetsburgh, M.

   Rev. Patrick Davidson

   STATE OF VIRGINIA.

   Brooke County.

   John Edie

   Cornelius Aten

   Thomas Peterson

   Henry Pittenger

   John Critser

   John M'Millan

   Henry Silverthorn

   John Marshall

   Hugh Pugh

   Peter Peterson, Sen.

   Alexander Scott

   John Coulter

   James Smith

   William Speer

   Ebenezer Archer

   Rev. James Hughes, 24 copies.

   John Wylie

   Daniel M'Louid

   John Baker

   Francis M'Farland

   Elizabeth Majunker

   Morgantown.

   William M'Cleary

   STATE OF KENTUCKY.

   Nelson County.

   Archibald Cameron, 2 copies.

   John Magee, 2 copies

   Robert Allen, 2 copies

   STATE OF OHIO.

   Trumbull County.

   Rev. Wm. Wick

   Timothy Swan

   James Linn

   Alexander M'Giffey

   James Walker

   James Watson

   John Anderson

   Richard Vanfleet

   Sam. & Hugh Bryson, 8 copies

   Matthew Guy

   Samuel Tyler

   Robert Hamilton

   Daniel Monteith

   Matthew Scott

   Andrew Boyd

   Rev. Jonathan Leslie, Smithfield.

   Jefferson County.

   Rev. John Rea

   William Watt, 8 copies.

   James Black, 8 copies.

   John Wallace, 8 copies

   James Byers

   Robert M'Millan, 8 cop.

   Allen Leeper, Sen. 8 copies.

   Rev. James Snodgrass, 10 copies.

   Wm. M'Millan

   James Bailey

   Daniel Vanhorn

   Stuart M'Clave

   John Gillis, Sen.

   Aaron Allen

   Joseph Reed

   William Scott

   Andrew Dixon

   David M'Cutchen

   Thomas Barr

   Jacob Vanhorn

   James Lee

   John Lyons.
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX

   A Complimentary Subject Index to
   Willison's Testimony

   Compiler's note: This subject index is not exhaustive and meant only to
   supplement the "Contents" found in the work itself. When there is an
   indented list, either the first entry is of the same subject matter or
   the indented list that follows contains different subjects found on the
   same page. At times, subjects may occur more than once in the list. The
   list mainly follows the chronological sequence of pages and subjects
   found therein. Therefore, various subjects will be found more than
   once.

   GENERAL
   Preface iii
   Testimony 25
   Advertisement 210
   Adherence 211
   Postscript, 1^st 212
   Contents 231
   Postscript, 2^nd 234
   Subscriber's Names 235
   PREFACE
   Popishness ix, xxii
   Corruptions listed viii - ix
   Acts of Synods against corruptions xii
   Disregard of Synods xiii
   Ministers with no scruples of patronage or error xiv
   Men with no scruples for orthodoxy appointed as professors and masters
   xiv
   Acceptation of errors xv
   Luther & David Ps. cxix -- against loss of truth xix

   Truth not sacrificed to preserve peace

   Peace as Judgment
   xix
   Jeremiah 9:3; Rev. 21:8 xx
   War -- France & Spain xxi
   TESTIMONY
   Aurelius & Dioclesian persecutions 26
   Druids 26
   Paladius; Lollards of Kyle; Luther; Melanchthon; Patrick Hamilton 28

   John Wicliff; John Huss; Burning of Mr. Hamilton

   George Wishard; John Rough; Jon Knox;

   John Wilcock; Mr. Craig; John Erkine of Dun;

   Parliament & Reformation - Confession of Faith
   29
   Cromwell 40
   Invades and oppresses Scots 40
   Charles II -- King 1651 41

   Laws over the Church
   42

   Clarification of the original WCF 23 (This may be another incident
   [1649] after the 1647 ratification and exception stated by James
   Bannerman in his book,

   "The Church of Christ" p 179.)
   37ff.

   Death of James Guthrie -- 1660

   Decapitated and his head placed in one of the ports in the city of
   Edinburgh
   43
   Death penalty of Charles II against preachers 45
   Destruction of Family Worship 45
   Forced denunciation of vows 46
   Persecution to the death 47, 48
   Persecution by Magistrate 51
   Subscription etc. 57
   Qualifications for elder 61
   Colony to America 61
   Confessional Subscription 62; 79
   Minister visitation 64
   Schools 64
   Westminster Confession 23.3; 26.6 66
   Renewal of covenant vows by ministers 67 (bottom) ff.
   Sins against vows 68
   Civil Magistrate & Church -- tensions 69ff.

   Profaning of the Lord's Day

   that came with union with England

   Episcopal worship opposed
   71-74
   The abandonment of Family worship etc. 72
   Worship deteriorated 72-73; 75
   Humility of Divines under God's just punishment 75
   Power of Presbyterian ministers to purge scandalous and erroneous
   ministers 76
   Riots 85
   Security of the people found under King George--not God. 85
   Mr. James Webster against gross false teachings of Mr. Simson --
   Arminianism etc. 86
   Heresies stated in a way that they would seem consonant with the
   Westminster Standards 87

   Marrow of modern Divinity laid before 1620 Assembly

   Arguments from natural reason

   Exceptions detailed

   Rebuke of ministers not to teach false doctrine ignored

   Sermons watered down, old doctrine "harsh"
   88

   Church elects officers; Acts 1:15, 23; 6:2; 8:14; 13:3; 14:23; 16:9; 1
   Jn. 4:1; 2 Jn. 10
   93
   Christian choice of pastors 94,95, 98, 99, 103, 104

   Acts 6; 14:23 etc., original languages
   105
   Evils no longer sensed 95

   Unchristian contentions in judicatories

   Scattering of the flock

   Simonatical practices, effects of
   97
   National Covenant 98

   Patrons

   Church planting
   101, 102
   Rom. 12:1; 2 Cor. 5:20-10:1; Philemon 9,10; 1 Thess. 2:7 106, 107
   Rom. 14:13, 19, 21 107
   1 Jn. 4:1; Mt. 7:15-16 108
   2 Jn. 10; Acts 17:11; Jn. 10:4, 5 109
   Eusebeius, Turretine 109
   Wicked Shepherds, sheep scattering, Jer. 23:1-2 110

   Eze. 34

   God visits church with rebukes via attacks on her Constitution

   Independent schemes of church govt., new improvements

   Fault finding in the Confession

   Democracy
   111
   The Lord' rebuke 113
   Arian errors of Professor Simons still taught though he was forbidden
   to do so 115
   Disregard for the flock and the Lord's discipline 116
   Calls received apart from Presbyteries 118
   Inferior numbers for a quorum 119

   Reversal of unconstitutional acts

   Innovations in preaching
   120
   God's providence in causing leaders to act foolishly on measures 122

   Selection of pastors

   Multiple days used for examination of gifts, home visits, preaching by
   candidate
   127
   Causeless grounds for not calling a minister, appearance, doctrine,
   etc. 128
   No obligation to laws of men 129
   Protests against assembly, synod considered criminal 132
   National fasting 140
   Preaching against loose moral discourses & neglecting Christ 143

   Little of Christ in people

   Not much difference between heathen moralisms & preaching
   144
   Morality verses Christ's righteousness in preaching 145
   Preaching and the moral law 146

   Christ the only source of strength

   Moral preachers and presupposition of natural power
   147

   1 Cor. 1:18, 21, 24; 2:2; Acts 2:36, 37; 10:43, 44; 11:20-21 on
   preaching
   149

   Preaching

   Eloquent moralisms that exclude Christ

   Entertainment

   Christless moral sermons
   150

   Indicators of when God is about to leave a people

   God gives people up to lifeless moral sermons
   151

   Sermon applications

   Self love, law of nature sufficient for happiness
   152, 153
   Catechism revised with out approval 154

   Rebukes of the Lord, persistence in sin

   Act against Church censures by magistrate
   155

   Magistrate & power of the keys

   Contrary to Confession

   WCF 30.1,2; 23.3

   Erastianism
   156
   Headship of Christ, not upheld 157

   William Wishart

   Charitable toward heathens

   Soft proceedings against

   Innovative words on Confessional matters
   158

   Plain & ordinary sense of words necessary

   Heretics put orthodox sense in their words

   Rebuke to those who do not hold plains sense, Titus 1:3.
   159
   Zeal for truth &; humility needed toward an erring church 164

   Uncharitable attacks against weaker brethren

   Marking narrow failings, mistakes, magnifying errors instead of
   covering sins (as Christ enjoins)
   167
   Flock scattering by those overzealous for truth 168, 169

   Judicatories overturn foundation of govt.,

   make defections greater than they are
   170

   Episcopal Church

   Differ only in govt., defections of, drift into Arminianism, corruption
   of worship in, slide into Popish superstitions, middle state for souls
   after death, corruption of Lord's Supper (as sacrifice), absolution by
   priest, baptismal regeneration
   171

   Revivals

   1732 or 1733, Saltzburg Germany, conversion from Popish superstition,
   20,000 people, loss of worldly goods to enjoy pure preaching of gospel;

   1735 -1736, Moravia Germany;

   1736, Northampton New England, Jonathan Edwards
   173

   Revivals (cont.)

   Oxford England, Methodists,

   Whitefield, Gilbert Tennant
   175

   Revivals, errors in,

   Pretended visions, prophecy, great multitudes, great attainments, Satan
   leading into error
   176

   Praying societies in Edinburgh

   Whitefield in Scotland 1741, Cambuslang 1742
   176
   Psalm singing 176
   Revival, effects of 179
   Revival, opposition to by seceders zealous for truth 181
   1 Cor. 1:27 182

   Revival, reactions in

   Bodily faintings, ecstasies, exampes in Scripture--

   Dan. 8:27; 10:8, 9
   186
   Examples of effects of revival on Reformers 187
   Jonathan Edwards on revival 187

   Need for awareness of sin

   Strict subscription

   Against natural reason

   Trinity
   188

   Against:

   Popish inclinations

   Holy Days held equal to Lord's Day

   Arminianism, Pelagianism

   Doctrines that exalt self

   Self love

   Magistrates assuming power of keys

   Erastianism

   Toleration of sects

   Sacramental test
   189

   Against:

   Swearing by kissing gospels

   Those in denial of:

   National Church

   Confession

   Subordinate judicatories

   Maintaining independency

   Power of keys in hands of community not officers
   190

   Sins:

   Atheism

   Witchcraft

   Fortune

   Self seeking

   Neglect of Family worship
   191

   Sins (cont.)

   Opposition to Holy Spirit

   Forgetting God's mercies
   192

   Sins (cont.)

   Following men's teachings
   193

   Decaying zeal to uphold truth

   Misapplication of God's word

   Contempt of others who do not agree

   Natural reason above supernatural revelation

   Elevation of religion of nature

   Freewill

   Christ as moral pattern
   193
   Confession of Faith, outward consent to & scarce reading of 194
   Abuse of Lord's Day 195
   Parental neglect 196
   Ministers, unsent but go anyway 197
   Confession of Faith, warning against errorists not adhering to; WCF
   30.1, 2 202

   Remedies for unaccountable practices

   Presbyteries have free access to moderate
   203
   Church Planting 204

   Freedom to call minister without undue influence,

   Qualifications for ministers

   doctrine

   godliness

   experimental religion
   205
   Ruling elders 206
   Reproach on the Confession of Faith 220
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   2 Kings

   [1]24:3-4

   2 Chronicles

   [2]2   [3]34:33   [4]36:15-16

   Job

   [5]13:7   [6]30:15

   Psalms

   [7]38:8   [8]48:13   [9]78:5-7   [10]78:41   [11]88:15   [12]94:16
   [13]101:3   [14]102:18   [15]119   [16]119:72   [17]119:120   [18]145:4

   Proverbs

   [19]18:14

   Song of Solomon

   [20]5:1

   Isaiah

   [21]22:12   [22]43:10   [23]43:10   [24]43:12   [25]44:8   [26]58:1

   Jeremiah

   [27]3:22   [28]4:2   [29]6:15   [30]8:12   [31]9:3   [32]9:3
   [33]11:10-11   [34]14:3   [35]22:7-9   [36]23:1-2   [37]23:1-2
   [38]23:21   [39]30:11

   Ezekiel

   [40]8:19   [41]34   [42]43:11   [43]43:11

   Daniel

   [44]4:35   [45]5:6   [46]8:27   [47]8:27   [48]10:8-9

   Hosea

   [49]13:5-7

   Amos

   [50]8:2-3

   Micah

   [51]3:11-12

   Habakkuk

   [52]3:16

   Matthew

   [53]7:15-16   [54]7:15-16   [55]10:32

   Luke

   [56]24:48

   John

   [57]5:33   [58]10:4-5   [59]10:4-5   [60]15:27

   Acts

   [61]1:8   [62]1:13-15   [63]1:15   [64]1:15   [65]1:23   [66]2
   [67]2:14   [68]2:36-37   [69]2:36-37   [70]6   [71]6   [72]6:2
   [73]6:2   [74]8:14   [75]8:14   [76]9   [77]10:40   [78]10:43-44
   [79]10:44   [80]11:20-21   [81]11:20-21   [82]13:3   [83]13:3
   [84]14:23   [85]14:23   [86]14:23   [87]14:23   [88]16:9   [89]16:9
   [90]16:29-30   [91]17:11   [92]17:11   [93]22:15   [94]22:18
   [95]24:25   [96]26:19

   Romans

   [97]12:1   [98]12:1   [99]14:13   [100]14:13   [101]14:19
   [102]14:19   [103]14:21   [104]14:21

   1 Corinthians

   [105]1:18   [106]1:18   [107]1:21   [108]1:21   [109]1:24   [110]1:24
   [111]1:27   [112]2:2   [113]2:2   [114]2:2   [115]14:24-25

   2 Corinthians

   [116]5:20   [117]5:20-10:1   [118]8:19   [119]10:1   [120]12:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [121]2:7   [122]2:7   [123]2:11

   Titus

   [124]1:3   [125]1:13

   Philemon

   [126]1:9   [127]1:9-10   [128]1:10

   Hebrews

   [129]12:6   [130]12:14

   1 John

   [131]4:1   [132]4:1   [133]4:1   [134]4:1

   2 John

   [135]1:10   [136]1:10   [137]1:10   [138]1:10

   Jude

   [139]1:3

   Revelation

   [140]2:2   [141]2:2   [142]2:14-15   [143]2:14-16   [144]2:20
   [145]3:11   [146]11:3   [147]11:7   [148]12:11   [149]21:8   [150]21:8
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Christus est summus Deus: [151]1
     * cum grano salis: [152]1
     * cum suffragiis creassent: [153]1
     * in cumulo: [154]1
     * in verbo principis: [155]1
     * per suffragia creassent: [156]1
     * summus Deus: [157]1 [158]2
     * vinculum pacis: [159]1
     * vinculum veritatis: [160]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [161]iv  [162]v  [163]vi  [164]vii  [165]viii  [166]ix  [167]x
   [168]xi  [169]xii  [170]xiii  [171]xiv  [172]xv  [173]xvi  [174]xvii
   [175]xviii  [176]xix  [177]xx  [178]xxi  [179]xxii  [180]xxiii
   [181]xxiv  [182]26  [183]27  [184]28  [185]29  [186]30  [187]31
   [188]32  [189]33  [190]34  [191]35  [192]36  [193]37  [194]38  [195]39
   [196]40  [197]41  [198]42  [199]43  [200]44  [201]45  [202]46  [203]47
   [204]48  [205]49  [206]50  [207]51  [208]52  [209]53  [210]54  [211]55
   [212]56  [213]57  [214]58  [215]59  [216]60  [217]61  [218]62  [219]63
   [220]64  [221]65  [222]66  [223]67  [224]68  [225]69  [226]70  [227]71
   [228]72  [229]73  [230]74  [231]75  [232]76  [233]77  [234]78  [235]79
   [236]80  [237]81  [238]82  [239]83  [240]84  [241]85  [242]86  [243]87
   [244]88  [245]89  [246]90  [247]91  [248]92  [249]93  [250]94  [251]95
   [252]96  [253]97  [254]98  [255]99  [256]100  [257]101  [258]102
   [259]103  [260]104  [261]105  [262]106  [263]107  [264]108  [265]109
   [266]110  [267]111  [268]112  [269]113  [270]114  [271]115  [272]116
   [273]117  [274]118  [275]119  [276]120  [277]121  [278]122  [279]123
   [280]124  [281]125  [282]126  [283]127  [284]128  [285]129  [286]130
   [287]131  [288]132  [289]133  [290]134  [291]135  [292]136  [293]137
   [294]138  [295]139  [296]140  [297]141  [298]142  [299]143  [300]144
   [301]145  [302]146  [303]147  [304]148  [305]149  [306]150  [307]151
   [308]152  [309]153  [310]154  [311]155  [312]156  [313]157  [314]158
   [315]159  [316]160  [317]161  [318]162  [319]163  [320]164  [321]165
   [322]166  [323]167  [324]168  [325]169  [326]170  [327]171  [328]172
   [329]173  [330]174  [331]175  [332]176  [333]177  [334]178  [335]179
   [336]180  [337]181  [338]182  [339]183  [340]184  [341]185  [342]186
   [343]187  [344]188  [345]189  [346]190  [347]191  [348]192  [349]193
   [350]194  [351]195  [352]196  [353]197  [354]198  [355]199  [356]200
   [357]201  [358]202  [359]203  [360]204  [361]205  [362]206  [363]207
   [364]208  [365]209  [366]210  [367]211  [368]212  [369]213  [370]214
   [371]215  [372]216  [373]217  [374]218  [375]219  [376]220  [377]221
   [378]222  [379]223  [380]224  [381]225  [382]226  [383]227  [384]228
   [385]229  [386]230  [387]231
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=3#iv-p37.1
   2. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p35.1
   3. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=34&scrV=33#iv-p72.1
   4. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=36&scrV=15#iv-p215.1
   5. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=13&scrV=7#vii-p5.2
   6. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=30&scrV=15#iv-p196.9
   7. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=8#iv-p196.10
   8. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=13#iii-p8.4
   9. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=5#iii-p8.1
  10. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=41#vii-p12.1
  11. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=15#iv-p196.12
  12. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=16#iii-p9.4
  13. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=3#i-p32.1
  14. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=18#iii-p8.3
  15. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#xi-p4.57
  16. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=72#iii-p28.1
  17. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=120#iv-p196.11
  18. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=4#iii-p8.2
  19. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=14#iv-p196.14
  20. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii-p10.1
  21. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=12#iv-p215.2
  22. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#i-p33.1
  23. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#iii-p7.12
  24. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=12#iii-p7.12
  25. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=8#iii-p7.13
  26. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=1#i-p35.1
  27. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv-p216.2
  28. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii-p9.1
  29. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iv-p215.3
  30. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iv-p215.4
  31. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iii-p32.1
  32. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=3#xi-p6.4
  33. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=10#iv-p215.5
  34. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iv-p196.8
  35. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=22&scrV=7#iv-p215.6
  36. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iv-p122.1
  37. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=1#xi-p30.29
  38. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=21#vii-p1.1
  39. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=30&scrV=11#iii-p34.1
  40. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=19#iii-p29.1
  41. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=0#xi-p31.1
  42. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=43&scrV=11#i-p34.1
  43. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=43&scrV=11#iii-p8.5
  44. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=35#vii-p12.2
  45. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv-p196.7
  46. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=8&scrV=27#iv-p197.1
  47. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=8&scrV=27#xi-p85.1
  48. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=8#iv-p197.2
  49. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iv-p215.9
  50. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iv-p215.7
  51. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv-p215.8
  52. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p196.13
  53. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=15#xi-p30.16
  54. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iv-p120.2
  55. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iii-p9.2
  56. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=48#iii-p7.3
  57. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=33#iii-p7.4
  58. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=4#xi-p30.22
  59. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iv-p120.5
  60. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=27#iii-p7.5
  61. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii-p7.6
  62. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv-p116.1
  63. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv-p98.1
  64. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xi-p24.1
  65. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=23#xi-p24.1
  66. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p196.1
  67. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv-p196.2
  68. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=36#iv-p164.2
  69. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=36#xi-p44.3
  70. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv-p117.1
  71. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xi-p25.1
  72. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv-p98.2
  73. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=2#xi-p24.2
  74. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=14#iv-p98.3
  75. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=14#xi-p24.3
  76. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv-p196.3
  77. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=40#iv-p164.3
  78. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=43#xi-p44.4
  79. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=44#iv-p164.3
  80. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=20#iv-p164.4
  81. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=20#xi-p44.5
  82. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iv-p98.4
  83. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=3#xi-p24.4
  84. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iv-p98.5
  85. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iv-p118.1
  86. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=23#xi-p24.5
  87. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=23#xi-p25.2
  88. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iv-p98.6
  89. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=9#xi-p24.6
  90. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=29#iv-p196.4
  91. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#xi-p30.21
  92. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iv-p120.4
  93. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iii-p7.7
  94. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iii-p7.7
  95. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=25#iv-p196.6
  96. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=19#iii-p7.8
  97. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv-p119.1
  98. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xi-p30.4
  99. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=13#iv-p119.6
 100. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=13#xi-p30.11
 101. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=19#iv-p119.6
 102. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=19#xi-p30.11
 103. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iv-p119.6
 104. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#xi-p30.11
 105. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv-p163.2
 106. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xi-p44.1
 107. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv-p163.2
 108. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xi-p44.1
 109. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv-p163.2
 110. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#xi-p44.1
 111. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xi-p82.13
 112. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv-p155.1
 113. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv-p164.1
 114. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xi-p44.2
 115. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=24#iv-p196.5
 116. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv-p119.2
 117. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xi-p30.5
 118. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=19#iv-p118.4
 119. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv-p119.3
 120. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iv-p112.1
 121. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv-p119.5
 122. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xi-p30.7
 123. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv-p119.5
 124. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xi-p65.1
 125. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv-p174.1
 126. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xi-p30.6
 127. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv-p119.4
 128. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xi-p30.6
 129. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv-p146.1
 130. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vii-p5.1
 131. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv-p98.7
 132. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv-p120.1
 133. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xi-p24.7
 134. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xi-p30.15
 135. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xi-p30.20
 136. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv-p98.8
 137. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv-p120.3
 138. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xi-p24.8
 139. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p7.10
 140. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii-p9.1
 141. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv-p72.2
 142. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv-p72.3
 143. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii-p9.3
 144. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv-p72.3
 145. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iii-p7.9
 146. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii-p7.2
 147. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=7#iii-p7.2
 148. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii-p7.11
 149. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#iii-p32.3
 150. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#xi-p6.5
 151. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p124.1
 152. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p124.2
 153. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p118.2
 154. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p90.2
 155. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p21.1
 156. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p118.3
 157. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p124.3
 158. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p124.4
 159. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p208.1
 160. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-p208.2
 161. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_iv
 162. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_v
 163. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_vi
 164. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_vii
 165. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_viii
 166. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_ix
 167. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_x
 168. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xi
 169. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xii
 170. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xiii
 171. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xiv
 172. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xv
 173. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xvi
 174. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xvii
 175. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xviii
 176. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xix
 177. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xx
 178. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xxi
 179. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xxii
 180. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xxiii
 181. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iii-Page_xxiv
 182. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_26
 183. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_27
 184. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_28
 185. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_29
 186. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_30
 187. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_31
 188. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_32
 189. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_33
 190. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_34
 191. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_35
 192. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_36
 193. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_37
 194. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_38
 195. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_39
 196. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_40
 197. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_41
 198. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_42
 199. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_43
 200. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_44
 201. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_45
 202. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_46
 203. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_47
 204. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_48
 205. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_49
 206. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_50
 207. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_51
 208. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_52
 209. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_53
 210. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_54
 211. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_55
 212. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_56
 213. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_57
 214. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_58
 215. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_59
 216. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_60
 217. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_61
 218. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_62
 219. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_63
 220. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_64
 221. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_65
 222. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_66
 223. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_67
 224. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_68
 225. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_69
 226. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_70
 227. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_71
 228. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_72
 229. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_73
 230. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_74
 231. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_75
 232. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_76
 233. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_77
 234. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_78
 235. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_79
 236. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_80
 237. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_81
 238. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_82
 239. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_83
 240. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_84
 241. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_85
 242. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_86
 243. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_87
 244. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_88
 245. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_89
 246. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_90
 247. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_91
 248. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_92
 249. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_93
 250. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_94
 251. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_95
 252. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_96
 253. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_97
 254. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_98
 255. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_99
 256. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_100
 257. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_101
 258. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_102
 259. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_103
 260. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_104
 261. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_105
 262. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_106
 263. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_107
 264. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_108
 265. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_109
 266. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_110
 267. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_111
 268. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_112
 269. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_113
 270. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_114
 271. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_115
 272. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_116
 273. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_117
 274. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_118
 275. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_119
 276. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_120
 277. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_121
 278. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_122
 279. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_123
 280. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_124
 281. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_125
 282. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_126
 283. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_127
 284. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_128
 285. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_129
 286. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_130
 287. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_131
 288. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_132
 289. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_133
 290. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_134
 291. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_135
 292. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_136
 293. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_137
 294. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_138
 295. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_139
 296. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_140
 297. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_141
 298. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_142
 299. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_143
 300. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_144
 301. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_145
 302. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_146
 303. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_147
 304. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_148
 305. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_149
 306. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_150
 307. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_151
 308. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_152
 309. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_153
 310. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_154
 311. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_155
 312. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_156
 313. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_157
 314. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_158
 315. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_159
 316. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_160
 317. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_161
 318. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_162
 319. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_163
 320. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_164
 321. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_165
 322. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_166
 323. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_167
 324. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_168
 325. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_169
 326. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_170
 327. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_171
 328. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_172
 329. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_173
 330. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_174
 331. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_175
 332. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_176
 333. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_177
 334. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_178
 335. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_179
 336. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_180
 337. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_181
 338. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_182
 339. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_183
 340. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_184
 341. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_185
 342. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_186
 343. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_187
 344. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_188
 345. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_189
 346. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_190
 347. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_191
 348. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_192
 349. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_193
 350. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_194
 351. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_195
 352. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_196
 353. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_197
 354. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_198
 355. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_199
 356. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_200
 357. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_201
 358. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_202
 359. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_203
 360. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_204
 361. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_205
 362. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_206
 363. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_207
 364. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_208
 365. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#iv-Page_209
 366. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#v-Page_210
 367. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#v-Page_211
 368. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vi-Page_212
 369. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_213
 370. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_214
 371. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_215
 372. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_216
 373. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_217
 374. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_218
 375. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_219
 376. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_220
 377. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_221
 378. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_222
 379. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_223
 380. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_224
 381. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_225
 382. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_226
 383. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_227
 384. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_228
 385. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_229
 386. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_230
 387. file:///ccel/w/willison/testimony/cache/testimony.html3#vii-Page_231
