     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Lectures to Professing Christians
      Creator(s): Finney, Charles G. (1792-1875)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

  Lectures to Professing Christians

      by

  CHARLES G. FINNEY

      1878 version
     __________________________________________________________________

   THESE: Lectures to Professing Christians, by President Finney, were
   delivered in the City of New York during the years 1836 and 1837.

   Notes of them were taken by the editor of the New York Evangelist as
   they were delivered. They were afterward revised by the author and
   printed in book form and many thousands sold. They were also printed in
   England. The book has been out of print in this country for years The
   frequent calls for it, and the hope of increasing the usefulness of
   these lectures have, led me to give them anew to the public. E. J. G.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
      James 1:22.

   There are two extremes in religion, equally false and equally fatal.
   And there are two classes of hypocrites that occupy these two extremes.
   The first class make religion to consist altogether in the belief of
   certain abstract doctrines, or what they call faith, and lay little or
   no stress on good works. The other class make religion to consist
   altogether in good works, (I mean, dead works) and lay little or no
   stress on faith in Jesus Christ, but hope for salvation by their own
   deeds. The Jews belonged generally to the last-mentioned class. Their
   religious teachers taught them that they would be saved by obedience to
   the ceremonial law. And therefore, when Paul began to preach, he seems
   to have attacked more especially this error of the Jews. He was
   determined to carry the main question, that men are justified by faith
   in Jesus Christ, in opposition to the doctrine of the scribes and
   pharisees, that salvation is by obedience to the law. And he pressed
   that point so earnestly, in his preaching and in his epistles, that he
   carried it, and settled the faith of the church in the great doctrine
   of justification by faith. And then certain individuals in the church
   laid hold of this doctrine and carried it to the opposite extreme, and
   maintained that men are saved by faith altogether, irrespective of
   works of any kind. They overlooked the plain principle, that genuine
   faith always results in good works, and is itself a good work.

   I said that these two extremes, that which makes religion to consist
   altogether in outward works and that which makes it consist altogether
   in faith, are equally false and equally fatal. Those who make religion
   consist altogether in good works, overlook the fact that works
   themselves are not acceptable to God unless they proceed from faith.
   For without faith it is impossible to please him. And those who make
   religion consist altogether in faith, overlook the fact that true faith
   always works by love, and invariably produces the works of love.

   They are equally fatal, because, on the one hand, without faith persons
   cannot be pardoned or justified; and on the other, without
   sanctification they cannot be fitted either to the employments or
   enjoyments of heaven. Let a sinner turn from his sins altogether, and
   suppose his works to be as perfect as he thinks them to be, and yet he
   could not be pardoned without faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ.
   And so if any one supposed that he could be justified by faith while
   his works were evil, he ought to know that without sanctification his
   faith is but dead, and cannot even be the instrument of his
   justification.

   It appears that the apostle James, in this epistle, designed to put
   this matter upon the right ground, and show exactly where the truth
   lay, and to explain the necessity, and reason of the necessity, of both
   faith and good works. This epistle is a very practical one, and it
   meets full in the face all the great practical questions of the day,
   and decides them.

   Doctrines in religion are of two classes, those which refer to God, and
   those which refer to human practice. Many confine their idea of
   religious doctrines to the former class. They think nothing is properly
   called doctrine but what respects God, his attributes, mode of
   existence, decrees, and so on. When I gave notice that I should
   commence a course of "Practical Lectures," I hope you did not
   understand me to mean that the lectures would not be doctrinal, or
   would have no doctrine in them. My design is to preach, if the Lord
   will, a course of lectures on practical doctrines. The doctrine which I
   propose to consider now, is this that professor of religion who does
   not practice what he admits to be true, is self-deceived.

   There are two classes of hypocrites among professors of religion, those
   that deceive others and those that deceive themselves. One class of
   hypocrites are those that, under a specious outside of morality and
   religion, cover up the enmity of their hearts against God, and lead
   others to think they are very pious people. Thus the pharisees obtained
   the reputation of being remarkably pious, by their outside show of
   religion, their alms and their long prayers. The other class is that
   referred to in the text, who do not deceive others but themselves.

   These are orthodox in sentiment, but loose in practice. They seem to
   suppose religion to consist in a parcel of notions, without regard to
   practice, and thus deceive themselves by thinking they are good
   Christians while destitute of true holiness. They are hearers of the
   word but not doers. They love orthodox preaching, and take great
   pleasure in hearing the abstract doctrines of religion exhibited, and
   perhaps have fights of imagination and glowing feelings in view of the
   character and government of God, but they are not careful to practice
   the precepts of God's word, nor are they pleased with the preaching of
   those doctrines which relate to human practice.

   Perhaps there are some present tonight of both these classes of
   hypocrites. Now mark! I am not going to preach tonight to those of you
   who, by great strictness of morals and outside show of religion,
   deceive others. I address, now, those of you who do not practice what
   you know to be true who are hearers and not doers. Perhaps I had better
   say, to secure attention, that it is very probable there are a number
   here now of this character. I do not know your names; but I wish you to
   understand, that if you are that character, you are the persons I am
   speaking to, just as if I called out your names. I mean you. You hear
   the word, and believe it in theory, while you deny it in practice. I
   say to you, that "you deceive yourselves." The text proves it. Here you
   have an express "Thus saith the Lord" for it, that all such characters
   are self-deceivers. I might quote a number of other passages of
   scripture, that are to the point, and there leave it. But I wish to
   call your attention to some other considerations beside the direct
   scripture testimony. In the first place, you do not truly believe the
   word. You hear it, and admit it to be true, but you do not truly
   believe it. And here let me say, that persons are themselves liable to
   deception on this point. Not that their consciousness deceives them,
   but they do not understand what it is that consciousness testifies.

   Two things are indispensable to evangelical, or saving faith. The first
   is intellectual conviction of the truth of a thing. And here I do not
   mean merely the abstract truth of it, but in its bearing on you. The
   truth, in its relation to you, or its bearing on your conduct, must be
   received intellectually. And then true faith includes a corresponding
   state of the heart. This always enters into the essence of true faith.
   When a man's understanding is convinced, and he admit the truth in its
   relation to himself, then there must be a hearty approbation of it in
   its bearing or relation to himself. Both these states of mind are
   indispensable to truth faith. Intellectual conviction of the truth is
   not saving faith. But intellectual conviction, then accompanied with a
   corresponding state of the affections, is saving faith Hence it follows
   that where there is true saving faith, there is always corresponding
   conduct. The conduct always follows the real faith. Just as certain as
   the will controls the conduct, men will act as they believe. Suppose I
   say to a man, Do you believe this? "Yes, I believe it." What does he
   mean? A mere intellectual conviction? He may have that and yet not have
   faith.

   A man may even feel an approbation of an abstract truth. This is what
   many persons suppose to be faith the approbation which they feel for
   the character and government of God, and for the plan of salvation,
   when viewed abstractedly. Many persons, when they hear an eloquent
   sermon on the attributes or government of God, are set all in a glow at
   the excellency displayed, when they have not a particle of true faith.
   I have heard of an infidel, who would be moved even to ecstasy at such
   themes. The rational mind is so constituted that it naturally and
   necessarily approves of truth when viewed abstractedly.

   The wickedest devils in hell love it, if they can see it without its
   relation to themselves. If they could see the gospel without any
   relation that interferes with their own selfishness, they would not
   only see it to be true, but would heartily approve of it. All hell, if
   they could view God in his absolute existence, without any relation to
   themselves, would heartily approve his character. The reason why wicked
   men and devils hate God is, because they see him in relation to
   themselves. Their hearts rise up in rebellion, because they see him
   opposed to their selfishness.

   Here is the source of a grand delusion among men in regard to religion.
   They see, it to be, true, and they really rejoice in contemplating it;
   they do not enter into its relation to themselves, and so they love to
   hear such preaching, and say they are fed by it. But mark! They go away
   and do not practice. See that man! he is sick, and his feelings are
   tender. In view of Christ, as a kind and tender Savior, his heart melts
   and he feels strong emotions of approbation towards Jesus Christ. Why?
   For the very same reasons that he would feel strong emotions toward the
   hero of a romance. But he does not obey Christ. He never practices one
   thing out of obedience to Christ, but views him abstractedly, and is
   delighted with his glorious and lovely character, while he himself
   remains in the gall of bitterness. Thus it is apparent that your faith
   must be an efficient faith, such as regulates your practice and
   produces good works, or it is not the faith of the gospel, it is no
   real faith at all.

   Again. It is further manifest that you are deceiving yourselves,
   because all true religion consists in obedience. And therefore, however
   much you may approve of Christianity, you have no religion unless you
   obey it. In saying that all religion consists in obedience, I do not
   mean outward obedience. But faith itself, true faith, work by love, and
   produces corresponding action. There is no real obedience but the
   obedience of the heart; love is the fulfilling of the law; and religion
   consists in the obedience of the heart, with a corresponding course of
   life. The man, therefore, who hears the truth, and approves it, and
   does not practice it, deceiveth himself. He is like the man beholding
   his natural face in a glass; for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his
   way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of a man he was.

   Again. That state of mind which you mistake for religion, an
   intellectual conviction of truth, and approval of it in the abstract,
   so far from being evidence that you pious, is as common to the wicked
   as to be good, whenever they can be brought to look at it abstractedly.
   This is the reason why it is often so difficult to convince sinners
   that they are opposed to God and his truth. Men are so constituted that
   they do approve of virtue, and do admire the character and government
   of God, and would approve and admire every truth in the Bible, if they
   could view it abstractedly, and without any relation to themselves. And
   when they sit under preaching that holds up the truth in such a way,
   that it has not much of a practical bearing on themselves, they may sit
   for years and never consider that they are opposed to God and his
   government.

   And I am more and more persuaded, that great multitudes are to be found
   in all our congregations, where the abstract doctrines of the gospel
   are much preached, who like the preaching and like to hear about God,
   and all these things, and yet are unconverted. And no doubt multitudes
   of them get into the churches, because they love orthodox preaching,
   when, after all, it is manifest that they are not doers of the word.
   And here is the difficulty; they have not had that searching preaching
   that made them see the truth in its bearing on themselves. And now they
   are in the church, whenever the truth is preached in its practical
   relation to them, they show the enmity of their hearts unchanged, by
   rising up in opposition to truth.

   They took it for granted that they were Christians, and so joined the
   church, because they could hear sound doctrinal preaching and approve
   of it, or because they read the Bible and approved of it.

   If their faith be not so practical as to influence their conduct, if
   they do not view the truth in its relation to their own practice, their
   faith does not affect them so much as the FAITH OF THE DEVIL.

    REMARKS

  1. Great injury has been done by false representations regarding the
  wickedness of real Christians.

   A celebrated preacher, not long since, is said to have given this
   definition of a Christian "A little grace and a great deal of devil." I
   utterly deny this definition. It is false and ruinous. A great deal is
   said that makes an impression that real Christians are the wickedest
   beings of the face of the earth. It is true that when they do sin, they
   incur great guilt. For a Christian to sin is highly criminal. And it is
   also true that enlightened Christians see in their sins great
   wickedness. When they compare their obligations with their lives, they
   are greatly humbled, and express their humility in very strong
   language. But it is not true that they are as bad as the devil, or
   anywhere in the neighborhood of it. This is perfectly demonstrable.
   When they do sin, their sins have great aggravation, and appear
   extremely wicked in the sight of God. But to suppose that men are real
   Christians while they live in the service of the devil, and have little
   of even the appearance of religion, is a sentiment that is not only
   false but of very dangerous tendency. It is calculated to encourage all
   that class of hypocrites who are Antinomians, and to encourage
   backsliders, as well as to do a great injury to the cause of Christ in
   the estimation of scorners. The truth is those who do not obey God are
   not Christian. The contrary doctrine is ruinous to the churches, by
   filling them up with multitudes whose claim to piety depends on their
   adoption of certain notions, while they never heartily intended to obey
   the requirements of the gospel in their lives.

  2. Those who are so much more zealous for doctrines than for practice, and who
  lay much more stress on that class of doctrines which relate to God than on
  that class which relate to their own conduct, are Antinomians.

   There are many who will receive that class of the doctrines of the
   Bible that relate to God and approve and love them, who have not a
   particle of religion. Those who are never "fed," as they call it, on
   any preaching but that of certain abstract points of doctrine, are
   Antinomians. They are the very persons against whom the apostle James
   wrote this epistle. They make religion to consist in a set of notions,
   while they do not lead holy lives.

  3. That class of professors of religion who never like to hear about God or
  his attributes, or mode of existence, the Trinity, decrees, election, and the
  like, but lay all stress in religious practice to the exclusion of religious
  doctrine, are pharisees.

   They make great pretensions to outward piety, and perhaps to inward
   flights of emotion of a certain poetical cast, while they will not
   receive the great truths that relate to God, but deny the fundamental
   doctrines of the gospel.

  4. The proper end and tendency of all right doctrine, when truly believed, is
  to produce correct practice.

   Wherever you find a man's practice heretical, you may be sure his
   belief is heretical too. The faith that he holds in his heart is just
   as heretical as his life. He may not be heretical in his notions and
   theories. He may be right there, even on the very points where he is
   heretical in practice. But he does not really believe it.

   For illustration: See that careless sinner there, grasping wealth, and
   rushing headlong in the search for riches. Does that man truly believe
   he is ever going to die? Perhaps you will say, he knows he must die.
   But I say, while he is in this attitude, he does not actually believe
   he is ever going to die. The subject is one which is not before his
   thoughts at all. And thus it is, therefore, impossible that he should
   believe it in his utter thoughtlessness. To ask him if he expect ever
   to die, and he will reply, "O yes, I know I must die; all men are
   mortal." As soon as he turns his thoughts to it, he assents to the
   truth. And if you could fasten the conviction on his mind till he is
   really and permanently impressed with it, he would infallibly change
   his conduct, and live for another world instead of this. It is just so
   in religion; whatever a man really believes is just as certain to
   control his practice as that the will governs the conduct.

  5. The church has for a long time acted too much on the Antinomial policy.

   She has been sticklish for the more abstract doctrines, and left the
   more practical too much out of view. She has laid greater stress on
   orthodoxy in those doctrines that are not practical, than in those that
   are practical. Look at the creeds of the church, and see how they all
   lay the main stress on those doctrines that have little relation to our
   practice. A man may be the greatest heretic on points of practice,
   provided he is not openly profane and vicious, and yet maintain a good
   standing in the church, whether his life corresponds with the gospel or
   not. Is not this monstrous? And hence we see that when it is attempted
   to purify the church in regard to practical errors, she cannot bear it.
   Why else is it that so much excitement is produced by attempting to
   clear the church from participation in sins of intemperance, and
   Sabbath-breaking, and slavery? Why is it so difficult to induce the
   church to do anything effectual for the conversion of the world? Oh,
   when shall the church be purified, or the world converted? Not till it
   is a settled point, that heresy in practice is the proof of heresy in
   belief. Not while a man may deny the whole gospel in his practice every
   day, and yet maintain his standing in the church as a good Christian.

  6. See how a minister may be deceived in regard to the state of his
  congregation.

   He preaches a good deal on the abstract doctrines, that do not
   immediately relate to practice, and his people say they are fed, and
   rejoice in it, and he thinks they are growing in grace, when in fact it
   is no certain sign that there is any religion among them. It is
   manifest that this is not certain evidence. But if when he preaches
   practical doctrines, his people show that they love the truth in
   relation to themselves, and show it by practicing it, then they give
   evidence of real love to the truth.

   If a minister find that his people love abstract doctrinal preaching,
   but that when he comes to press the practical doctrines they rebel, he
   may be sure that if they have any religion, it is in a low state; and
   if he find, on fair trial, that he cannot bring them up to it, so as to
   receive practical doctrine, he may be satisfied they have not a
   particle of religion, but are a mere company of Antinomians, who think
   they can go to heaven on a dead faith in abstract orthodoxy.

  7. See what a vast multitude of professors of religion there are who are
  deceiving themselves.

   Many suppose they are Christians from the emotions they feel in view of
   the truth, when in fact what they receive is truth presented to their
   minds in such a way that they do not see its bearing on themselves. If
   you bring the truth so to bear on them, as to destroy their pride and
   cut them off from their worldliness, such professors resist it. Look
   abroad upon the church. See what a multitude of orthodox churches and
   orthodox Christians live and feed upon the abstract doctrines of
   religion from year to year.

   Then look farther at their lives, and see how little influence their
   professed belief has upon their practice. Have they saving faith? It
   cannot be. I do not mean to say that none of these church members are
   pious, but I do say that those who do not adopt in practice what they
   admit in theory who are hearers of the word but not doers deceive
   themselves.

   Inquire now how many of you really believe the truths you hear
   preached. I have proposed to preach a course of "practical" lectures. I
   do not mean that I shall preach lectures that have no doctrine in them.
   That is not preaching at all. But what I desire is, to see whether you
   will, as a church, do what you believe to be true. If I do not succeed
   in convincing you that any doctrine I may maintain is really true, that
   is another affair. That is reason enough why you should not do it. But
   if I do succeed in proving from the scriptures, and convincing your
   understanding, that it is true, and yet you do not practice it, I shall
   then have the evidence before my own eyes what your character is, and
   no longer deceive myself with the idea that this is a Christian church.

   Are you conscious that the gospel is producing a practical effect upon
   you, according to your advancement in knowledge? Is it weaning you from
   the world? Do you find this to be your experience, that when you
   receive any practical truth into your minds you love it, and love to
   feel its application to yourself, and take pleasure in practicing it?
   If you are not growing in grace, becoming more and more holy, yielding
   yourselves up to the influence of the gospel, you are deceiving
   yourselves. How is it now with you who are elders of this church? How
   is it with you who are heads of families all of you? When you hear a
   sermon, do you seize hold of it and take it home to you, and practice
   it? Or do you receive it into your minds, and approve of it, and never
   practice it? Woe to that man who admits the truth, and yet turns away
   and does not practice it, like the man beholding his natural face in a
   glass turning away and forgetting what manner of man he was.
     __________________________________________________________________

      They feared the Lord, and served their own gods. 2 Kings 17:33.

   When the ten tribes of Israel were carried away captive by the king of
   Assyria, their places were supplied with strangers of different
   idolatrous nations, who knew nothing of the religion of the Jews. Very
   soon the wild beasts increased in the country, and the lions destroyed
   multitudes of the people, and they thought it was because they did not
   know the god of the country, and had therefore ignorantly transgressed
   his religion, and offended him, and he had sent the lions among them as
   a punishment. So they applied to the king, who told them to get one of
   the priests of the Israelites to teach them the manner of the god of
   the land. They took this advice, and obtained one of the priests to
   come to Bethel and teach them the religious ceremonies and modes of
   worship that had been practiced there. And he taught them to fear
   Jehovah, as the God of that country. But still they did not receive him
   as the only God. They feared him; that is, they feared his anger and
   his judgments, and to avert these, they performed the prescribed rites.
   But they "served" their own gods. They kept up their idolatrous
   worship, and this was what they loved and preferred, though they felt
   obliged to pay some reverence to Jehovah, as the God of that country.
   There are still multitudes of persons, professing to fear God, and
   perhaps possessing a certain kind of the fear of the Lord, who,
   nevertheless, serve their own gods they have other things to which
   their hearts are supremely devoted, and other objects in which they
   mainly put their trust.

   There are, as you know, two kinds of fear. There is that fear of the
   Lord which is the beginning of wisdom, which is founded in love. There
   is also a slavish fear, which is a mere dread of evil, and is purely
   selfish. This is the kind of fear which is possessed by those people
   spoken of in the text. They were afraid Jehovah would send his
   judgments upon them, if they did not perform certain rites and this was
   the motive they had for paying him worship. Those who have this fear
   are supremely selfish, and while they profess to reverence Jehovah,
   have other gods whom they love and serve.

   There are several classes of persons to whom this is applicable, and my
   object tonight is to describe some of them, in such a way, that those
   of you here, who possess this character, may know yourselves, and may
   see how it is that your neighbors know you and understand your real
   characters.

   To serve a person is to be obedient to the will and devoted to the
   interests of that individual. It is not properly called serving where
   only certain acts are performed, without entering into the service of
   the person; but to serve, is to make it a business to do the will and
   promote the interest of the person. To serve God is to make religion
   the main business of life. It is to devote one's self, heart, life,
   powers, time, influence, and all, to promote the interests of God, to
   build up the kingdom of God, and to advance the glory of God. Who are
   they who, while they profess to fear the Lord, serve their own gods?

   I answer, first, all those of you who have not heartily and practically
   renounced the ownership of your possessions, and given them up to God.

   It is self-evident that if you have not done this, you are not serving
   God. Suppose a gentleman were to employ a clerk to take care of his
   store, and suppose the clerk were to continue to attend to his own
   business, and when asked to do what is necessary for his employer, who
   pays him his wages, he should reply,

   "I really have so much business of my own to attend to, that I have no
   time to do these things;" would not everybody cry out against such a
   servant, and say he was not serving his employer at all, his time is
   not his own, it is paid for, and he but served himself? So where a man
   has not renounced the ownership of himself, not only in thought, but
   practically, he has not taken the first lesson in religion. He is not
   serving the Lord, but serving his own gods.

  2. That man who does not make the business in which he is engaged a part of
  his religion, does not serve God.

   You hear a man say, sometimes, I am so much engaged all day in the
   world, or in worldly business, that I have not time to serve God. He
   thinks he serves God a little while in the morning, and then attends to
   his worldly business. That man, you may rely on it, left his religion
   where he said his prayers. He is willing, perhaps, to give God the time
   before breakfast, before he gets ready to go to his own business; but
   as soon as that is over, away he goes to his own work. He fears the
   Lord enough, perhaps, to go through his prayers night and morning, but
   he serves his own gods. That man's religion is the laughing stock of
   hell! He prays very devoutly, and then, instead of engaging in his
   business for God, he is serving himself. No doubt the idols are well
   satisfied with the arrangement, but God is wholly displeased.

  3. But again: Those of you are serving your own gods, who devote to Jehovah
  that which costs you little or nothing.

   There are many who make religion consist in certain acts of piety that
   do not interfere with their selfishness. You pray in the morning in
   your family, because you can do it then very conveniently, but do not
   suffer the service of Jehovah to interfere with the service of your
   gods, or to stand in the way of your getting rich, or enjoying the
   world. The gods you serve make no complaint of being slighted or
   neglected for the service of Jehovah.

  4. All that class are serving their own gods, who suppose that the six days of
  the week belong to themselves, and that the Sabbath only is God's day.

   There are multitudes who suppose that the week is man's time, and the
   Sabbath only God's, and that they have a right to do their own work
   during the week, and to serve themselves, and promote their own
   interests, if they will only keep the Sabbath strictly, and serve God
   on the Sabbath. For instance: a celebrated preacher, in illustrating
   the wickedness of breaking the Sabbath, used this illustration "Suppose
   a man, having seven dollars in his pocket, should meet a beggar in
   great distress, and give him six dollars, keeping only one for himself;
   and the beggar, seeing that he retained one dollar, should return and
   rob him of that; would not every heart despise his baseness?" You see
   it embodies this idea that it is very ungrateful to break the Sabbath
   since God has given to men six days for their own, to serve themselves,
   and only reserved the Sabbath to himself, and to rob God of the seventh
   day is base ingratitude.

   You that do this do not serve God at all. If you are selfish during the
   week, you are selfish altogether. To suppose you had any real piety
   would imply that you were converted every Sabbath and unconverted every
   Monday. If a man would serve himself all the week and really posses
   religion on the Sabbath, he requires to be converted for it. But is
   this the idea of the Sabbath, that it is a day to serve God in
   exclusive of other days? Is God in need of your services on the Sabbath
   to keep his work on?

   God requires all your services as much on the six days as on the
   Sabbath, only he has appropriated the Sabbath to peculiar duties, and
   required its observance as a day of rest from bodily toil and from
   those fatiguing cares and labors that concern the present world. But
   because God uses means in accomplishing his purposes, and men have
   bodies as well as souls, and the gospel is to be spread and sustained
   by the things of this world, therefore God requires you to work all the
   six days at your secular employments. But it is all for his service, as
   much as the worship of the Sabbath. The Sabbath is no more given for
   the service of God than Monday. You have no more right to serve
   yourselves on Monday than you have on the Sabbath. If any of you have
   thus considered the matter, and imagined that the six days of the week
   were your own time, it shows that you are supremely selfish. I beg of
   you not to consider that in prayer and on the Sabbath you are serving
   God at all, if the rest of the time you are considered as serving
   yourself. You have never known the radical principle of serving the
   Lord.

  5. Those are serving themselves, or their own gods, who will not make any
  sacrifices of personal ease and comfort in religion.

   For instance, there are multitudes who object to free churches on this
   ground, that they require a sacrifice of personal gratification. They
   talk like this: "We wish to sit with our families;" or, "We want our
   seats cushioned," or "We always like to sit in the same place." They
   admit that free churches are necessary, in order to make the gospel
   accessible to the thousands that are going to hell in this city. But
   they cannot make these little sacrifices, to throw open the doors of
   God's house to this mass of impenitent sinners.

   These little things often indicate most clearly the state of men's
   hearts. Suppose your servant were to say, "I cannot do this," or "I
   cannot do that," because it interferes with his personal ease and
   comfort. He cannot do this because he likes to sit on a cushion and
   work. Or he cannot do that because it would separate him from his
   family an hour and a half. What! is that doing service? When a man
   enters into service he gives up his ease and comfort for the interest
   and at the will of his employer. Is it true that any man is supremely
   devoted to the service of God, when he shows that his own ease and
   comfort are dearer than the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and that he would
   sooner sacrifice the salvation of sinners than sit on a hard seat, or
   be separated from his family an hour or two?

  6. Those are serving their own gods, who give their time and money, when they
  do give, grudgingly, by constraint, and not of a ready mind, and with a
  cheerful heart.

   What would you think of your servant, if you had to dun or drive him
   all the time, to do anything for your interest? Would you not say he
   was an eye-servant? How many people there are, who when they do
   anything on account of religion, do it grudgingly. If they do anything,
   it comes hard. If you go to one of these characters, and want his time
   or his money for any religious object it is difficult to get him
   engaged. It seems to go across the grain and is not easy or natural. It
   is plain he does not consider the interests of Christ's kingdom the
   same with his own. He may make a show of fearing the Lord, but he
   "serves" some other gods of his own.

  7. Those who are always ready to ask how little they may do for religion
  rather than how much they may do, are serving their own gods.

   There are multitudes of persons who seem always to ask how little they
   can get along with in what they do for God.

   You hear such a man making up his accounts of profit and loss "So much
   made this year then so much it costs for charity so much obliged to
   give for religion." (OBLIGED to give for the interests of religion!)
   "and so much lost by fire, and so much by bad debts," and so on is that
   man serving God? It is a simple matter of fact that you have never set
   your hearts on the object of promoting religion in the world. If you
   had, you would ask, How much can I do for this object and for that?
   Cannot I do so much or so much or so much?

  8. They who are laying up wealth for their families, to elevate and aggrandize
  them, are serving gods of their own, and not Jehovah.

   Those who are thus aiming to elevate their own families into a
   different sphere, by laying up wealth for them, show that they have
   some other object to live for than bringing this world under the
   authority of Jesus Christ. They have other gods to serve. They may
   pretend to fear the Lord, but they "serve" their own gods.

  9. Those who are making it their object to accumulate so much property that
  they can retire from business and live at ease, are serving their own gods.

   There are many persons who profess to be the servants of God, but are
   eagerly engaged in gathering property, and calculating to retire to
   their country seat by-and-by, and live at their ease. What do you mean?
   Has God given you a right to a perpetual Sabbath, as soon as you have
   made so much money? Did God tell you, when you professed to enter his
   service, to work hard so many years, and then you might have a
   perpetual holiday? Did he promise to excuse you after that from making
   the most of your time and talents, and let you live at ease the rest of
   your days? If your thoughts are set upon this notion, I tell you, you
   are not serving God but your own selfishness and sloth.

  10. Those persons are serving their own gods who would sooner gratify their
  appetites than deny themselves things that are unnecessary, or even hurtful,
  for the sake of doing good.

   You find persons that greatly love things that do them no good, and
   others even form an artificial appetite for the thing positively
   loathsome, and after it they will go, and no arguments will prevail
   upon them to abandon it for the sake of doing good. Are such persons
   absorbed in the service of God? Certainly not. Will they sacrifice
   their lives for the kingdom of God? Why you cannot make them even give
   up a quid of tobacco! a weed that is injurious to health and loathsome
   to society; they cannot give it up, were it to save a soul from death!

   Who does not see that selfishness predominates in such persons? It
   shows the astonishing strength of selfishness. You often see the
   strength of selfishness showing itself in some such little thing more
   than in things that are greater. The real state of a man's mind stands
   out, that self-gratification is the law of his life, so strongly, that
   it will not give place, even in a trifle, to those great interests, for
   which he ought to be willing to lay down his life.

  11. Those persons who are most readily moved to action by appeals to their own
  selfish interests, show that they are serving their own gods.

   You see what motive influences such a man. Suppose I wish to get him to
   subscribe for building a church, what must I urge? Why, I must show how
   it will improve the value of his property, or advance his party, or
   gratify his selfishness in some other way. If he is more excited by
   these motives, than he is by a desire to save perishing souls and
   advance the kingdom of Christ, you see that he has never given himself
   up to serve the Lord. He is still serving himself. He is more
   influenced by his selfish interests than by all those benevolent
   principles on which all religion turns. The character of a true servant
   of God is right opposite to this.

   Take the case of two servants, one devoted to his master's interests,
   and the other having no conscience or concern but to secure his wages.
   Go to one, and he throws into the shade all personal considerations,
   and enlists with heart and soul in achieving the object. The other will
   not act unless you present some selfish motive; unless you say, "Do so,
   and I will raise your wages or set you up in business," or the like. Is
   there not a radical difference between these two servants? Is not this
   an illustration of what actually takes place in our churches? Propose a
   plan of doing good that will cost nothing, and they will all go for it.
   But propose a plan which is going to affect their personal interest to
   cost money, or take up time in a busy season, and you will see they
   begin to divide. Some hesitate; some doubt; some raise objections; and
   some resolutely refuse. Some enlist at once, because they see it will
   do great good. Others stand back till you devise some means to excite
   their selfishness in its favor. What causes the difference? Some of
   them are serving their own gods.

  12. Those are of this character, who are more interested in other subjects
  than in religion.

   If you find them more ready to talk on other subjects; more easily
   excited by them, more awake to learn the news, they are serving their
   own gods. What multitudes are more excited by the bank question, or the
   question about war, or about the fire, or anything of a worldly nature,
   than about revivals, missions, or anything connected with the interests
   of religion. You find them all engaged about politics or speculation;
   but if you bring up the subject of religion, ah, they are afraid of
   excitement! and talk about animal feeling! Showing that religion is not
   the subject that is nearest their hearts. A man is always most easily
   excited on that subject that lies nearest his heart. Bring that up, and
   he is interested. When you can talk early and late about the news and
   other worldly topics, and when you cannot possibly be interested in the
   subject of religion, you know that your heart is not in it; and if you
   pretend to be a servant of God, you are a hypocrite.

  13. When persons are more jealous for their own fame than for God's glory, it
  shows that they live for themselves, and serve their own gods.

   You see a man more vexed or grieved by what is said against him than
   against God; whom does he serve who is his God, himself or Jehovah?
   There is a minister thrown into a fever because somebody has said a
   word derogatory to his scholarship, or his dignity, or his
   infallibility, while he is as cool as ice at all the indignities thrown
   upon the blessed God. Is that man a follower of Paul, willing to be
   considered a fool for the cause of Christ? Did that man ever take the
   first lesson in religion? If he had, he would rejoice to have his name
   cast out as evil for the cause of religion. No, he is not serving God;
   he is serving his own gods.

  14. Those are serving their own gods, who are not make salvation of souls the
  great and leading object of their lives.

   The end of all religious institutions, that which gives value to them
   all, is the salvation of sinners. The end for which Christ lives, and
   for which he has left his church in the world, is the salvation of
   sinners. This is the business which God sets his servants about, and if
   any man be not doing this, as his business as the leading and main
   object of his life, he is not serving Jehovah, he is serving his own
   gods.

  15. Those who are doing but little for God, or who bring but little to pass
  for God, cannot properly be said to serve him.

   Suppose you ask a professed servant of God. "What are you doing for
   God? Are you bringing anything to pass? Are you instrumental in the
   conversion of any sinners?

   Are you making impressions in favor of religion, or helping forward the
   cause of Christ? "He replies," Why I do not know have a hope; I
   sometimes think I do love God; but I do not know that I am doing any
   thing in particular at present." Is that man serving God! Or is he
   serving his own gods? "I talk to sinners some times," he says, "but
   they do not seem to feel much." Then YOU do not feel. If your heart be
   not in it, no wonder you cannot make sinners feel. Whereas, if you do
   your duty, with your heart in the work, sinners cannot help feeling.

  16. Those who seek for happiness in religion, rather than for usefulness, are
  serving their own gods.

   Their religion is entirely selfish. They want to enjoy religion, and
   are all the while inquiring how they can get happy frames of mind, and
   how they can be pleasurably excited in religious exercises. And they
   will go only to such meetings, and sit only under such preaching, as
   will make them happy; never asking the question whether that is the way
   to do the most good or not. Now, suppose your servant should do so, and
   be constantly contriving how to enjoy himself, and if he thought he
   could be most happy in the parlor, stretched on the sofa, with a pillow
   of down under his head, and another servant to fan him, refusing to do
   the work which you set him about, and which your interest urgently
   requires; instead of manifesting a desire to work for you, and a
   solicitude for your interest, and a willingness to lay himself out with
   all his powers in your service, he wants only to be happy! It is just
   so with those professed servants of Jehovah, who want to do nothing but
   sit on their handsome cushion, and have their minister feed them.
   Instead of seeking how to do good, they are only seeking to be happy.
   Their daily prayer is not, like that of the converted Saul of Tarsus,
   "Lord what wilt thou have me to do?" but, "Lord, tell me how I can be
   happy." Is that the spirit of Jesus Christ? No, he said, "I delight to
   do thy will. O God." Is that the spirit of the apostle Paul? No, he
   threw of his upper garments at once, and made his arms bare foot the
   field of labor.

  17. Those who make their own salvation their supreme object in religion, are
  serving their own gods.

   There are multitudes in the church, who show by their conduct, and even
   avow in their language, that their leading object is to secure their
   own salvation, and their grand determination is to get their own souls
   planted on the firm battlements of the heavenly Jerusalem, and walk the
   golden fields of Canaan above. If the Bible is not in error all such
   characters will go to hell. Their religion is pure selfishness. And "he
   that will save his life shall lose it, and he that will lose his life
   for my sake, shall save it."

    REMARKS

  1. See why so little is accomplished in the world for Jesus Christ.

   It is because there are so few that do anything for it. It is because
   Jesus Christ has so few real servants in the world. How many professors
   do you suppose there are in this church, or in your whole acquaintance,
   that are really at work for God, and making a business of religion, and
   laying themselves out to advance the kingdom of Christ? The reason why
   religion advances no faster is, that there are so few to advance it,
   and so many to hinder it. You see a parcel of people at a fire, trying
   to get out the goods of a store.

   Some are determined to get out the goods, but the rest are not engaged
   about it, and they divert their attention by talking about other
   things, or positively hinder them by finding fault with their way of
   doing it, or by holding them back. So it is in the church. Those who
   are desirous of doing the work are greatly hindered by the
   backwardness, the cavils, and the positive resistance of the rest.

  2. See why so few Christians have the spirit of prayer. How can they have the
  spirit of prayer? What should God give them the spirit of prayer for?

   Suppose a man engaged in his worldly schemes, and that God should give
   that man the spirit of prayer. Of course he would pray for that which
   lies nearest his heart; that is, for success in his worldly schemes, to
   serve his own gods with. Will God give him the spirit of prayer for
   such purpose? Never. Let him go to his own gods for a spirit of prayer,
   out let him not expect Jehovah to bestow the spirit of prayer, while he
   is serving his own gods.

  3. You see that there are a multitude of professors, of religion that have not
  begun to be religious yet.

   Said a man to one of them, Do you feel that your property and your
   business are all God's, and do you hold and manage them for God? "O,
   no," said he, "I have not got so far as that yet." Not got so far as
   that! That man had been a professor of religion for years, and yet had
   not got so far as to consider his property, and business, and all that
   he had, as belonging to God! No doubt he was serving his own gods. For
   I insist upon it, that this is the very beginning of religion. What is
   conversion, but turning from the service of the world to the service of
   God? And yet this man had not found out that he was God's servant. And
   he seemed to think he was getting a great way in religion, to feel that
   all he had was the Lord's.

  4. It is great dishonesty for persons to profess to serve the Lord, and yet in
  reality serve themselves.

   You who are performing religious duties from selfish motives are in
   reality trying to make God your servant. If your own interest be the
   supreme object, all your religious services are only desires to induce
   God to promote your interests. Why do you pray, or keep the Sabbath, or
   give your property for religious objects? You answer, "For the sake of
   promoting my own salvation." Indeed! Not to glorify God, but to get to
   heaven! Do not you think the devil would do all that, if he thought he
   could gain his end by it and be a devil still? The highest style of
   selfishness must be to get God with all his attributes, enlisted in the
   service of your mighty self.

   And now, my hearers, where are you all? Are you serving Jehovah, or are
   you serving your own gods? How have you been doing these six months
   that I have been absent? Have you done anything for God? Have you been
   living as servants of God? Is Satan's kingdom weakened by what you have
   done? Could you say now, "Come with me, and I will show you this and
   that sinner converted, or this and that backslider reclaimed, or this
   and that weak saint strengthened and aided?" Could you bring living
   witnesses of what you have done in the service of God? Or would your
   answer be, "I have been to meeting regularly on the Sabbath, and heard
   a great deal of good preaching, and I have generally attended the
   prayer meetings, and we had some precious meetings, and I have prayed
   in my family, and twice or thrice a day in my closet, and read the
   Bible." And in all that you have been merely passive, as to anything
   done for God. You have feared the Lord, and served your own gods.

   "Yes, but I have sold so many goods, and made so much money, of which I
   intend to give a tenth to the missionary cause." Who hath required this
   at your hand, instead of saving souls? Going to send the gospel to the
   heathen, and letting sinners right under your own eyes go down to hell!
   Be not deceived. If you loved souls, in you were engaged to serve God,
   you would think of souls here, and do the work of God here. What should
   we think of a missionary going to the heathen, who had never said a
   word to sinners around him at home? Does he love souls? There is
   burlesque in the idea of sending such a man to the heathen.

   The man that will do nothing at home is not fit to go to the heathen.
   And he that pretends to be getting money for missions while he will not
   try to save sinners here, is an outrageous hypocrite.
     __________________________________________________________________

      He that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith; he
      whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14:28.

   It was a custom among the idolatrous heathen to offer the bodies of
   slain beasts in sacrifice. A part of every beast that was offered
   belonged to the priest. The priests used to send their portion to
   market to sell, and it was sold in the shambles as any other meat. The
   Christian Jews that were scattered everywhere were very particular as
   to what meats they ate, so as not even to run the least danger of
   violating the Mosaic law, and they raised doubts, and created disputes
   and difficulties among the churches. This was one of the subjects about
   which the church of Corinth was divided and agitated, until they
   finally wrote to the apostle Paul for directions. A part of the First
   Epistle to the Corinthians was doubtless written as a reply to such
   inquiries. It seems there were some who carried their scruples so far
   that they thought it not proper to eat any meat; for if they went to
   market for it, they were continually in danger of buying that which was
   offered to idols. Others thought it made no difference; they had a
   right to eat meat, and they would buy it in the market as they found
   it, and give themselves no trouble about the matter. To quell the
   dispute, they wrote to Paul, and in chapter six, he takes up the
   subject and discusses it in full.

   "Now, as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have
   knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth. And if any man
   think that he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to
   know. But if any man love God, the same is known of him. As concerning
   therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto
   idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is
   none other God but one. For though there be that are called gods,
   whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,)
   but to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and
   we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
   him. Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge; for some with
   conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an
   idol; and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.

   "His conscience is defiled," that is, he regards it as a meat offered
   to an idol, and is really practicing idolatry The eating of meat is a
   matter of total indifference, in itself.

   "But meat commendeth us not to God; for neither if we eat are we the
   better; neither if we eat not, are we the worse. But take heed lest by
   any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that
   are weak. For if any man see thee, which hast knowledge, sit at meat in
   the idol's temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be
   emboldened to eat those things offered to idols; and through thy
   knowledge shall the weak brother perish for whom Christ died?"

   Although they might have a sufficient knowledge on the subject to know
   that an idol is nothing, and cannot make any change in the meat itself,
   yet if they should be seen eating meat that was known to have been
   offered to an idol, those who were weak might be emboldened by it to
   eat the sacrifices as such, or as an act of worship to the idol,
   supposing all the while that they were but following the example of
   their more enlightened brethren.

   But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak
   conscience, ye sin against Christ. "Wherefore, if meat make my brother
   to offend, I will eat no more flesh while the world standeth, lest I
   make my brother to offend."

   This is his benevolent conclusion, that he would rather forego the use
   of flesh altogether than be the occasion of drawing a weak brother away
   into idolatry. For, in fact, to sin so against a weak brother is to sin
   against Christ.

   In writing to the Romans he takes up the same subject the same dispute
   had existed there. After laying down some general maxims and
   principles, he gives this rule:

   "Him that is weak in faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputation.
   For one believeth that he may eat all things; another who is weak,
   eateth herbs."

   There were some among them who chose to live entirely on vegetables,
   rather than run the risk of buying in the shambles flesh which had been
   offered in sacrifice to idols. Others ate their flesh as usual, buying
   what was offered in market, asking no questions for conscience' sake.
   Those who lived on vegetables charged the other with idolatry. And
   those that ate flesh accused the others of superstition and weakness.
   This was wrong.

   "Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not; and let not him
   which eateth not, judge him that eateth; for God hath received him. Who
   art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own master he
   standeth or falleth; yea, he shall be holden up; for God is able to
   make him stand."

   There was also a controversy about observing the Jewish festival days
   and holy days. A part supposed that God required this, and therefore
   they observed them. The others neglected them because they supposed God
   did not require the observance.

   "One man esteemeth one day above another; another esteemeth every day
   alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that
   regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regardeth
   not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. He that eateth, eateth
   to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the
   Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks. For none of us liveth to
   himself, and no man dieth to himself. For whether we live, we live unto
   the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live
   therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. For to this end Christ both died,
   and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
   living. But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at
   naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of
   Christ. For as it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee
   shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every
   one of us shall give account of himself to God. Let us not therefore,
   judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a
   stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall in his brother's way."

   Now mark what he says.

   "But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not
   charitably: destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died."

   That is, I know that the distinction of meats into clean and unclean,
   is not binding under Christ, but to him that believes in the
   distinction, it is a crime to eat indiscriminately, because he does
   what he believes to be contrary to the commands of God. "All things
   indeed are pure, but it is evil to him that eateth with offense." Every
   man should be persuaded in his own mind, that what he is doing is
   right. If a man eat of meats called unclean, not being clear in his
   mind that it is right, he offends God.

   "It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing
   whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak."

   This is a very useful hint to those wine-bibbers and beer guzzlers, who
   think the cause of temperance is going to be ruined by giving up wine
   and beer, when it is notorious, to every person of the least
   observation, that these things are the greatest hindrance to the cause
   all over the country.

   "Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that
   condemneth not himself in THAT thing which he alloweth. And he that
   doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith; for
   whatsoever is not of faith is sin."

   The word rendered damned means condemned, or adjudged guilty of
   breaking the law of God. If a man doubts whether it is lawful to do a
   thing, and while in that state of doubt, he does it, he displeases God,
   he breaks the law and is condemned whether the thing be in itself right
   or wrong. I have been thus particular in explaining the text in its
   connection with the context, because I wished fully to satisfy your
   minds of the correctness of the principle laid down that if a man does
   that of which he doubts the lawfulness, he sins, and is condemned for
   it in the sight of God.

   Whether it is lawful itself, is not the question. If he doubts its
   lawfulness, it is wrong in him.

   There is one exception which ought to be noticed here, and that is,
   where a man as honestly and fully doubts the lawfulness of omitting to
   do it as he does the lawfulness of doing it. President Edwards meets
   this exactly in his 39th resolution:

   "Resolved, never to do any thing that I so much question the lawfulness
   of, as that I intend, at the same time, to consider and examine
   afterwards, whether it be lawful or not: except I as much question the
   lawfulness of the omission."

   A man may have equal doubts whether he is bound to do a thing or not to
   do it. Then all that can be said is, that he must act according to the
   best light he can get. But where he doubts the lawfulness of the act,
   but has no cause to doubt the lawfulness of the omission, and yet does
   it, he sins and is condemned before God, and must repent or be damned.
   In further examination of the subject, I propose,

   I. To show some reasons why a man is criminals for doing that of which
   he doubts the lawfulness. II. To show its application to a number of
   specific cases. III. Offer a few inferences and remarks, as time may
   allow.

  I. I am to show some reasons for the correctness of the principle laid down in
  the text that if a man does that of which he doubts the lawfulness, he is
  condemned.

   1. One reason why an individual is condemned if he does that of which
   he doubts the lawfulness, is that if God so far enlightens his mind as
   to make him doubt the lawfulness of an act, he is bound to stop there
   and examine the question and settle it to his satisfaction.

   To illustrate this: suppose your child is desirous of doing a certain
   thing, or suppose he is invited by his companions to go somewhere, and
   he doubts whether you would be willing, do you not see that it is his
   duty to ask you? If one of his schoolmates invites him home, and he
   doubts whether you would like it, and yet goes, is not this palpably
   wrong?

   Or suppose a man cast away on a desolate island, where he finds no
   human being, and he takes up his abode in a solitary cave, considering
   himself as all alone and destitute of friends, or relief, or hope; but
   every morning he finds a supply of nutritious and wholesome food
   prepared for him, and set by the mouth of his cave, sufficient for his
   wants that day. What is his duty? Do you say, he does not know that
   there is a being on the island, and therefore he is not under
   obligations to any one? Does not gratitude, on the other hand, require
   him to search and find out his unseen friend, and thank him for his
   kindness? He cannot say, "I doubt whether there is any being here, and
   therefore will do nothing but eat my allowance and take my ease, and
   care for nothing." His not searching for his benefactor would of itself
   convict him of as desperate wickedness of heart, as if he knew who it
   was, and refused to return thanks for the favors received.

   Or suppose an Atheist opens his eyes on this blessed light of heaven,
   and breathes this air, sending health and vigor through his frame. Here
   is evidence enough of the being of God to set him on the inquiry after
   that Great Being who provides all these means of life and happiness.
   And if he does not inquire for farther light, if he does not care, if
   he sets his heart against God, he shows that he has the heart as well
   as the intellect of an Atheist. He has, to say the least, evidence that
   there MAY BE a God. What then is his business? Plainly, it is to set
   himself honestly, and with a most child-like and reverent spirit, to
   inquire after him and pay him reverence. If, when he has so much light
   as to doubt whether there may not be a God, he still goes around as if
   there were none, and does not inquire for truth and obey it, he shows
   that his heart is wrong, and that it says let there be no God.

   There is a Deist, and here a book claiming to be a revelation from God.
   Many good men have believed it to be so. The evidences are such as to
   have perfectly satisfied the most acute and upright minds of its truth.
   The evidences, both external and internal are of great weight. To say
   there are NO evidences is itself enough to bring any man's soundness of
   mind into question, or his honesty. There is, to lay the least that can
   be said, sufficient evidence to create a doubt whether it is a fable
   and an imposture. This is in fact but a small part, but we will take it
   on this ground. Now is it his duty to reject it? No Deist pretends that
   he can be so fully persuaded in his own mind, as to be free from all
   doubt. All he dares to attempt is to raise cavils and create doubts on
   the other side. Here, then, it is his duty to stop, and not oppose the
   Bible, until he can prove without a doubt, that it is not from God.

   So with the Unitarian. Granting (what is by no means true) that the
   evidence in the Bible is not sufficient to remove all doubts that Jesus
   Christ is God; yet it afford evidence enough to raise a doubt on the
   other side, and he has no right to reject the doctrine as untrue, but
   is bound humbly to search the scriptures and satisfy himself. Now no
   intelligent and honest man can say that the scripture afford "no
   evidence" of the divinity of Christ. They do afford evidence which has
   convinced and fully satisfied thousands of the acutest minds, and who
   have before been opposed to the doctrine. No man can reject the
   doctrine without a doubt, because here is evidence that it may be true.
   And if it may be true, and there is reason to doubt if it is not true,
   then he rejects it at his peril.

   Then the Universalist. Where is one who can say he has not so much as a
   doubt whether there is not a hell, where sinners go after death into
   endless torment. He is bound to stop and inquire, and search the
   scriptures. It is not enough for him to say he does not believe in a
   hell. It may be there is, and if he rejects it, and goes on reckless of
   the truth whether there is or not, that itself makes him a rebel
   against God. He doubts whether there is not a hell which he ought to
   avoid, and yet he acts as if he was certain and had no doubts. He is
   condemned. I once knew a physician who was a Universalist, and who has
   gone to eternity to try the reality of his speculations.

   He once told me that he had strong doubts of the truth of Universalism,
   and had mentioned his doubts to a minister, who confessed that he, too,
   doubted its truth, and he did not believe there was a Universalist in
   the world who did not.

   2. For a man to do a thing when he doubts whether it is lawful shows
   that he is selfish, and has other objects besides doing the will of
   God.

   It shows that he wants to do it to gratify himself. He doubts whether
   God will approve of it, and yet he does it. Is he not a rebel? If he
   honestly wished to serve God, when he doubted he would stop and inquire
   and examine until he was satisfied. But to go forward while he is in;
   doubt, shows that he is selfish and wicked, and is willing to do it
   whether God is pleased or not, and that he wants to do it, whether it
   is right or wrong. He does it because he wants to do it, and not
   because it is right.

   3. To act thus is an impeachment of the divine goodness.

   He assumes it as uncertain whether God has given a sufficient
   revelation of his will, so that he might know his duty if he would. He
   virtually says that the path of duty is left so doubtful that he must
   decide at a venture.

   4. It indicates slothfulness and stupidity of mind.

   It shows that he had rather act wrong than use the necessary diligence
   to learn and know the path of duty. It shows that he is either
   negligent or dishonest in his inquiries.

   5. It manifests a reckless spirit.

   It shows a want of conscience, an indifference to right, a setting
   aside of the authority of God, a disposition not to do God's will, and
   not to care whether He is pleased or displeased, a desperate
   recklessness and headlong temper, that is the height of wickedness.

   The principle then, which is so clearly laid down, in the text and
   contest, and also in the chapter which I read from Corinthians, is
   fully sustained by examination that for a man to do a thing, when he
   doubts the lawfulness of it, is sin, for which he is condemned before
   God, and must repent or be damned.

  II. I am now to show the application of this principle to a variety of
  particular cases in human life. But,

   First I will mention some cases where a person may be equally in doubt
   with respect to the lawfulness of a thing, whether he is bound to do it
   or not to do it.

   Take the subject of Wine at the Communion Table.

   Since the temperance reformation has brought up the question about the
   use of wine, and various wines have been analyzed and the quantity of
   alcohol they contain has been disclosed, and the difficulty shown of
   getting wines in this country that are not highly alcoholic, it has
   been seriously doubted by some whether it is right to use such wines as
   we can get here in celebrating the Lord's supper. Some are strong in
   the belief that wine is an essential part of the ordinance, and that we
   ought to use the best wine we can get, and there leave the matter.
   Others say that we ought not to use alcoholic or intoxicating wine at
   all; and that as wine is not, in their view, essential to the
   ordinance, it is better to use some other drink.

   Both these classes are undoubtedly equally conscientious, and desirous
   to do what they have most reason to believe is agreeable to the will of
   God. And others, again, are in doubt on the matter. I can easily
   conceive that some conscientious persons may be very seriously in doubt
   which way to act. They are doubtful whether it is right to use
   alcoholic wine, and are doubtful whether it is right to use any other
   drink in the sacrament. Here is a case that comes under President
   Edwards' rule, "where it is doubtful in my mind, whether I ought to do
   it or not to do it," and which men must decide according to the best
   light they can get, honestly, and with a single desire to know and do
   what is most pleasing to God.

   I do not intend to discuss this question, of the use of wine at the
   communion, nor is this the proper place for a full examination of the
   subject. I introduced it now merely for the purpose of illustration.
   But since it is before us, I will make two or three remarks.

   (1.) I have never apprehended so much evil as some do, from the use of
   common wine at the communion. I have not felt alarmed at the danger or
   evil of taking a sip of wine, a teaspoonful or so, once a month, or
   once in two months, or three months. I do not believe that the disease
   of intemperance (and intemperance, you know, is in reality a disease of
   the body) will be either created or continued by so slight a cause. Nor
   do I believe it is going to injure the temperance cause so much as some
   have supposed. And therefore, where a person uses wine as we have been
   accustomed to do, and is fully persuaded in his own mind, he does not
   sin.

   (2.) On the other hand, I do not think that the use of wine is any way
   essential to the ordinance. Very much has been said and written and
   printed on the subject, which has darkened counsel by words without
   knowledge. To my mind there are stronger reasons than I have anywhere
   seen exhibited, for supposing that wine is not essential to this
   ordinance. Great pains have been taken to prove that our Savior used
   wine that was unfermented, when he instituted the supper, and which
   therefore contained no alcohol. Indeed, this has been the point chiefly
   in debate, But in fact it seems just as irrelevant as it would to
   discuss the question, whether he used wheat or oaten bread, or whether
   it was leavened or unleavened. Why do we not hear this question
   vehemently discussed? Because all regard it as unessential. In order to
   settle this question about the wine, we should ask what is the meaning
   of the ordinance of the supper. What did our Savior design to do? It
   was to take the two staple articles for the support of life, food and
   drink, and use them to represent the necessity and virtue of the
   atonement.

   It is plain that Christ had that view of it, for it corresponds with
   what he says, "My flesh is meat indeed, and thy blood is drink indeed."
   So he poured out water in the temple, and said, "If any man thirst, let
   him come unto me and drink." He is called the "Bread of life." Thus it
   was customary to show the value of Christ's sufferings by food and
   drink. Why did he take bread instead of some other article of food?
   Those who know the history and usages of that country will see that he
   chose that article of food which was in most common use among the
   people. When I was in Malta, it seemed as if a great part of the people
   lived on bread alone. They would go in crowds to the market place, and
   buy each a piece of coarse bread, and stand and eat it. Thus the most
   common and the most universally wholesome article of diet is chosen by
   Christ to represent his flesh. Then why did he take wine to drink? For
   the same reason; wine is the common drink of the people, especially at
   their meals, in all those countries. It is sold there for about a cent
   a bottle, wine being cheaper than small beer is here.

   In Sicily I was informed that wine was sold for five cents a gallon,
   and I do not know but it was about as cheap as water. And you will
   observe that the Lord's supper was first observed at the close of the
   feast of the passover, at which the Jews always used wine. The meaning
   of the Savior in this ordinance, then, is this: As food and drink are
   essential to the life of the body, so his body and blood, or his
   atonement, are essential to the life of the soul.

   For myself, I am fully convinced that wine is not essential to the
   communion, and I should not hesitate to give water to any individual
   who conscientiously preferred it. Let it be the common food and drink
   of the country, the support of life to the body, and it answers the end
   of the institution. If I was a missionary among the Esquimaux Indians,
   where they live on dried seal's flesh and snow-water, I would
   administrate the supper in those substances. It would convey to their
   minds the idea that they cannot live without Christ. I say, then, that
   if an individual is fully persuaded in his own mind, he does not sin in
   giving up the use of wine. Let this church be fully persuaded in their
   own minds, and I shall have no scruple to do either way, if they will
   substitute any other wholesome drink, that is in common use, instead of
   the wine. And at the same time, I have no objection myself against
   going on in the old way.

   Now, do not lose sight of the great principle that is under discussion.
   It is this: where a man doubts honestly, whether it is lawful to do a
   thing, and doubts equally, on the other hand whether it is lawful to
   omit doing it, he must pray over the matter, and search the scriptures,
   and get the best light he can on the subject, and then act. And when he
   does this, he is by no means to be judged or censured by others for the
   course he takes. "Who art thou that judgest another man's servant?" And
   no man is authorized to make his own conscience the rule of his
   neighbor's conduct.

   A similar case is where a minister is so situated that it is necessary
   for him to go a distance on the Sabbath to preach, as where he preaches
   to two congregations, and the like. Here he may honestly doubt what is
   his duty, on both hands. If he goes he appears to strangers to
   disregard the Sabbath. If he does not go, the people will have no
   preaching. The direction is, let him search the scriptures, and get the
   best light he can, make it a subject of prayer, weigh it thoroughly,
   and act according to his best judgment.

   So in the case of a Sabbath-school teacher. He may live at a distance
   from the school, and be obliged to travel to it on the Sabbath, or they
   will have no school. And he may honestly doubt which is his duty, to
   remain in his own church on the Sabbath, or to travel there, five,
   eight, or ten miles, to a destitute neighborhood, to keep up the
   Sabbath school. Here he must decide for himself, according to the best
   light he can get. And let no man set himself up to judge over a humble
   and conscientious disciple of the Lord Jesus.

   You see that in all these cases it is understood and is plain that the
   design is to honor God, and the sole ground of doubt is, which course
   will really honor him. Paul says, in reference to all laws of this
   kind, "He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he
   that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it." The
   design is to do right, and the doubt is as to the means of doing it in
   the best manner.

   Secondly I will mention some cases, where the DESIGN is wrong, where
   the object is to gratify self, and the individual has doubts whether he
   may do it lawfully. I shall refer to cases concerning which there is a
   difference of opinion to acts of which the least that can be said is
   that a man must have doubts of their being lawful.

   1. Take, for instance, the making and vending of alcoholic drinks.

   After all that has been said on this subject, and all the light that
   has been thrown upon the question, is there a man living in this land
   who can say he sees no reason to doubt the lawfulness of this business.
   To say the least that can be said, there can be no honest mind but must
   be brought to doubt it. We suppose, indeed, that there is no honest
   mind but must know it is unlawful and criminal. But take the most
   charitable supposition possible for the distiller or the vender, and
   suppose he is not fully convinced of its unlawfulness.

   We say he must, at least, DOUBT its lawfulness. What is he to do then?
   Is he to shut his eyes to the light, and go on, regardless of truth, so
   long as he can keep from seeing it? No. He may cavil and raise
   objections as much as he pleases, but he knows that he has doubts about
   the lawfulness of his business; and if he doubts, and still persists in
   doing it, without taking the trouble to examine and see what is right,
   he is just as sure to be damned as if he went on in the face of
   knowledge. You hear these men say, "Why, I am not fully persuaded in my
   own mind that the Bible forbids making or vending ardent spirits."
   Well, suppose you are not fully convinced, suppose all your possible
   and conceivable objections and cavils are not removed, what then? You
   know you have doubts about its lawfulness. And it is not necessary to
   take such ground to convict you of doing wrong. If you doubt its
   lawfulness, and yet persist in doing it, you are in the way to hell.

   2. So where an individual is engaged in an employment that requires him
   to break the Sabbath.

   As for instance, attending on a post-office that is opened on the
   Sabbath, or a turnpike gate, or in a steam-boat, or any other
   employment that is not work of necessity. There are always some things
   that must be done on the Sabbath, they are works of absolute necessity
   or of mercy.

   But suppose a case in which the labor is not necessary, as in the
   transportation of the mail on the Sabbath, or the like. The least that
   can be said, the lowest ground that can be taken by charity itself,
   without turning fool, is, that the lawfulness of such employment is
   doubtful. And if they persist in doing it, they sin, and are on the way
   to hell. God has sent out the penalty of his law against them, and if
   they do not repent they must be damned.

   3. Owning stocks in steamboat and railroad companies, in stages, canal
   boats, etc., that break the Sabbath.

   Can any such owner truly say he does not doubt the lawfulness of such
   an investment of capital? Can charity stoop lower than to say, that man
   must strongly doubt whether such labor is a work of necessity or mercy?
   It is not necessary in the case to demonstrate that it is unlawful
   though that can be done fully, but only to show so much light as to
   create a doubt of its lawfulness. Then if he persist in doing it, with
   that doubt unsatisfied, he is condemned and lost.

   4. The same remarks will apply to all sorts of lottery gambling. He
   doubts.

   5. Take the case of those indulgences of appetite which are subject of
   controversy, and which, to say the least, are of doubtful right.

   (A.) The drinking of wine, and beer, and other fermented intoxicating
   liquors. In the present aspect of the temperance cause, is it not
   questionable at least, whether making use of these drinks is not
   transgressing the rule laid down by the apostle, "It is good neither to
   eat flesh nor drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth,
   or is offended, or made weak." No man can make me believe he has no
   doubts of the lawfulness of doing it. There is no certain proof; of its
   lawfulness, and there is strong proof of its unlawfulness, and every
   man who does it while he doubts the lawfulness, is condemned, and if he
   persists, is damned.

   If there is any sophistry in all this, I should like to know it, for I
   do not wish to deceive others nor to be deceived myself. But I am
   entirely deceived if this is not a simple, direct, and necessary
   inference, from the sentiment of the text.

   (B.) Tobacco. Can any man pretend that he has no doubt that it is
   agreeable to the will of God for him to use tobacco? No man can pretend
   that he doubts the lawfulness of his OMISSION of these things. Does any
   man living think that he is bound in duty to make use of wine, or
   strong beer, or tobacco, as a luxury? No. The doubt is all on one side.
   What shall we say then, of that man who doubts the lawfulness of it,
   and still fills his face with the poisonous weed? He is condemned.

   (C.) I might refer to tea and coffee. It is known generally, that these
   substances are not nutritious at all, and that nearly eight millions of
   dollars are spent annually for them in this country. Now, will any man
   pretend that he does not doubt the lawfulness of spending all this
   money for that which is of no use, and which are well known to all who
   have examined the subject, to be positively injurious, intolerable to
   weak stomachs, and as much as the strongest can dispose of? And all
   this while the various benevolent societies of the age are loudly
   calling for help to send the gospel abroad and save a world from hell?
   To think of the church alone spending millions upon their tea tables is
   there no doubt here?

   6. Apply this principle to various amusements.

   (A.) The theater. There are vast multitudes of professors of religion
   who attend the theater. And they contend that the Bible no where
   forbids it. Now mark. What Christian professor ever went to a theater
   and did not doubt whether he was doing what was lawful. I by no means
   admit that it is a point which is only doubtful. I suppose it is a very
   plain case, and can be shown to be, that it is unlawful. But I am now
   only meeting those of you, if there are any here, who go to the
   theater, and are trying to cover up yourselves in the refuge that the
   Bible nowhere expressly forbids it.

   (B.) Parties of pleasure, where they go and eat and drink to
   surfeiting. Is there no reason to doubt whether that is such a use of
   time and money as God requires? Look at the starving poor, and consider
   the effect of this gaiety and extravagance, and see if you will ever go
   to another such party or make one, without doubting its lawfulness.
   Where can you find a man, or a woman, that will go so far as to say
   they have no doubt? Probably there is not one honest mind who will say
   this. And if you doubt, and still do it, you are condemned.

   You see that this principle touches a whole class of things, about
   which there is a controversy, and where people attempt to parry off by
   saying it is not worse than to do so and so, and thus get away from the
   condemning sentence of God's law. But in fact, if there is a doubt, it
   is their duty to abstain.

   (C.) Take the case of balls, of novel reading, and other methods of
   wasting time. Is this God's way to spend your lives? Can you say you
   have no doubt of it?

   7. Making calls on the Sabbath.

   People will make a call, and then make an apology about it. "I did not
   know that it was quite right, but I thought I would venture it." He is
   a Sabbath-breaker in heart, at all events, because he doubts.

   8. Compliance with worldly customs at new-year's day.

   Then the ladies are all at home, and the gentlemen are running all
   about town to call on them, and the ladies make their great
   preparations, and treat them with their cake, and their wine, and
   punch, enough to poison them almost to death, and all together are
   bowing down to the goddess of fashion. Is there a lady here that does
   not doubt the lawfulness of all this? I say it can be demonstrated to
   be wicked, but I only ask the ladies of this city, Is it not doubtful
   whether this is all lawful?

   I should call in question the sanity of the man or woman that had no
   doubt of the lawfulness of such a custom, in the midst of such
   prevailing intemperance as exists in this day. Who among you will
   practice it again? Practice it if you dare at the peril of your soul!
   If you do that which is merely doubtful, God frowns and condemns; and
   HIS voice must be regarded.

   I know people try to excuse the matter, and say it is well to have a
   day appropriated to such calls, when every lady is at home and every
   gentleman freed from business, and all that. And all that is very well.
   But when it is seen to be so abused and to produce so much evil, I ask
   every Christian here, if you can help doubting its lawfulness? And if
   it be doubtful, it comes under the rule: "If meat make my brother to
   offend." If keeping new-years leads to so much gluttony, and
   drunkenness, and wickedness, does it not bring the lawfulness of it
   into doubt? Yes, that is the least that can be said, and they who doubt
   and yet do it, sin against God.

   9. Compliance with the extravagant fashions of the day.

   Christian lady! have you never doubted, do you not now doubt, whether
   it be lawful for you to copy these fashions, brought from foreign
   countries, and from places which it were a shame even to name in this
   assembly? Have you no doubt about it? And if you doubt and do it, you
   are condemned, and must repent of your sin, or you will be lost
   forever!

   10. Intermarriages of Christians with impenitent sinners.

   This answer always comes up. "But after all you say, it is not certain
   that these marriages are not lawful." Supposing it be so, yet does not
   the Bible and the nature of the case make it at least doubtful whether
   they are right? It can be demonstrated, indeed, to be unlawful But
   suppose it could not be reduced to demonstration; what Christian ever
   did it and did not doubt whether it was lawful? And he that doubteth is
   condemned. See that Christian man or woman that is about forming such a
   connection doubting all the way whether it is right: trying to pray
   down conscience under pretext of praying for light: praying all around
   your duty, and yet pressing on. Take Care! You know you doubt the
   lawfulness of what you propose, and remember that "he that doubteth is
   damned."

   Thus you see, my hearers, that here is a principle that will stand by
   you when you attempt to rebuke sin, if the power of society be employed
   to face you down, or put you on the defensive, and demand absolute
   proof of the sinfulness of a cherished practice. Remember the burden of
   proof does not lie on you, to show beyond a doubt the absolute
   unlawfulness of the thing. If you can show sufficient reason to
   question its lawfulness, and to create a valid doubt whether it is
   according to the will of God, you shift the burden of proof to the
   other side. And unless they can remove the doubt, and show that there
   is no room for doubt, they have no right to continue in the doubtful
   practice, and if they do, they sin against God.

    REMARKS

   1. The knowledge of duty is not indispensable to moral obligation, but
   the possession of the means of knowledge is sufficient to make a person
   responsible.

   If a man has the means of knowing whether it is right or wrong he is
   bound to use the means, and is bound to inquire and ascertain at his
   peril.

   2. If those are condemned, and adjudged worthy of damnation, who do
   that of which they doubt the lawfulness, what shall we say of the
   multitudes who are doing continually that which they know and confess
   to be wrong?

   Woe to that man who practices that which he condemns. And "happy is he
   that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth."

   3. Hypocrites often attempt to shelter themselves behind their doubts
   to get clear of their duty.

   The hypocrite is unwilling to be enlightened, he does not wish to know
   the truth, because he does not wish to obey the Lord, and so he hides
   behind his doubts, and turns away his eye from the light, and will not
   look or examine to see what his duty is, and in this way he tries to
   shield himself from responsibility. But God will drag them out from
   behind this refuge of lies, by the principle laid down m the test, that
   their very doubts condemn them.

   Many will not be enlightened on the subject of temperance, and still
   persist in drinking or selling rum, because they are not fully
   convinced it is wrong. And they will not read a tract or a paper, nor
   attend a temperance meeting, for fear they shall be convinced. Many are
   resolved to indulge in the use of wine and strong beer, and they will
   not listen to anything calculated to convince them of the wrong. It
   shows that they are determined to indulge in sin, and they hope to hide
   behind their doubts. What better evidence could they give that they are
   hypocrites?

   Who, in all these United States, can say, that he has no doubt of the
   lawfulness of slavery? Yet the great body of the people will not hear
   anything on the subject, and they go into a passion if you name it, and
   it is even seriously proposed, both at the north and at the south, to
   pass laws forbidding inquiry and discussion on the subject. Now suppose
   these laws should be passed, for the purpose of enabling the nation to
   shelter itself behind its doubts whether slavery is a sin, that ought
   to be abolished immediately will that help the matter? Not at all. If
   they continue to hold their fellow men as property, in slavery, while
   they doubt its lawfulness, they are condemned before God, and we may be
   sure their sin will send them out, and God will let them know how He
   regards it.

   It is amazing to see the foolishness of people on this subject; as if
   by refusing to get clear of their doubts, they could get clear of their
   sin. Think of the people of the south: Christians, and even ministers,
   refusing to read a paper on the subject of slavery, and perhaps sending
   it back with abusive or threatening words. Threatening! for what? For
   reasoning with them about their duty? It can be demonstrated
   absolutely, that slavery is unlawful, and ought to be repented of, and
   given up, like any other sin. But suppose they only doubt the
   lawfulness of slavery, and do not mean to be enlightened, they are
   condemned of God. Let them know that they cannot put this thing down,
   they cannot clear themselves of it. So long as they doubt its
   lawfulness, they cannot hold men in slavery without sin; and that they
   do doubt its lawfulness is demonstrated by this opposition to
   discussion.

   We may suppose a case, and perhaps there may be some such in the
   southern country, where a man doubts the lawfulness of holding slaves,
   and equally doubts the lawfulness of emancipating them in their present
   state of ignorance and dependence. In that case he comes under Pres.
   Edward's rule, and it is his duty not to fly in a passion with those
   who would call his attention to it, not to send back newspapers and
   refuse to read, but to inquire on all hands for light, and examine the
   question honestly in the light of the word of God, till his doubts are
   cleared up. The least he can do is to set himself with all his power to
   educate them and train them to take care of themselves as fast and as
   thoroughly as possible, and to put them in a state where they can be
   set at liberty.

   4. It is manifest there is but very little conscience in the church.

   See what multitudes are persisting to do what they strongly doubt the
   lawfulness of.

   5. There is still less love to God than there is conscience.

   It cannot be pretended that love to God is the cause of all this
   following of fashions, this practicing indulgences, and other things of
   which people doubt the lawfulness. They do not persist in these things
   because they love God so well. No, no, but they persist in it because
   they wish to do it, to gratify themselves, and they had rather run the
   risk of doing wrong than to have their doubts cleared up. It is because
   they have so little love for God, so little care for the honor of God.

   6. Do not say, in your prayers, "O Lord, if I have sinned in this
   thing, O Lord, forgive me the sin."

   If you have done that of which you doubted the lawfulness, you have
   sinned, whether the thing itself be right or wrong. And you must
   repent, and ask forgiveness.

   And now, let me ask you all who are here present, are you convinced
   that to do what you doubt the lawfulness of, is sin? If you are, I have
   one more question to ask you. Will you from this time relinquish every
   thing of which you doubt the lawfulness? Every amusement, every
   indulgence, every practice, every pursuit? Will you do it, or will you
   stand before the solemn judgment seat of Jesus Christ, condemned? If
   you will not relinquish these things, you show that you are an
   impenitent sinner, and do not INTEND to obey God, and if you do not
   repent you bring down upon your head God's condemnation and wrath, for
   ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.
      Leviticus 19:17.

   The whole verse reads thus: "Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy
   heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
   upon him." In the margin, as those of you who have Bibles with marginal
   notes can see, the last words of the verse are rendered, "that thou
   bear not sin for him." And this, I am satisfied, is the correct
   translation. The idea is this that men are bound to reprove their
   neighbors for sin, lest they become partakers with them, or accessory
   to their sin.

   In speaking from these words, I design to pursue the following order:

   I. To show the reasons for the rule laid down by and in the test. II.
   Show to whom the rule is applicable. III. Mention several exceptions
   which God has made to the rule, or classes of persons who are not to be
   reproved for their sins. IV. The manner of performing this duty. V.
   Several specific applications of the principles established.

  I. I am to show the reasons for the rule.

   1. Love to God plainly requires this.

   If we really love God, we shall of course feel bound to reprove those
   that hate and abuse him and break his commands. If I love the
   government of the country, should I not reprove and rebuke a man who
   should abuse or revile the government! If a child loves his parents
   will he not of course reprove a man that abuses his parents in his
   hearing?

   2. Love to the universe will lead to the same thing.

   If a man love the universe, if he be actuated by universal benevolence,
   he knows that sin is inconsistent with the highest good of the
   universe, and that it is calculate to injure and ruin the whole if not
   counteracted; that its direct tendency is to overthrow the order and
   destroy the happiness of the universe. And therefore, if he see this
   doing, his benevolence will lead him to reprove and oppose it.

   3. Love to the community in which you live, is another reason.

   Not only love to the universe at large, but love to the particular
   people with which you are connected, should lead you to reprove sin.
   Sin is a reproach to any people, and whoever commits it goes to produce
   a state of society that is injurious to every thing good. His example
   has a tendency to corrupt society, to destroy its peace, and to
   introduce disorder and ruin, and it is the duty of every one who loves
   the community to resist and reprove it.

   4. Love to your neighbor demands it.

   Neighbor, here, means any body that sins within the reach of your
   influence; not only in your presence, but in your neighborhood, if your
   influence can reach him, or in your nation, or in the world. If he sins
   he injures himself, and therefore if we love him we shall reprove his
   sins. Love to the intemperate induces us to warn him of the
   consequences of his course. Suppose we see our neighbor exposed to a
   temporal calamity, say his house on fire.

   True love will induce us to warn him and not to leave him to perish in
   the flames, especially if we saw him inclined to persist in his course,
   and stay in the burning house, we should expostulate earnestly with
   him, and not suffer him to destroy himself, if we could possibly
   prevent it. Much more should we warn him of the consequences of sin,
   and reprove him, and strive to turn him, before he destroys himself.

   5. It is cruel to omit it.

   If you see your neighbor sin, and you pass by and neglect to reprove
   him, it is just as cruel as if you should see his house on fire, and
   pass by and not warn him of it. Why not? If he is in the house, and the
   house burns, he will lose his life. If he sins and remains in sin, he
   will go to hell. Is it not cruel to let him go unwarned to hell? Some
   seem to consider it not cruel to let a neighbor go on in sin till the
   wrath of God comes on him to the uttermost. Their feelings are so
   tender that they cannot wound him by telling him of his sin and his
   danger. No doubt, the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Instead
   of warning their neighbor of the consequences of sin, they actually
   encourage him in it.

   6. To refuse to do it is rebellion against God.

   For any one to see rebellion and not to reprove it or lift his hand to
   oppose it, is itself rebellion. It would be counted rebellion by the
   laws of the land. The man who should know of a treasonable plot, and
   did not disclose it or endeavor to defeat it, would be held an
   accessory, and condemned as such by law. So if a man sees rebellion
   breaking out against God, and does not oppose it, or make efforts to
   suppress it, he is himself a rebel.

   7. If you do not reprove your neighbors for their sin, you are
   chargeable with their death.

   God holds us chargeable with the death of those whom we suffer to go on
   in sin without reproof, and it is right he should. If we see them sin,
   and make no opposition, and give no reproof, we consent to it, and
   countenance them in it. If you see a man preparing to kill his
   neighbor, and stand still and do nothing to prevent it, you consent,
   and are justly chargeable as accessory; in the eye of God and the eye
   of law, you are justly chargeable with the same sin. So if you see a
   man committing any iniquity, and do nothing to resist it, you are
   guilty with him. His blood will be upon his own head, but at whose hand
   will God require it? What says God respecting a watchman? "Son of man,
   I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou
   shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto
   the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak
   to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
   iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand." This is true of
   all men. If you suffer a neighbor, who is within reach of your
   influence, to pass on in sin unwarned, he will die in his iniquity, but
   his blood shall be required at your hand.

   8. Your silence encourages him in sin.

   He is authorized to infer from your silence that you approve his sin,
   or, at least, that you do not care for it. Especially if he knows you
   are a professor of religion. It is an old maxim that silence is
   consent. Sinners do regard your silence as a virtual sanction of what
   they do.

   9. By reproving your neighbor who sins, you may save him.

   What multitudes have been reformed by timely reproof. Most of those who
   are saved, are saved by somebody's rebuking them for their sins and
   urging them to repentance you may be instrumental in saving any man, if
   you speak to him, and reprove him, and pray for him, as you ought. How
   many instances there are, where a single reproof has been to the
   transgressor like the barbed arrow in his soul, that rankled, and
   rankled, the poison whereof done up his spirits, until he submitted to
   God. I have known instances where even a look of reproof has done the
   work.

   10. If you do not save the individual reproved, your reproof may save
   somebody else that may be acquainted with the fact.

   Such cases have often occurred, where the transgressor has not been
   reclaimed, but others have been deterred from following his example by
   the rebukes directed to him. Who can doubt that, if professors of
   religion were faithful in this duty, men would fear encountering their
   reproofs, and that fear would deter them from such conduct, and
   multitudes who now go on unblushing and unawed, would pause and think,
   and be reclaimed and saved? Will you, with such an argument for
   faithfulness before you, let sinners go on unrebuked till they stumble
   into hell?

   11. God expressly requires it.

   The language of the text is, in the original, exceedingly strong. The
   word is repeated, which is the way in which the Hebrew expresses a
   superlative, so as to leave no doubt on the mind, not the least
   uncertainty as to the duty, nor any excuse for not doing it. There is
   not a stronger command of God in the Bible than this. God has given it
   the greatest strength of language that he can. "Thou shalt in any wise
   rebuke him," that is, without any excuse, "and not bear his sin," not
   be accessory to his ruin. It is a maxim of law, that if a man knows of
   a murder about to be committed and does not use means to prevent it, he
   shall be held accessory before the fact. If he knows of murder which
   has been done, and does not endeavor to bring the criminal to justice,
   he is accessory after the fact. So by the law of God, if you do not
   endeavor to bring a known transgressor to repentance, you are
   implicated in the guilt of his crime, and are held responsible at the
   throne of God.

   12. If you do it in a right manner, you will keep a conscience void of
   offense in regard to your neighbor, whatever may be his end.

   And you cannot do this without being faithful in the reproof of sin. A
   man does not live conscientiously, towards God or man, unless he is in
   the habit of reproving transgressors who are within his influence. This
   is one grand reason why there is so little conscience in the church. In
   what respect are professors of religion so much in the habit of
   resisting their consciences, as in regard to the duty of reproving sin?
   Here is one of the strongest commands in the Bible, and yet multitudes
   do not pay any attention to it at all. Can they have a clear
   conscience? They may just as well pretend to have a clear conscience,
   and get drunk every day. No man keeps the law of God, or keeps his
   conscience clear, who sees sin and does not reprove it. He has
   additional guilt, who knows of sin and does not reprove it. He breaks
   two commandments. First, he becomes accessory to the transgression of
   his neighbor, and then he disobeys an express requirement by refusing
   to reprove his neighbor.

   13. Unless you reprove men for their sins, you are not prepared to meet
   them in judgment.

   Are you prepared to meet your children in the judgment, if you have not
   reproved nor chastised them, nor watched over their morals? "Certainly
   not," you say. But why?

   "Because God has made it my duty to do this, and he holds me
   responsible for it." Very well. Then take the case of any other man
   that sins under your eye, or within reach of your influence, and goes
   down to hell, and you have never reproved him. Are you not responsible?
   Oh, how many are now groaning in hell, that you have seen commit sin,
   and have never reproved, and now they are pouring curses on your head
   because you never waned them. And how can you meet them in judgment?

   14. Unless you do this, you are not prepared to meet God.

   How many there are who profess to love God, and yet never so much as
   pretend to obey this command. Are such people prepared to meet God?
   When he says, "Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor," that is,
   without any excuse.

  II. To whom is this command addressed?

   Manifestly, to all men that have neighbors. It was addressed to all the
   people of Israel, and through them to all who are under the government
   of God to high and low, rich and poor, young and old, male and female,
   and every individual who is under the government of God, or bound to
   obey his commands.

  III. Some exceptions to the universal application of this law.

   He that made the law has a right to admit of exceptions. And the rule
   is binding in all cases, unless they come within the exceptions. There
   are some exceptions to the rule before us, laid down in the Bible.

   1. God says, "Rebuke not a scorned, lest he hate thee."

   There is a state of mind, where a person is known to be a scorner, a
   despiser of religion, a hater of God, and has no regard to his law, and
   is not to be influenced by any fear or care for God, why should you
   reprove him? It will only provoke a quarrel, without any good resulting
   to anybody. Therefore God makes such a character an exception to the
   rule.

   2. Jesus Christ says, "Cast not your pearls before swine, least they
   trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you."

   Whatever else this passage means, it appears to me to mean this, that
   sometimes men are in such a state of mind that to talk to them about
   religion would be at once irrational and dangerous, like casting pearls
   before swine. They have such a contempt for religion, and such a
   stupid, sensual, swinish heart, that they will trample all your
   reproofs under their feet, and turn upon you in anger besides. It is
   lawful to let such men go on; and your not meddling with them will be
   greater wisdom than to attack them. But great charity should be used,
   not to suppose those of your neighbors to be swine, who do not deserve
   it, and who might be benefited by suitable reproof.

   3. Men who are in a settled state of self-righteousness, it is best to
   let alone.

   Christ said of the Scribes and Pharisees, "Let them alone, they be
   blind leaders of the blind." That is, they were so full of pride and
   conceit, so satisfied of their own wisdom and goodness, that they
   cannot be reached by any reproof, and it seems best to let them alone;
   for if you begin to reprove them, you might as well face a northwester
   as think of making an impression on them. They will face you down, and
   are so full of arguments, and cavils, and bullyings, that you gain
   nothing.

  IV. The manner in which this duty is to be performed.

   1. It should be done always in the name of the Lord.

   It is important when you reprove your neighbor for sin, always to make
   him feel it is not a personal controversy with you, not a matter of
   selfishness on your part, or claiming any right of superiority, or to
   lord it over him, but that you reprove him in the name of the Lord, for
   the honor of God, because he has broken his law. If, by your manner,
   you in any way make the impression on his mind that it is a personal
   controversy, or done for any private motive with you, he will
   invariably rise up against you, and resist, and perhaps retort upon
   you. But if you make the impression on his mind that it is done in the
   name of God, and bring him right up before God as an offender, he will
   find it exceedingly difficult to get away from you without at least
   confessing that he is wrong.

   2. It should always be done with great solemnity.

   Above all things, do not make him think that it is just a little thing
   that you hint to him, but make him feel that it is for a sin against
   God you are reproving him, and that it is what in your view ought to be
   looked upon as an awful thing.

   3. You should use more or less severity, according to the nature of the
   case, and the circumstances under which the sin was committed.

   (1.) The relation of the parties.

   Your relation to the person who has been guilty of sin, should be
   properly regarded.

   If a child is going to reprove a parent, he should do it in a manner
   suited to the relation he stands in. If a man is going to reprove a
   magistrate, or if an individual is about to rebuke an elder, the
   apostle says it must be in that way, "entreat him as a father." This
   relation should enter deeply into the manner of administering reproof.
   The relation of parents and children, of husbands and wives, of
   brothers and sisters, should all be regarded. So the ages of the
   parties, their relative circumstances in life. For servants to reprove
   their masters in the same manner as their equals is improper. This
   direction should never be overlooked or forgotten, for if it is, the
   good effect of reproof will be all lost. But remember, that no
   relations in life, or relative circumstances of the parties, take away
   the obligation of this duty. Whatever be the relation, you are to
   reprove sin, and are bound to do it in the name of the Lord. Do it, not
   as if you were complaining or finding fault for a personal injury
   committed against yourself, but as a sin against God. Thus, when a
   child reproves a parent for sin, he is not to do it as if he was
   expostulating with him for any injury done to himself, but with an eye
   to the fact that the parent has sinned against God, and therefore, with
   all that plainness, and faithfulness, and pungency that sin calls for.

   (2.) Reproof should be regulated by the knowledge which the offender
   has of his duty.

   If the individual is ignorant, reproof should be more in the form of
   instruction, rather than of severe rebuke. How do you do with your
   little child? You instruct him and strive to enlighten his mind
   respecting his duty. You proceed, of course, very differently from what
   you would do with a hardened offender.

   (3.) With reference also to the frequency of the offense.

   You would reprove a first offense in a very different manner from what
   you would use towards an habitual transgressor. If a person is
   accustomed to sin, and knows that it is wrong, you use more severity.
   If it is the first time, perhaps a mere allusion to it may be
   sufficient to prevent a repetition.

   (4.) So, also, you are to consider whether he has been frequently
   reproved for the sin.

   If he has not only often committed the sin, but been often reproved,
   and yet has hardened his neck, there is the greater necessity for using
   sharpness. The hardening influence of former reproofs resisted, shows
   that no common expostulations will take hold. He needs to have the
   terrors of the Lord poured upon him like a storm of hail.

   4. Always show that your temper is not ruffled.

   Never manifest any displeasure at the transgressor, which he can
   possibly construe into personal displeasure at himself. It is often
   important to show your strong displeasure at what he is doing.
   Otherwise he will think you are not in earnest. Suppose you reprove a
   man for murder, in a manner not expressing any abhorrence of his crime,
   you would not expect to produce an effect. The manner should be suited
   to the nature of the crime, yet so as not to lead him to think you have
   any personal feeling. Here is the grand defect in the manner of
   reproving crime, both in the pulpit and out of it. For fear of giving
   offense, men do not express their abhorrence of the sin, and therefore
   transgressors are so seldom reclaimed.

   5. Always reprove in the Spirit of God.

   You should always have so much of the Holy Ghost with you, that when
   you reprove a man for sin, he will feel as if it came from God. I have
   known cases, where reproof from a Christian in that state has cut the
   transgressor to the heart, and stung like the arrow of the Almighty,
   and he could not get rid of it till he repented.

   6. There are many different ways of giving reproof so as to reach the
   individual reproved.

   Sometimes it can be done best by sending a letter, especially if the
   person be at a distance. And there are cases where it can be done so,
   even in your own neighborhood. I knew an individual who chose this way
   of reprimanding a sea-captain for intemperance in crossing the
   Atlantic. The captain drank hard, especially in bad weather, and when
   his services were most wanted. The individual was in great agony, for
   the captain was not only intemperate, but when he drank he was
   ill-natured, and endangered the lives of all on board. He made it a
   subject of prayer. It was a difficult case. He did not know how to
   approach the captain so as to make it probable he should do good and
   not hurt; for a captain at sea, you know, is a perfect despot, and has
   the most absolute power on earth. After a while he sat down and wrote a
   letter, and gave it to the captain with his own hand, in which he
   plainly and affectionately, but faithfully and most pointedly, set
   forth his conduct, and the sin he was committing against God and man.
   He accompanied it with much prayer to God. The captain read it, and it
   completely cured him; he made an apology to the individual, and never
   drank another drop of anything stronger than coffee or tea on the whole
   passage.

   7. Sometimes it is necessary to reprove sin by forming societies, and
   getting up newspapers, and forming a public sentiment against a
   particular sin, that shall be a continued and overwhelming rebuke. The
   Temperance Societies, Moral Reform Societies, Anti-Slavery Societies,
   etc., are designed for this end.

  V. I will mention now some of the cases in which the principles are
  applicable.

   They are peculiarly applicable to those crimes which are calculated to
   undermine the institutions of society, and to exert a wide-spread
   influence. Such sins can only be held in check and put down by
   faithfulness in reproof.

   1. Sabbath-breaking.

   If Christians would universally mark transgressors, and rebuke them
   that trample on the Sabbath, they would do more to put a stop to
   Sabbath-breaking than by all other means. If Christians were united in
   this, how long do you suppose it would be before this sin would be put
   down? If only a few were faithful, and constant and persevering, they
   might do much. If only a few do it, and these only now and then, it
   might not have much effect. But I believe if all professors of religion
   were to do it, every grocery and grog shop, and oyster cellar, and
   fruit stand, would be shut up. At all events, they are bound to do it,
   whatever may be the result; and so long as they neglect their duty,
   they are chargeable before God with all the Sabbath breaking in the
   city. If all the churches and ecclesiastical bodies in the land were
   united to remonstrate with the government, and would continue to do it,
   firmly, and in the name of the Lord, do you suppose government would
   continue to violate the Sabbath with their mail? I tell you, no. The
   church can do this, I believe, in one year, if all were united
   throughout the country, and could speak out fully, in the fear of God,
   and without any fear of man. No man who ever expected to be elected to
   office again, would ever again advise the breaking of the Sabbath. But
   now, while the church is divided, and not half in earnest, there are so
   few speak out, that government despises them, and pays no attention.
   Thus it is that the church connive at Sabbath-breaking, and they are
   without excuse, till they speak out and rebuke their rulers, in the
   name of Jehovah, for breaking his holy law.

   2. Intemperance and rum-selling.

   Suppose every man in this city that sells rum was continually subject
   to the rebukes which God requires; suppose every man that passed by
   were to reprove him for his sin; how long could he sell rum? If only
   the church were to do it; if that deacon and that elder would do it,
   and every Christian would follow him with rebukes in the name of the
   Lord for poisoning men to death with rum, he could not go on and do it.
   Such a strong and decided testimony would soon drive him from his trade
   of death. In self-defense he would have to yield to the pressure of
   solemn rebuke.

   3. Lewdness.

   This is a wide-spreading evil, that ought to be universally rebuked.

   It should be rebuked unsparingly, not only from the pulpit, but by the
   press, and in the street, till it be driven from its strong holds, and
   made to hide itself in the chambers of hell.

   4. Slavery.

   What! shall men be suffered to commit one of the most God-dishonoring
   and most heaven-daring sins on earth, and not be reproved?

   It is a sin against which all men should bear testimony, and lift up
   their voice like a trumpet, till this giant iniquity is banished from
   the land and from the world.

  VI. I shall consider some of the difficulties which are sometimes raised in
  the way of the performance of this duty.

   1. It is often asked, Is it a duty to reprove my neighbor when there is
   no prospect of doing any good?

   I answer, it may be very essential to reprove sin in many cases where
   there is no prospect that the individual whom you reprove will be
   benefited. As in cases where your silence would be taken for connivance
   in his sin. Or where the very fact of his being reproved may prevent
   others from falling into the like crime. Where the offender comes
   properly under the description of a scorned or a swine, there God has
   made an exception, and you are not bound to reprove. But in other
   cases, duty is yours, consequences God's.

   2. It is asked, Should I reprove strangers? Why not? Is not the
   stranger your neighbor?

   You are not to reprove a stranger in the same way that you would a
   familiar acquaintance; but the fact of his being a stranger is not a
   reason why he should not be reproved, if he break the command of God.
   If a man swear profanely, or break the Sabbath, in your presence, his
   being a stranger does not excuse you from the duty and the
   responsibility of administering reproof, or trying to bring him to
   repentance and save his soul.

   3. It is asked, Should we reprove a person when he is drunk?

   Generally not: for when a person is drunk he is deranged. There may be
   cases where it is proper, for the purpose of warning others. But so far
   as the drunkard himself is concerned, as a general rule, it is not
   expedient. Yet there are many cases where reproof to a man even when
   drunk, has taken such a hold on his mind as to sober him, and turn him
   from his beastly sin.

   4. Shall we reprove great men, and those who are above us in society,
   and who may look down on us and on our reproofs with contempt?

   That does not alter your duty. "Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy
   neighbor, and not bear sin for him." You should bear in mind the
   relation in which he stands, and treat him accordingly. But still, if
   he sin against God, it is your duty to reprove him in an appropriate
   manner.

  REMARKS

   1. Do not talk about people's sins, but go and reprove them.

   It is very common to talk about people's sins behind their backs, but
   this is great wickedness. If you want to folk about any person's sins,
   go and talk to him about whom, and try to get him to repent and forsake
   them. Do not go and talk to others against him behind his back, and
   leave him to go on in his sins, unwarned to hell.

   2. How few professors of religion are sufficiently conscientious to
   practice this duty.

   I suppose there are thousands in this city, who never think of doing
   it. Yes; professors of religion live in habitual disobedience to this
   plain, and strongly expressed command of God. And then they wonder why
   they do not have the spirit of prayer, and why there are not more
   revivals! Wonder!

   3. See why so few persons enjoy religion.

   They live in habitual neglect of this command, making excuses, when God
   has said there shall be no excuse. And how can they enjoy religion?
   What would the universe think of God, if he should grant the joys of
   religion to such unfaithful professors?

   4. We see that the great mass of the professors of religion have more
   regard to their own reputation than to the requirements of God.

   The proof is, that sooner than run the risk of being called censorious,
   or of getting enemies by rebuking sin, they will let men go on in sin
   unrebuked, notwithstanding God says, "Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy
   neighbor." But I shall offend him if I reprove his sin. "In any wise
   rebuke him," says Jehovah. It shows that they have a greater fear of
   men than of God. For fear at offending man, they run the risk of
   offending God. Yea, they absolutely disobey God, in one of his plainest
   and strongest commandments, rather than incur the displeasure of men by
   rebuking their sins.

   5. No man has a right to say to us, when we reprove him for his sin,
   that it is none of our business to meddle with him.

   How often do transgressors tell faithful reprovers, they had better
   mind their own business and not meddle with what does not concern them.
   And they are called meddlers and busybodies, for interfering in other
   people's concerns. At the south, they have got themselves into a great
   rage because we at the north are trying to convince them of the
   wickedness of slavery. And they say it is none of our business, that
   slavery is a matter peculiarly their own, and they will not suffer
   anybody else to interfere with them, and they require us to let them
   alone, and will not even allow us to talk about the subject. And they
   want our northern legislatures to pass laws forbidding us to rebuke our
   southern neighbors for their sin in holding men in slavery. God forbid
   that we should be silent. Jehovah himself has commanded us to rebuke
   our neighbor in any wise, let the consequences be as they may. And we
   will rebuke them, though all hell should rise up against it.

   Are we to hold our peace and be partakers in the sin of slavery, by
   connivance, as we have been? God forbid. We will speak of it, and bear
   our testimony against it, and pray over it, and complain of it to God
   and man. Heaven shall know, and the world shall know, and hell shall
   know, that ye protest against the sin, and will continue to rebuke it,
   till it is broken up. God Almighty says, "Thou shalt in any wise rebuke
   thy neighbor," and we must do it.

   So the rum-dealer is all the while pleading, "It is none of your
   concern what I do; please to mind your own business, and let me alone."
   But it is our business to reprove him when he dispenses his poison, and
   it is everybody's concern, and every man is bound to rebuke his crime
   till he gives it up, and ceases to destroy the lives and souls of his
   neighbors.

   6. We see the importance of consistency in religion.

   If a man professes to love God, he ought to have consistency enough to
   reprove those that oppose God. If Christians were only consistent in
   this duty, many would be converted by it, a right public sentiment
   would be formed, and sin would be rebuked and forced to retire before
   the majesty of Christian rebuke. If Christians were not such cowards,
   and absolutely disobedient to this plain command of God, one thing
   would certainly come of it either they would be murdered in the streets
   as martyrs, because men could not bear the intolerable presence of
   truth, or they would be speedily converted to God.

   What shall we say, then, to such professors of religion? Afraid to
   reprove sinners! When God commands, not prepared to obey? How will they
   answer it to God?

   Now, beloved, will you practice this duty? Will you reprove sin
   faithfully, so as not to bear sin for your neighbors? Will you make
   your whole life a testimony against sin? Will you clear your souls, or
   will you hold your peace and be weighed down with the guilt of all the
   transgressors around you and within the sphere of your influence? God
   says, "Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not bear sin for
   him."
     __________________________________________________________________

      Who is on the Lord's side? Exodus 32:26.

   The question was addressed by Moses to the professed people of God,
   immediately after their great departure from God while Moses was on the
   Mount, when they went and worshiped a golden calf which had been cast
   for them by Aaron. After expostulating with the guilty nation, he
   called out, "Who is on the Lord's side?" It is not my intention to
   dwell on the history of this case particularly, but to come at once to
   the main design I have in view this evening, which is to show that
   there are

      THREE CLASSES OF PROFESSING CHRISTIANS

   I. The true friends of God and man. II. Those who are actuated by hope
   and fear, or in other words by self-love, or by selfishness. III. Those
   who are actuated by public opinion.

   These three classes may be known by attending to the characteristic
   developments which show what is the leading design in their religion.
   It needs not be proved, that persons may set out in religion from very
   different motives, some from real love to religion, and some from other
   motives. The differences may be arranged in these three classes, and by
   attending to the development of their real design in becoming
   religions, you learn their characters. They all profess to be servants
   of God, and yet by observing the lives of many, it becomes manifest
   that instead of their being God's servants they are only trying to make
   God their servant. Their leading aim and object is to secure their own
   salvation, or some other advantage for themselves, through the medium
   of the favor of God. They are seeking to make God their friend, that
   they may make use of him to serve their own turn.

  I. There is a class of professed Christians who are the true friends of God
  and man.

   If you attend to those things which develop the true design and aim of
   their religion, you will see it to be such. They are truly and
   sincerely benevolent.

   1. They will make it manifest that this is their character, by their
   carefulness in avoiding sin.

   They will show that they hate it in themselves, and that they hate it
   in others. They will not justify it in themselves, and they will not
   justify it in others. They will not seek to cover up or to excuse their
   own sins, neither will they try to cover up or to excuse the sins of
   others. In short they aim at perfect holiness. This course of conduct
   makes it evident that they are the true friends of God. I do not mean
   to say that every true friend of God is perfect, no more than I would
   say that every truly affectionate and obedient child is perfect, or
   never fails in duty to his parent. But if he is an affectionate and
   obedient child, his aim is to obey always, and if he fails in any
   respect, he by no means justifies it, or pleads for it, or aims to
   cover it up, but as soon as he comes to think of the matter, is
   dissatisfied with himself, and condemns his conduct.

   So these persons who are the true friends of God and man, are ever
   ready to complain of themselves, and to blame and condemn themselves
   for what is wrong. But you never see them finding fault with God. You
   never hear them excusing themselves and throwing off the blame upon
   their Maker, by telling of their inability to obey God, or speaking as
   if God had required impossibilities of his creatures. They always speak
   as if they felt that what God has required is right and reasonable, and
   themselves only to blame for their disobedience.

   2. They manifest a deep abhorrence of the sins of other people.

   They do not cover up the sins of others, or plead for them and excuse
   them, or smooth them over by "perhaps this," or "perhaps that." You
   never hear them apologizing for sin. As they are indignant at sin in
   themselves, they are just as much so when they see it in others. They
   know its horrible nature, and abhor it always.

   3. Another thing in which this spirit manifests itself, is zeal for the
   honor and glory of God.

   They show the same ardor to promote God's honor and interest, that the
   true patriot does to promote the honor and interest of his country. If
   he greatly loves his country, its government, and its interest, he sets
   his heart upon promoting its advancement and benefit. He is never so
   happy as when he is doing something for the honor and advancement of
   his country. So a child that truly loves his father, is never so happy
   as when he is advancing his father's honor and interest. And he never
   feels more indignant grief, than when he sees his father abused or
   injured. If he sees his father disobeyed or abused by those who ought
   to obey, and love, and honor him, his heart breaks forth with indignant
   grief.

   There are multitudes of professing Christians, and even ministers, who
   are very zealous to defend their own character and their own honor. But
   this one class feel more engaged, and their hearts beat higher, when
   defending or advancing God's honor. These are the friends of God and
   man.

   4. They show that they sympathize with God in his feelings towards man.

   They have the same kind of friendship for souls that God feels. I do
   not mean that they feel in the same degree, but that they have the same
   kind of feelings. There is such a thing as loving the souls of men and
   hating their conduct too. There is such a thing as constitutional
   sympathy, which persons feel for those who are in distress. This is
   natural. You always feel this for a person in distress, unless you have
   some selfish reason for feeling malevolent. If you saw a murderer hung,
   you would feel compassion for him. The wicked have this natural
   sympathy for those that suffer.

   There is another peculiar kind of sympathy which the real child of God
   feels, and manifests towards sinners. It is a mingled feeling of
   abhorrence and compassion, of indignation against his sins, and pity
   for his person. It is possible to feel this deep abhorrence of sin
   mingled with deep compassion for souls capable of such endless
   happiness, and yet bound to eternal misery.

   I will explain myself. There are two kinds of love: one is the love of
   benevolence. This has no respect to the character of the person loved,
   but merely views the individual as exposed to suffering and misery.
   This God feels towards all men. The other kind includes esteem or
   approbation of character. God feels this only towards the righteous. He
   never feels this love towards sinners. He infinitely abhors them. He
   has an infinitely strong exercise of compassion and abhorrence at the
   same time. Christians have the same feelings, only not in the same
   degree, but they have them at the same time. Probably they never feel
   right unless they have both these feelings in exercise at the same
   time. The Christian does not feel as God feels towards individuals nor
   feel according to the true character of the individuals, unless both
   these feelings exist in his mind at the same time. You see this by one
   striking characteristic. The Christian will rebuke most pointedly and
   frequently those for whom he feels the deepest compassion. Did you
   never see this?

   Did you never see a parent yearning with compassion over a child, and
   reprove him with tears, and yet with a pungency that would make the
   little offender quail under his rebuke. Jesus Christ often manifested
   strongly these two emotions. He wept over Jerusalem, and yet he tells
   the reason in a manner that shows his burning indignation against their
   conduct. "O Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest them
   that are sent unto thee!" Ah, what a full view he had of their
   wickedness, at the moment that he wept with compassion for the doom
   that hung over them.

   It is just so with this class of Christians. You never find one of them
   addressing a sinner so as merely to make him weep because somebody is
   weeping for him. But his tender appeals are accompanied with strong
   rebuke for sin.

   I wish you to remember this point that the true friend of God and man
   never takes the sinner's part, because he never acts through mere
   compassion. And at the same time, he is never seen to denounce the
   sinner, without at the same time manifesting compassion for his soul
   and a strong desire to save him from death.

   5. It is a prominent object with such Christians, in all their
   intercourse with men, to make them friends of God.

   Whether they converse, or pray, or attend to the duties of life, it is
   their prominent object to recommend religion and to lead every body to
   glorify God. It is very natural they should do this, if they are true
   friends of God. A true friend of the government wishes everybody to be
   a friend of the government. A true and affectionate child wishes
   everybody to love and respect his father. And if only one is at enmity,
   it is his constant aim and effort to bring him to reconciliation. The
   same you would expect from a true friend of God, as a leading feature
   of his character, that he would make it a prominent object of his life
   to reconcile sinners to God.

   Now mark me! If this is not the leading feature of your character, if
   it is not the absorbing topic of thought and effort to reconcile men to
   God, you have not the root of the matter in you. Whatever appearance of
   religion you may have, you lack the leading and fundamental
   characteristic of true piety. It wants the leading feature of the
   character and aims of Jesus Christ, and of his apostles and prophets.
   Look at them, and see how this feature stands out in strong and eternal
   relief, as the leading characteristic, the prominent design and object,
   of their lives, Now let me ask you, what is the leading object of your
   life, as it appears in your daily walk? Is it to bring all God's
   enemies to submit to him? If not, away with your pretensions to
   religion. Whatever else you may have, you have not the true love of God
   in you.

   6. Where there are persons of this class, you will see them
   scrupulously avoid everything that in their estimation is calculated to
   defeat their great end.

   They always wish to avoid every thing calculated to prevent the
   salvation of souls, everything calculated to divert attention or in any
   way to hinder the conversion of souls. It is not the natural question
   with them, when any thing is proposed which is doubtful, to ask, "Is
   this something which God expressly forbids?" The first question that
   naturally suggests itself to their minds is, "What will be the bearing
   of this upon religion? Will it have a tendency to prevent the
   conversion of sinners, to hinder the progress of revivals, to roll back
   the wheels of salvation?" If so, they do not need the thunders of Sinai
   to be pealed in their ears, to forbid their doing it. If they see it
   contrary to the spirit of holiness, and contrary to the main object
   they have in view, that is enough.

   Look at the temperance reformation for an illustration of this. Here
   let me say, that it was the influence of intemperance, in hindering the
   conversion and salvation of sinners, that first turned the attention of
   the benevolent men who commenced the reformation, to inquire on the
   subject. And the same class of persons are still carrying it on. Such
   men do not stand and cavil at every step of the way, and say, "Drinking
   rum is no where prohibited in the Bible, and I do not feel bound to
   give it up." They find that it hinders the great object for which they
   live, and that is enough for them they give it up of course. They avoid
   whatever they see would hinder a revival, as a matter of course, just
   as a merchant would avoid anything that had a tendency to impair his
   credit, and defeat his object of making money by his business. Suppose
   a merchant was about to do something that you knew would injuriously
   affect his credit, and you go to him in the spirit of friendship and
   advise him not to do it, would he turn round and say, "Show me the
   passage in the Bible where God has prohibited this?" No. He would not
   ask you to show him anything more than this, that it is inconsistent
   with his main design.

   Mark this, all of you: A person who is strongly desirous of the
   conversion of sinners does not need an express prohibition to prevent
   his doing that which he sees is calculated to prevent this. There is no
   danger of his doing that which will defeat the very object of his life.

   7. This class of professing Christians are always distressed unless
   they see the work of converting sinner going on.

   They call it a lamentable state of things in the church, if no sinners
   are converted. No matter what else is true, no matter how rich the
   congregation grows, nor how popular their minister, nor how many come
   to hear him, their panting hearts are uneasy unless they see the work
   of conversion actually going on. They see that all the rest is nothing
   without this yea, that even the means of grace are doing more hurt than
   good, unless sinners are converted.

   Such professors as these are a great trouble to those who are religious
   from other motives, and who therefore wish to keep all quiet, and have
   everything go on regularly in the "good old way." They are often called
   "uneasy spirits in the church." And mark it! if a church has a few such
   spirits in it, the minister will be made uneasy unless his preaching is
   such as to convert sinners. You sometimes hear of these men reproving
   the church, and pouring out their expostulations for living so coldly
   and worldly, and the church reply, "O, we are doing well enough, do you
   not see how we foolish, it is only because you are always uneasy." When
   in fact their hearts are grieved and their souls in agony because
   sinners are not converted and souls are pressing down to hell.

   8. You will see them when manifesting a spirit of prayer, praying not
   for themselves but for sinners.

   If you know the habitual tenor of people's prayers, it will show which
   way the tide of their feelings sets. If a man is actuated in religion
   mainly by desire to save himself, you will hear him praying chiefly for
   himself that he may have his sins pardoned and "enjoy" much of the
   Spirit of God, and the like. But if he is truly the friend of God and
   man, you will find that the burden of his prayers is for the glory of
   God in the salvation of sinners; and he is never so copious and
   powerful in prayer as when he gets upon his favorite topic the
   conversion of sinners. Go into the prayer meeting where such Christians
   pray, and instead of seeing them all shut up in the nut shell of their
   own interests, spending their whole prayer on themselves, and just
   closing with a flourish about the kingdom of Christ, you will hear them
   pouring out their souls in prayer for the salvation of sinners. I
   believe there have been cases of such Christians who were so much
   absorbed in their desires for the salvation of sinners, that for weeks
   together they did not even pray for their own salvation.

   Or if they pray for themselves at all, it is that they may be clothed
   with the Spirit of God, so that they can go out and be mighty through
   God in pulling souls out of the fire.

   You that are here can tell how it is with your prayers, whether you
   feel most and pray most for yourselves or for sinners. If you know
   nothing about the spirit of prayer for sinners, you are not the true
   friend of God and man. What! no heart to feel when sinners are going to
   hell by your side! No sympathy with the Son of God, who gave his life
   to save sinners! Away with all such professions of religion. "If any
   man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." Do not tell me
   men are truly pious, when their prayers are droned over, as much a
   matter of form as when the poor popish priest counts over his beads.
   Such a man deceives himself, if he talk about being the true friend of
   God and man.

   9. These persons do not want to ask what are the things they are
   "required" to do for the conversion of sinners.

   When anything is presented to them that promises success in converting
   sinners, they do not wait to be commanded to do it, on pains and
   penalties if they do not. They only want the evidence that it is
   calculated to advance the object on which their hearts are set, and
   they will engage in it with all their soul. The question is not with
   them all the while, "What am I expressly commanded to do?" but, "In
   what way can I do most for the salvation of souls, and the conversion
   of the world to God?" They do not wait for an express command in the
   Bible, before they engage in the work of missions, or Sabbath schooled
   or any other enterprise that promises to save souls; but they are ready
   to every good word and work.

   10. Another characteristic of such Christians is a disposition to deny
   themselves to do good to others.

   God has established throughout all the universe the principle of
   GIVING. Even in the natural world, the river, the ocean, the clouds,
   all give. It is so throughout the whole kingdom of nature and of grace.
   This diffusive principle is every where recognized. This is the very
   spirit of Christ. He sought not to please himself, but to do good to
   others. He found his highest happiness in denying himself to do good to
   others. So it is with this class of persons they are ever ready to deny
   themselves of enjoyments and comforts, and even of necessaries, when by
   so doing they can do more good to others.

   11. They are continually devising new means and new measures for doing
   good.

   This is what would be expected from their continual desire to do good.
   Instead of being satisfied with what does not succeed, they are
   continually devising new ways and means to effect their object. They
   are not like those persons who make themselves satisfied with doing
   what they call their duty. Where an individual is aiming mainly at his
   own salvation, he may think if he does his duty he is discharged from
   responsibility, and so he is satisfied he thinks he has escaped from
   divine wrath and gained heaven for himself, by doing what God required
   him to do, and he cannot help it, whether sinners are saved or lost.
   But with the other class, it is not so much their object to gain heaven
   and avoid wrath, but their leading object is to save souls and to honor
   God. And if this object is not advanced, they are in pain. Such a man
   in the one whose soul is all the while devising liberal things, and
   trying new things, and if one fails, trying another and another, and
   cannot rest till he has found something that will succeed in the
   salvation of souls.

   12. They always manifest great grief when they see the church asleep
   and doing nothing for the salvation of sinners.

   They know the difficulty the impossibility of doing anything
   considerable for the salvation of sinners while the church is asleep.
   Go into a church where the great mass are doing nothing for the
   conversion of sinners, and floating along on the current of the world,
   and you will find that the true friends of God and man are grieved at
   such a state of things. Those who have other objects in view in being
   religious, may think they are going on very well. They are not grieved
   when they see the professed people of God going after show and folly.
   But if there are any of this class, you will find them grieved and
   distressed at heart, because the church is in such a state.

   13. They are grieved if they see reason to think their minister
   temporizes, or does not reprove the church pointedly and faithfully for
   their sins.

   The other classes of professors are willing to be rocked to sleep, and
   willing their minister should preach smooth, flowery, and eloquent
   sermons, and flattering sermons, with no point and no power. But these
   are not satisfied unless he preaches powerfully and pointedly, and
   boldly, and rebukes and entreats and exhorts, with all long-suffering
   and doctrine. Their souls are not fed, or edified, or satisfied with
   any thing that does not take hold, and do the work for which the
   ministry was appointed by Jesus Christ.

   14. This class of persons will always stand by a faithful minister, who
   preaches the truth boldly and pointedly.

   No matter if the truth he preaches hits them, they like it, and say,
   Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be an excellent oil. When the
   truth is poured forth with power, their souls are fed, and grow strong
   in grace. They can pray for such a minister. They can weep in their
   closet, and pour out their souls in prayer for him, that he may have
   the Spirit of God always with him. While others scold and cavil at him
   and talk about his being extravagant, and all that, you will find
   Christians of this sort will stand by him, yea, and would go to the
   stake with him for the testimony of Jesus. And this they do for the
   best of all reasons such preaching falls in with the great design for
   which these Christians live.

   15. This sort of Christians are especially distressed when ministers
   preach sermons not adapted to convert sinners.

   I mean when the sermon is not especially addressed to the church, to
   stir them up. Others may approve the sermon, and praise it, and tell
   what a great sermon it is, or how eloquent, or lucid, or grand, or
   sublime, but it does not suit them if it lacks this one characteristic
   a tendency to convert sinners. You will find some people that are great
   sticklers for the doctrine of election, and they will not believe it is
   a gospel sermon unless it has the doctrine of election in it, but if
   the doctrine of election is in it they are suited whether it is adapted
   to convert sinners or not. But where a man has his heart set on the
   conversion of sinners, if he hears a sermon not calculated to do this,
   he feels as if it lacked the "great thing" that constitutes a gospel
   sermon. But if they hear a sermon calculated to save souls, then they
   are fed, and their souls rejoice.

   Hence you see the ground for the astonishing difference you often find
   in the judgment which people pass upon preaching. There is in fact no
   better test of character than this. It is easy to see who they are that
   are filled with the love of God and of souls, by the judgment which
   they pass upon preaching. The true friends of God and man, when they
   hear a sermon that is not particularly designed to probe and rouse the
   church and bring them to action, if it is not such as to bear down on
   sinners and does not tend to convert sinners, it is not the sermon for
   them.

   You will always find this class of persons speaking in terms of
   dissatisfaction with themselves, that they do no more for the
   conversion of sinners.

   However much they may really "do" for this object, it seems that the
   more they do the more they long to do. They are never satisfied.
   Instead of being satisfied with the present degree of their success,
   there is no end of their longing for the conversion of sinners. I
   recollect a good man, who used to pray till he was exhausted with
   praying for individuals, and for places, and for the world's
   conversion. Once when he was quite exhausted with praying, he exclaimed
   "Oh! my longing, aching heart! There is no such thing as satisfying my
   unutterable desires for the conversion of sinners. My soul breaketh for
   the longing that it hath." That man, though he had been useful beyond
   almost any other man of his age, yet he saw so much to do, and he so
   longed to see the work go forward and sinners saved, that his mortal
   frame could not sustain it. "I find," said he, one day, "that I am
   dying for want of strength to do more to save the souls of men. Oh, how
   much I want strength, that I may save souls."

   17. If you wish to move this class of persons, you must make use of
   motives drawn from their great and leading object.

   If you wish to move them, you must hold up the situation of sinners,
   and show how they dishonor God, and you will find this will move their
   souls and set them on fire sooner than any appeal to their hopes and
   fears. Roll on them this great object. Show them how they can convert
   sinners, and their longing hearts beat and wrestle with God in prayer,
   and travail for souls, until they see them converted, and Christ formed
   in them the hope of glory.

   I might mention many other characteristics which belong to this class
   of professing Christians the true friends of God and man, did time and
   strength permit. But I must stop here, and postpone the consideration
   of the other two classes till next Friday evening, if we are spared,
   and the Lord permit.

   Now, do you belong to this class, or not? I have mentioned certain
   great fundamental facts, which, when they exist, indicate the true
   character of individuals, by showing what is their main design and
   object in life. You can tell whether this is your character. When I
   come to the other part of the subject, I shall endeavor to describe
   those classes of professing Christians, whose religious zeal, prayers,
   and efforts, have another design, and show their character, and how
   this design is carried out.

   And now, beloved, I asked you before God, have you these
   characteristics of a child of God? Do you know they belong to you? Can
   you say, "O Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love
   thee, and that these are the features of my character!"
     __________________________________________________________________

      Who is on the Lord's side? Exodus 32:26.

   Last Friday evening, you will remember, that in discoursing from this
   text, I mentioned three classes of professors of religion: those who
   truly love God and man, those who are actuated solely by selfishness
   (or at most self-love) in their religious duties, and those who are
   actuated only by a regard for public opinion. I also mentioned several
   characteristics of the first class, by which they may be known. This
   evening I intend to mention several characteristics of the second
   class,

   Those professors who are actuated by self-love or by selfishness.

   I design to show how their leading or main design in religion develops
   itself in their conduct. The conduct of men invariably shows what is
   their true and main design. A man's character is as his supreme object
   is. And if you can learn by his conduct what that leading object is,
   then you can know with certainty what his character is. And I suppose
   this may generally be known by us with great certainty, if we would
   candidly and thoroughly observe their conduct.

   These three classes of professors agree in many things, and it would be
   impossible to discriminate between them by an observation of these
   things only. But there are certain things in which they differ, and by
   close observation the difference will be seen in their conduct, from
   which we infer a difference in their character. And those points in
   which they differ belong to the very fundamental of religion.

  II. I will now proceed to mention some of the characteristics of the second
  class

   Those who are actuated by self love, or by selfishness, in whom hope
   and fear are the main springs of all they do in religion. And the
   things that I shall mention are such as, when they are seen, make it
   evident that the individual is actuated by a supreme regard to his own
   good, and that the fear of evil, or the hope of advantage to himself,
   is the foundation of all his conduct.

   1. They make religion a subordinate concern.

   They show by their conduct that they do not regard religion as the
   principal business of life, but as subordinate to other things. They
   consider religion as something that ought to come in by the by, as
   something that ought to come in and find a place among other things, as
   a sort of Sabbath-day business, or something to be confined to the
   closet and the hour of family prayer, and the Sabbath, but not as the
   grand business of life. They make a distinction between religious duty
   and business, and consider them as entirely separate concerns. Whereas,
   if they had right views of the matter, they would consider religion as
   the only business of life, and nothing else either lawful or worth
   pursuing, any further than as it promotes or subserves religion. If
   they had the right feeling, religion would characterize all that they
   do, and it would be manifest that everything they do is an act of
   obedience to God, or an act of irreligion.

   2. Their religious duties are performed as a task, and are not the
   result of the constraining love of God that burns within them.

   Such a one does not delight in the exercise of religious affections;
   and as to communion with God, he knows nothing of it. He performs
   prayer as a task.

   He betakes himself to religious duties as sick persons take medicine,
   not because they love it, but because they hope to derive some benefit
   from it.

   And here let me ask those who are present tonight, Do you enjoy
   religious exercises, or do you perform them because you hope to receive
   benefit by them? Be honest, now, and answer this question, just
   according to the truth, and see where you stand.

   3. They manifestly possess a legal spirit, and not a gospel spirit.

   They do rather what they are obliged to do, in religion, and not what
   they love to do. They have an eye to the commands of God, and yield
   obedience to his requirements, in performing religious duties, but do
   not engage in those things because they love them. They are always
   ready to inquire, in regard to duty, not so much how they can do good,
   as how they can be saved. There is just the difference between them,
   that there is between a convinced sinner and a true convert. The
   convinced sinner asks "What must I do to be saved?" The true convert
   asks "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" So this class of professors
   are constantly asking, "What must I do to get to heaven?" and not "What
   can I do to get other people there?" The principal object of such a
   professor of religion is not to save the world, but to save himself.

   4. They are actuated by fear much more than by hope.

   They perform their religious duties chiefly because they dare not omit
   them. They go to the communion, not because they love to meet Christ,
   or because they love to commune with their brethren, but because they
   dare not stay away. They fear the censures of the church, or they are
   afraid they shall be damned if they neglect it. They perform their
   closet duties not because they enjoy communion with God, but because
   they dare not neglect them. They have the spirit of slaves, and go
   about the service of God, as slaves go about the service of their
   master, feeling that they are obliged to do about so much, or be beaten
   with many stripes. So these professors feel as if they were obliged to
   have about so much religion, and perform about so many religious
   duties, or be lashed by conscience and lose their hopes. And therefore
   they go through, painfully and laboriously enough, with about so many
   religious duties in a year, and that they call religion!

   5. Their religion is not only produced by the fear of disgrace or the
   fear of hell, but it is mostly of a negative character.

   They satisfy themselves, mostly, with doing nothing that is very bad.
   Having no spiritual views, they regard the law of God chiefly as a
   system of prohibitions, just to guard men from certain sins, and not as
   a system of benevolence fulfilled by love. And so, if they are moral in
   their conduct, and tolerably serious and decent in their general
   deportment, and perform the required amount of religious exercises,
   this satisfies them. Their conscience harasses them, not so much about
   sins of omission as sins of commission. They make a distinction between
   neglecting to do what God positively requires, and doing what he
   positively forbids. The most you can say of them is that they are not
   very bad. They seem to think little or nothing of being useful to the
   cause of Christ, so long as they cannot be convicted of any positive
   transgression.

   6. This class of persons are more or less strict in religious duties,
   according to the light they have and the sharpness with which
   conscience pursues them.

   Where they have enlightened minds and tender consciences, you often
   find them the most rigid of all professors. They tithe even to mint and
   anise. They are stiff even to moroseness. They are perfect pharisees,
   and carry everything to the greatest extremes, so far as outward
   strictness is concerned.

   7. They are more or less miserable in proportion to the tenderness of
   their conscience.

   With all their strictness, they cannot be sensible that they are great
   sinners after all: and having no just sense of the gospel
   justification, this leaves them very unhappy. And the more enlightened
   and tender their conscience, the more they are unhappy. Notwithstanding
   their strictness, they feel that they come short of their duty, and not
   having any gospel faith, nor any of that holy anointing of the Holy
   Spirit that brings peace to the soul, they are unsatisfied, and uneasy,
   and miserable.

   Perhaps many of you have seen such persons. Perhaps some of you are
   such, and you never knew what it was to feel justified before God,
   through the blood of Jesus Christ, and you know not what it is to feel
   that Jesus Christ has accepted and owned you as his. You never felt in
   your minds what that is which is spoken of in the text, "There is now
   no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
   the flesh, but after the Spirit." Does such language bring home any
   warm and practical idea to you, that it is a reality because you
   experience it in your soul? Or do you, after all, still feel condemned
   and guilty, and have no sense of pardoned sin, and no experimental
   peace with God, or confidence in Jesus Christ.

   8. This class of persons are encouraged and cheered by reading the
   accounts of ancient saints who fell into great sins.

   They feel wonderfully instructed and edified when they hear the sins of
   Gods people set forth in a strong light. Then they are comforted and
   their hopes are wonderfully strengthened. Instead of feeling humbled
   and distressed, and feeling that such conduct is so contrary to all
   religion that they could hardly believe they were saints if it had not
   been found in the Bible, and that they could not believe at all that
   persons who should do such things under the light of the Christian
   dispensation, could be saints; they feel gratified and strengthened,
   and their hopes confirmed, by all these things. I once knew a man, an
   elder too, brought before the session of a church for the crime of
   adultery, and he actually excused himself by this plea: He did not
   know, he said, why he should be expected to be better than David, the
   man after God's own heart.

   9. They are always much better pleased, by how much the lower the
   standard of piety is held out from the pulpit.

   If the minister adopts a low standard, and is ready charitably to hope
   that almost every body is a Christian, they are pleased, and compliment
   him for his expansive charity, and praise him as such an excellent man,
   so charitable, etc. It is easy to see why this class of persons are
   pleased with such an exhibition of Christianity. It subserves their
   main design. It helps them to maintain what they call a "comfortable
   hope," notwithstanding they do so little for God. Right over against
   this, you will see, is the conduct of the man whose main design is to
   rid the world of sin. He wants all men to be holy, and therefore he
   wants to have the true standard of holiness held up. He wants all men
   to be saved, but he knows they cannot be saved unless they are truly
   holy. And he would as soon think of Satan's going to heaven as of
   getting a man there by frittering away the Bible standard of holiness
   by "charity."

   10. They are fond of having "comfortable" doctrines preached.

   Such persons are apt to be fond of having the doctrine of saints'
   perseverance much dwelt on, and the doctrine of election. Often, they
   want nothing else but what they call the doctrines of grace. And if
   they can be preached in such an abstract way, as to afford them comfort
   without galling their consciences too much, they are fed.

   11. They love to have their ministers preach sermons "to feed
   Christians."

   Their main object is not to save sinners, but to be saved themselves,
   and therefore they always choose a minister, not for his ability in
   preaching for the confession of sinners, but for his talents in feeding
   the church with mere abstractions.

   12. They lay great stress on having "a comfortable hope."

   You will hear them talking very solemnly about the importance of having
   a comfortable hope. If they can only enjoy their minds, they show very
   little solicitude whether anybody else around them is saved or not. If
   they can have only their fears silenced and their hopes cherished they
   have religion enough to satisfy them.

   Right over against this, you will find the true friends of God and man
   are thinking mainly of something else: they are trying to pull sinners
   out of the fire, and do not spend their energy in sustaining a
   comfortable hope to themselves.

   In their prayers, you will find the class I am now speaking of, are
   praying mainly that their evidences may be brightened, and that they
   may feel assured that they are going to heaven, and know that they are
   accepted of God. Their great object is to secure their hopes, and so
   they pray that their evidences may be brightened, instead of praying
   that their faith may be strengthened, and their souls full of the Holy
   Ghost to pull sinners out of the fire.

   13. They live very much on their own frames of mind.

   They lay great stress on the particular emotions which they have from
   time to time. If at any time they have some high-wrought feelings of a
   religious nature, they dwell on them, and make this evidence last a
   great while. One such season of excitement will prop up their hopes as
   long as they can distinctly call it up to remembrance. No matter if
   they are not doing anything now, and are conscious they have no
   exercises of love to God now, they recollect the time when they had
   such and such feelings, and that answers to keep alive their hopes. If
   there has been a revival, and they mingled in its scenes until their
   imagination has been wrought up so that they could weep and pray and
   exhort with feeling during a revival, that will last them a long time,
   and they will have a comfortable hope for years on the strength of it.
   Although, after the revival is over, they do nothing to promote
   religion, and their hearts are as hard as adamant, they have a very
   comfortable hope all the while, patiently waiting for a revival to come
   and give them another move.

   Are any of you who are here now, propping yourselves up by your past
   frames and feelings, leaning on evidences, not from what you are NOW
   doing but something that you felt last year, or years ago? Let me tell
   you, that if you are thus living on past experience, you will find it
   will fail when you come to need it.

   14. They pray almost exclusively for themselves.

   If you could listen at the door of their closets, you would hear
   eight-tenths of all their petitions going up for themselves.

   It shows how they value their own salvation in comparison with the
   salvation of others. It is as eight to two. And if they pray in
   meetings, very often it will be just the same, and you would not
   suppose, from their prayers, that they knew there was a sinner on earth
   traveling the road to hell. They pray for themselves just as they do in
   the closet, only they couple the rest of the church with them so as to
   say "we."

   15. Such persons pray to be fitted for death much more than they pray
   to be fitted to live a useful life.

   They are more anxious to be prepared to die, than to be prepared to
   save sinners around them. If they ask for the Spirit of God, they want
   it to prepare them to die, more than as the Psalmist prayed, "Then will
   I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto
   thee." How many of you are of this character? How many are there here,
   whose prayers are described exactly? An individual who made it his
   great absorbing object to do good and save sinners, would not be apt to
   think so much about when, or where, or how he shall die, as how he may
   do the most good while he lives. And as to his death, he leaves that
   all to God, and he is not afraid to leave it all with him. He has long
   ago given his soul up to him, and now the great question with him is
   not, When shall I die? but, how shall I live so as to honor God?

   16. They are more afraid of punishment than they are of sin.

   Precisely over against this, you will find the true friends of God and
   man more afraid of sin than of punishment. It is not the question with
   them, "If I do this shall I be punished?" or, "If I do this, will God
   forgive me:" But the question is that which Joseph asked, "How can I do
   this great wickedness, and sin against God?" There was the spirit of a
   child of God, afraid of sin more than punishment, and so much afraid of
   sin that he had no thought of punishment.

   This class of persons I am speaking of, often indulge in sin if they
   can persuade themselves that God will for give them, or when they think
   they can repent of it afterwards. They often reason in this way: "Such
   a minister does this;" or "Such an elder or professor does this, and
   why may not I do the same?" There was a member of this church had a
   class in the Sabbath school; but seeing that others did not take a
   class, the individual reasoned in this way: "Why should I do it any
   more than they?" and so gave up the class. Here is the spirit of this
   whole description of professors "Others get along without doing such
   and such things, and why should I trouble myself to be better than
   they?" It is not sin that they fear, but punishment. They sin, they
   know, but they hope to escape punishment. Who cannot see that this in
   contrary to the spirit of the true friends of God, whose absorbing
   object it is to get sin, and all sin, out of the world? Such persons
   are not half so much afraid of hell us they are of committing sin.

   17. They feel and manifest greater anxiety about being saved
   themselves, than if all the world was going to hell.

   Such a professor, if his hope begins to fail, wants to have everybody
   engaged, to pray for HIM, and make a great ado, and move all the
   church, when he never thinks of doing anything for the sinners around
   him, who are certainly on the road to hell. He shows that his mind is
   absorbed in himself, and that his main design is not to see how much
   good he can do.

   18. They are more fond of receiving good than of doing good.

   You may know such persons have not the spirit of the gospel. They have
   never entered into the spirit of Jesus Christ, when he said, "It is
   more blessed to give than to receive."

   A person actuated by true love to God and man enjoys what he does to
   benefit others, far more than they do who receive good at his hand. He
   is really benevolent, and it is a gratification to him to show
   kindness, because his heart is set upon it, and when he can do it, a
   holy joy is shed over his mind, and he enjoys it exquisitely.

   The other class are more eager to receive than to impart. They want to
   receive instruction more than to impart it. They want to receive
   comfort, but are never ready to deny themselves to give the comforts of
   the gospel to others. How directly contrary this is to the diffusive
   spirit of the gospel, any one can see at a glance. That spirit ends its
   supreme happiness in communicating happiness to others. But this class
   of persons want to lay everybody under contribution to impart happiness
   to themselves, instead of laying themselves out to bless others.

   Who does not know these two classes of professor? One always seeking
   out objects to do good to, the other always trying to gain good
   themselves. One anxious to communicate, the other to receive. One to do
   good, the other to get good. These two classes of character are just as
   opposite as light and darkness.

   19. If this class of professors are led to pray for the conversion and
   salvation of others, you may observe that they are actuated by the same
   kind of considerations as they are when they pray for themselves.

   They are chiefly afraid of hell themselves, and when they are strongly
   convicted, they are afraid others will go there too. They are seeking
   happiness for themselves, and when self is not in the way, they seek
   the same for others. They pray for sinners, not because they have such
   a sense of the evil of sin which sinners are committing, as because
   they have such a sense of the terrors of hell to which sinners are
   going. It is not because sinners dishonor God that they want them
   converted, but because they are in danger. Their great object in
   praying is to secure the safety of those they pray for, as it is their
   great object in religion to secure their own safety. They pity
   themselves and they pity others. If there was no danger, they would
   have no motive to pray either for themselves or others.

   The true friends of God and man feel compassion for winners too, but
   they feel much more for the honor of God. They are more distressed to
   see God abused and dishonored than to see sinners go to hell. And if
   God must be for ever dishonored or men go to hell just as certainly as
   they love God supremely, they will decide that sinners shall sink to
   endless torments sooner than God fail of his due honor. And they
   manifest their true feelings in their prayers. You hear them praying
   for sinners as rebels against God, as guilty criminals deserving of
   eternal wrath, as the enemies of God and the universe; and while they
   are full of compassion for sinners, they feel also the enkindlings of
   holy indignation against them for their conduct towards the blessed
   God.

   20. The class of professors I am speaking of are very apt to be
   distressed with doubts.

   They are apt to talk a great deal about their doubts. This makes up a
   great part of their history the detail of their doubts. The great thing
   with them being the enjoyment of a comfortable hope, as soon as they
   begin to doubt, it is all over with them, and so they make a great ado
   with their doubts, and then they are not prepared to do anything for
   religion because they have these doubts. The true friends of God and
   man being engaged in doing good, if the devil at any time suggests that
   they are going to hell, the first answer they think of is, "What if I
   should? Only let me pull sinners out of the fire while I can." I
   suppose real Christians may have doubts.

   But they are much less apt to have them, by how much the more they are
   fully bent on saving sinners. It will be very hard work for Satan to
   get a church who is fully engaged in the work to be much troubled with
   doubts. Their attention is not on that, but on something else, and he
   cannot get the advantage over them.

   21. They manifest great uneasiness at the increasing calls for self
   denial to do good.

   Said an individual, "What will this temperance reformation come to? At
   first they only went against ardent spirit, and I gave up that, and did
   very well without it. Then they called on us to give up wine; and now
   they are calling on us to give up our tea and coffee, and tobacco;
   where will it end?" This class of persons are in constant distress at
   being called on to give up so much. The good that is to be done does
   not enter into their thoughts, because they are all the while dwelling
   on what they have to give up.

   It is easily seen why it is that these aggressive movements on the
   kingdom of darkness distress such person. Their object never was to
   search out and banish from this world everything that is dishonorable
   to God or injurious to man. They never entered upon religion with the
   determination to clear out every such thing from the earth, as far as
   they had power, and as fast as they were convinced that it was
   injurious to themselves or others, in soul or body. And therefore they
   are distressed by the movements of those who are truly engaged to
   search out and clear away every evil.

   These persons are annoyed by the continually increasing calls to give
   for missions, Bibles, tracts, and the like. The time was, when a rich
   man gave twenty-five dollars a year to such things, he was thought to
   be doing pretty well. But now there are so many calls for subscriptions
   and contributions, that they are in torment all the time. "I don't like
   these contributions, I am opposed to having contributions taken up in
   the congregation, I think they do hurt." They feel specially sole at
   these agents. "I don't know about these beggars that are going about."
   They are obliged to keep giving all the time, in order to keep up their
   character, or to have any hope, but they are much distressed about it,
   and do not know what the world is coming to, things are in such a
   strange pass.

   As you raise the general standard of living in the church, this class
   of professors find they have to come up too, lest their hopes should be
   shaken. And the common standard of professors has been raised already
   so much, that I have no doubt it costs this class of persons new four
   times as much of what they call religion, to keep up a hope, as it did
   twenty years ago. And what will become of them if there are to be so
   many new movements and new measures, and so much done to save the
   world? The Lord help them, for they are in great distress!

   22. When they are called upon to exercise self-denial for the sake of
   doing good, instead of being a pleasant thing, it gives them unmingled
   pain.

   Such a one does not know anything about enjoying self-denial. He cannot
   understand how self-denial is pleasant, nor how anybody can take
   pleasure in it, or have joy of heart in denying himself for the sake of
   doing good to others. That, he thinks, is a height in religion to which
   he has not attained. Yet the true friend of God and man, whose heart is
   fully set to do good, never enjoys any money he expends so well as that
   which he gives to promote Christ's kingdom. If he is really pious, he
   knows that is the best disposition he can make of his money. Nay, he is
   sorry to be obliged to use money for anything else, when there are so
   many opportunities to do good with it.

   I want you who are here to look at this. It is easy to see that if an
   individual has his heart very much set upon anything, all the money he
   can save for that object is most pleasing to him, and the more he can
   save from other objects for this that his heart is set on, the better
   he is pleased. If an individual find it hard for him to give money for
   religious objects, it is easy to see that his heart is not set on it.
   If it were, he would have given his money with joy. What would you
   think of a man who should set himself against giving money for the
   advancement of religion, and get up an excitement in the church, about
   the missionary cause, and having so many calls for money, when he had
   never given five dollars? It would be absolute demonstration that his
   heart was not truly set on the cause of Christ; if it were, he would
   give his money for it, as free as water; and the more he could spare
   for it, the better he would be pleased.

   23. This class of persons are not forward in promoting revivals.

   This is not their great object. They always have to be dragged into the
   work. When a revival has begun, and gone on, and the excitement is
   great, then they come in and appear to be engaged in it. But you never
   see them taking the lead, or striking out a-head of the rest, and
   saying to the rest of the brethren, Come on and let us do something for
   the Lord.

   24. As a matter of fact, they do not convert sinners to God.

   They may be instrumental of good, in various ways, and so may Satan be
   instrumental of good.

   But as a general thing, they do not pull sinners out of the fire. And
   the reason is, that this is not their great object. How is it with you?
   Do you absolutely succeed in converting sinners? Is there any one who
   will look to yon as the instrument of his conversion? If you were truly
   engaged for this, you could not rest satisfied without doing it, and
   you would go about it so much in earnest, and with such agonizing
   prayer that you would do it.

   25. They do not manifest much distress when they behold sin.

   They do not rebuke it. They love to mingle in scenes where sin is
   committed. They love to be where they can hear vain conversation, and
   even to join in it. They love worldly company and worldly books. Their
   spirit is worldly. Instead of hating even the garment spotted with the
   flesh, they love to hang around the confines of sin, as if they had
   complacency in it.

   26. They take but very little interest in published accounts of
   revivals, missions, etc.

   If any of the missions are tried severely, they neither know nor feel
   it. If missions prosper, they never know it, they take no interest in
   it. Very likely they do not take any religious paper whatever. Or if
   they do, when they sit down to read it, if they come to a revival, they
   pass it over, to read the secular news, or the controversy, or
   something else. The other class, the true friends of God and man, on
   the contrary, love to learn the progress of revivals. They love to read
   a religious paper, and when they take it up, the first thing they do is
   to run their eye over it to find where there are revivals, and there
   they feast their souls, and give glory to God. And so with missions:
   their heart goes forth with the missionaries, and when they hear that
   the Lord has poured forth his Spirit on a mission, they feel a glow of
   holy joy thrill through them.

   27. They do not aim at any thing higher than a legal, painful, negative
   religion.

   The love of Christ does not constrain them to a constant warfare
   against sin, and a constant watch to do all the good in their power.
   But what they do is done only because they think they must. And they
   maintain a kind of piety that is formal, heartless, worthless.

   28. They come reluctantly into all the special movements of the church
   for doing good.

   If a protracted meeting is proposed, you will generally find this class
   of persons hanging back, and making objections, and raising
   difficulties as long as they can. If any other special effort is
   proposed, they come reluctantly, and prefer the good old way. They feel
   sore at being obliged to add so much every year to their religion in
   order to maintain their hope.

   29. They do not enjoy secret prayer.

   They do not pray in their closets because they LOVE to pray but because
   they think it is their duty, and they dare not neglect it.

   30. They do not enjoy the Bible.

   They do not read the Bible because it is sweet to their souls, sweeter
   than honey or the honey-comb. They do not "enjoy" the reading, as a
   person enjoys the most exquisite delights. They read it because it is
   their duty to read it; and it would not do to profess to be a Christian
   and not read the Bible: but in fact they find it a dry book.

   31. They do not enjoy prayer meetings.

   Slight excuses keep them away. They never go unless they find it
   necessary for the sake of keeping up appearances, or to maintain their
   hope. And when they do go, instead of having their souls melted and
   fired with love, they are cold, listless, dull, and glad when it is
   over.

   32. They are very much put to it to understand what is meant by
   disinterestedness.

   To serve God because they love him, and not for the sake of the reward,
   is what they do not understand.

   33. Their thoughts are not anxiously fixed upon the question, When
   shall the world be converted to God?

   Their hearts are not agonized with such thoughts as this, on, how long
   shall wickedness prevail? Oh, when shall this wretched world be rid of
   sin and death? Oh, when shall men cease to sin against God? They think
   much more of the question, When shall I die and go to heaven, and get
   rid of all my trials and cares?

   But I find I am again obliged to omit the examination of the last class
   of professors till next Friday evening, when, with the leave of
   Providence, it will be attended to.

    REMARKS

  1. I believe you will not think me extravagant, when I say that the religion I
  have described, appears to be the religion of a very large mass in the church.

   To say the least, it is greatly to be feared that a majority of
   professing Christians are of this description. To say this, is neither
   uncharitable nor censorious.

  2. This religion is radically defective.

   There is nothing of true Christianity in it. It differs from
   Christianity as much as the Pharisees differed from Christ as much as
   gospel religion differs from legal religion.

   Now, let me ask you, to which of these classes do you belong? Or are
   you in neither? It may be that because you are conscious you do not
   belong to the second class, you may think you belong to the first, when
   in fact, you will find, when I come to describe the third class of
   professors, that I describe your true character.

   How important it is that you know for a certainty what is your true
   character whether you are actuated in religion by true love to God and
   man, or whether you are religious only out of regard to yourself. O,
   what a solemn thought, if this church, of which I have been the pastor,
   have never come to an intelligent decision of the question, whether
   they are the true friends of God and man or not. Do settle it, beloved.
   Now is the time. Settle this, and then go to work for God.
     __________________________________________________________________

      For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. John 12:48.

   These words were spoken of certain individuals who refused to confess
   that Jesus was the Christ, because he was extremely unpopular with the
   scribes and pharisees, and principal people of Jerusalem.

   There is a plain distinction between self-love, or the simple desire of
   happiness, and selfishness. Self-love, the desire of happiness and
   dread of misery, is constitutional; it is a part of our frame as God
   made us, and as he intended us to be; and its indulgence within the
   limits of the law of God, is not sinful. Whenever it is indulged
   contrary to the law of God, it becomes sinful. When the desire of
   happiness or the dread of misery becomes the controlling principle, and
   we prefer our own gratification to some other greater interest, it
   becomes selfishness. When, to avoid pain or procure happiness, we
   sacrifice other greater interests, we violate the great law of
   disinterested benevolence, it is no longer self-love, acting within
   lawful bounds, but selfishness.

   In my last Friday evening lecture, I described a class of professors of
   religion, who are moved to perform religious exercises by hope and
   fear. They are moved sometimes by self-love, and sometimes by
   selfishness. Their supreme object is not to glorify God, but to secure
   their own salvation. You will recollect that this class, and the class
   I had described before as the real friends of God and man, agree in
   many things, and if you look only at the things in which they agree,
   you cannot distinguish between them. It is only by a close observation
   of those things in which they differ, that you can see that the main
   design of the latter class is not to glorify God, but to secure their
   own salvation. In that way we can see their supreme object developed,
   and see that when they do the same things, outwardly, which those do
   whose supreme object is to glorify God, they do them from entirely
   different motives, and consequently the acts themselves are, in the
   sight of God, of an entirely different character.

  III. Tonight, I design to point out the characteristics of the third class of
  professing Christians, who "love the praise of men more than the praise of
  God."

   I would not be understood to imply that a mere regard for reputation
   has led this class to profess religion. Religion has always been too
   unpopular with the great mass of mankind to render it a general thing
   to become professing Christians from a mere regard to reputation. But I
   mean, that where it is not generally unpopular to become a professor of
   religion, and will not diminish popularity, but will increase it with
   many, a complex motive operates the hope of securing happiness in a
   future world, and that it may increase reputation here. And thus many
   are led to profess religion, when after all, on a close examination, it
   will be seen that the leading object, which is prized beyond anything
   else, is the good opinion of their fellow men. Sooner than forfeit this
   utterly, they would not profess religion. Their profession turns on
   this. And although they do profess to be sincere Christians, you may
   see by their conduct, on close examination, that they will do nothing
   that will forfeit this good opinion of men. They will not encounter the
   odium that they must, if they were to give themselves up to root sin
   out of the world.

   Observe, that impenitent sinners are always influenced by one of two
   things, in all that they do that appears like religion. Either they do
   them out of regard to mere natural principles as compassion or
   self-love principles that are constitutional in them or from
   selfishness.

   They are done either out of regard to their own reputation or
   happiness, or the gratification of some natural principle in them, that
   has no moral character; and not from the love of God in them. They love
   "the praise of men more than the praise of God."

   I will now mention several things by which you may detect the true
   character of the class of persons of whom I have been speaking; who
   make the praise of men their idol, notwithstanding they profess to love
   God supremely. And they are things by which you can detect your own
   true characters, if there are any present who properly belong to this
   class.

   1. They do what the apostle Paul says certain persons did in his day,
   and for that reason they remained ignorant of the true doctrine; they
   "measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves among
   themselves."

   There are a vast many individuals, who, instead of making Jesus Christ
   their standard of comparison, and the Bible their rule of life,
   manifestly aim at no such thing. They show that they never seriously
   dreamed of making the bible their standard. The great question with
   whom is, whether they do about as many things in religion, and are
   about as pious as other people, or as the churches around them. Their
   object is to maintain a respectable profession of religion. Instead of
   seriously inquiring for themselves, what the Bible really requires, and
   asking how Jesus Christ would act in such and such cases, they are
   looking simply at the common run of professing Christians, and are
   satisfied with doing what is commendable in their estimation. They
   prove to a demonstration, that their object is not so much to do what
   the Bible lays down as duty, as to do what the great mass of professing
   Christians do to do what is respectable, rather than what is right.

   2. This class of persons do not trouble themselves about elevating the
   standard of piety around them.

   They are not troubled at the fact, that the general standard of piety
   is so low in the church, that it is impossible to bring the great mass
   of sinners to repentance. They think the standard at the present time
   is high enough. Whatever be the standard at the time it satisfies them.
   While the real friends of God and man are complaining of the church,
   because the standard of piety is so low, and trying to wake up the
   church to elevate the tone of religion, it all seems to this class of
   persons like censoriousness, and a meddlesome, uneasy disposition, and
   as denoting a bad spirit in them. Just as when Jesus Christ denounced
   the scribes and pharisees, and leading professors of his day, they
   said, "He hath a devil." "Why, he is denouncing sour doctors of
   divinity, and all our best men, and even dares to call the scribes and
   pharisees hypocrites, and he tells us that except our righteousness
   shall exceed theirs, we can in no case enter the kingdom of heaven.
   What a bad spirit he has."

   A large part of the church at the present day have the same spirit, and
   every effort to open the eyes of the church and to make Christians see
   that they live so low, so worldly, so much like hypocrites, that it is
   impossible the work of the Lord should go on, only excites ill will and
   occasions reproach. "O," they say, "what a bad spirit he shows, so
   censorious, and so unkind, surely that is anything but the meek, and
   kind, and loving spirit of the Son of God." They forget how Jesus
   Christ poured out his anathemas, enough to make the hills of Judea
   shake, against those that had the reputation of being the most pious
   people in that day. Just as if Jesus Christ never said anything severe
   to anybody, but just fawned over them, and soothed them into his
   kingdom. Who does not know that it was the hypocritical spirit
   exhibited by professors of religion, that roused his soul and moved his
   indignation, and called forth his burning torrents of denunciation.

   He was always complaining of the very people who were set up as
   patterns of piety, and called them hypocrites, and thundered over their
   heads the terrible words, "How can ye escape the damnation of hell!"

   It is not wonderful, when so many love the praise of men more than the
   praise of God, that there should be excitement when the truth is told.
   They are very well satisfied with the standard of piety as it is, and
   think that while the people are doing so much for Sabbath schools, and
   missions, and tracts, that is doing pretty well, and they wonder what
   the man would have. Alas! alas! for their blindness! They do not seem
   to know that with all this the lives of the generality of professing
   Christians are almost as different from the standard of Jesus Christ as
   light is from darkness.

   3. They make a distinction between those requirements of God that are
   strongly enforced by public sentiment and those that are not thus
   guarded.

   They are very scrupulous in observing such requirements as public
   sentiment distinctly favors, while they easily set at naught those
   which public sentiment does not enforce. You have illustrations of this
   on every side. I might mention the temperance reformation. How many
   there are who yield to public sentiment in this matter what they never
   would yield to God or man. At first they waited to see how it would
   turn. They resisted giving up ardent spirits. But when that became
   popular, and they found they could do very well with other alcoholic
   stimulants, they gave it up. But they are determined to yield no
   farther than public sentiment drives them. They show that it is not
   their object, in joining the temperance society, to carry out the
   reform, so as to slay the monster Intemperance; but their object is to
   maintain a good character. They love "the praise of men more than the
   praise of God."

   See how many individuals there are, who keep the Sabbath, not because
   they love God, but because it is respectable. This is manifest, because
   they keep it while they are among their acquaintances, or where they
   are known. But when they get where they are not known, or where it will
   not be a public disgrace, you will find them traveling on the Sabbath.

   All those sins that are reprobated by public opinion this class of
   persons abstain from, but they do other things just as bad which are
   not thus frowned on. They do those duties which are enforced by public
   opinion, but not those that are less enforced. They will not stay away
   from public worship on the Sabbath, because they could not maintain any
   reputation for religion at all if they did. But they neglect things
   that are just as peremptorily enjoined in the word of God.

   Where an individual habitually disobeys any command of God, knowing it
   to be such, it is just as certain as his soul lives, that the obedience
   he appears to render, is not from a regard to God's authority, or love
   to God, but from other motives. He does not, in fact, obey any command
   of God. The Apostle has settled this question. "Whosoever," says he,
   "shall keep the whole law, and offend in one point, is guilty of all;"
   that is, does not truly keep any one precept of the law. Obedience to
   God's commands implies an obedient state of heart, and therefore
   nothing is obedience that does not imply a supreme regard to the
   authority of God.

   Now, if a man's heart be right, then whatever God enjoins he regards as
   of more importance than anything else. And if a man regard any thing
   else of superior weight to God's authority, that is his idol. Whatever
   we supremely regard that is our god; whether it be reputation, or
   comfort, or riches, or honor, or whatever it is that we regard
   supremely, that is the god of our hearts. Whatever a man's reason may
   be for habitually neglecting anything which he knows to be the command
   of God, or that he sees to be required to promote the kingdom of
   Christ, there is demonstration absolute that he regards that as
   supreme.

   There is nothing acceptable to God in any of his services. Rest
   assured, all his religion is the religion of public sentiment. If he
   neglects any thing required by the law of God, because he can pass
   along in neglect, and public sentiment does not enjoin it; or if he
   does other things inconsistent with the law of God, merely because
   public opinion does require it, it is a simple matter of fact, that it
   is public sentiment to which he yields obedience, in all his conduct,
   and not a regard to the glory of God.

   How is it with you beloved? Do you habitually neglect any requirement
   of God, because it is not sustained and enforced by public sentiment?
   If you are a professor of religion, it is to be presumed you do not
   neglect any requirement that is strongly urged by public sentiment.
   But, how is it with others? Do you not habitually neglect some duties?
   Do you not live in some practices reputable among men, that you know to
   be contrary to the law of God? If you do, it is demonstration absolute
   that you regard the opinions of men more than the judgment of God.
   Write down your name, hypocrite.

   4. This class of professors are apt to indulge in some sins when they
   are away from home, that they would not commit at home.

   Many a man who is temperate at home, when he gets to a distance, will
   toss off his glass of brandy and water at the table, or step up to the
   bar of a steam-boat and call for liquor without shame; or if they are
   in Europe, they will go to the theater. When I was in the
   Mediterranean, at Messina, a gentlemen asked me if I would go to the
   theater with him. "What! I go to the theater? A minister go to the
   theater?" "Why," said he, "you are away from home, and no one would
   know it." "But would not God know it?" It was plain that he thought,
   although I was a minister, I could go to the theater when I was away
   from home. No matter if God knew it, so long as men did not know it.
   And how should he get that idea, but by seeing ministers who would do
   just such things?

   5. Another development of the character of these individuals is, that
   they indulge themselves in secret sin.

   I am now speaking of something, by which you may know yourselves. If
   you allow yourselves in any sins secretly, when you can get along
   without having any human being know it, know that God sees it, and that
   he has already written down your name, hypocrite. You are more afraid
   of disgrace in the eye of mortals, than of disgrace in the eye of God.
   If you loved God supremely, it would be a small thing to you that any
   and every body else knew your sins, in comparison with having them
   known to God. If tempted to any such thing, you would exclaim, "What!
   shall I commit sin under the eye of God?"

   6. They indulge in secret omissions of duty, which they would not dare
   to have known to others.

   They may not practice any secret sins, or indulge in those secret
   pollutions that are spoken of, but they neglect those duties, that if
   they were known to neglect, it would so called disreputable to their
   Christian character. Such as secret prayer for instance. They will go
   to the communion yes, to the communion! and appear to be very pious on
   the Sabbath, and yet, as to private piety, they know nothing of it.
   Their closet for prayer is unknown to God or man. It is easy to see
   that reputation is their idol. They dread to lose their reputation more
   than to offend God.

   How is it with you? Is it a fact, that you habitually omit those secret
   duties, and are more careful to perform your public duties than private
   ones? Then what is your character?

   Do you need to be told? "They loved the praise of men more than the
   praise of God."

   7. The conscience of this class of persons seems to be formed on other
   principles than those of the gospel.

   They seem to have a conscience in those things that are popular, and no
   conscience at all on those things that are not required by public
   sentiment. You may preach to them ever so plainly, their duty, and
   prove it ever so clearly, and even make them confess that it is their
   duty, and yet so long as public sentiment does not require it, and it
   is not a matter of reputation, they will continue on in the same way as
   before. Show them a "Thus saith the Lord," and make them see that their
   course is palpably inconsistent with Christian perfection, and contrary
   to the interests of the kingdom of Christ, and yet they will not alter.
   They make it manifest that it is not the requirement of God they
   regard, but the requirement of public opinion. They love the praise of
   men more than the praise of God.

   8. This class of persons generally dread, very much, the thought of
   being considered fanatical.

   They are ignorant, practically, of a first principle in religion, that
   all the world is wrong! That the public sentiment of the world is all
   against God, and that every one who intends to serve God must in the
   first instance set his face against the public sentiment of the world.
   They are to take it for granted, that in a world of rebels, public
   sentiment is as certainly wrong as that there is a controversy with
   God. They have never had their eyes open to this fundamental truth,
   that the world is wrong, and that God's ways are directly over against
   their ways. Consequently, it is true, and always has been true, that
   "all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution."
   They shall be called fanatical, superstitious, ultras, and the like.
   They always have been, and they always will be, as long as the world is
   wrong.

   But this class of persons will never go further than is consistent with
   the opinions of worldly men. They say they must do this and that in
   order to have influence over such men. Right over against this is the
   course of the true friends of God and man. Their leading aim is to
   reverse the order of the world, and turn the world upside down, to
   bring all men to obey God, and all the opinions of men to conform to
   the word of God, and all the usages and institutions of the world to
   accord with the spirit of the gospel.

   9. They are very intent on making friends on both sides.

   They take the middle course always. They avoid the reputation of being
   righteous over-much, on the one hand, and on the other hand, of being
   has or irreligious. It has been so for centuries, that a person could
   maintain a reputable profession of religion, without ever being called
   fanatical. And the standard is still so without ever being called
   fanatical. And the standard is still so low, that probably the great
   mass of the Protestant churches are trying to occupy this middle
   ground. They mean to have friends on both sides. They are not set down
   as reprobates on the one hand, nor as fanatics or bigots on the other.
   They are "fashionable Christians!" They may be called fashionable
   Christians for two reasons. One is, that their style of religion is
   popular and fashionable; and the other is, that they generally follow
   worldly fashions. Their aim in religion is not to do anything that will
   disgust the world. No matter what God requires, they are determined to
   be so prudent as not to bring on them the censures of the world, nor
   offend the enemies of God. They have manifestly more regard to men than
   to God. And if they are ever so circumstance that they must do that
   which will displease their friends and neighbors, or offend God, they
   will offend God. If public sentiment clashes with the commands of God,
   they will yield to public sentiment.

   10. They will do more to gain the applause of men than to gain the
   applause of God.

   This is evident from the fact, that they will yield obedience only to
   those requirements of God which are sustained by public opinion.
   Although they will not exercise self-denial to gain the applause of
   God, yet they will exercise great self-denial to gain the applause of
   men. The men that gave up ardent spirits, because public sentiment
   rendered it necessary, will give up wine also, whenever a public
   sentiment sufficiently powerful shall demand it; and not till then.

   11. They are more anxious to know what are the opinions of men about
   them, than to know what is God's opinion of them.

   If one of this class is a minister, and preaches a sermon, he is more
   anxious to know what the people thought of it, than to know what God
   thought of it. And if he make anything like a failure, the disgrace of
   it with men cuts him ten times more than the thought that he has
   dishonored God, or hindered the salvation of souls. Just so with an
   elder, or a member of the church, of this class. If he pray in a
   meeting, or exhort, he is more concerned to know what is thought of it,
   than to know how God is pleased.

   If such a one has some secret sin found out, he is vastly more
   distressed about it because he is disgraced than because God is
   dishonored. Or if he fall into open sin, when he comes to be met with
   it, he cares as much again about the disgrace as about the sin of it.

   They are more anxious about their appearance in the eyes of the world,
   than in the eyes of God. Females of this character are vastly more
   anxious, when they go to church, how the body shall appear in the eyes
   of men, than how the heart shall appear in the eyes of God. Such a one
   will be all the week engaged in getting everything in order, so as to
   make her person appear to advantage, and perhaps will not spend half an
   hour in her closet, to prepare her heart to appear before God in his
   courts. Every body can see, at a glance, what this religion is, the
   moment it is held up to view. Nobody is at a loss to say what that
   man's or that woman's name is it is hypocrite. They will go into the
   house of God with their hearts dark as midnight, while every thing in
   their external appearance is comely and decent. They must appear well
   in the eyes of men, no matter how that part is on which God fixes his
   eye. The heart may be dark, and disordered, and polluted, and they care
   not, so long as the eye of man detects no blemish.

   12. They refuse to confess their sins in the manner which the law of
   God requires, lest they should lose their reputation among men.

   If they are ever required to make confession of more than they think
   consistent with their reputation, they are more anxious as to how it
   will affect their character, than to know whether God is satisfied.

   Search your hearts, you that have made confessions, and see which most
   affects your minds, the question what God thought of it, or what men
   thought of it. Have you refused to confess what you knew God required,
   because it would hurt your reputation among men? Will not God judge
   your hearts? Only be honest now, and let it be answered.

   13. They will yield to custom what they know to be injurious to the
   cause of religion, and to the welfare of mankind.

   A striking instance of this is found in the manner of keeping new
   year's day. Who does not know that the customary manner of keeping new
   year's day, setting out their wine and their rich cake and costly
   entertainments, and spending the day as they do, is a waste of money,
   hurtful to health, and injurious to their own souls and to the
   interests of religion?

   And yet they do it. Shall we be told that persons who will do this when
   they know it is injurious, supremely love God? I care not who attempts
   to defend such a custom, it is wrong, and every Christian must know it
   to be so. And those who persist in it when they know better,
   demonstrate that a supreme regard to God is not their rule of life.

   14. They will do things of doubtful character, or things the lawfulness
   of which they strongly doubt, in obedience to public sentiment.

   You will recollect that on the evening of the first day of the year I
   took up this subject, and showed that those who do things of doubtful
   character, of the lawfulness of which they are not satisfied, are
   condemned for it in the sight of God.

   15. They are often "ashamed" to do their duty, and so much ashamed that
   they will not do it.

   Now when a person is so much ashamed to do what God requires as not to
   do it, it is plain that his own reputation is his idol. How many do you
   find who are ashamed to acknowledge Jesus Christ, ashamed to reprove
   sin in high places or low places, and ashamed to speak out when
   religion is assailed! If they supremely regarded God, could they ever
   be ashamed of doing their duty? Suppose a man's wife were calumniated,
   would he be ashamed to defend his wife? By no means. If his children
   were abused, would he be ashamed to take their part? Not if he loved
   them; it would not be shame that would deter him from defending his
   wife or children. If a man was friendly to the administration of the
   government of his country, and heard it calumniated, would he be
   ashamed to defend it? He might not think it expedient to speak, for
   other reasons; but if he was a true friend to the government, he would
   not be "ashamed" to speak in its behalf, anywhere.

   Now such persons as I am speaking of, will not take decided ground when
   they are among the enemies of truth, where they would be subject to
   reproach for doing it. They are very bold for the truth when among its
   friends, and will make a great display of their courage. But when put
   to the trial, they will sell the Lord Jesus Christ, or deny him before
   his enemies, and put him to open shame, rather than rebuke wickedness,
   or speak out in his cause among his enemies.

   16. They are opposed to all encroachments on their self-indulgence, by
   advancing light on practical subjects.

   They are much disturbed by every new proposal that draws on their
   purses, or breaks in upon their habitual self-indulgence. And you may
   talk as much, and preach as much in favor of it as you please, there is
   only one way to reach this kind of people, and that is by creating a
   new public sentiment. When you have brought over, by the power of
   benevolence and of conscience, a sufficient number in the community to
   create a public sentiment in its favor, then they will adopt your new
   proposals, and not before.

   17. They are always distressed at what they call the "ultraism" of the
   day.

   They are much afraid the ultraism of the present day will destroy the
   church. They say we are carrying things too far, and we shall produce a
   reaction. Take, for instance, the Temperance Reformation. The true
   friends of temperance now know, that alcohol is the same thing,
   wherever it is found, and that to save the world and banish
   intemperance, it is necessary to banish alcohol in all its forms. The
   pinch of the Temperance Reformation has never yet been decided. The
   mass of the community have never been called to any self-denial in the
   cause. The place where it will pinch is, when it comes to the question,
   whether men will exercise SELF-DENIAL, to crush the evil. If they may
   continue to drink wine and beer, it is no self-denial; to give up
   ardent spirits. It is only changing the form in which alcohol is taken,
   and they can drink as freely as before.

   Many friends of the cause, when they saw what multitudes were rushing
   into it, were ready to shout a triumph. But the real question is not
   yet tried. And multitudes will never yield, until the friends of God
   and man can form a public sentiment so strong as to crush the character
   of every man who will not give it up. You will find many doctors of
   divinity and pillars of the church, who are able to drink their wine,
   that will stand their ground, and no command of God, no requirement of
   benevolence, no desire to save souls, no pity for bleeding humanity,
   will move such persons, until you can form a public sentiment so
   powerful as to force them to it, on penalty of loss of reputation. For
   they love the praise of men.

   And it is a query now in my mind, a matter of solemn and anxious doubt,
   whether in the present low state of piety and decline of revivals of
   religion in the church, a public sentiment can be formed, so powerful
   as to do this. If not, we shall be driven back. The Temperance
   Reformation, like a dam of sand, will be swept away, the floodgates
   will be opened again, and the world will go reeling down to hell. And
   yet thousands of professors of religion, who want to enjoy public
   respect and at the same time enjoy themselves in their own way, are
   crying out as if they were in distress at the ultraism of the times!

   18. They are often opposed to men, and measures, and things, while they
   are unpopular and subject to reproach; and when they become popular,
   fall in with them.

   Let an individual go through the churches in any section, and wake them
   up to a revival of religion, and while he is little known, these
   persons are not backward to speak against him. But let him go on, and
   gain influence, and they will fall in and commend him and profess to be
   his warmest friends. It was just so with Jesus Christ. Before his
   death, he had a certain degree of popularity. Multitudes would follow
   him, as he went through the streets, and cry "Hosanna, Hosanna!" But
   observe, they never would follow him an atom farther than his
   popularity followed him. As soon as he was arrested as a criminal, they
   all turned round and began to cry, "Crucify him, crucify him!"

   This class of persons, as they set with the tide one way, when a man is
   reproached, so they will set with the tide the other way when he comes
   to be honored. There is only one exception. And that is, when they have
   become so far committed to the opposition, that they cannot come round
   without disgrace. And then they will be silent, until another
   opportunity comes up for letting out the burning fires that are
   rankling within them.

   Very often a revival in a church, when it first begins, is opposed by
   certain members of the church. They do not like to have such things
   carried on, they are afraid there is too much animal excitement, and
   the like. But the work goes on; and by-and-by they seem to fall in and
   go with the multitude. At length the revival is over, and the church
   grows cold again, and before long you will find this class of persons
   renewing their opposition to the work, and as the church declines they
   press their opposition, and perhaps, in the end, induce the church
   itself to take ground against the very revival which they had so much
   enjoyed. This is the very way in which individuals have acted in regard
   to revivals in this country. There are many such cases. They were awed
   by public sentiment and made to bow down to the revival, while it was
   in its power, but by-and-by, as the revival declines, they begin to let
   out the opposition that is in their hearts, and which was suppressed
   for a time because the revival was popular.

   It has been just so in regard to the cause of missions, in a degree,
   and if anything should turn up, unfavorable to missions, so as to break
   the present power of public sentiment in their favor, you would find
   plenty of these fair weather supporters turning to the opposition.

   19. If any measure is proposed to promote religion they are very
   sensitive and scrupulous not to have anything done that is unpopular.

   If they live in a city, they ask what will the other churches think of
   such a measure? And if it is likely to bring reproach on their church
   or their minister, in view of the ungodly, or in view of the other
   churches, they are distressed about it. No matter how much good it will
   do, or how many souls it will save, they do not want to have anything
   done to injure the respectability of their church.

   20. This class of persons never aim at forming a public sentiment in
   favor of perfect godliness.

   The true friends of God and man are always aiming at forming public
   sentiment, and correcting public sentiment, on all points where it is
   wrong. They are set, with all their hearts, to search out all the evils
   in the world, and to reform the world, and drive out iniquity from the
   earth. The other class are always following public sentiment as it is,
   and feeling after the course of the tide, to go that way, shrinking
   back from everything that goes in the face of public sentiment. And
   they are ready to brand as imprudent, or rash, any man or anything,
   that goes to stem the tide of public sentiment and turn it the other
   way.

    REMARKS

  1. It is easy for persons to take credit for their sins, and make themselves
  believe certain things are acts of piety, which are in fact only acts of
  hypocrisy.

   They do the things that outwardly pertain to piety, and they give
   themselves credit for being pious, when their motives are all corrupt
   and hollow, and not one of them drawn from a supreme regard to God's
   authority. This is manifest from the fact that they do nothing except
   where God's requirements are backed up by public sentiment. Unless you
   aim to do all your duty, and yield obedience in every thing, the piety
   for which you claim credit is mere hypocrisy, and is in fact sin
   against God.

  2. There is a great deal more apparent piety in the church than there is real
  piety.

   There are many things which sinners suppose are good but which are
   abominable in the sight of God.

  4. But for the love of reputation and the fear of disgrace, how many there are
  in the church, who would break out into open apostasy.

   How many are there here, who know you would break Out into open vice,
   were it not for the restraints of public sentiment, the fear of
   disgrace, and the desire to gain the credit of virtue? Where a person
   is virtuous from a regard to the authority of God, whether public
   sentiment favor it or frown upon it, that is true piety. If otherwise,
   they have their reward. They do it for the sake of gaining credit in
   the eyes of men, and they gain it. But if they expect any favor at the
   hand of God, they will assuredly be disappointed. The only reward which
   he will bestow upon such selfish hypocrites is, that they may be
   damned.

   And now I wish to know how many of you will determine to do your duty,
   and all your duty, according to the will of God, let public sentiment
   be as it may? Who of you will agree to take the Bible for your rule,
   Jesus Christ for your pattern, and do what is right, in all cases,
   whatever man may say or think? Every one that is not willing to take
   this ground must regard himself as a stranger to the grace of God. He
   is by no means in a state of justification.

   If he is not resolved upon doing what he knows to be right, let public
   sentiment be as it may, it in proof positive that he loves the praise
   of men more than the praise of God.

   And let me say to the impenitent sinners present. You see what it is to
   be a Christian. It is to be governed by the authority of God IN ALL
   THINGS, and not by public sentiment, to live not by hopes and fears,
   but by supreme consecration of yourself unto God. You see that if you
   mean to be religious, you must count the cost. I will not flatter you.
   I will never try to coax you to become religious, by keeping back the
   truth. If you mean to be Christians, you must give yourselves wholly up
   to Christ. You cannot float along to heaven on the waves of public
   sentiment. I will not deceive you on this point.

   Do you ask, sinner, what is to become of all these professors of
   religion, who are conformed to the world, and who love the praise of
   men more than the praise of God? I answer They will go to hell, with
   you, and with all other hypocrites. Just as certain as that the
   friendship of the world is enmity with God.

   Wherefore, come out from among them, my people, and be ye separate, and
   I will receive you saith the Lord, I will be a Father to you, and ye
   shall be my sons and daughters. And now, who will do it? In the church
   and among sinners, who will do it? Who? Who is on the Lord's side? Who
   is willing to say, "We will no longer go with the multitude to do evil,
   but are determined to do the will of God, in all things whatsoever, and
   let the world think or say of us as it may." As many of you as are now
   willing to do this, will signify it by rising in your places before the
   congregation, and will then kneel down, while prayer is offered, that
   God would accept and seal your solemn covenant to obey God henceforth
   in every thing, through evil report and through good report.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Be not conformed to this world. Romans 12:2.

   It will be recollected by some who are present, that sometime since I
   made use of this text in preaching in this place, but the object of
   this evening's discourse is so far different that it is not improper to
   employ the same text again. The following is the order in which I
   design to discuss the subject of

      CONFORMITY TO THE WORLD

  I. To show what is not meant by the command of the text. II. Show what is
  meant by the command, "Be not conformed to this world." III. To mention some
  of the reasons why this requirement is made upon all who will live a godly
  life. IV. To answer some objections that are made to the principles laid down.

   I am to show what is not meant by the requirement, "Be not conformed to
   this world."

   I suppose it is not meant, that Christians should refuse to benefit by
   the useful arts, improvements, and discoveries of the world. It is not
   only the privilege but the duty of the friends of God to avail
   themselves of these, and to use for God all the really useful arts and
   improvements that arise among mankind.

  II. I am to show what is meant by the requirement.

   It is meant that Christians are bound not to conform to the world in
   the three following things. I mention only these three, not because
   there are not many other things in which conformity to the world is
   forbidden, but because these three classes are all that I have had time
   to examine tonight, and further, because these three are peculiarly
   necessary to be discussed at the present time. The three things are
   three departments of life, in which it is required that you be not
   conformed to this world.

   They are BUSINESS, FASHION, POLITICS.

   In all these departments it is required that Christians should not do
   as the world do, they should neither receive the maxims, nor adopt the
   principles, nor follow the practices of the world.

  III. I am to mention some reasons for the command, "Be not conformed to this
  world."

   You are by no means to act on the same principles, nor from the same
   motives, nor pursue your object in the same manner that the world do,
   either in the pursuits of business, or of fashion, or of politics. I
   shall examine these several departments separate.

   First Of Business.

  1. The first reason why we are not to be conformed to this world in business,
  is, that the principle of the worlds that of supreme selfishness. This is true
  universally, in the pursuit of business. The whole course of business in the
  world is governed and regulated by the maxims of supreme and unmixed
  selfishness. It is regulated without the least regard to the commands of God,
  or the glory of God, or the welfare of their fellow men. The maxims of
  business generally current among business men, and the habits and usages of
  business men, are all based upon supreme selfishness.

   Who does not know, that in making bargains, the business men of the
   world consult their own interest, and seek their own benefit, and not
   the benefit of those they deal with? Who has ever heard of a worldly
   man of business making bargains, and doing business for the benefit of
   those he dealt with? No, it is always for their own benefit. And are
   Christians to do so? They are required to act on the very opposite
   principle to this: "Let no man seek his own, but every man another's
   wealth." They are required to copy the example of Jesus Christ. Did he
   ever make bargains for his own advantage? And may his followers adopt
   the principle of the world a principle that contains in it the seeds of
   hell! If Christians are to do this, is it not the most visionary thing
   on earth to suppose the world is ever going to be converted to the
   gospel.

  2. They are required not to conform to the world, because conformity to the
  world is totally inconsistent with the love of God or man.

   The whole system recognizes only the love of self. Go through all the
   ranks of business men, from the man that sells candy on the sidewalk at
   the corner of the street, to the greatest wholesale merchant or
   importer in the United States, and you will find that one maxim runs
   through the whole, to "buy as cheap as you can, and sell as dear as you
   can, to look out for number one," and to do always, as far as the rules
   of honesty will allow, all that will advance your own interests, let
   what will become of the interest of others. Ungodly men will not deny
   that these are the maxims on which business is done in the world. The
   man who pursues this course is universally regarded as doing business
   on business principles. Now, are these maxims consistent with holiness,
   with the love of God or the love of man, with the spirit of the gospel
   or the example of Jesus Christ? Can a man conform to the world in these
   principles, and yet love God? Impossible! No two things can be more
   unlike. Then Christians are by no means to conform to the business
   maxims of the world.

  3. These maxims, and the rules by which business is done in the world, are
  directly opposite to the gospel of Jesus Christ and the spirit he exhibited,
  and the maxima he inculcated, and the rules which he enjoined that all his
  followers should obey, on pain of hell.

   What was the spirit Jesus Christ exemplified on earth? It was the
   spirit of self-denial, of benevolence, of sacrificing himself to do
   good to others. He exhibited the same spirit that God does, who enjoys
   his infinite happiness in going out of himself to gratify his
   benevolent heart in doing good to others. This is the religion of the
   gospel, to be like God, not only doing good, but enjoying it, joyfully
   going out of self to do good. This is the gospel maxim: "it is more
   blessed to give than to receive." And again, "Look not every man on his
   own things, but every man also on the things of others." What says the
   business man of the world? "Look out for number one." These very maxims
   were made by men who knew and cared no more for the gospel, than the
   heathen do. Why should Christians conform to such maxims as these?

  4. To conform to the world in the pursuits of business is a flat contradiction
  of the engagements that Christians make when they enter the church.

   What is the engagement that you make when you enter the church? Is it
   not, to renounce the world and live for God, and to be actuated by the
   Spirit of Jesus Christ, and to possess supreme love to God, and to
   renounce self, and to give yourself to glorify God, and do good to men?
   You profess not to love the world, its honors, or its riches. Around
   the communion table, with your hand on the broken body of your Savior,
   you avouch these to be your principles, and pledge yourself to live by
   these maxims. And then what do you do? Go away, and follow maxims and
   rules gotten up by men, whose avowed principle is the love of the
   world, and whose avowed object is to get the world? Is this your way?
   Then, unless you repent, let me tell you, you will be damned.

   It is no more certain, that any infidel, or any profligate wretch, will
   go to hell, than that all such professing Christians will go there,
   which conform to the world. They have double guilt. They are sworn
   before God to a different course, and when they pursue the business
   principles of the world, they show that they are perjured wretches.

  5. Conformity to the world is such a manifest contradiction of the principles
  of the gospel, that sinners when they see it, do not and cannot understand
  from it the true nature and object of the gospel itself.

   How can they understand that the object of the gospel is to raise men
   above the love of the world, and above the influence of the world, and
   place them on higher ground, to live on totally different principles?
   When they see professing Christians acting on the same principles with
   other men, how can they understand the true principles of the gospel,
   or know what it means by heavenly-mindedness, self-denial, benevolence,
   and so on?

  6. It is this spirit of conformity to the world, that has already eaten out
  the love of God from the church.

   Show me a young convert, while his heart is warm, and the love of God
   glows out from his lips. What does he care for the world? Call up his
   attention to it, point him to its riches, its pleasures, or its honors,
   and try to engage him in their pursuit, and he loathes the thought. But
   let him now go into business, and do business on the principles of the
   world one year, and you no longer find the love of God glowing in his
   heart, and his religion has become the religion of conscience, dry,
   meager, uninfluential anything but the glowing love of God, moving him
   to acts of benevolence. I appeal to every man in this house, and if my
   voice was loud enough I would appeal to every professor of religion in
   this city, if it is not. And if any one should say, "No, it is not so,"
   I should regard it as proof that he never knew what it was to feel she
   glow of a convert's first love.

  7. This conformity to the world in business is one of the greatest
  stumbling-blocks in the way of the conversion of sinners.

   What do wicked men think, when they see professing Christians, with
   such professions on their lips, and pretending to believe what the
   Bible teaches, and yet driving after the world, as eager as anybody,
   making the best bargains, and dealing as hard as the most worldly? What
   do they think? I can tell you what they say. They say "I do not see but
   these Christians do just as the rest of us do, they act on the same
   principles, look out as sharp for number one, drive as hard bargains,
   and get as high interest as anybody." And it must be said that these
   are not things of which the world accuse Christians slanderously. It is
   a notorious fact that most of the members of the church pursue the
   world, as far as appears, in the same spirit, by the same maxims, and
   to the same degree, that the ungodly do who maintain a character for
   uprightness and humanity. The world say, "Look at the church, I don't
   see as they are any better than I am; they go to the full length that I
   do after the world." If professing Christians act on the same
   principles with worldly men, as the Lord liveth, they shall have the
   same reward. They are set down in God's book of remembrance as black
   hypocrites, pretending to be the friends of God while they love the
   world. For whoso loveth the world is the enemy of God. They profess to
   be governed by principles directly opposite to the world, and if they
   do the same things with the world, they are hypocrites.

  8. Another reason for the requirement,

   "Be not conformed to this world," is the immense, salutary and
   instantaneous influence it would have if everybody would do business on
   the principles of the gospel. Just turn the tables over, and let
   Christians do business one year on gospel principles. It would shake
   the world. It would ring louder than thunder. Let the ungodly see
   professing Christians, in every bargain, consulting the good of the
   person they are trading with seeking not their own wealth, but every
   man another's wealth living above the world setting no value on the
   world any farther than it can be a means of glorifying God. What do you
   think would be the effect? What effect DID it have in Jerusalem, when
   the whole body of Christians gave up their business, and turned out in
   a body to pursue the salvation of the world? They were only a few
   ignorant fishermen, and a few humble women, but they turned the world
   upside down. Let the church live so now, and it would cover the world
   with confusion of face, and overwhelm them with convictions of sin.
   Only let them see the church living above the world, and doing business
   on gospel principles, seeking not their own interests but the interests
   of their fellow men, and infidelity would hide its head, heresy would
   be driven from church, and this charming, blessed spirit of love, would
   go over the world like the waves of the sea.

  Secondly. Of Fashions.

   Why are Christians required not to follow the fashions of the world?

  1. Because it is directly at war with the spirit of the gospel, and is minding
  earthly things.

   What is minding earthly things, if it is not to follow the fashions of
   the world, that like a tide are continually setting to and fro, and
   fluctuating in their forms, and keeping the world continually changing?
   There are many men of large business in the world, and men of wealth,
   who think they care nothing for the fashions. They are occupied with
   something else, and they trust the fashions altogether with their
   tailor, taking it for granted that he will make all right. But mind, if
   he should make a garment unfashionable, you would see that they do care
   about the fashions, and they never would employ that tailor again.
   Still, at present their thoughts are not much on the fashions. They
   have a higher object in view. And they think it beneath the dignity of
   a minister to preach about fashions. They overlook the fact, that with
   the greater part of mankind fashion is everything. The greater part of
   the community are not rich, and never expect to be, but they look to
   the world to enable them to make a "respectable" appearance, and to
   bring up their families in a "respectable" manner; that is, to "follow
   the fashions." Nine-tenths of the population never look at any thing
   higher, than to do as the world does, or to follow the fashions. For
   this they strain every nerve. And this is what they set their hearts
   on, and what they live for.

   The merchant and the rich man deceives himself, therefore, if he
   supposes that fashion is a little thing. The great body of the people
   mind this, their minds are set upon it, the thing which they look for
   in life is to have their dress, equipage, furniture, and so on, like
   other people, in the fashion, or "respectable" as they call it.

  2. To conform to the world is contrary to their profession.

   When people join the church, they profess to give up the spirit that
   gives rise to the fashions. They profess to renounce the pomps and
   vanities of the world, to repent of their pride, to follow the meek and
   lowly Savior, to live for God. And now, what do they do? You often see
   professors of religion go to the extreme of the fashion. Nothing will
   satisfy them that is not in the height of fashion. And a Christian
   female dress-maker who is conscientiously opposed to the following of
   fashions, cannot get her bread. She cannot get employment even among
   professing Christian ladies, unless she follows the fashions in all
   their countless changes. God knows it is so, and they must give up
   their business if their conscience will not permit them to follow the
   changes of fashion.

  3. This conformity is a broad and complete approval of the spirit of the
  world.

   What is it that lies at the bottom of all this shifting scenery? What
   is the cause that produces all this gaudy show and dash, and display?
   It is the love of applause. And when Christians follow the changes of
   fashion, they pronounce all this innocent. All this waste of money and
   time and thought, all this feeding and cherishing of vanity and the
   love of applause, the church sets her seal to, when he conforms to the
   world.

  4. Nay, further, another reason is, that following the fashions of the world,
  professing Christians show that they do in fact love the world.

   They show it by their conduct, just as the ungodly show it by the same
   conduct. As they act alike they give evidence that they are actuated by
   one principle, the love of fashion.

  5. When Christian professors do this, they show most clearly that they love
  the praise of men.

   It is evident that they love admiration and Italy, just as sinners do.
   Is not this inconsistent with Christian principle, to go right into the
   very things that are set up by the pride and fashion and lust of the
   ungodly?

  6. Conforming to the world in fashion, you show that you do not hold yourself
  accountable to God for the manner in which you lay out money.

   You practically disown your stewardship of the money that is in your
   possession. By laying out money to gratify your own vanity and lust,
   you take off the keen edge of that truth, which ought to cut that
   sinner in two, who is living to himself. It is practically denying that
   the earth is the Lord's, with the cattle on a thousand hills, and all
   to be employed for his glory.

  7. You show that reputation is your idol.

   When the cry comes to your ears on every wind, from the ignorant and
   the lost of all nations, "Come over and help us, come over and help
   us," and every week brings some call to send the gospel, to send
   tracts, and Bibles, and missionaries, to those who are perishing for
   lack of knowledge, if you choose to expend money in following the
   fashions, it is demonstration that reputation is your idol. Suppose
   now, for the sake of argument that it is not prohibited in the word of
   God, to follow the fashions, and that professing Christians, if they
   will, may innocently follow the fashions: (I deny that it is innocent,
   but suppose it were,) does not the fact that they do follow them when
   there are such calls for money, and time, and thought, and labor to
   save souls, prove conclusively that they do not love God nor the souls
   of men?

   Take the case of a woman, whose husband is in slavery, and she is
   trying to raise money enough for his redemption. There she is, toiling
   and saving, rising up early and sitting up late, and eating the bread
   of carefulness, because her husband, the father of her children, the
   friend of her youth, is in slavery. Now go to that woman and tell her
   that it is innocent for her to follow the fashions, and dress, and
   display like her neighbors will she do it? Why not? She does not desire
   to do it. She will scarcely buy a pair of shoes for her feet; she
   grudges almost the bread she eats so intent is she on her great object.

   Now suppose a person loved God, and the souls of men, and the kingdom
   of Christ, does he need an express prohibition from God to prevent him
   from spending his money and his life in following the fashion? No,
   indeed, he will rather need a positive injunction to take what is
   needful for his own comfort and the support of his own life. Take the
   case of Timothy.

   Did he need a prohibition to prevent him from indulging in the use of
   wine? So far from it, he was so cautious that it required an express
   injunction from God to make him drink a little as a medicine. Although
   he was sick, he would not drink it till he had the word of God for it,
   he saw the evils of it so clearly. Now, show me a man or woman, I care
   not what their professions are, that follows the fashions of the world,
   and I will show you what spirit they are of.

   When the cry comes to your ears on every wind, from the ignorant and
   the lost of all nations, "Come over and help us, come over and help
   us," and every week brings some call to send the gospel, to send
   tracts, and Bibles, and missionaries, to those who are perishing for
   lack of knowledge, if you choose to expend money in following the
   fashions, it is demonstration that reputation is your idol. Suppose
   now, for the sake of argument that it is not prohibited in the word of
   God, to follow the fashions, and that professing Christians, if they
   will, may innocently follow the fashions: (I deny that it is innocent,
   but suppose it were,) does not the fact that they do follow them when
   there are such calls for money, and time, and thought, and labor to
   save souls, prove conclusively that they do not love God nor the souls
   of men?

   Take the case of a woman, whose husband is in slavery, and she is
   trying to raise money enough for his redemption. There she is, toiling
   and saving, rising up early and sitting up late, and eating the bread
   of carefulness, because her husband, the father of her children, the
   friend of her youth, is in slavery. Now go to that woman and tell her
   that it is innocent for her to follow the fashions, and dress, and
   display like her neighbors will she do it? Why not? She does not desire
   to do it. She will scarcely buy a pair of shoes for her feet; she
   grudges almost the bread she eats so intent is she on her great object.

   Now suppose a person loved God, and the souls of men, and the kingdom
   of Christ, does he need an express prohibition from God to prevent him
   from spending his money and his life in following the fashion? No,
   indeed, he will rather need a positive injunction to take what is
   needful for his own comfort and the support of his own life. Take the
   case of Timothy. Did he need a prohibition to prevent him from
   indulging in the use of wine? So far from it, he was so cautious that
   it required an express injunction from God to make him drink a little
   as a medicine. Although he was sick, he would not drink it till he had
   the word of God for it, he saw the evils of it so clearly. Now, show me
   a man or woman, I care not what their professions are, that follows the
   fashions of the world, and I will show you what spirit they are of.

   You tempt yourself to pride and folly and a worldly spirit.

   Suppose a man that had been intemperate and was reformed, should go and
   surround himself with wine and brandy and every seductive liquor,
   keeping the provocative of appetite always under his eye, and from time
   to time tasting a little; does he not tempt himself? Now see that woman
   that has been brought up in the spirit of pride and show, and that has
   been reformed, and has professed to abandon them all; let her keep
   these trappings, and continue to follow the fashions, and pride will
   drag her backwards as sure as she lives. She tempts herself to sin and
   folly.

  12. You are tempting the world.

   You are setting the world into a more fierce and hot pursuit of these
   things. The very things that the world love, and that they are sure to
   have scruples about their being right, professing Christians fall in
   with and follow, and thus tempt the world to continue in the pursuit of
   what will destroy their souls in hell.

  13. By following the fashions, you are tempting the devil to tempt you.

   When you follow the fashions, you open your heart to him. You keep it
   for him, empty, swept, and garnished. Every woman that suffers herself
   to follow the fashions may rely upon it, she is helping Satan to tempt
   her to pride and sin.

  14. You lay a great stumbling block before the greatest part of mankind.

   There are a few persons who are pursuing greater objects than fashion.
   They are engaged in the scramble for political power, or they are eager
   for literary distinction, or they are striving for wealth. And they do
   not know that their hearts are set on fashion at all. They are
   following selfishness on a larger scale. But the great mass of the
   community are influenced mostly by these fluctuating fashions. To this
   class of persons it is a great and sore stumbling block, when they see
   professing Christians just as prompt and as eager to follow the
   changing of fashion as themselves. They see, and say, "What does their
   profession amount to, when they follow the fashions as much as
   anybody?" or "Certainly it is right to follow the fashions, for see the
   professing Christians do it as much as we."

  15. Another reason why professing Christians are required not to be conformed
  to the world in fashion is, the great influence their disregarding fashion
  would have on the world.

   If professing Christians would show their contempt for these things,
   and not pretend to follow them, or regard them, how it would shame the
   world, and convince the world that they were living for another object,
   for God and for eternity! How irresistible it would be! What an
   overwhelming testimony in favor of our religion! Even the apparent
   renunciation of the world, by many orders of monks, has doubtless done
   more than anything else to put down the opposition to their religion,
   and give it currency and influence in the world. Now suppose all this
   was hearty and sincere, and coupled with all that is consistent and
   lovely in Christian character, and all that is zealous and bold in
   labors for the conversion of the world from sin to holiness. What an
   influence it would have! What thunders it would pour into the ears of
   the world, to wake them up to follow after God!

  Thirdly. In Politics.

   I will show why professing Christians are required not to be conformed
   to the world in politics.

  1. Because the politics of the world are perfectly dishonest.

   Who does not know this? Who does not know that it is the proposed
   policy of every party to cover up the defects of their own candidate,
   and the good qualities of the opposing candidate? And is not this
   dishonest? Every party holds up its candidate as a piece of perfection,
   and then aims to ride himself into office by any means, fair or foul.
   No man can be an honest man, that is committed to a party, to go with
   them, let them do what they may. And can a Christian do it, and keep a
   conscience void of offense?

  2. To conform to the world in politics is to tempt God.

   By falling in with the world in politics, Christians are guilty of
   setting up rulers over them by their own vote, who do not fear nor love
   God, and who set the law of God at defiance, break the Sabbath, and
   gamble, and commit adultery, and fight duels, and swear profanely, and
   leave the laws unexecuted at their pleasure, and that care not for the
   weal or woe of their country, so long as they can keep their office. I
   say Christians do this. "For it is plain that where parties are
   divided, as they are in this country, there are Christians enough to
   turn the scale in any election.

   " Now let Christians take the ground that they will not vote for a
   dishonest man, or a Sabbath breaker, or gambler, or whoremonger, or
   duelist, for any office, and no party could ever nominate such a
   character with any hope of success. But on the present system, where
   men will let the laws go unexecuted, and give full swing to mobs, or
   lynch murders, or robbing the mails, or anything else, so they can run
   in their own candidate who will give them the offices, any man is a
   dishonest man that will do it, be he professor or non-professor. And
   can a Christian do this and be blameless?

  3. By engaging with the world in politics, Christians grieve the Spirit of
  God.

   Ask any Christian politician if he ever carried the Spirit of God with
   him into a political campaign? Never. I would by no means be understood
   to say that Christians should refuse to vote, and to exercise their
   lawful influence in public affairs. But they ought not to follow a
   party.

  4. By following the present course of politics, you are contributing your aid
  to undermine all government and order in the land.

   Who does not know that this great nation now rocks and reels, because
   the laws are broken and trampled under foot, and the executive power
   refuses or dare not act? Either the magistrate does not wish to put
   down disorder, or he temporizes and lets the devil rule. And so it is
   in all parts of the country, and all parties. And can a Christian be
   consistent with his profession, and vote for such men to office?

  5. You lay a stumbling-block in the way of sinners.

   What do sinners think, when they see professing Christians acting with
   them in their political measures, which they themselves know to be
   dishonest and corrupt? They say, "We understand what we are about, we
   are after office, we are determined to carry our party into power, we
   are pursuing our own interest; but these Christians profess to live for
   another and a higher end, and yet here they come, and join with us, as
   eager for the loaves and fishes as the rest of us." What greater
   stumbling-block can they have?

  6. You prove to the ungodly that professing Christians are actuated by the
  same spirit as themselves.

   Who can wonder that the world is incredulous as to the reality of
   religion? If they do not look for themselves into the scriptures, and
   there learn what religion is, if they are governed by the rules of
   evidence from what they see in the lives of professing Christians, they
   ought to be incredulous. They ought to infer, so far as this evidence
   goes, that professors of religion do not themselves believe in it. It
   is the fact. I doubt, myself, whether the great mass of professors
   believe the Bible.

  7. They show, so far as their evidence can go, that there is no change of
  heart.

   What is it? Is it going to the communion table once in a month or two,
   and sometimes to prayer meeting? In that a change of heart, when they
   are just as eager in the scramble for office as any others? The world
   must be fools to believe in a change of heart on such evidence.

  8. Christians ought to cease from conformity to the world in politics, from
  the influence which such a course would have on the world. Suppose Christians
  were to act perfectly conscientious and consistent in this matter, and to say,
  "We will not vote for any man to office, unless he fears God, and will rule
  the people in righteousness." Ungodly men would not set men as candidates, who
  themselves set the laws at defiance. No.123

   Every candidate would be obliged to show that he was prepared to act
   from higher motives, and that he would lay himself out to make the
   country prosperous, and to promote virtue, and to put down vice and
   oppression and disorder, and to do all he can to make the people happy
   and holy! It would shame the dishonest politicians, to show that the
   love of God and man is the motive that Christians have in view. And a
   blessed influence would go over the land like a wave.

  IV. I am to answer some objections that are made against the principles here
  advanced.

  1. In regard to business.

   Objection. "If we do not transact business on the same principles on
   which ungodly men do it, we cannot compete with them, and all the
   business of the world will fall into the hands of the ungodly. If we
   pursue our business for the good of others, if we buy and sell on the
   principle of not seeking our own wealth, but the wealth of those we do
   business with, we cannot sustain a competition with worldly men, and
   they will get all the business."

   Let them have it, then. You can support yourself by your industry in
   some humbler calling, and let worldly men do all the business.

   "Objection." But then, how should we get money to spread the gospel?"

   A holy church that would act on the principles of the gospel, would
   spread the gospel faster than all the money that ever was in New York,
   or that ever will be. Give me a holy church, that would live above the
   world, and the work of salvation would roll on faster than with all the
   money in Christendom.

   Objection. "But we must spend a great deal of money to bring forward an
   educated ministry."

   Ah! if we had a HOLY ministry, it would be far more important than an
   educated ministry. If the ministry were holy enough, they would do
   without so much education. God forbid that I should undervalue an
   educated ministry. Let ministers be educated as well as they can, the
   more the better, if they are only holy enough. But it is all a farce to
   suppose that a literary ministry can convert the world. Let the
   ministry have the spirit of prayer, let the baptism of the Holy Ghost
   be upon them, and they will spread the gospel. Only let Christians live
   as they ought, and the church would shake the world!. If Christians in
   New York would do it, the report would soon fill every ship that leaves
   the port, and waft the news on every wind, till the earth was full of
   excitement and inquiry, and conversions would multiply like the drops
   of morning dew.

   Suppose you were to give up your business, and devote yourselves
   entirely to the work of extending the gospel. The church once did so,
   and you know what followed. When that little band in Jerusalem gave up
   their business and spent their time in the work of God, salvation
   spread like a wave. And I believe, if the whole Christian church were
   to turn right out, and convert the world, it would be done in a very
   short time.

   And further, the fact is, that you would not be required to give up
   your business. If Christians would do business in the spirit of the
   gospel, they would soon engross the business of the world.

   Only let the world see, that if they go to a Christian to do business,
   he will not only deal honestly, but benevolently, that he will actually
   consult the interest of the person he deals with, as if it were his own
   interest, and who would deal with anybody else? What merchant would go
   to an ungodly man to trade, who he knew would try to get the advantage
   of him, and cheat him, while he knew that there were Christian
   merchants to deal with, that would consult his interests as much as
   they do their own? Indeed, it is a known fact, that there are now
   Christian merchants in this city, who regulate the prices of the
   articles they deal in. Merchants come in from the country, and inquire
   around to see how they can buy goods, and they go to these men to know
   exactly what articles are worth at a fair price, and govern themselves
   accordingly.

   The advantage, then, is all on one side. The church can make it for the
   interest of the ungodly to do business on right principles. The church
   can regulate the business of the world, and woe to them if they do not.

  2. In regard to fashion.

   Objection. "Is it best for Christians to be singular?"

   Certainly; Christians are bound to be singular. Then are called to be a
   peculiar people, that is, a singular people, essentially different from
   the rest of mankind. To maintain that we are not to be singular, is the
   same as to maintain that we are to be conformed to the world. "Be not
   singular," that is, be like the world. In other words, "Be ye conformed
   to the world." This is the direct opposite to the command in the text.

   But the question now regards fashion, in dress, equipage, and so on.
   And here I will confess that I was formerly myself in error. I
   believed, and I taught, that the best way for Christians to pursue, was
   to dress so as not to be noticed, to follow the fashions and changes so
   as not to appear singular, and that nobody would be led to think of
   their being different from others in these particulars. But I have seen
   my error, and now wonder greatly at my former blindness. It is your
   duty to dress so plain as to show to the world, that you place no sort
   of reliance in the things of fashion, and set no value at all on them,
   but despise and neglect them altogether. But unless you are singular,
   unless you separate yourselves from the fashions of the world, you show
   that you do value them. There is no way in which you can hear a proper
   testimony by your lives against the fashions of the work, but by
   dressing plain. I do not mean that you should study singularity, but
   that you should consult convenience and economy, although it may be
   singular.

   Objection. "But if we dress plain, the attention of people will be
   taken with it."

   The reason of it is this, so few do it that it is a novelty, and
   everybody stares when they see a professing Christian so strict as to
   disregard the fashions. Let them all do it, and the only thing you show
   by it is that you are a Christian, and do not wish to be confounded
   with the ungodly. Would it not tell on the pride of the world, if all
   the Christians in it were united in bearing a practical testimony
   against its vain show.

   Objection. "But in this way you carry religion too far away from the
   multitude. It is better not to set up an artificial distinction between
   the church and the world."

   The direct reverse of this is true. The nearer you bring the church to
   the world, the more you annihilate the reasons that ought to stand out
   in view of the world, for their changing sides and coming over to the
   church.

   Unless you go right out from them, and show that you are not of them in
   any respect, and carry the church so far as to have a broad interval
   between saints and sinners, how can you make the ungodly feel that so
   great a change is necessary.

   Objection. "But this change which is necessary is a change of heart."

   True; but will not a change of heart produce a change of life?

   Objection. "You will throw obstacles in the way of persons becoming
   Christians. Many respectable people will become disgusted with
   religion, and if they cannot be allowed to dress and be Christians,
   they will take to the world altogether."

   This is just about as reasonable as it would be for a temperance man to
   think he must get drunk now and then, to avoid disgusting the
   intemperate, and to retain his influence over them. The truth is, that
   persons ought to know, and ought to see in the lives of professing
   Christians, that if they embrace religion, they must be weaned from the
   world, and must give up the love of the world, and its pride, and show,
   and folly, and live a holy life, in watchfulness, and self-denial, and
   active benevolence.

   Objection. "Is it not better for us to disregard this altogether, and
   not pay any attention to such little things, and let them take their
   course; let the milliner and manta-maker do as they please, and follow
   the usages of society in which we live, and the circle in which we
   move?"

   Is this the way to show contempt for the fashions of the world? Do
   people ordinarily take this course of showing contempt for a thing, to
   practice it? Why, the way to show your abhorrence of the world is to
   follow along in the customs and the fashions of the world! Precious
   reasoning this.

   Objection. "No matter how we dress, if our hearts are right?"

   Your heart right! Then your heart may be right when your conduct is all
   wrong. Just as well might the profane swearer say, "No matter what
   words I speak, if my, heart is right." No, your heart is not right,
   unless your conduct is right. What is outward conduct, but the acting
   out of the heart? If your heart was right, you would not wish to follow
   the fashions of the world.

   Objection. "What is the standard of dress? I do not see the use of all
   your preaching, and laying down rules about plain dress, unless you
   give us a standard."

   This is a mighty stumbling block with many. But to any mind the matter
   is extremely simple. The whole can be comprised in two simple rules.
   One is Be sure, in all your equipage, and dress, and furniture, to show
   that you have no fellowship with the designs and principles of those
   who are aiming to set off themselves, and to gain the applause of men.
   The other is let economy be first consulted, and then convenience.
   Follow Christian economy; that is, save all you can for Christ's
   service; and then, let things be as convenient as Christian economy
   will admit.

   Objection. "Would you have us all to turn Quakers, and put on their
   plain dress?"

   Who does not know, that the plain dress of the Quakers has won for them
   the respect of all the thinking part of the ungodly in the community?
   Now, if they had coupled with this, the zeal for God, and the
   weanedness from the world, and the contempt for riches, and the
   self-denying labor for the conversion of sinners to Christ, which the
   gospel enjoins, and the clear views of the plan of salvation, which the
   gospel inculcates, they would long since have converted the world.

   And if all Christians would imitate them in their plain dress, (I do
   not mean the precise cut and fashion of their dress, but in a plain
   dress, throwing contempt upon the fashions of the world,) who can doubt
   that the conversion of the world would hasten on apace?

   Objection. "Would you make us all into Methodists?"

   Who does not know that the Methodists, when they were noted for their
   plain dress, and for renouncing the; fashions and show of the world,
   used to have power with God in prayer and that they had the universal
   respect of the world as sincere Christians. And who does not know that
   since they have laid aside this peculiarity, and conformed to the world
   in dress and other things, and seemed to be trying to lift themselves
   up as a denomination, and gain influence with the world, they are
   losing the power of prayer? Would to God they had never thrown down
   this wall. It was one of the leading excellences of Wesley's system, to
   have his followers distinguished from others by a plain dress.

   Objection. "We may be proud of a plain dress as well as of a
   fashionable dress. The Quakers are as proud as we are."

   So may any good thing be abused. But that is no reason why it should
   not be used, if it can be shown to be good I put it back to the
   objector

   Is that any reason why a Christian female, who fears God and loves the
   souls of men, should neglect the means which may make an impression
   that she is separated from the world, and pour contempt on the fashions
   of the ungodly, in which they are dancing their way to hell?

   Objection. "This is a small thing, and ought not to take up so much of
   a minister's time in the pulpit."

   This is an objection often heard from worldly professors. But the
   minister that fears God will not be deterred by it. He will pursue the
   subject, until such professing Christians are cut off from their
   conformity to the world, or cut off from the church. It is not merely
   the dress, as dress but it is the conformity to the world in dress and
   fashion, that is the great stumbling-block in the way of sinners. How
   can the world be converted, while professing Christians are conformed
   to the world? What good will it do to give money to send the gospel to
   the heathen, when Christians live so at home? Well might the heathen
   ask, "What profit will it be to become Christians, when those who are
   Christians are pursuing the world with all the hot haste of the
   ungodly?" The great thing necessary for the church is to break off from
   conformity to the world, and then they will have power with God in
   prayer, and the Holy Ghost will descend and bless their efforts, and
   the world will be converted.

   Objection. "But if we dress so, we shall be called fanatics."

   Whatever the ungodly may call you, fanatics, Methodists, or anything,
   you will be known as Christians, and in the secret consciences of men
   will be acknowledged as such. It is not in the power of unbelievers to
   pour contempt on a holy church, that are separated from the world. How
   was it with the early Christians? They lived separate from the world,
   and it made such an impression, that even infidel writers say of them,
   "These men win the hearts of the mass of the people, because they give
   themselves up to deeds of charity, and pour contempt on the world."
   Depend upon it, if Christians would live so now, the last effort of
   hell would soon be expended in vain to defeat the spread of the gospel.
   Wave after wave would flow abroad, till the highest mountain tops were
   covered with the waters of life.

  3. In regard to politics.

   Objection. "In this way, by acting on these principles and refusing to
   unite with the world in politics, we could have no influence in
   government and national affairs."

   I answer, first, It is so now. Christians, as such, have no influence.
   There is not a Christian principle adopted because it is Christian, or
   because it is according to the law of God.

   I answer, secondly, If there is no other way for Christians to have an
   influence in the government, but by becoming conformed to the world in
   their habitual principles and parties, then let the ungodly take the
   government and manage it in their own way, and do you go and serve God.

   I answer, thirdly, No such result will follow. Directly the reverse of
   this would be the fact. Only let it be known that Christian citizens
   will on no account assist bad men into office; only let it be known
   that the church will go only for men that will aim at the public good,
   and both parties will be sure to set up such men. And in this way, the
   church could legitimately exert an influence, by compelling all parties
   to bring forward only men who are worthy of an honest man's support.

   Objection. "In this way the church and the world will be arrayed
   against each other." The world is too selfish for this. You cannot make
   parties so. Such a line can never be a permanent division. For one year
   the ungodly might unite against the church, and leave Christians in a
   small minority. But in the end, the others would form two parties, each
   courting the suffrages of Christians, by offering candidates such as
   Christians can conscientiously vote for.

      REMARKS.

   1. By non-conformity to the world, you may save much money for doing
   good.

   In one year a greater fund might be saved by the church than has ever
   been raised for the spread of the gospel.

   2. By non-conformity to the world, a great deal of time may be saved
   for doing good, that is now consumed and wasted in following the
   fashions, and obeying the maxims, and joining in the pursuits of the
   world.

   3. At the same time, Christians in this way would preserve their peace
   of conscience, would enjoy communion with God, would have the spirit of
   prayer, and would possess far greater usefulness.

   Is it not time something was done? Is it not time that some church
   struck out a path, that should not be conformed to the world, but
   should be according to the example and Spirit of Christ?

   You profess that you want to have sinners converted. But what avails
   it, if they sink right back again into conformity with the world?
   Brethren, I confess, I am filled with pain in view of the conduct of
   the church. Where are the proper results of the glorious revivals we
   have had? I believe they were genuine revivals of religion and
   outpourings of the Holy Ghost, that the church has enjoyed the last ten
   years. I believe the converts of the last ten years are among the best
   Christians in the land. Yet after all, the great body of them are a
   disgrace to religion.

   Of what use would it be to have a thousand members added to the church,
   to be just such as are now in it? Would religion be any more honored by
   it, in the estimation of ungodly men? One holy church, that are really
   crucified to the world, and the world to them, would do more to
   recommend Christianity, than all the churches in the country, living as
   they now do. O, if I had strength of body to go through the churches
   again, instead of preaching to convert sinners, I would preach to bring
   up the churches to the gospel standard of holy living. Of what use is
   it to convert sinners, and make them such Christians as these? Of what
   use is it to try to convert sinners, and make them feel there is
   something in religion, and when they go to trade with you, or meet you
   in the street, have you contradict it all, and tell them, by your
   conformity to the world, that there is nothing in it?

   Where shall I look, where shall the Lord look, for a church like the
   first church, that will come out from the world, and be separate, and
   give themselves up to serve God? O, if this church would do so. But it
   is of little use to make Christians if they are not better. Do not
   understand me as saying that the converts made in our revivals, are
   spurious. But they live so as to be a disgrace to religion. They are so
   stumbled by old professors that many of them do more hurt than good.
   The more there are of them, the more occasion infidelity seems to find
   for her jeers and scoffs.

   Now, do you believe that God commands you not to be conformed to the
   world? Do you believe it? And dare you obey it, let people say what
   they will about you? Dare you now separate yourselves from the world,
   and never again be controlled by its maxims, and never again copy its
   practices, and never again will be whiffled here and there by its
   fashions? I know a man that lives so, I could mention his name, he pays
   no attention to the customs of the world in this respect, and what is
   the result? Wherever that man goes, he leaves the impression behind
   that he is a Christian. O, if one church would do so, and would engage
   in it with all the energy that men of the world engage in their
   business, they would turn the world upside down.

   Will you do so? Will you break off from the world now, and enter into
   covenant with God, and declare that you will dare to be singular enough
   to be separate from the world, and from this time set your faces as a
   flint to obey God, let the world say what they will? Dare you do it?
   Will you do it?
     __________________________________________________________________

      For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of;
      but the sorrow of the world worketh death. 2 Corinthians 7:10.

   In this chapter the apostle refers to another epistle which he had
   formerly written to the church at Corinth, on a certain subject, in
   which they were greatly to blame. He speaks here of the effect that it;
   had, in bringing them to true repentance. They sorrowed after a godly
   sort. This was the evidence that their repentance was genuine.

   "For behold this self-same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort,
   what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves,
   yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea,
   what zeal, yea, what revenge! In all things ye have approved yourselves
   to be clear in this matter."

   In the verse which I have taken for my text, he speaks of two kinds of
   sorrow for sin, one working repentance unto salvation, the other
   working death. He alludes to what is generally understood by two kinds
   of repentance. And this is the subject of discourse tonight.

      TRUE AND FALSE REPENTANCE.

   In discoursing on the subject, I design to show,

   I. What true repentance is. II. How it may be known. III. What is false
   and spurious repentance. IV. How it may be known.

   It is high time professors of religion were taught to discriminate much
   more than they do in regard to the nature and character of various
   exercises on the subject of religion. Were it so the church would not
   be so overrun with false and unprofitable professors. I have, of late,
   been frequently led to examine, over and over again, the reason why
   there is so much spurious religion, and I have sought to know what is
   the foundation of the difficulty. That multitudes suppose themselves to
   be religious, who are not so, unless the Bible is false, is notorious.
   Why is it that so many are deceived? Why do so many, who are yet
   impenitent sinners, get the idea that they have repented? The cause is
   doubtless a want of discriminating instruction respecting the
   foundation of religion, and especially a want of discrimination
   respecting true and false repentance.

  I. I am to show what is true repentance.

   It involves a change of opinion respecting the nature of sin, and this
   change of opinion followed by a corresponding change of feeling towards
   sin. Feeling is the result of thought. And when this change of opinion
   is such as to produce a corresponding change of feeling, if the opinion
   is right and the feeling corresponds, this is true repentance. It must
   be right opinion. The opinion now adopted might be such an opinion as
   God holds respecting sin. Godly sorrow, such as God requires, must
   spring from such views of sin as God holds.

   First. There must be a change of opinion in regard to sin.

   1. A change of opinion in regard to the nature of sin.

   To one who truly repents sin looks like a very different thing from
   what it does to him who has not repented.

   Instead of looking like a thing that is desirable or fascinating, it
   looks the very opposite, most odious and detestable, and he is
   astonished at himself, that he ever could have desired such a thing.
   Impenitent sinners may look at sin and see that it will ruin them,
   because God will punish them for it; but, after all, it appears in
   itself desirable; they love it; they roll it under their tongue. If it
   could end in happiness, they never would think of abandoning it. But to
   the other it is different; he looks at his own conduct as perfectly
   hateful. He looks back upon it, and exclaims, "How hateful, how
   detestable, how worthy of hell, such and such a thing was in me."

   2. A change of opinion of the character of sin as respects its relation
   to God.

   Sinners do not see why God threatens sin with such terrible punishment.
   They love it so well themselves, that they cannot see why God should
   look at it in such a light as to think it worthy of everlasting
   punishment. When they are strongly convicted, they see it differently,
   and so far as opinion is concerned, they see it in the same light that
   a Christian does, and then they only want a corresponding change of
   feeling to become Christians. Many a sinner sees its relation to God to
   be such that it deserves eternal death, but his heart does not go with
   his opinions. This is the case with the devils and wicked spirits in
   hell. Mark, then! a change of opinion is indispensable to true
   repentance, and always precedes it. The heart never goes out to God in
   true repentance without a previous change of opinion. There may be a
   change of opinion without repentance, but no genuine repentance without
   a change of opinion.

   3. A change of opinion in regard to the tendencies of sin.

   Before the sinner thinks it utterly incredible that sin should have
   such tendencies as to deserve everlasting death. He may be fully
   changed, however, as to his opinions on this point without repentance,
   but it is impossible a man should truly repent without a change of
   opinion. He sees sin, in its tendency, as ruinous to himself and
   everybody else, soul and body, for time and eternity, and at variance
   with all that is lovely and happy in the universe. He sees that sin is
   calculated in its tendencies to injure himself and everybody else, and
   that there is no remedy but universal abstinence. The devil knows it to
   be so. And possibly there are some sinners now in this congregation who
   know it.

   4. A change of opinion in regard to the desert of sin.

   The word rendered repentance implies all this. It implies a change in
   the state of the mind including all this. The careless sinner is almost
   devoid of right ideas, even so far as this life is concerned,
   respecting the desert of sin. Suppose he admits in theory that sin
   deserves eternal death, he does not believe it. If he believed it, it
   would be impossible for him to remain a careless sinner. He is
   deceived, if he supposes that he honestly holds such an opinion as that
   sin deserves the wrath of God for ever. But the truly awakened and
   convicted sinner has no more doubt of this than he has of the existence
   of God. He sees clearly that sin must deserve everlasting punishment
   from God. He knows that this is a simple matter of fact.

  Secondly. In true repentance there must be a corresponding change of feeling.

   The change of feeling respects sin in all these particulars, its
   nature, its relations, its tendencies, and its deserts. The individual
   who truly repents, not only sees sin to be detestable and vile, and
   worthy of abhorrence, but he really abhors it, and hates it in his
   heart.

   A person may see sin to be hurtful and abominable, while yet his heart
   loves it, and desires it, and clings to it. But when he truly repents,
   he most heartily abhors and renounces it.

   In relation to God, he feels towards sin as it really is. And here is
   the source of those gushings of sorrow in which Christians sometimes
   break out, when contemplating sin. The Christian views it as to its
   nature, and simply feels abhorrence. But when he views it in relation
   to God, then he weeps; the fountains of his sorrow gush forth, and he
   wants to get right down on his face and pour out a flood of tears over
   his sins.

   Then as to the tendencies of sin, the individual who truly repents
   feels it as it is. When he views sin in its tendencies, it awakens a
   vehement desire to stop it, and to save people from their sins, and
   roll back the tide of death. It sets his heart on fire, and he goes to
   praying, and laboring, and pulling sinners out of the fire with all his
   might, to save them from the awful tendencies of sin. When the
   Christian sets his mind on this, he will bestir himself to make people
   give up their sins. Just as if he saw all the people taking poison
   which he knew would destroy them, and he lifts up his voice to warn
   them to beware.

   He feels right, as to the desert of sin. He has not only an
   intellectual conviction that sin deserves everlasting punishment, but
   he feels that it would be so right and so reasonable, and so just, for
   God to condemn him to eternal death, that so far from finding fault
   with the sentence of the law that condemns him, he thinks it the wonder
   of heaven, a wonder of wonders, if God can forgive him. Instead of
   thinking it hard, or severe, or unkind in God, that incorrigible
   sinners are sent to hell, he is full of adoring wonder that he is not
   sent to hell himself, and that this whole guilty world has not long
   since been hurled down to endless burnings. It is the last thing in the
   world he would think to complain of, that all sinners are not saved;
   but O, it is a wonder of mercy that all the world is not damned. And
   when he thinks of such a sinner's being saved, he feels a sense of
   gratitude that he never knew anything of till he was a Christian.

  II. I am to show what are the works or effects of genuine repentance.

   I wish to show you what are the works of true repentance, and to make
   it so plain to your minds, that you can know infallibly whether you
   have repented or not.

   1. If your repentance is genuine, there is in your mind a conscious
   change of views and feeling in regard to sin.

   Of this you will be just as conscious as you ever were of a change of
   views and feelings on any other subject. Now, can you say this? Do you
   know, that on this point there has been a change in you, and that old
   things are done away and all things have become new.

   2. Where repentance is genuine, the disposition to repeat sin is gone.

   If you have truly repented, you do not now love sin; you do not now
   abstain from it through fear, and to avoid punishment, but because you
   hate it. How is this with you? Do you know that your disposition to
   commit sin is gone? Look at the sins you used to practice when you were
   impenitent how do they appear to you? Do they look pleasant and would
   you really love to practice them again if you dared? If you do, if you
   have the disposition to sin left, you are only convicted. Your opinions
   of sin may be changed, but if the love of that sin remains, as your
   soul lives, you are still an impenitent sinner.

   3. Genuine repentance worketh a reformation of conduct.

   I take this idea to be chiefly intended in the text, where it says
   "Godly sorrow worketh repentance." Godly sorrow produces a reformation
   of conduct.

   Otherwise it is a repetition of the same idea; or saying, that
   repentance produces repentance. Whereas, I suppose the apostle was
   speaking of such a change of mind as produces a change of conduct,
   ending in salvation. Now, let me ask you, are you really reformed? Have
   you forsaken your sins? Or, are you practicing them still? If so, you
   are still a sinner. However you may have changed your mind, if it has
   not wrought a change of conduct, an actual reformation, it is not godly
   repentance, or such as God approve.

   4. Repentance, when true and genuine, leads to confession and
   restitution.

   The thief has not repented while he keeps the money he stole. He may
   have conviction, but no repentance. If he had repentance, he would go
   and give back the money. If you have cheated any one, and do not
   restore what you have taken unjustly; or if you have injured any one,
   and do not set about rectifying the wrong you have done, as far as in
   you lies, you have not truly repented.

   5. True repentance is a permanent change of character and conduct.

   The text says it is repentance unto salvation, "not to be repented of."
   What else does the apostle mean by that expression but this, that true
   repentance is a change so deep and fundamental that the man never
   changes back again? People often quote it as if it read, repentance
   that does not need to be repented of. But that is not what he says. It
   is not to be repented of; or, in other words, repentance that will not
   be repented of so thorough, that there is no going back. The love of
   sin is truly abandoned. The individual who has truly repented, has so
   changed his views and feelings, that he will not change back again, or
   go back to the love of sin. Bear this in mind now, all of you, that the
   truly penitent sinner exercises feelings of which he never will repent.
   The text says it is "unto salvation." It goes right on, to the very
   rest of heaven. The very reason why it ends in salvation is, because it
   is such as will not be repented of.

   And here I cannot but remark, that you see why the doctrine of the
   Saints' Perseverance is true, and what it means. True repentance is
   such a thorough change of feelings and the individual who exercises it
   comes so to abhor sin, that he will persevere of course, and not go and
   take back all his repentance and return to sin again.

  III. I am to speak of false repentance.

   False or spurious repentance is said to be worldly, the sorrow of the
   world; that is, it is sorrow for sin, arising from worldly
   considerations and motives connected with the present life, or at most,
   has respect to his "own happiness" in a future world, and has no regard
   to the true nature of sin.

   1. It is not founded on such a change of opinion as I have specified to
   belong to true repentance.

   The change is not on fundamental points. A person may see the evil
   consequences of sin in a worldly point of view, and it may fill him
   with consternation. He may see that it will greatly affect his
   character, or endanger his life; that if some of his concealed conduct
   should be found out, he would be disgraced, and this may fill him with
   fear and distress.

   It is very common for persons to have this kind of worldly sorrow, when
   some worldly consideration is at the bottom of it all.

   2. False repentance is founded on selfishness.

   It may be simply a strong feeling of regret, in the mind of the
   individual, that he has done as he has, because he sees the evil
   consequences of it to himself, because it makes him miserable, or
   exposes him to the wrath of God, or injures his family or his friends,
   or because it produces some injury to himself in time or in eternity.
   All this is pure selfishness. He may feel remorse of conscience biting,
   consuming remorse and no true repentance. It may extend to fear deep
   and dreadful fear of the wrath of God and the pains of hell, and yet be
   purely selfish, and all the while there may be no such thing as a
   hearty abhorrence of sin, and no feelings of the heart going out after
   the convictions of the understanding, in regard to the infinite evil of
   sin.

  IV. I am to show how this false or spurious repentance may be known.

   1. It leaves the feelings unchanged.

   It leaves unbroken and unsubdued the disposition to sin in the heart.
   The feelings as to the nature of sin are not so changed, but that the
   individual still feels a desire for sin. He abstains from it, not from
   abhorrence of it, but from dread of the consequences of it.

   2. It works death.

   It leads to hypocritical concealment. The individual who has exercised
   true repentance is willing to have it known that he has repented, and
   willing to have it known that he was a sinner. He who has only false
   repentance, resorts to excuses and lying to cover his sins, and is
   ashamed of his repentance. When he is called to the envious seat, he
   will cover up his sins by a thousand apologies and excuses, trying to
   smooth them over, and extenuate their enormity. If he speaks of his
   past conduct, he always does it in the softest and most favorable
   terms. You see a constant disposition to cover up his sin. This
   repentance leads to death. It makes him commit one sin to cover up
   another. Instead of that ingenuous, openhearted breaking forth of
   sensibility and frankness, you see a palavering, smooth-tongued,
   half-hearted mincing out of something that is intended to answer the
   purpose of a confession, and yet to confess nothing.

   How is it with you? Are you ashamed to have any person talk with you
   about your sins? Then your sorrow is only a worldly sorrow, and worketh
   death. How often you see sinners getting out of the way to avoid
   conversation about their sins, and yet calling themselves anxious
   inquirers, and expecting to become Christians in that way. The same
   kind of sorrow is found in hell. No doubt all those wretched
   inhabitants of the pit wish to get away from the eye of God. No such
   sorrow is found among the saints in heaven. Their sorrow is open,
   ingenuous, full and hearty. Such sorrow is not inconsistent with true
   happiness. The saints are full of happiness, and yet full of deep and
   undisguised, and gushing sorrow for sin. But this worldly sorrow is
   ashamed of itself, is mean and miserable, and worketh death.

   3. False repentance produces only a partial reformation of conduct.

   The reformation that is produced by worldly sorrow extends only to
   those things of which the individual has been strongly convicted. The
   heart is not changed. You will see him avoid only those cardinal sins,
   about which he has been much exercised.

   Observe that young convert. If he is deceived, you will find that there
   is only a partial change in his conduct. He is reformed in certain
   things, but there are many things which are wrong that he continues to
   practice.

   If you become intimately acquainted with Him, instead of finding him
   tremblingly alive to sin every where, and quick to detect it in every
   thing that is contrary to the spirit of the gospel, you will find him,
   perhaps, strict and quick-sighted in regard to certain things, but
   loose in his conduct and lax in his views on other points, and very far
   from manifesting a Christian spirit in regard to all sin.

   4. Ordinarily, the reformation produced by false sorrow is temporary
   even in those things which are reformed.

   The individual is continually relapsing into his old sins. The reason
   is, the disposition to sin is not gone, it is only checked and
   restrained by fear, and as soon as he has a hope and is in the church
   and gets bolstered up so that his fears are allayed, you see him
   gradually wearing back, and presently returning to his old sins. This
   was the difficulty with the house of Israel, that made them so
   constantly return to their idolatry and other sins. They had only
   worldly sorrow. You see it now everywhere in the church. Individuals
   are reformed for a time, and taken into the church, and then relapse
   into their old sins. They love to call it; getting cold in religion,
   and backsliding, and the like, But the truth is, they always loved sin,
   and when the occasion offered, they returned to it, as the sow that was
   washed to her wallowing in the mire, because she was always a sow.

   I would you should understand this point thoroughly. Here is the
   foundation of all those fits and starts in religion, that you see so
   much of. People are awakened, and convicted, and by-and-by they get to
   hope and settle down in false security and then away they go. Perhaps,
   they may keep so far on their guard as not to be turned out of the
   church, but the foundations of sins are not broken up, and they return
   to their old ways. The woman that loved dress loves it still; and
   gradually returns to her ribands and gewgaws. The man who loved money
   loves it yet, and soon slides back into his old ways, and dives into
   business, and pursues the world as eagerly and devotedly as he did
   before he joined the church.

   Go through all the departments of society, and if you find thorough
   conversions, you will find that their most besetting sins before
   conversion are farthest from them now. The real convert is least likely
   to fall into his old besetting sin, because he abhors it most. But if
   he is deceived and worldly minded, he is always tending back into the
   same sins. The woman that loves dress comes out again in all her glory,
   and dashes as she used to do. The fountain of sin was not broken up.
   They have not purged out iniquity from their heart but they regarded
   iniquity in their heart all the time.

   5. It is a forced reformation.

   The reformation produced by a false repentance, is not only a partial
   reformation, and a temporary reformation, but it is also forced and
   constrained. The reformation of one who has true repentance is from the
   heart; he has no longer a disposition to sin. In him the Bible promise
   is fulfilled. He actually finds that "Wisdom's ways are ways of
   pleasantness, and all her paths are peace." He experiences that the
   Savior's yoke is easy and his burden is light. He has felt that God's
   commandments are not grievous but joyous. More to be desired are they
   than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the
   honeycomb.

   But this spurious kind of repentance is very different: it is a legal
   repentance, the result of fear and not of love; a selfish repentance,
   anything but a free, voluntary, hearty change from sin to obedience.
   You will find, if there are any individuals here that have this kind of
   repentance, you are conscious that you do not abstain from sin by
   choice, because you hate it, but from other considerations.

   It is more through the forbiddings of conscience, or the fear you shall
   lose your soul, or lose your hope, or lose your character, than from
   abhorrence of sin or love to duty.

   Such persons always need to be crowded up to do duty, with an express
   passage of scripture, or else they will apologize for sin, and evade
   duty, and think there is no great harm in doing as they do. The reason
   is, they love their sins, and if there is not some express command of
   God which they dare not fly in the face of, they will practice them.
   Not so with true repentance. If a thing seems contrary to the great law
   of love, the person who has true repentance will abhor it, and avoid it
   of course, whether he has an express command of God for it or not. Show
   me such a man, and I tell you he don't need an express command to make
   him give up the drinking or making or vending of strong drink. He sees
   it is contrary to the great law of benevolence, and he truly abhors it,
   and would no more do it than he would blaspheme God, or steal, or
   commit any other abomination.

   So the man that has true repentance does not need a "Thus saith the
   Lord," to keep him from oppressing his fellow men, because he would not
   do anything wrong. How certainly men would abhor any thing of the kind,
   if they had truly repented of sin.

   6. This spurious repentance leads to self-righteousness.

   The individual who has this repentance may know that Jesus Christ is
   the only Savior of sinners, and may profess to believe on him and to
   rely on him alone for salvation, but after all, he is actually placing
   ten times more reliance on his reformation than on Jesus Christ for his
   salvation. And if he would watch his own heart, he would know it is so.
   He may say he expects salvation by Christ, but in, fact he is dwelling
   more on his reformation, and his hope is founded more on that, than on
   the atonement of Christ, and he is really patching up a righteousness
   of his own.

   7. It leads to false security.

   The individual supposes the worldly sorrow he has had to be true
   repentance, and he trusts to it. It is a curious fact, that so far as I
   have been able to get at the state of mind of this class of persons,
   they seem to take it for granted that Christ will save them because
   they have had sorrow on account of their sins, although they are not
   conscious that they have ever felt any resting in Christ. They felt
   sorrow, and then they got relief and felt better, and now they expect
   to be saved by Christ, when their very consciousness will teach them
   that they have never felt a hearty reliance on Christ.

   8. It hardens the heart.

   The individual who has this kind of sorrow becomes harder in heart, in
   proportion to the number of times that he exercises such sorrow. If he
   has strong emotions of conviction, and his heart does not break up and
   flow out, the fountains of feeling are more and more dried up, and his
   heart more and more difficult to be reached.

   Take a real Christian, one who has truly repented, and every time you
   bring the truth to bear upon him so as to break him down before God, he
   becomes more and more mellow, and more easily affected, and excited,
   and melted, and broken down under God's blessed word, so long as he
   lives and to all eternity. His heart gets into the habit of going along
   with the convictions of his understanding, and he becomes as teachable
   and tractable as a little child.

   Here is the grand distinction. Let churches, or individual members, who
   have only this worldly repentance, pass through a revival, and get
   waked up, and bustle about, and then grow cold again. Let this be
   repeated and you find them more and more difficult to be roused, till
   by-and-by they become as hard as the nether mill-stone, and nothing can
   ever rally them to a revival again. Directly over against this are
   those churches and individuals who have true repentance. Let them go
   through successive revivals, and you find them growing more and more
   mellow and tender until they get to such a state, that if they hear the
   trumpet blow for a revival, they kindle and glow instantly, and are
   ready for the work.

   This distinction is as broad as between light and darkness. It is every
   where observable among the churches and church members. You see the
   principle illustrated in sinners, who, after passing through repeated
   revivals, by-and-by will scoff and rail at all religion, and although
   the heavens hang with clouds of mercy over their heads, they heed it
   not, but reject it. It is so in churches and members; if they have not
   true repentance, every fresh excitement hardens the heart and renders
   them more difficult to be reached by the truth.

   9. It sears the conscience.

   Such persons are liable at first to be thrown into distress, whenever
   the truth is flashed upon their mind. They may not have so much
   conviction as the real Christian. But the real Christian is filled with
   peace at the very time that his tears are flowing from conviction of
   sin. And each repeated season of conviction makes him more and more
   watchful, and tender, and careful, till his conscience becomes, like
   the apple of his eye, so tender that the very appearance of evil will
   offend it. But the other kind of sorrow, which does not lead to hearty
   renunciation of sin, leaves the heart harder than before, and by-and-by
   sears the conscience as with a hot iron. This sorrow worketh death.

   10. It rejects Jesus Christ as the ground of hope.

   Depending on reformation and sorrow, or any thing else, it leads to no
   such reliance on Jesus Christ, that the love of Christ will constrain
   him to labor all his days for Christ.

   11. It is transient and temporary.

   This kind of repentance is sure to be repented of. By-and-by you will
   find such persons becoming ashamed of the deep feelings that they had.
   They do not want to speak of them, and if they talk of them it is
   always lightly and coldly. They perhaps hustled about in time of
   revival, and appeared as much engaged as any body, and very likely were
   among the extremes in every thing that was done. But now the revival is
   over, and you find them opposed to new measures, and changing back, and
   ashamed of their zeal. They in fact repent of their repentance.

   Such persons, after they have joined the church, will be ashamed of
   having come to the anxious seat. When the height of the revival has
   gone by, they will begin to talk against being too enthusiastic, and
   the necessity of getting into a more sober and consistent way in
   religion. Here is the secret they had a repentance of which they
   afterwards repented.

   You sometimes find persons who profess to be converted in a revival,
   turning against the very measures, and means, and doctrines, by which
   they profess to have been converted. Not so with the true Christian. He
   is never ashamed of his repentance. The last thing he would ever think
   of being ashamed of, is the excitement of feeling he felt in a revival.

    REMARKS.

  1. We learn from what has been said, one reason why there is so much spasmodic
  religion in the church.

   They have mistaken conviction for conversion, the sorrow of the world
   for that godly sorrow that worketh repentance unto salvation, not to be
   repented of. I am convinced, after years of observation, that here is
   the true reason for the present deplorable state of the church all over
   the land.

  2. We see why sinners under conviction feel as if it was a great cross to
  become Christians.

   They think it a great trial to give up their ungodly companions, and to
   give up their sins. Whereas, if they had true repentance, they would
   not think it any cross to give up their sins. I recollect how I used to
   feel, when I first saw young persons becoming Christians and joining
   the church. I thought it was a good thing on the whole to have
   religion, because they would save their souls and get to heaven. But
   for the time, it seemed to be a very sorrowful thing. I never dreamed
   then that these young people could be really happy now. I believe it is
   very common for persons, who know that religion is good on the whole,
   and good in the end, to think they cannot be happy in religion. This is
   all owing to a mistake respecting the true nature of repentance. They
   do not understand that true repentance leads to an abhorrence of those
   things that were formerly loved. Sinners do not see that when their
   young friends become true Christians, they feel an abhorrence for their
   balls and parties, and sinful amusements and follies, that the love for
   these things is crucified.

   I once knew a young lady who was converted to God. Her father was a
   very proud worldly man. She used to be very fond of dress, and the
   dancing school, and balls. After she was converted, her father would
   force her to go to the dancing school. He used to go along with her,
   and force her to stand up and dance. She would go there and weep, and
   sometimes when she was standing up on the floor to dance, her feelings
   of abhorrence and sorrow would so come over her, that she would turn
   away and burst into tears. Here you see the cause of all that. She
   truly repented of these things, with a repentance not to be repented
   of. O, how many associations would such a scene recall to a Christian,
   what compassion for her former gay companions, what abhorrence of their
   giddy mirth, how she longed to be in the prayer-meeting, how could she
   be happy there? Such is the mistake which the impenitent, or those who
   have only worldly sorrow, fall into, in regard to the happiness of the
   real Christian.

  3. Here you see what is the matter with those professing Christians who think
  it a cross to be very strict in religion.

   Such persons are always apologizing for their sins, and pleading for
   certain practices, that are not consistent with strict religion. It
   shows that they love sin still, and will go as far as they dare in it.
   If they were true Christians, they would abhor it, and turn from it,
   and would feel it to be a cross to be dragged to it.

  4. You see the reason why some know not what it is to enjoy religion.

   They are not cheerful and happy in religion. They are grieved because
   they have to break off from so many things they love, or because they
   have to give so much money. They are in the fire all the time. Instead
   of rejoicing in every opportunity of self-denial, and rejoicing in the
   plainest and most cutting exhibitions of truth, it is a great trial to
   them to be told their duty, when it crosses their inclinations and
   habits.

   The plain truth distresses them. Why? Because their hearts do not love
   to do duty. If they loved to do their duty, every ray of light that
   broke in upon their minds from heaven, pointing out their duty, would
   be welcomed, and make them more and more happy.

   Whenever you see such persons, if they feel cramped and distressed
   because the truth presses them, if their hearts do not yield and go
   along with the truth, hypocrite is the name of all such professors of
   religion. If you find that they are distressed like anxious sinners,
   and that the more you point out their sins the more they are
   distressed, be you sure, that they have never truly repented of their
   sins, nor given themselves up to be God's.

  5. You see why many professed converts, who have had very deep exercises at
  the time of their conversion, afterwards apostatize.

   They had deep convictions and great distress of mind, and afterwards
   they got relief and their joy was very great, and they were amazingly
   happy for a season. But by-and-by they decline, and then they
   apostatize. Some, who do not discriminate properly between true and
   false repentance, and who think there cannot be such "deep" exercises
   without divine power, call these cases of falling from grace. But the
   truth is, They went out from us because they were not of us. They never
   had that repentance that his and annihilates the disposition to sin.

  6. See why backsliders are so miserable.

   Perhaps you will infer that I suppose all true Christians are perfect,
   from what I said about the disposition to sin being broken up and
   changed. But this does not follow. There is a radical difference
   between a backslidden Christian and a hypocrite who has gone back from
   his profession. The hypocrite loves the world, and enjoys sin when he
   returns to it. He may have some fears and some remorse, and some
   apprehension about the loss of character; but after all he enjoys sin.
   Not so with the backslidden Christian. He loses his first love, then he
   falls a prey to temptation, and so he goes into sin. But he does not
   love it; it is always bitter to him; he feels unhappy and away from,
   home. He has indeed, at the time, no Spirit of God, no love of God in
   exercise to keep him from sin, but he does not love sin; he is unhappy
   in sin; he feels that he is a wretch. He is as different from the
   hypocrite as can be. Such an one, when he leaves the love of God, may
   be delivered over to Satan for a time, for the destruction of the
   flesh, that the Spirit may be saved; but he can never again enjoy sin
   as he used to, or delight himself as he once could in the pleasures of
   the world. Never again can he drink in iniquity like water. So long as
   he continues to wander, he is a wretch. If there is one such here
   tonight, you know it.

  7. You see why convicted sinners are afraid to pledge themselves to give up
  their sins.

   They tell you they dare not promise to do it, because they are afraid
   they shall not keep the promise. There you have the reason. "They love
   sin." The drunkard knows that he loves rum, and though he may be
   constrained to keep his promise and abstain from it, yet his appetite
   still craves it. And so with the convicted sinner. He feels that he
   loves sin, that his hold on sin has never been broken off, and he dares
   not promise.

  8. See why some professors of religion are so much opposed to pledges.

   It is on the same principle. They love their sins so well, they know
   their hearts will plead for indulgence, and they are afraid to promise
   to give them up. Hence many who profess to think they are Christians,
   refuse to join the church. The secret reason is, they feel that their
   heart is still going after sin, and they dare not come under the
   obligations of the church-covenant. They do not want to be subject to
   the discipline of the church, in case they should sin. That man knows
   he is a hypocrite.

  9. Those sinners who have worldly sorrow, can now see where the difficulty
  lies, and what is the reason they are not converted.

   Their intellectual views of sin may be such, that if their hearts
   corresponded, they would be Christians. And perhaps they are thinking
   that this is true repentance. But if they were truly willing to give up
   sin, and all sin, they would not hesitate to pledge themselves to it,
   and to have all the world know that they had done it. If there are any
   such here, I ask you now to come forward, and take these seats. If you
   are willing to give up sin, you are willing to promise to do it, and
   willing to have it known that you have done it. But if you resist
   conviction, and when your understanding is enlightened to see what you
   ought to do, your heart still goeth forth after your sins, tremble,
   sinner, at the prospect before you. All your convictions will avail you
   nothing. They will only sink you deeper in hell for having resisted
   them.

   If you are willing to give up your sins, you can signify it as I have
   named. But if you still love your sins, and want to retain them, you
   can keep your seats. And now, shall we go and tell God in prayer, that
   these sinners are unwilling to give up their sins, that though they are
   convinced they are wrong, they love their idols, and after them they
   will go? The Lord have mercy on them, for they are in a fearful case.
     __________________________________________________________________

      He that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much. Luke 16:10.

   These words are a part of the parable of the unjust steward, or rather,
   a principle which our Lord lays down in connection with the parable.
   The words do not require that I should go into an explanation of the
   parable itself, as they make no part of the story which the Lord Jesus
   was relating. The principle involved or laid down is what I have to do
   with tonight. In preaching from these words I design to illustrate the
   principle laid down, which is this:

   One who is dishonest in small matters, is not really honest in
   anything.

   The order which I shall pursue is the following:

   I. I shall show what I do not mean by this principle. II. Show what I
   do mean by it. III. Prove the principle, that one who is dishonest in
   small matters is not really honest at all. IV. Show by what principle
   those individuals are governed who, while they are dishonest in small
   things, appear to be honest, and even religious, in larger affairs. V.
   Mention several instances where persons often manifest a want of
   principle in small matters.

  I. I am to show what I do not mean by the principle, that one who is dishonest
  in small matters is not really honest in anything.

   Answer. I do not mean that if a person is dishonest in small matters,
   and will take little advantages in dealing, it is therefore certain
   that in greater matters he will not deal openly and honorably according
   to the rules of business.

   Or that it is certain, if a man will commit petty thefts and
   depredations, that he will commit highway robbery. There may be various
   reasons why a man who will commit such depredations will not go into
   more daring and outrageous crimes.

   Or that if a man indulges unclean thoughts, it is certain he will
   commit adultery.

   Or that if he indulges covetous desires, it is certain he will steal.

   Or that if he indulges in ill-will towards any one, he will commit
   murder.

   Or that if he would enslave a fellow man, and deprive him of
   instruction and of all the rights of man, he will certainly commit
   other crimes of equal enormity.

   Or that if he will defraud the government in little things, such as
   postage, or duties on little articles, he will rob the treasury.

  II. I am to explain what I do mean by the principle laid down, that if a man
  is dishonest in little things, he is not really honest in anything.

   What I mean is, that if a man is dishonest in small matters, it shows
   that he is not governed by principle in anything. It is therefore
   certain that it is not real honesty of heart which leads him to act
   right in greater matters. He must have other motives than honesty of
   heart, if he appears to act honestly in larger things, while he acts
   dishonestly in small matters.

  III. I am to prove the principle.

   I am not going to take it for granted, although the Lord Jesus Christ
   expressly declares it. I design to mention several considerations in
   addition to the force of the text. I believe it is a general impression
   that a person may be honest in greater matters, and deserve the
   character of honesty, notwithstanding he is guilty of dishonesty in
   small matters.

   1. If he was actuated by a supreme regard to the authority of God and
   if this was the habitual state of his mind, such a state of mind would
   be quite as apt to manifest itself in smaller matters as in large. Nay,
   where the temptation is small, he would be more certain to act
   conscientiously than in greater matters, because there is less to
   induce him to act otherwise. What is honesty? If a man has no other
   motives for acting honestly than mere selfishness, the devil is as
   honest as he is; for I dare say he is honest with his fellow devils, as
   far as it is for his interest or policy to be so. Is that honesty?
   Certainly not and, therefore, if a man does not act honestly from
   higher motives than this, he is not honest at all, and if he appears to
   be honest in certain important matters, he has other motives than a
   regard to the honor of God.

   2. It is certain that, if an individual is dishonest in small matters,
   he is not actuated by love to God. If he was actuated by love to God,
   he would feel that dishonesty in small matters is just as inconsistent
   as in great. It is as real a violation of the law of God, and one who
   truly loves God would no more act dishonestly in one than in the other.

   3. It is certain that he is not actuated by real love to his neighbor,
   such as the law of God requires. If he loved his neighbor as himself,
   he would not defraud him in small things any more than in great. Nay,
   he might do it in great things, where the temptation to swerve from his
   integrity was powerful. But where the temptation is small, it cannot be
   that one who truly loves his neighbor would act dishonestly. See the
   case of Job. Job truly loved God, and you see how far he went, and what
   distress he endured, before he would say a word that even seemed
   disparaging or complaining of God. And when the temptation was
   overwhelming, and he could see no reason why he should be so afflicted,
   and his distress became intolerable, and his soul was all in darkness,
   and his wife set in and told him to curse God and die, he would not do
   it then, but said, "Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh.
   What! shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
   receive evil?" Do you suppose Job would have swerved from his integrity
   in little things, or for small temptations? Never. He loved God. And if
   you find a man who truly loves his neighbor, you will not see him
   deceiving or defrauding his neighbor for trifling temptations.

  IV. I am to examine some of the motives by which a person may be actuated, who
  is dishonest in little things, while he may appear to be honest in greater
  matters.

   Our own business here is to ascertain how this apparent discrepancy can
   consist with the declaration in the test. The Lord Jesus Christ has
   laid down the principle, that if a man is dishonest in small matters,
   he is not strictly honest at all. Now, here are facts, which to many
   appear to contradict this. We see many men that in small matters
   exhibit a great want of principle, and appear to be quite void of
   principle, while in larger things they appear to be honorable and even
   pious. This must be consistent, or else Jesus Christ has affirmed a
   falsehood. That it is consistent with truth will be admitted, if we can
   show that their conduct in regard to larger matters can be accounted
   for on other principles than honesty of heart. If we can account for it
   on principles of mere selfishness, it will be admitted, that where a
   man is dishonest in small things, he is not really honest at all,
   however honestly he may act in regard to larger matters.

   1. They may act honestly in larger matters for fear of disgrace.

   They may know that certain small things are not likely to be mentioned
   in public, or to have a noise made about them, and so they may do such
   things, while the fear of disgrace deters them from doing the same
   things in regard to larger matters, because it will make a noise. What
   is this but one form of selfishness overbalancing another form? It is
   selfishness still, not honesty.

   2. He may suppose it will injure his business, if he is guilty of
   dishonesty with men of business, and so he deals honesty in important
   matters, while in little things he is ready to take any advantage he
   can, that will not injure his business. Thus a man will take advantage
   of a seamstress, and pay her a little less than he knows it is really
   worth for making a garment, while the same individual, in buying a bale
   of goods, would not think of showing a disposition to cheat, because it
   would injure his business. In dealing with an abused and humble
   individual, he can gripe and screw out a few cents without fear of
   public disgrace, while he would not for any consideration do an act
   which would be publicly spoken of as disreputable and base.

   3. Fear of human law may influence a man to act honestly in such things
   as are likely to be taken up, while in such small matters as the law is
   not likely to notice, he will defraud or take advantage.

   4. The love of praise influences many to act honestly and honorably,
   and even piously, in matters that are likely to be noticed. Many a man
   will defraud a poor person out of a few cents in the price of labor,
   and then, in some great matter on a public occasion, appear to act with
   great liberality. What is the reason, that individuals who habitually
   screw down their servants, and seamstresses, and other poor people that
   they employ, to the lowest penny, and take all the advantage they can
   of such people, will then, if a severe winter comes, send out cart
   loads of fuel to the poor, or give large sums of money to the
   committees? You see that it is for the love of praise, and not for the
   love of God nor the love of man.

   5. The fear of God. He may be afraid of the divine wrath, if he commits
   dishonest acts of importance, while he supposes God will overlook
   little things, and not notice it if he is dishonest in such small
   matters.

   6. He may restrain his dishonest propensities from mere
   self-righteousness, and act honestly in great things, for the sake of
   bolstering up his own good opinion of himself, while in little things
   he will cheat and play the knave.

   I said in the beginning, that I did not mean, that if a man would take
   small advantages, he would certainly never act with apparent
   uprightness. It often comes to pass, that individuals who act with
   great meanness and dishonesty in small affairs, will act uprightly and
   honorably, on the ground that their character and interest are at
   stake. Many a man, who among merchants is looked upon as an honorable
   dealer, is well known, by those who are more intimately acquainted with
   him, to be mean and knavish and overreaching in smaller matters, or in
   his dealings with more humble and more dependent individuals. It is
   plain that it is not real honesty of heart which makes him act with
   apparent honesty in his more public transactions.

   So I said, that if an individual will commit petty thefts, it is not
   certain he would commit highway robbery. He might have various reasons
   for abstaining, without having a particle too much honesty to rob on
   the highway, or to cut a purse out of your pocket in a crowd. The
   individual may not have courage enough to break out in highway robbery,
   or not skill enough, or nerve enough, or he may be afraid of the law,
   or afraid of disgrace, or other reasons.

   An individual may indulge unclean thoughts, habitually, and yet never
   actually commit adultery. He may be restrained by fear, or want of
   opportunity, and not by principle. If he indulges unclean thoughts, he
   would certainly act uncleanly, if it were not for other reasons than
   purity of principle.

   An individual may manifest a covetous spirit, and yet not steal. But he
   has the spirit that would lead him to steal, if not restrained by other
   reasons than honesty or principle.

   A man may be angry, and yet his anger never break out in murder. But
   his hatred would lead him to do it, so far as principle is concerned.
   And if it is not done, it is for other reasons than true principle.

   An individual may oppress his fellow man, enslave him deprive him of
   instruction, and compel him to labor without compensation, for his own
   benefit, and yet not commit murder, or go to Africa to engage in the
   slave trade, because it would endanger his reputation or his life. But
   if he will do that which divests life of all that is desirable to
   gratify his own pride or promote his own interest, it cannot be
   principle, either of love to God or love to man, that keeps him from
   going any length, if his interest requires it. If a man, from regard to
   his own selfish interest, will take a course towards any human being
   which will deprive him of all that renders life desirable, it is easy
   to see that, so far as principle is concerned, there is nothing in the
   way of his doing it by violence on the coast of Africa or taking life
   itself when his interest requires it.

   So an individual who will defraud the United States treasury of
   eighteen cents in postage has none too much principle to rob the
   treasury if he had the same prospect of impunity. The same principle
   that allowed him to do the one would allow him to do the other. And the
   same motive that led him to do the one, would lead him to do the other
   if he had an opportunity, and if it were not counteracted by some other
   motive equally selfish.

   A man may, in like manner, be guilty of little misrepresentations, who
   would not dare to tell a downright lie. Yet if he is guilty of coloring
   the truth, and misrepresenting facts, with a design to deceive, or to
   make facts appear otherwise than they really are, he is really lying,
   and the individual who will do this would manufacture ever so many
   lies, if it was for his interest, or were he not restrained by other
   reasons than a sacred regard to truth.

  V. I will mention some instances, where persons are dishonest in small
  matters, while they appear to act honestly and even piously in regard to
  matters of greater importance.

   1. We often find individuals manifesting a great want of principle in
   regard to the payment of small debts, while they are extremely careful
   and punctual in the payment of notes in the bank, and in all their
   commercial transactions.

   For instance, there is a man takes a newspaper, the price is only a
   small sum, and the publisher cannot send a collector to every
   individual, so this man lets his subscription lie along perhaps for
   years, and perhaps never pays it. The same individual, if it had been a
   note at the bank, would have been punctual enough; and no pains would
   have been spared, rather than let the note run beyond the day.

   Why? Because, if he does not pay his note in the bank, it will be
   protested, and his credit will be injured, but the little debt of
   twenty shillings or five dollars will not be protested, and he knows
   it, and so he lets it go by, and the publisher has to be at the trouble
   and expense of sending for it, or go without his money. How manifest it
   is that this man does not pay his notes at the bank from honesty of
   principle, but purely from a regard to his own credit and interest.

   2. I have before referred to the case of seamstresses. Suppose an
   individual employs women to sew for him, and for the sake of
   underselling others in the same trade, he beats down these women below
   the just price of such work. It is manifest that the individual is not
   honest in anything. If, for sake of making more profits, or of
   underselling, he will beat down these women suppose he is honorable and
   prompt in his public transactions no thanks to him, it is not because
   he is honest in his heart, but because it is his interest to seem so.

   3. Some manifest this want of principle by committing little petty
   thefts. If they live at a boarding house, where there are boarders,
   they will commit little petty thefts perhaps for fuel in the cellar. An
   individual will not be at the expense of getting a little charcoal for
   himself, to kindle his fire in the morning, but gets along by pilfering
   from the stores laid in by others, a handful at a time. Now the
   individual that will do that, shows himself to be radically rotten at
   heart.

   A case came to my knowledge, of this kind. An individual was sitting in
   a room, where a gentleman had on the table for some purpose a tumbler
   of wine and a pitcher of water. The gentleman had occasion to go out of
   the room a moment, but accidentally left the door ajar, and while he
   was out, looking back he saw this individual drink a part of the wine
   in the tumbler, and then, to conceal it, fill up the tumbler with
   water, and take his seat. Now the individual who did that showed that
   he loved wine, and that he was none too good to steal; he showed, that
   so far as principle was concerned, he would get drunk if he had the
   means, and steal if he had a chance; in fact, at heart, he was both a
   drunkard and a thief.

   4. Individuals often manifest great dishonesty when they find articles
   that have been lost, especially articles of small value. One will find
   a penknife, perhaps, or a pencil case, and never make the least
   inquiry, even among those he has reason to believe were the losers.
   Now, the man that would find a penknife, and keep it without making
   inquiry, where there was any prospect of finding the owner, so far as
   principle is concerned, would keep a pocket-book full of bank notes, if
   he should find it, and have an equal chance of concealment. And yet
   this same individual, if he should find a pocket-book with five
   thousand dollars in it, would advertise it in the newspapers, and make
   a great noise, and profess to be wonderfully honest. But what is his
   motive? He knows that the five thousand dollars will be inquired into,
   and if he is discovered to have concealed it, he shall be ruined. Fine
   honesty, this.

   5. Many individuals conceal little mistakes that are made in their
   favor, in reckoning, or giving change. If an individual would keep
   still, say nothing, and let it pass, when such a mistake is made in his
   favor, it is manifest that nothing but a want of opportunity and
   impunity would prevent him from taking any advantage whatever, or
   overreaching to any extent.

   6. Frauds on the post-office are of the same class.

   Who does not know that there is a great deal of dishonesty practiced
   here? Some seem to think there is no dishonesty in cheating the
   government out of a little postage. Postmasters will frank letters they
   have no right to. Many will frank letters not only for their families
   but for their neighbors, all directly contrary to law, and a fraud upon
   the post-office. The man that will do that is not honest.

   What would not such a man do, if he had the same prospect of impunity
   in other frauds, that he has in this?

   7. Smuggling is a common form of petty dishonesty. How many a man will
   contrive to smuggle little articles in his trunk, when he comes home
   from England, that he knows ought to pay duty to the custom-house, and
   he thinks but little of it, because the sum is so small where as, the
   smaller the sum the more clearly is principle developed. Because the
   temptation is so small, it shows how weak is the man's principle of
   honesty, that can be overcome by such a trifle. The man that would do
   this, if he had the same opportunity, would smuggle a cargo. If, for so
   little, he would lose sight of his integrity, and do a dishonest act,
   he is not too good to rob the treasury.

    REMARKS.

  1. The real state of a man's heart is often more manifested in smaller matters
  than in business of greater moment.

   Men are often deceived here, and think their being honest in greater
   things will go to prove their honesty of heart, notwithstanding their
   knavishness in smaller things, and so they are sure to be on their
   guard in great things, while they are careless of little matters, and
   so act out their true character. They overlook the fact, that all their
   honesty in larger matters springs from a wrong principle, from a desire
   "to appear" honest, and not from a determination to be honest. They
   overlook their own petty frauds because they guard their more public
   manifestations of character, and then take it for granted that they are
   honest, which they are nothing but rottenness at heart. The man who
   will take advantage in little things, where he is not watched, is not
   actuated by principle. If you want to know your real character, watch
   your hearts, and see how your principles develop themselves in little
   things.

   For instance, suppose you are an eye-servant. You are employed in the
   service of another, and you do not mind being idle at times for a short
   time, in the absence of your employer. Or you slight your work when not
   under the eye of your employer, as you would not if he was present. The
   man who will do this is totally dishonest, and not to be trusted in any
   thing, and very likely would take money from his employer's
   pocket-book, if it were not for the fear of detection or some other
   equally selfish motive. Such a person is not to be trusted at all,
   except in circumstances where it is his interest to be honest.

   Mechanics that slight their work when it will not be seen or known by
   their employer, are rotten at heart, and not to be trusted at all, any
   farther than you can make it for their interest to be honest.

   Persons who will knowingly misstate facts in conversation, would bear
   false witness in court under oath, if favored with opportunity and
   impunity. They never tell the truth at all because it is truth, or from
   the love of truth. Let no such men be trusted.

   Those who are unchaste in conversation would be unchaste in conduct, if
   they had opportunity and impunity. Spurn the man or woman who will be
   impure in speech, even among their own sex, they have no principle at
   all, and are not to be trusted on the ground of their principles. If
   persons are chaste from principle, they will no more indulge in unclean
   conversation than unclean actions. They will abhor even the garment
   spotted with the flesh.

   2. The individual who will indulge in any one sin, does not abstain
   from any sin because it is sin. If he hated sin, and was opposed to sin
   because it is sin, he would no more indulge in one sin than another. If
   a person goes to pick and choose among sins, avoiding some, and
   practicing others, it is certain that it is not because he regards the
   authority of God, or hates sin, that he abstains from any sin whatever.

   3. Those individuals who will not abandon all intoxicating drinks for
   the purpose of promoting temperance, never gave up ardent spirits for
   the sake of promoting temperance.

   It is manifest that they gave up ardent spirits from some other
   consideration than a regard to the temperance cause. If that had been
   their object, they would give up alcohol in all its forms, and when
   they find that there is alcohol in wine, and beer, and cider they would
   give them up of course. Why not?

   4. The man who for the sake of gain, will sell rum, or intoxicating
   drinks, to his neighbor, and put a cup to his neighbor's mouth, and
   would thus consent to ruin him, soul and body, would consent to sell
   his neighbor into slavery to promote his own selfish interests, if he
   could do it with impunity. And if he did not rob and murder him for the
   sake of his money, it certainly would not be because the love of God or
   of man restrained him. If the love of self is so strong, that he will
   consent to do his neighbor the direct injury of selling him ardent
   spirits nothing but selfishness under some other form prevailing over
   the love of money, could prevent his selling men into slavery, robbing,
   or murdering them, to get their money.

   He might love his own reputation; he might fear the penalty of human
   law; he might fear the destruction of his own soul, so much as to
   restrain him from these acts of outrage and violence. But certainly it
   could not be the principle of love to God or man that would restrain
   him.

   5. The individual who will enslave his fellow men for his own selfish
   objects, would enslave others, any or all, if his interest demanded,
   and if he had the same opportunity.

   If a man will appropriate the rights of one, he would without any
   reluctance appropriate the rights of all men, if he could do it with
   impunity. The individual who will deprive a black man of his liberty,
   and enslave him, would make no scruple to enslave a white man if
   circumstances were equally favorable. The man who contends that the
   black laborer of the south ought to be held in slavery, if he dared,
   would contend to have the white laborers of the north enslaved, and
   would urge the same kind of arguments that the peace and order of
   society requires it, and laborers are so much better off when they have
   a master to take care of them. The famous Bible argument too, is as
   good in favor of white slaves as black, if you only had the power to
   carry it out. The man who holds his fellow man as property, would take
   his fellow man as property, if he could with impunity. The principle is
   the same in all. It is not principle that keeps men who hold slaves
   from kidnaping on the coast of Africa, or from making war to enslave
   the free laborers of the north.

   6. The man that will not practice self-denial in little things to
   promote religion, would not endure persecution for the sake of
   promoting religion.

   Those who will not deny their appetite would not endure the scourge and
   the stake. Perhaps, if persecution were to arise, some might endure it
   for the sake of the applause it would bring, or to show their spirit,
   and to face opposition. There is a natural spirit of obstinacy, which
   is often roused by opposition, that would go to the stake rather than
   yield a point. But it is easily seen, that it is not true love to the
   cause which prompts a man to endure opposition, if he will not endure
   self-denial in little things for the sake of the cause.

   7. Little circumstances often discover the state of the heart.

   The individual that we find delinquent in small matters, we of course
   infer would be much more so in larger affairs, if circumstances were
   equally favorable.

   Where you find persons wearing little ornaments from vanity, set them
   down as rotten at heart. If they could they would go all lengths in
   display, if they were not restrained by some other considerations than
   a regard to the authority of God and the honor of religion. You may see
   this every day in the streets. Men walking with their cloaks very
   carefully thrown over their shoulders, so as to show the velvet; and
   women with their feathers tossing in the air: it is astonishing how
   many ways there are in which these little things show their pride and
   rottenness of heart.

   You say these are little things. I know they are little things, and
   because they are little things, I mention them. It is because they are
   little things, that they show the character so clearly. If their pride
   were not deeply rooted, they would not show it in little things. If a
   man had it put into his power to live in a palace, with everything
   corresponding, it would be no wonder if he should give way to the
   temptation. But when his vanity shows itself in little things he gives
   full evidence that it has possession of his soul.

   How important it is for you to see this, and to keep a watch over these
   little things, so as to see what you are, and to know your characters
   they appear in the sight of God.

   How important to cultivate the strictest integrity, such as will carry
   itself out in small things as well as in large. There is something so
   beautiful, when you see an individual acting in little things with the
   same careful and conscientious uprightness as in matters of the
   greatest moment. Until professors of religion will cultivate this
   universal honesty, they will always be a reproach to religion.

   Oh, how much would be gained if professors of religion would evince
   that entire purity and honesty on all occasions and to all persons, and
   do what is just right, so as to commend religion to the ungodly. How
   often do sinners fix their eye on some petty delinquencies of
   professors of religion, and look with amazement at such things in
   persons who profess the fear of God. What an everlasting reproach to
   religion, that so many of its professors are guilty of these little,
   mean, paltry knaveries. The wicked have cause enough to see that such
   professors cannot have any principle of honesty, and that such religion
   as they exhibit is good for nothing, and is not worth having.

   Of what use is it for that woman to talk to her impenitent servant
   about religion, when her servant knows that she will not hesitate to
   overreach, and screw down, and cheat, in petty things? Or for that
   merchant to talk to his clerks, who know that, however honorable he may
   be in his greater and more public transactions, he is mean end knavish
   in little things? It is worse than useless.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Examine yourself whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. 2
      Corinthians 13:5.

   In speaking from this text I design to pursue the following order:

   I. Show what is intended by the requirement in the text. II. The
   necessity of this requirement. III. The practicability of the duty
   enjoined. IV. Give some directions as to the manner of performing the
   duty.

  I. I am to show what is intended by the requirement in the text, "Examine
  yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves."

   It requires that we should understand our own hearts, that we should
   take the proper steps to make proof of our real characters, as they
   appear in the sight of God. It refers not to a trial of proof of our
   strength, or knowledge, but our moral character, that we should
   thoroughly test it, so as to understand it as it is. It implies that we
   should know how God regards us, and what he thinks of us whether he
   considers us saints or sinners. It is nothing less than a positive
   command that we should ascertain our own true character, and settle the
   question definitely for ourselves, whether we are saints or sinners,
   heirs of heaven or heirs of hell.

  II. I am to show the necessity of this requirement.

   1. It is indispensable to our own peace of mind, that we should prove
   and ascertain our true character, as it is in the sight of God.

   The individual who is uncertain as to his real character, can have no
   such thing as settled peace of mind. He may have apathy more or less
   complete and perfect, but apathy is very different from peace. And very
   few professors of religion, or persons who continue to hear the gospel,
   can have such apathy for any length of time, as to suppress all uneasy
   feelings, at being uncertain respecting their true character and
   destiny. I am not speaking of hypocrites, who have seared their
   consciences, or of scoffers who may be given up of God. But in regard
   to others, it is strictly true that they must have this question
   settled in order to enjoy peace of mind.

  2. It is essential to Christian honesty.

   A man who is not truly settled in his mind as to his own character is
   hardly honest in religion. If he makes a profession of religion when he
   does not honestly believe himself a saint, who does not know that is
   not exactly honest? He is half a hypocrite at heart. So when he prays,
   he is always in doubt whether his prayers are acceptable, as coming
   from a child of God.

  3. A just knowledge of one's own character is indispensable to usefulness.

   If a person has always to agitate this question in his mind, "Am I a
   Christian?" If he has to be always anxiously looking at his own estate
   all the while, and doubtful how he stands, it must be a great hindrance
   to his usefulness. If when he speaks to sinners, he is uncertain
   whether he is not himself a sinner, he cannot exhort with that
   confidence and simplicity, that he could if he felt his own feet on a
   rock. It is a favorite idea with some people, that it is best for
   saints to be always in the dark, to keep them humble.

   Just as if it was calculated to make a child of God proud to know that
   he is a child of God. Whereas, one of the most weighty considerations
   in the universe to keep him from dishonoring God is, to know that he is
   a child of God. When a person is in an anxious state of mind, he can
   have but little faith, and his usefulness cannot be extensive till the
   question is settled.

  III. The practicability of this requirement.

   It is a favorite idea with some, that in this world the question never
   can be settled. It is amazing what a number of persons there are, that
   seem to make a virtue of their great doubts, which they always have,
   whether they are Christians. For hundreds of years it has been looked
   upon by many as a suspicious circumstance, if a professor of religion
   is not filled with doubts. It is considered as almost a certain sign,
   he knows nothing of his own heart. One of the universal questions put
   to candidates for admission has been, "Have you any doubts of your good
   estate?" And if the candidate answers, "O yes, I have great doubts,"
   that is all very well, and is taken as evidence that he is spiritual,
   and has a deep acquaintance with his own heart, and has a great deal of
   humility. But if he has no doubts, it is taken as evidence that he
   knows little of his own heart, and is most probably a hypocrite. Over
   against all this, I maintain that the duty enjoined in the text is a
   practicable duty, and that Christians can put themselves to such a
   proof, as to know their own selves, and have a satisfactory assurance
   of their real character.

   1. This is evident from the command in the text, "Examine yourselves,
   whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves." Will any one
   believe that God requires us to examine ourselves and prove ourselves,
   and see what is our true character, when he knows it to be impossible
   for us ever to learn our true character.

   2. We have the best possible medium of proof, to try ourselves and
   prove our character, and that is our consciousness.

   Consciousness gives the highest possible certainty as to the facts by
   which our characters are to be determined, and the great question is
   settled. What is our state before God? We may have, and ought to have,
   the same kind of evidence of our state before God as we have of our
   existence; and that is, consciousness. Nay, we cannot help having the
   evidence. Consciousness is continually testifying what are our states
   of mind, and it only needs for us to take notice of what consciousness
   testifies, and we can settle the question as certainly as we can our
   own existence.

   3. God gives men such constant opportunities to act out what is in
   their hearts, that nothing but negligence can prevent their coming to a
   decision of the matter.

   If men, were shut up in dungeons, where they had no opportunity to act,
   and no chance of being influenced by circumstances, and no way to
   develop the state of their hearts, they would not be so much to blame
   for not knowing themselves. But God has placed them in the
   circumstances in which they are in this life on purpose, as he said to
   the children of Israel, to prove them, and to know what is in their
   hearts, and whether they will keep his commandments or no. The things
   around us must produce an impression on our minds, and lead us to feel
   and act in some way. And this affords opportunities of self-knowledge,
   when we see how we feel and how we are inclined to act in such
   diversified circumstances.

   4. We are farther qualified to trust to our own true characters, by
   having a perfect rule to try them by.

   The law of God is a true standard by which to try our characters. We
   know exactly what that is, and we have therefore an infallible and an
   invariable rule by which to judge of ourselves. We can bring our
   feelings and actions to this rule, and compare them with this standard,
   and know exactly what is their true character in the sight of God, for
   God himself tries them by the same standard.

   5. Our circumstances are such that nothing but dishonesty can possibly
   lead us to self-deception.

   The individual who is self-deceived is not only careless and negligent,
   but decidedly dishonest, or he would not deceive himself. He must be to
   a great degree prejudiced by pride, and blinded by self-will or he
   could not but know that he is not what he professes to be. The
   circumstances are so many and so various, that call forth the exercises
   of his mind, that it must be willful blindness that is deceived. If
   they never had any opportunities to act, or if circumstances did not
   call forth their feelings, they might be ignorant. A person who had
   never seen a beggar, might not be able to tell what were his true
   feelings towards beggars. But place him where he meets beggars every
   day, and he must be willfully blind or dishonest, if he do not know the
   temper of his heart towards a beggar.

  IV. I will mention a few things as to the manner of performing this duty.

   First Negatively.

   1. It is not done by waiting for evidence to come to us.

   Many seem to wait, in a passive attitude, for the evidence to come to
   them, to decide whether they are Christians or not. They appear to have
   been waiting for certain feelings to come to them. Perhaps they pray
   about it; perhaps they pray very earnestly, and then wait for the
   feelings to come which will afford them satisfactory evidence of their
   good estate. Many times they will not do anything in religion till they
   get this evidence, and they sit and wait, and wait, in vain expectation
   that the Spirit of God will come some time or other, and lift them out
   of this slough, while they remain thus passive and stupid. They may
   wait till doomsday and never get it in this way.

   2. Not by any direct attempt to force the feelings into exercise which
   are to afford the evidence.

   The human mind is so constituted, that it never will feel by trying to
   feel. You may try as hard as you please, to feel in a particular way.
   Your efforts to put forth feelings are totally unphilosophical and
   absurd. There is now nothing before the mind to produce emotion or
   feeling. Feeling is always awakened in the mind by the mind's being
   intensely fixed on some object calculated to awaken feeling. But when
   the mind is fixed, not upon the object, but on direct attempts to put
   forth feeling, this will not awaken feeling. It is impossible. The
   attention must be taken up with the object calculated to awaken
   feeling, or there will be no feeling. You may as well shut up your eye
   and attempt to see, or go into a dark room. In a dark room there is no
   object to awaken the sense of sight and you may exert yourself and
   strain your eyes, and try to see, but you will see nothing. When the
   mind's attention is taken up with looking inward, and attempting to
   examine the nature of the present emotion, that emotion at once ceases
   to exist, because the attention is no longer fixed on the object that
   causes the emotion. I hold my hand before this lamp, it casts a shadow;
   but if I take the lamp away, there is no shadow; there must be a light
   to produce a shadow.

   It is just as certain that if the mind is turned away from the object
   that awakens emotion, the emotion ceases to exist. The mind must be
   fixed on the object, not on the emotion, or there will be no emotion,
   and consequently no evidence.

   3. You will never get evidence by spending time in mourning over the
   state of your heart.

   Some people spend their time in nothing but complaining, "O, I don't
   feel, I can't feel, my heart is so hard." What are they doing? Nothing
   but mourning and crying because they don't feel. Perhaps they are
   trying to work themselves up into feeling! Just as philosophical as
   trying to fly. While they are mourning all the while, and thinking
   about their hard hearts, and doing nothing, they are the ridicule of
   the devil. Suppose a man should shut himself out from the fire and then
   go about complaining how old he is, the very children would laugh at
   him. He must expect to freeze, if he will shut himself out from the
   means of warmth. And all his mournings and feeling bad will not help
   the matter.

   Second Positively. What must be done in this duty?

   If you wish to test the true state of your heart with regard to any
   object, you must fix your attention on that object. If you wish to test
   the power or accuracy of sight, you must apply the faculty to the
   object, and then you will test the power and state of that faculty. You
   place yourself in the midst of objects, to test the state of your eyes;
   or in the midst of sounds, if you wish to test the perfectness of your
   ears. And the more you shut out other objects that excite the other
   senses, and the more strongly you fasten your minds on this one, the
   more perfectly you test the keenness of your vision, or the perfectness
   of your hearing. A multiplicity of objects is liable to distract the
   mind. When we attend to any object calculated to awaken feeling, it is
   impossible not to feel. The mind is so constituted that it cannot but
   feel. It is not necessary to stop and ask, "Do I feel?"

   Suppose you put your hand near the fire, do you need to stop and ask
   the question, "Do I really feel the sensation of warmth?" You know, of
   course, that you do feel. If you pass your hand rapidly by the lamp,
   the sensation may be so slight as not to be noticed, but is none the
   less real, and if you paid attention strictly enough, you would know
   it. Where the impression is slight, it requires an effort of attention
   to notion your own consciousness. So the passing feeling of the mind
   may be so slight as not to occupy your thoughts, and thus may escape
   your notice, but it is not the less real. But hold your hand in the
   lamp a minute, and the feeling will force itself upon your notice,
   whatever be your other occupations. If the mind is fixed on an object
   calculated to excite emotions of any kind, it is impossible not to feel
   those emotions in a degree; and if the mind is intently fixed, it is
   impossible not to feel the emotions in such a degree as to be conscious
   that they exist. These principles will show you how we are to come at
   the proof of our characters, and know the real state of our feelings
   towards any object. It is by fixing our attention on the object till
   our emotions are so excited that we become conscious what they are.

   I will specify another thing that ought to be borne in mind. Be sure
   the things on which your mind is fixed, and on which you wish to test
   the state of your heart, are realities.

   There is a great deal of imaginary religion in the world, which the
   people who are the subjects of it mistake for real. They have high
   feelings, their minds are much excited, and the feeling corresponds
   with the object contemplated. But here is the source of the delusion
   the object is imaginary. It is not that the feeling is false or
   imaginary. It is real feeling. It is not that the feeling does not
   correspond with the object before the mind. It corresponds perfectly.
   But the object is a fiction.

   The individual has formed a notion of God, or of Jesus Christ, or of
   salvation, that is altogether aside from the truth, and his feelings in
   view of these imaginations are such as they would be towards the true
   objects, if he had true religion, and so he is deluded. Here is
   undoubtedly a great source of the false hope and professions in the
   world.

  V. I will now specify a few things on which it is your duty to try the state
  of your minds.

   1. Sin not your own particular sins, but sin itself, as an outrage
   committed against God.

   You need not suppose you will get at the true state of your hearts
   merely, by finding in your mind a strong feeling of disapprobation of
   sin. This belongs to the nature of an intelligent being, as such. All
   intelligent beings feel a disapprobation of sin, when viewed
   abstractly, and without reference to their own selfish gratification.
   The devil, no doubt, feels it. The devil no more feels approbation for
   sin, when viewed abstractly, than Gabriel. He blames sinners and
   condemns their conduct, and whenever he has no selfish reason for being
   pleased at what they do, he abhors it. You will often find in the
   wicked on earth, a strong abhorrence of sin. There is not a wicked man
   on earth, that would not condemn and abhor sin, in the abstract. The
   mind is so constituted, that sin is universally and naturally and
   necessarily abhorrent to right reason and to conscience. Every power of
   the mind revolts at sin. Man has pleasure in them that commit iniquity,
   only when he has some selfish reason for wishing then to commit it. No
   rational being approves of sin, as sin.

   But there is a striking difference between the constitutional
   disapprobation of sin, as an abstract thing, and that hearty
   detestation and opposition that is founded on love to God. To
   illustrate this idea. It is one thing for that youth to feel that a
   certain act is wrong, and quite another thing to view it as an injury
   to his father. Here is some thing in addition to his former feeling. He
   has not only indignation against the act as wrong, but his love to his
   father produces a feeling of grief that is peculiar. So the individual
   who loves God feels not only a strong disapprobation of sin, as wrong,
   but a feeling of grief mingled with indignation when he views it as
   committed against God.

   If, then, you want to know how you feel towards sin, how do you feel
   when you move around among sinners, and see them break God's law? When
   you hear them swear profanely, or see them break the Sabbath, or get
   drunk, how do you feel? Do you feel as the Psalmist did when he wrote,
   "I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy
   word?" So he says, "Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they
   keep not thy law." And again, "Horror hath taken hold upon me, because
   of the wicked that forsake thy law."

   2. You ought to test the state of your hearts towards your own sins.

   Look back on your past sins, call up your conduct in former times, and
   see whether you do cordially condemn it and loathe it, and feel as an
   affectionate child would feel, when he remembers how he has disobeyed a
   beloved parent. It is one thing to feel a strong conviction that your
   former conduct was wicked. It is quite another thing to have this
   feeling attended with strong emotions of grief, because it was sin
   against God. Probably there are few Christians who have not looked back
   upon their former conduct towards their parents with deep emotion, and
   thought how a beloved father and an affectionate mother have been
   disobeyed and wronged; and who have not felt, in addition to a strong
   disapprobation of their conduct, a deep emotion of grief, that inclined
   to vent itself in weeping, and perhaps did gush forth in irrepressible
   tears. Now this is true repentance towards a parent. And repentance
   towards God is the same thing, and if genuine, it will correspond in
   degree to the intensity of attention with which the mind is fixed on
   the subject.

   3. You want to test your feelings towards impenitent sinners.

   Then go among them, and converse with them, on the subject of their
   souls, warn them, see what they say, and how they feel, and get at the
   real state of their hearts, and then you will know how you feel towards
   the impenitent. Do not shut yourself up in your closet and try to
   imagine an impenitent sinner. You may bring up a picture of the
   imagination that will affect your sympathies, and make you weep and
   pray. But go and bring your heart in contact with the living reality of
   a sinner, reason with him, exhort him, find out his cavils, his
   obstinacy, his insincerity, pray with him if you can. You cannot do
   this without waking up emotions in your mind, and if you are a
   Christian, it will wake up such mingled emotions of grief, compassion
   and indignation, as Jesus Christ feels, and as will leave you no room
   to doubt what is the state of your heart on this subject. Bring your
   mind in contact with sinners, and fix it there, and rely on it you will
   feel.

   4. You want to prove the state of your mind towards God.

   Fix your thoughts intently on God. And do not set yourselves down to
   imagine a God after your own foolish hearts, but take the Bible and
   learn there what is the true idea of God. Do not fancy a shape or
   appearance, or imagine how he looks, but fix your mind on the Bible
   description of how he feels and what he does, and what he says, and you
   cannot but feel. Here you will detect the real state of your heart.
   Nay, this will constitute the real state of your heart, which you
   cannot mistake.

   5. Test your feelings towards Christ.

   You are bound to know whether you love the Lord Jesus Christ or not.
   Run over the circumstances of his life, and see whether they appear as
   realities to your mind, his miracles, his sufferings, his lovely
   character, his death, his resurrection, his ascension, his intercession
   now at the right hand of the throne of God. Do you believe all these?
   Are they realities to your mind? What are your feelings in view of
   them? When you think of his willingness to save, his ability to save,
   his atoning death, his power, if these things are realities to you, you
   will have feelings of which you will be conscious, and concerning which
   there will be no mistake.

   6. What are your feelings towards the saints.

   If you wish to test your heart on this point, whether you love the
   saints, do not let your thoughts run to the ends of the earth, but fix
   your mind on the saints by you and see whether you love them, whether
   you desire their sanctification, whether you really long to have them
   grow in grace, whether you can bear them in your heart to the throne of
   grace in faith, and ask God to bestow blessings on them.

   7. So in regard to revivals.

   You wish to know what is the state of your feelings towards revivals,
   then read about them, think of them, fix your mind on them, and you
   cannot but have feelings that will evince the state of your heart. The
   same is true of the heathen, of the slaves, of drunkards, of the Bible,
   of any object of pious regard. The only way to know the state of your
   heart is to fix your mind on the reality of those things, till you feel
   so intensely that there is no mistaking the nature of your feelings.

   Should you find a difficulty in attending to any of these objects
   sufficiently to produce feeling, it is owing to one of two reasons,
   either your mind is taken up with some other parts of religion, so as
   not to allow of such fixed attention to the specified object, or your
   thought wander with the fool's eyes, to the ends of the earth. The
   former is sometimes the case, and I have known some Christians to be
   very much distressed because they did not feel so intensely as they
   think they ought, on some subjects. Their own sins, for instance. A
   person's mind may be so much taken up with anxiety, and labor, and
   prayer for sinners, that it requires an effort to think enough about
   his own soul to feel deeply, and when he goes on his knee to pray about
   his own sins, that sinner with whom he has been talking comes right up
   before his mind and he can hardly pray for himself. It is not to be
   regarded as evidence against you, if the reason why you do not feel on
   one subject in religion is because your feelings are so engrossed about
   another, of equal importance. But if your thoughts run all over the
   world, and that is the reason you do not feel deeply enough to know
   what is your true character, if your mind will not come down to the
   Bible, and fix on any object of religious feeling, lay a strong hand on
   yourself, and fix your thoughts with a death-grasp, till you do feel.
   You can command your thoughts: God has put the control of your mind in
   your own hands. And in this way, you can control your own feelings, by
   turning your attention upon the object you wish to feel about. Bring
   yourself, then, powerfully and resolutely, to that point, and give it
   not over till you fasten your mind to the subject, and till the deep
   fountains of feeling break up in your mind, and you know what is the
   state of your heart, and understand your real character in the sight of
   God.

    REMARKS.

   1. Activity in religion is indispensable to self-examination.

   An individual can never know what is the true state of his heart,
   unless he is active in the duties of religion. Shut up in his closet,
   he never can tell how he feels towards objects that are without, and he
   never can feel right towards them until he goes out and acts. How can
   he know his real feeling towards sinners, if he never brings his mind
   in contact with sinners? He goes into his closet, and his imagination
   may make him feel, but it is a deceitful feeling, because not produced
   by a reality. If you wish to test the reality of your feelings towards
   sinners, go out and warn sinners, and then the reality of your feelings
   will manifest itself.

   2. Unless persons try their hearts by the reality of things, they are
   constantly subject to delusion, and are all the time managing to delude
   themselves.

   Suppose an individual shut up in a cloister, shut out from the world of
   reality, and living in a world of imagination. He becomes a perfect
   creature of imagination. So it is in religion, with those who do not
   bring their mind in contact with realities. Such persons think they
   love mankind, and yet do them no good. They imagine they abhor sin, and
   yet do nothing to destroy it. How many persons deceive themselves, by
   an excitement of the imagination about missions, for instance; how
   common it is for persons to get up a great deal of feeling, and hold
   prayer meetings for missions, who really do nothing to save souls.
   Women will spend a whole day at a prayer meeting to pray for the
   conversion of the world, while their impenitent servant in the kitchen
   is not spoken to all day, and perhaps not in a month, to save her soul.
   People will get up a public meeting, and talk about feeling for the
   heathen, when they are making no direct efforts for sinners around
   them. This is all a fiction of the imagination. There is no reality in
   such a religion as that. If they had real love of God, and love of
   souls, and real piety, the pictures drawn by the imagination about the
   distant heathen would not create so much more feeling than the reality
   around them.

   It will not do to say, it is because their attention is not turned
   towards sinners around them. They hear the profane oaths, and see the
   Sabbath-breaking and other vices, as a naked reality before their eyes,
   every day. And if these produce no feeling, it is in vain to pretend
   that they feel as God requires for sinners in heathen lands, or
   anywhere. Nay, take this very individual, now so full of feeling for
   the heathen, as he imagines, and place him among the heathen transport
   him to the Friendly Islands, or elsewhere, away from the fictions of
   imagination, and in the midst of the cold and naked reality of
   heathenism, and all his deep feeling is gone. He may write letters home
   about the abominations of the heathen, and all that, but his feeling
   about their salvation is gone. You hear people talk so about the
   heathen, who have never converted a soul at home rely upon it, that is
   all imagination. If they do not promote revivals at home, where they
   understand the language and have direct access to their neighbors, much
   less can they be depended on to promote the real work of religion on
   heathen ground. The churches ought to understand this, and keep it in
   mind in selecting men to go on foreign missions. They ought to know
   that if the naked reality at home does not excite a person to action,
   the devil would only laugh at a million such missionaries.

   The same delusion often manifests itself in regard to revivals. There
   is an individual who is a great friend to revivals. But mark they are
   always revivals of former days, or of revivals in the abstract, or
   distant revivals, or revivals that are yet to come. But as to any
   present revival, he is always found aloof and doubtful. He can read
   about revivals in President Edwards' day, or in Scotland, or in Wales,
   and be greatly excited and delighted. He can pray, "O Lord, revive thy
   work; O, Lord, let us have such revivals, let us have a Pentecost
   season, when thousands shall be converted in a day." But get him into
   the reality of things, and he never happens to see a revival in which
   he can take any interest, or feel real complacency. He is friendly to
   the fictitious imaginings of his own mind; he can create a state of
   things that will excite his feelings, but no naked reality ever brings
   him out to cooperate in actually promoting a revival.

   In the days of our Savior, the people said, and no doubt really
   believed, that they abhorred the doings of those who persecuted the
   prophets. They said, "If we had been in the days of our fathers, we
   would not have been partakers with them of the blood of the prophets."
   No doubt they wondered that people could be so wicked as to do such
   things But they had never seen a prophet; they were moved simply by
   their imagination. And as soon as the Lord Jesus Christ appeared, the
   greatest of prophets, on whom all the prophecies centered, they
   rejected him, and finally put him to death, with as much cold-hearted
   cruelty as ever their fathers had killed a prophet. "Fill ye up," says
   our Savior, "the treasure of your fathers, that upon you may come all
   the righteous blood shed upon the earth."

   Mankind have always, in every age of the world, fallen in love with the
   fictions of their own imagination, over which they have stumbled into
   hell. Look at the Universalist. He imagines a God that will save
   everybody, at any rate, and a heaven that will accommodate everybody;
   and then he loves the God he has made, and the heaven he has imagined,
   and perhaps will even weep with love. His feelings are often deep, but
   they are delusive, because excited by fiction and not by truth.

   3. The more an individual goes out from himself, and makes things not
   belonging to himself the subject of thought, the more piety he will
   have, and the more evidence of his piety.

   Religion consists in love, in feeling right and doing right, or doing
   good. If therefore you wish to have great piety, do not think of having
   it by cultivating it in a way which never caused piety to grow; that
   is, by retiring into a cloister, and withdrawing from contact with
   mankind. If the Lord Jesus Christ had supposed such circumstances to be
   favorable to piety, he would have directed them so. But he knew better.

   He has therefore appointed circumstances as they are, so that his
   people may have a thousand objects of benevolence, a thousand
   opportunities to do good. And if they go out of themselves, and turn
   their hearts upon these things, they cannot fail to grow in piety, and
   to have their evidences increasing and satisfactory.

   4. It is only in one department of self-examination that we can
   consistently shut ourselves up in the closet to perform the duty; that
   is, when we want to look back and calmly examine the motives of our
   past conduct. In such cases it is often necessary to abstract our
   thoughts and keep out other things from our minds, to turn our minds
   back and look at things we have done, and the motives by which we were
   actuated. To do this effectually, it is often necessary to resort to
   retirement, and fasting, and prayer. Some times it is impossible to
   wake up a lively recollection of what we wish to examine, without
   calling in the laws of association to our aid. We attempt to call up
   past scenes, and all seems confusion and darkness, until we strike upon
   some associated idea, that gradually brings the whole fresh before us.
   Suppose I am to be called as a witness in court concerning a
   transaction, I can sometimes gain a lively recollection of what took
   place, only by going to the place, and then all the circumstances come
   up, as if but of yesterday. So we may find in regard to the
   reexamination of some part of our past history, that no shutting
   ourselves up will bring it back, no protracted meditation or fasting,
   or prayer, till we throw ourselves into some circumstances that will
   wake up the associated ideas, and thus bring back the feelings we
   formerly had.

   Suppose a minister wishes to look back and see how he felt, and the
   spirit with which he had preached years ago. He wishes to know how much
   real piety there was in his labors. He might get at a great deal in his
   closet on his knees, by the aid of the strong influences of the Spirit
   of God. But he will come at it much more effectually by going to the
   place, and preaching again there. The exact attitude in which his mind
   was before, may thus recur to him, and stand in strong reality before
   his mind.

   5. In examining yourselves, be careful to avoid expecting to find all
   the graces of the Christian in exercise in your mind at once.

   This is contrary to the nature of mind. You ought to satisfy
   yourselves, if you find the exercises of your mind are right, on the
   subject that is before your mind. If you have wrong feelings at the
   time, that is another thing. But if you find that the emotions at the
   time are right, do not draw a wrong inference, because some other right
   emotion is not in present exercise. The mind is so constituted, that it
   can only have one train, of emotions at a time.

   6. From this subject you see why people often do not feel more than
   they do.

   They are taking a course not calculated to produce feeling. They feel,
   but not on the right subjects. Mankind always feel on some subjects;
   and the reason why they do not feel deeply on religious subjects is,
   because their attention is not deeply fixed on such subjects.

   7. You see the reason why there is such a strange diversity in the
   exercises of real Christians.

   There are some Christians whose feelings, when they have any feeling
   are always of the happy kind. There are others whose feelings are
   always of a sad and distressing kind. They are in almost constant agony
   for sinners. The reason is, that their thoughts are directed to
   different objects. One class are always thinking of the class of
   objects calculated to make them happy; the other are thinking of the
   state of the church, or the state of sinners, and weighed down as with
   a burden, as if a mountain were on their shoulders. Both may be
   religious, both classes of feelings are right, in view of the objects
   at which they look.

   The apostle Paul had continual heaviness and sorrow of heart on account
   of his brethren. No doubt he felt right. The case of his brethren who
   had, rejected the Savior, was so much the object of his thoughts, the
   dreadful wrath that they had brought upon themselves, the doom that
   hung over them, was constantly before him mind, and how could he be
   otherwise than sad?

   8. Observe the influence of these two classes of feelings in the
   usefulness of individuals.

   Show me a very joyful and happy Christian, and he is not generally a
   very useful Christian. Generally, such are so taken up with enjoying
   the sweets of religion, that they do but little. You find a class of
   ministers, who preach a great deal on these subjects, and make their
   pious hearers very happy in religion, but such ministers are seldom
   instrumental in converting many sinners, however much they may have
   refreshed, and edified, and gratified saints. On the other hand you
   will find men who are habitually filled with deep agony of soul in view
   of the state of sinners, and these men will be largely instrumental in
   converting men. The reason is plain. Both preached the truth both
   preached the gospel, in different proportions, and the feelings
   awakened correspond with the views they preached. The difference is,
   that one comforted the saints the other converted sinners.

   You may see a class of professors of religion who are always happy, and
   they are lovely companions, but they are very seldom engaged in pulling
   sinners out of the fire. You find others always full of agony for
   sinners, looking at their state, and longing to have souls converted.
   Instead of enjoying the antepast of heaven on earth, they are
   sympathizing with the Son of God when he was on earth, groaning in his
   spirit, and spending all night in prayer.

   9. The real revival spirit is a spirit of agonizing desires and prayer
   for sinners.

   10. You see how you may account for your own feelings at different
   times.

   People often wonder why they feel as they do. The answer is plain. You
   feel so, because you think so. You direct your attention to those
   objects which are calculated to produce those feelings.

   11. You see why some people's feelings are so changeable.

   There are many whose feelings are always variable and unsteady. That is
   because their thoughts are unsteady. If they would fix their thoughts,
   they would regulate their feelings.

   12. You see the way to beget any desired state of feeling in your own
   mind, and how to beget any desired state of feeling in others.

   Place the thoughts on the subject that is calculated to produce those
   feelings, and confine them there, and the feelings will not fail to
   follow.

   13. There are multitudes of pious persons who dishonor religion by
   their doubts.

   They are perpetually talking about their doubts, and they take up a
   hasty conviction that they have no religion. Whereas if instead of
   dwelling on their doubts they will fix their minds on other subjects,
   on Christ for instance, or go out and seek sinners, and try to bring
   them to repentance, rely upon it, they will feel, and feel right, and
   feel so as to dissipate their doubts.

   Remember, you are not to wait till you feel right before you do this.
   Perhaps some things that I said to this church have not been rightly
   understood. I said you could do nothing for God unless you felt right.
   Do not therefore infer, that you are to sit still and do nothing till
   you are satisfied that you do feel right. But place yourself in
   circumstances to make you feel right, and go to work. On one hand, to
   bustle about without any feeling is no way, and on the other hand, to
   shut yourself up in your closet and wait for feeling to come, is no
   way. Be sure to be always active. You never will feel right otherwise.
   And then keep your mind constantly under the influence of those objects
   that are calculated to create and keep alive Christian feelings.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with
      sparks, walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks that ye have
      kindled. This shall ye have of my hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow.
      Isaiah 50:11.

   It is evident, from the connection of these words in the chapter, that
   the prophet was addressing those who professed to be religious, and who
   flattered themselves that they were in a state of salvation, but in
   fact their hope was a fire of their own kindling, and sparks created by
   themselves. Before I proceed to discuss the subject, let me say that as
   I have given notice that it was my intention to discuss the nature of
   true and false conversion, it will be of no use but to those who will
   be honest in applying it to themselves. If you mean to profit by the
   discourse, you must resolve to make a faithful application of it to
   yourselves just as honest as if you thought you were now going to the
   solemn judgment. If you will do this, I may hope to be able to lead you
   to discover your true state, and if you are now deceived, direct you in
   the true path to salvation. If you will not do this, I shall preach in
   vain, and you will hear in vain.

   I design to show the difference between true and false conversion, and
   shall take up the subject in the following order:

   I. Show that the natural state of man is a state of pure selfishness.
   II. Show that the character of the converted is that of benevolence.
   III. That the new birth consists in a change from selfishness to
   benevolence. IV. Point out some things wherein saints and sinners, or
   true and spurious converts, may agree, and some things in which they
   differ. V. Answer some objections that may be offered against the view
   I have taken, and conclude with some remarks.

  I. I am to show that the natural state of man, or that in which all men are
  found before conversion, is pure, unmingled selfishness.

   By which I mean, that they have no gospel benevolence. Selfishness is
   regarding one's own happiness supremely, and seeking one's own good
   because it is his own. He who is selfish places his own happiness above
   other interests of greater value; such as the glory of God and the good
   of the universe. That mankind, before conversion, are in this state, is
   evident from many considerations.

   Every man knows that all other men are selfish. All the dealings of
   mankind are conducted on this principle. If any man overlooks this, and
   undertakes to deal with mankind as if they were not selfish, but were
   disinterested, he will be thought deranged.

  II. In a converted state, the character is that of benevolence.

   An individual who is converted is benevolent, and not supremely
   selfish. Benevolence is loving the happiness of others, or rather
   choosing the happiness of others. Benevolence is a compound word, that
   properly signifies good willing, or choosing the happiness of others.
   This is God's state of mind. We are told that God is love; that is, he
   is benevolent. Benevolence comprises his whole character. All his moral
   attributes are only so many modifications of benevolence. An individual
   who is converted is in this respect like God. I do not mean to be
   understood, that no one is converted, unless he is purely and perfectly
   benevolent, as God is; but that the balance of his mind, his prevailing
   choice is benevolent. He sincerely seeks the good of others, for its
   own sake.

   And, by disinterested benevolence I do not mean, that a person who is
   disinterested feels no interest in his object of pursuit, but that he
   seeks the happiness of others for its own sake, and not for the sake of
   its reaction on himself, in promoting his own happiness. He chooses to
   do good because he rejoices in the happiness of others, and desires
   their happiness for its own sake. God is purely and disinterestedly
   benevolent. He does not make his creatures happy for the sake of
   thereby promoting his own happiness, but because he loves their
   happiness and chooses it for its own sake. Not that he does not feel
   happy in promoting the happiness of his creatures, but that he does not
   do it for the sake of his own gratification. The man who is
   disinterested feels happy in doing good. Otherwise doing good itself
   would not be virtue in him. In other words, if he did not love to do
   good, and enjoy doing good, it would not be virtue in him.

   Benevolence is holiness. It is what the law of God requires: "Thou
   shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart and soul and strength,
   and thy neighbor as thyself." Just as certainly as the converted man
   yields obedience to the law of God, and just as certainly as he is like
   God, he is benevolent. It is the leading feature of his character, that
   he is seeking the happiness of others, and not his own happiness, as
   his supreme end.

  III. That true conversion is a change from a state of supreme selfishness to
  benevolence.

   It is a change in the end of pursuit, and not a mere change in the
   means of attaining the end. It is not true that the converted and the
   unconverted differ only in the means they use, while both are aiming at
   the same end. It is not true that Gabriel and Satan are pursuing the
   same end, and both alike aiming at their own happiness, only pursuing a
   different way. Gabriel does not obey God for the sake of promoting his
   own happiness. A man may change his means, and yet have the same end,
   his own happiness. He may do good for the sake of the temporal benefit.
   He may not believe in religion, or in any eternity, and yet may see
   that doing good will be for his advantage in this world. Suppose, then,
   that his eyes are opened, and he sees the reality of eternity; and then
   he may take up religion as a tears of happiness in eternity. Now, every
   one can see that there is no virtue in this. It is the design that
   gives character to the act, not the means employed to effect the
   design. The true and the false convert differ in this. The true convert
   chooses, as the end of his pursuit, the glory of God and the good of
   his kingdom. This end he chooses for its own sake, because he views
   this as the greatest good, as a greater good than his own individual
   happiness. Not that he is indifferent to his own happiness, but he
   prefers God's glory, because it is a greater good. He looks on the
   happiness of every individual according to its real importance, as far
   as he is capable of valuing it, and he chooses the greatest good as his
   supreme object.

  IV. Now I am to show some things in which true saints and deceived persons may
  agree, and some things in which they differ.

   1. They may agree in leading a strictly moral life.

   The difference is in their motives. The true saint leads a moral life
   from love to holiness; the deceived person from selfish considerations.
   He uses morality as a means to an end, to effect his own happiness. The
   true saint loves it as an end.

   2. They may be equally prayerful, so far as the form of praying is
   concerned.

   The difference is in their motives. The true saint loves to pray; the
   other prays because he hopes to derive some benefit to himself from
   praying.

   The true saint expects a benefit from praying, but that is not his
   leading motive. The other prays from no other motive.

   3. They may be equally zealous in religion.

   One may have great zeal, because his zeal is according to knowledge,
   and he sincerely desires and loves to promote religion, for its own
   sake. The other may show equal zeal, for the sake of having his own
   salvation more assured, and because he is afraid of going to hell if he
   does not work for the Lord, or to quiet his conscience, and not because
   he loves religion for its own sake.

   4. They may be equally conscientious in the discharge of duty; the true
   convert because he loves to do duty, and the other because he dare not
   neglect it.

   5. Both may pay equal regard to what is right; the true convert because
   he loves what is right, and the other because he knows he cannot be
   saved unless he does right. He is honest in his common business
   transactions, because it is the only way to secure his own interest.
   Verily, they have their reward. They get the reputation of being honest
   among men, but if they have no higher motive, they will have no reward
   from God.

   6. They may agree in their desires, in many respects. They may agree in
   their desires to serve God; the true convert because he loves the
   service of God, and the deceived person for the reward, as the hired
   servant serves his master.

   They may agree in their desires to be useful; the true convert desiring
   usefulness for its own sake, the deceived person because he knows that
   is the way to obtain the favor of God And then in proportion as he is
   awakened to the Importance of having God's favor, will be the intensity
   of his desires to be useful.

   In desires for the conversion of souls; the true saint because it will
   glorify God; the deceived person to gain the favor of God. He will be
   actuated in this, just as he is in giving money. Who ever doubted that
   a person might give his money to the Bible Society, or the Missionary
   Society, from selfish motives alone, to procure happiness, or applause,
   or obtain the favor of God? He may just as well desire the conversion
   of souls, and labor to promote it, from motives purely selfish.

   To glorify God; the true saint because he loves to see God glorified,
   and the deceived person because he know that is the way to be saved.
   The true convert has his heart set on the glory of God, as his great
   end, and he desires to glorify God as an end, for its own sake. The
   other desires it as a means to his great end, the benefit of himself.

   To repent. The true convert abhors sin on account of its hateful
   nature, because it dishonors God, and therefore he desires to repent of
   it. The other desires to repent, because he knows that unless he does
   repent he will be damned.

   To believe in Jesus Christ. The true saint desires it to glorify God,
   and because he loves the truth for its own sake. The other desires to
   believe, that he may have a stronger hope of going to heaven.

   To obey God. The true saint that he may increase in holiness; the false
   professor because he desires the rewards of obedience.

   7. They may agree not only in their desires, but in their resolutions.
   They may both resolve to give up sin, and to obey God, and to lay
   themselves out in promoting religion, and building up the kingdom of
   Christ; and they may both resolve it with great strength of purpose,
   but with different motives.

   8. They may also agree in their designs. They may both really design to
   glorify God, and to convert men, and to extend the kingdom of Christ,
   and to have the world converted; the true saint from love to God and
   holiness, and the other for the sake of securing his own happiness.

   One chooses it as an end, the other as a means to promote a selfish
   end.

   They may both design to be truly holy; the true saint because he loves
   holiness, and the deceived person because he knows that he can be happy
   in no other way.

   9. They may agree not only in their desires, and resolutions and
   designs, but also in their affection towards many objects.

   They may both love the Bible; the true saint because it is God's truth,
   and he delights in it, and feasts his soul on it; the other because he
   thinks it is in his own favor, and is the charter of his own hopes.

   They may both love God; the one because he sees God's character to be
   supremely excellent and lovely in itself and he loves it for its own
   sake; the other because he thinks God is his particular friend, that is
   going to make him happy for ever, and he connects the idea of God with
   his own interest.

   They may both love Christ. The true convert loves his character; the
   deceived person thinks he will save him from hell, and give him eternal
   life and why should he not love him?

   They may both love Christians: the true convert because he sees in them
   the image of Christ, and the deceived person because they belong to his
   own denomination, or because they are on his side, and he feels the
   same interest and hopes with them.

   10. They may also agree in hating the same things. They may both hate
   infidelity, and oppose it strenuously the true saint because it is
   opposed to God and holiness, and the deceived person because it injures
   an interest in which he is deeply concerned, and if true, destroys all
   his own hopes for eternity. So they may hate error; one because it is
   detestable in itself, and contrary to God and the other because it is
   contrary to his views and opinions.

   I recollect seeing in writing, some time ago, an attack on a minister
   for publishing certain opinions, "because," said the writer, these
   sentiments would destroy all my hopes for eternity." A very good reason
   indeed! as good as a selfish being needs for opposing an opinion.

   They may both hate sin; the true convert because it is odious to God,
   and the deceived person because it is injurious to himself. Cases have
   occurred, where an individual has hated his own sins, and yet not
   forsaken them. How often the drunkard, as he looks back at what he once
   was, and contrasts his present degradation with what he might have
   been, abhors his drink; not for its own sake, but because it has ruined
   him. And he still loves his cups, and continues to drink, though, when
   he looks at their effects, he feels indignation.

   They may be both opposed to sinners. The opposition of true saints is a
   benevolent opposition, viewing and abhorring their character and
   conduct, as calculated to subvert the kingdom of God. The other is
   opposed to sinners because they are opposed to the religion he has
   espoused, and because they are not on his side.

   11. So they may both rejoice in the same things. Both may rejoice in
   the prosperity of Zion, and the conversion of souls; the true convert
   because he has his heart set on it, and loves it for its own sake, as
   the greatest good, and the deceived person because that particular
   thing in which he thinks he has such a great interest is advancing.

   12. Both may mourn and feel distressed at the low state of religion in
   the church: the true convert because God is dishonored, and the
   deceived person because his own soul is not happy, or because religion
   is not in favor.

   Both may love the society of the saints; the true convert because his
   soul enjoys their spiritual conversation the other because he hopes to
   derive some advantage from their company. The first enjoys it because
   out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh; the other because
   he loves to talk about the great interest he feels in religion, and the
   hope he has of going to heaven.

   13. Both may love to attend religious meetings; the true saint because
   his heart delights in acts of worship, in prayer and praise, in hearing
   the word of God and in communion with God and his saints, and the other
   because he thinks a religious meeting a good place to prop up his hope.
   He may have a hundred reasons for loving them, and yet not at all for
   their own sake, or because he loves in itself, the worship and the
   service of God.

   14. Both may find pleasure in the duties of the closet. The true saint
   loves his closet, because he draws near to God, and finds delight in
   communion with God, where there are no embarrassments to keep him from
   going right to God and conversing. The deceived person finds a knife of
   satisfaction in it, because it is his duty to pray in secret and he
   feels a self-righteous satisfaction in doing it. Nay, he may feel a
   certain pleasure in it, from a kind of excitement of the mind which he
   mistakes for communion with; God.

   15. They may both love the doctrines of grace; the true saint because
   they are so glorious to God, the other because he thinks them a
   guarantee of his own salvation.

   16. They may both love the precept of God's law; the true saint because
   it is so excellent, so holy, and just, and good; the other because he
   thinks it will make him happy if he loves it, and he does it as a means
   of happiness.

   Both may consent to the penalty of the law. The true saint consents to
   it in his own case, because he feels it to be just in itself for God to
   send him to hell. The deceived person because he thinks he is in no
   danger from it.

   He feels a respect for it, because he knows that it is right, and his
   conscience approves it, but he has never consented to it in his own
   case.

   17. They may be equally liberal in giving to benevolent societies. None
   of you doubt that two men may give equal sums to a benevolent object,
   but from totally different motives. One gives to do good, and would be
   just as willing to give as not, if he knew that no other living person
   would give. The other gives for the credit of it, or to quiet his
   conscience, or because he hopes to purchase the favor of God.

   18. They may be equally self-denying in many things. Self-denial is not
   confined to true saints. Look at the sacrifices and self-denials of the
   Mohammedans, going on their pilgrimage to Mecca. Look at the heathen,
   throwing themselves under the car of Juggernaut. Look at the poor
   ignorant papists, going up and down over the sharp stones on their bare
   knees, till they stream with blood. A Protestant congregation will not
   contend that there is any religion in that. But is there not
   self-denial? The true saint denies himself, for the sake of doing more
   good to others. He is more set on this than on his own indulgence or
   his own interest. The deceived person may go equal lengths, but from
   purely selfish motives.

   19. They may both be willing to suffer martyrdom. Read the lives of the
   martyrs, and you will have no doubt that some were willing to suffer,
   from a wrong idea of the rewards of martyrdom, and would rush upon
   their own destruction because they were persuaded it was the sure road
   to eternal life.

   In all these cases, the motives of one class are directly over against
   the other. The difference lies in the choice of different ends. One
   chooses his own interest, the other chooses God's interest, as his
   chief end. For a person to pretend that both these classes are aiming
   at the same end, is to say that an impenitent sinner is just as
   benevolent as a real Christian; or that a Christian is not benevolent
   like God, but is only seeking his own happiness, and seeking it in
   religion rather than in the world.

   And here is the proper place to answer an inquiry, which is often made:
   "If these two classes of persons may be alike in so many particulars,
   how are we to know our own real character, or to tell to which class we
   belong? We know that the heart is deceitful above all things, and
   desperately wicked, and how are we to know whether we love God and
   holiness for their own sake, or whether we are seeking the favor of
   God, and aiming at heaven for our own benefit?" I answer,

   1. If we are truly benevolent, it will appear in our daily
   transactions. This character, if real, will show itself in our
   business, if anywhere. If selfishness rules our conduct there, as sure
   as God reigns we are truly selfish. If in our dealings with men we are
   selfish, we are so in our dealings with God. "For whoso loveth not his
   brother, whom he hath seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not
   seen?" Religion is not merely love to God, but love to man also. And if
   our daily transactions show us to be selfish, we are unconverted; or
   else benevolence is not essential to religion, and a man can be
   religious without loving his neighbor as himself.

   2. If you are disinterested in religion, religious duties will not be a
   task to you. You will not go about religion as the laboring man goes to
   his toil, for the sake of a living. The laboring man takes pleasure in
   his labor, but it is not for its own sake. He would not do it if he
   could help it. In its own nature it is a task, and if he takes any
   pleasure in it, it is for its anticipated results, the support and
   comfort of his family, or the increase of his property.

   Precisely such is the state of some persons in regard to religion. They
   go to it as the sick man takes his medicine, is cause they desire its
   effects, and they know they must have it or perish. It is a task that
   they never would do for its own sake. Suppose men love labor, as a
   child loves play. They would do it all day long, and never be tired of
   doing it, without any other inducement than the pleasure in doing it.
   So it is in religion, where it is loved for its own sake, there is no
   weariness in it.

   3. If selfishness is the prevailing character of your religion, it will
   take sometimes one form and sometimes another.

   For instance: If it is a time of general coldness in the church, real
   converts will still enjoy their own secret communion with God, although
   there may not be so much doing to attract notice in public. But the
   deceived person will then invariably be found driving after the world.
   Now, let the true saints rise up, and make a noise, and speak their
   joys aloud, so that religion begins to be talked of again; and perhaps
   the deceived professor will soon begin to bustle about, and appear to
   be even more zealous than the true saint. He is impelled by his
   convictions and not affections. When there is no public interest, he
   feels no conviction; but when the church awakes, he is convicted, and
   compelled to stir about, to keep his conscience quiet. It is only
   selfishness in another form.

   4. If you are selfish, your enjoyment in religion will defend mainly on
   the strength of your hopes of heaven, and not on the exercise of your
   affections. Your enjoyments are not in the employments of religion
   themselves, but of a vastly different kind from those of the true
   saint. They are mostly from anticipating. When your evidences are
   renewed, and you feel very certain of going to heaven, then you enjoy
   religion a good deal. It depends on your hope, and not on your love for
   the things for which you hope. You hear persons tell of their having no
   enjoyment in religion when they lose their hopes. The reason is plain.
   If they loved religion for its own sake, their enjoyment would not
   depend on their hope. A person who loves his employment is happy
   anywhere. And if you loved the employments of religion, you would be
   happy if God should put you in hell, provided he would only let you
   employ yourself in religion. If you might pray and praise God, you
   would feel that you could be happy anywhere in the universe; for you
   would still be doing the things in which your happiness mainly
   consists. If the duties of religion are not the things in which you
   feel enjoyment, and if all your enjoyment depends on your hope, you
   have no true religion; it is all selfishness.

   I do not say that true saints do not enjoy their hope. But that is not
   the great thing with them. They think very little about their own
   hopes. Their thoughts are employed about something else. The deceived
   person, on the contrary, is sensible that he does not enjoy the duties
   of religion; but only that the more he does, the more confident he is
   of heaven. He takes only such kind of enjoyment in it, as a man does
   who thinks that by great labor he shall have great wealth.

   5. If you are selfish in religion, your enjoyments will be chiefly from
   anticipation. The true saint already enjoys the peace of God, and has
   heaven begun in his soul. He has not merely the prospect of it, but
   eternal life actually begun in him. He has that faith which is the very
   substance of things hoped for. Nay, he has the very feelings of heaven
   in him. He anticipates joys higher in degree, but the same in kind. He
   knows that he has heaven begun in him, and is not obliged to wait till
   he dies to taste the joys of eternal life. His enjoyment is in
   proportion to his holiness, and not in proportion to his hope.

   6. Another difference by which it may be known whether you are selfish
   in religion, is this that the deceived person has only a purpose of
   obedience, and the other has a preference of obedience. This is an
   important distinction, and I fear few persons make it. Multitudes have
   a purpose of obedience, who have no true preference of obedience.
   Preference is actual choice, or obedience of heart. You often hear
   individuals speak of their having had a purpose to do this or that act
   of obedience, but failed to do it. And they will tell you how difficult
   it is to execute their purpose. The true saint, on the other hand,
   really prefers, and in his heart chooses obedience, and therefore he
   finds it easy to obey. The one has a purpose to obey, like that which
   Paul had before he was converted, as he tells us in the seventh chapter
   of Romans. He had a strong purpose of obedience, but did not obey,
   because his heart was not in it. The true convert prefers obedience for
   its own sake; he actually chooses it, and does it.

   The other purposes to be holy, because he knows that is the only way to
   be happy. The true saint chooses holiness for its own sake, and he is
   holy.

   7. The true convert and the deceived person also differ in their faith.
   The true saint has a confidence in the general character of God, that
   leads him to unqualified submission to God. A great deal is said about
   the kinds of faith, but without much meaning. True confidence in the
   Lord's special promises, depends on confidence in God's general
   character. There are only two principles on which any government, human
   or divine, is obeyed, fear and confidence. No matter whether it is the
   government of a family, or a ship, or a nation, or a universe. All
   obedience springs from one of these two principles. In the one case,
   individuals obey from hope of reward and fear of the penalty. In the
   other, from that confidence in the character of the government, which
   works by love. One child obeys his parent from confidence in his
   parent. He has faith which works by love. The other yields an outward
   obedience from hope and fear. The true convert has this faith, or
   confidence in God, that leads him to obey God because he loves God.
   This is the obedience of faith he has that confidence in God, that he
   submits himself wholly into the hands of God.

   The other has only a partial faith, and only a partial submission. The
   devil has a partial faith. He believes and trembles. A person may
   believe that Christ came to save sinners, and on that ground may submit
   to him, to be saved; while he does not submit wholly to him, to be
   governed and disposed of. His submission is only on condition that he
   shall be saved. It is never with that unreserved confidence in God's
   whole character, that leads him to say, "Thy will be done." He only
   submits to be saved. His religion is the religion of law. The other is
   gospel religion. One is selfish, the other benevolent. Here lies the
   true difference between the two classes. The religion of one is outward
   and hypocritical. The other is that of the heart holy, and acceptable
   to God.

   8. I will only mention one difference more. If your religion is
   selfish, you will rejoice particularly in the conversion of sinners,
   where your own agency is concerned in it, but will have very little
   satisfaction in it, where it is through the agency of others. The
   selfish person rejoices when he is active and successful in converting
   sinners, because he thinks he shall have a great reward. But instead of
   delighting in it when done by others, he will be even envious. The true
   saint sincerely delights to have other useful, and rejoices when
   sinners are converted by the instrumentality of others as much as if it
   was his own. There are some who will take interest in a revival, only
   so far as themselves are connected with it, while it would seem they
   had rather sinners should remain unconverted, that they should be saved
   by the instrumentality of an evangelist, or a minister of another
   denomination. The true spirit of a child of God is to say, "Send, Lord,
   by whom thou wilt send only let souls be saved, and thy name
   glorified!"

  V. I am to answer some objections which are made against this view of the
  subject.

   Objection 1. "Am I not to have any regard to my own happiness?"

   Answer. It is right to regard your own happiness according to its
   relative value. Put it in this scale, by the side of the glory of God
   and the good of the universe, and then decide, and give it the value
   which belongs to it. This is precisely what God does. And this is what
   he means, when he commands you to love your neighbor as yourself.

   And again you will in fact promote your own happiness, precisely in
   proportion as you leave it out of view Your happiness will be in
   proportion to your disinterestedness. True happiness consists mainly in
   the gratification of virtuous desires. There may be pleasure in
   gratifying desires that are selfish, but it is not real happiness. But
   to be virtuous, your desires must be disinterested. Suppose a man sees
   a beggar in the street; there he sits on the curbstone, cold and
   hungry, without friends, and ready to perish. The man's feelings are
   touched? and he steps into a grocery close by, and buys him a loaf of
   bread. At once the countenance of the beggar lights up, and he looks
   unutterable gratitude. Now it is plain to be seen that the
   gratification of the man in the act is precisely in proportion to the
   singleness of his motive. If he did it purely and solely out of
   benevolence, his gratification is complete in the act itself. But if he
   did it, partly to make it known that he is a charitable and humane
   person, then his happiness is not complete until the deed is published
   to others. Suppose there is a sinner in his sins; he is truly wicked
   and truly wretched. Your compassion is excited, and you convert and
   save him. If your motives were to obtain honor among men, and to secure
   the favor of God, you are not completely happy until the deed is told,
   and perhaps put in the newspaper. But if you wished purely to save a
   soul from death, then as soon as you see that done, your gratification
   is complete and your joy unmingled. So it is in all religious duties;
   your happiness is precisely in proportion as you are disinterested.

   If you aim at doing good for its own sake, then you will be happy in
   proportion as you do good. But if you aim directly at your own
   happiness, and if you do good simply as a means of securing your own
   happiness, you will fail. You will be like the child pursuing his own
   shadow; he can never overtake it, because it always keeps just so far
   before him. Suppose in the case I have mentioned, you have no desire to
   relieve the beggar, but regard simply the applause of a certain
   individual. Then you will feel no pleasure at all in the relief of the
   beggar; but when that individual hears of it and commends it, then you
   are gratified. But you are not gratified in the thing itself. Or
   suppose you aim at the conversion of sinners; but if it s not love to
   sinners that leads you to do it, how can the conversion of sinners make
   you happy? It has no tendency to gratify the desire that prompted the
   effort. The truth is, God has so constituted the mind of man, that it
   must seek the happiness of others as its end or it cannot be happy.
   Here is the true reason why all the world, seeking their own happiness,
   and not the happiness of others, fail of their end. It is always just
   so far before them. If they would leave off seeking their own
   happiness, and lay themselves out to do good, they would be happy.

   Objection 2. "Did not Christ regard the joy set before him? And did not
   Moses also have respect unto the recompense of reward? And does not the
   Bible say we love God because he first loved us."

   Answer 1. It is true that Christ despised the shame and endured the
   cross, and had regard to the joy set before him. But what was the joy
   set before him? Not his own salvation, not his own happiness, but the
   great good he would do in the salvation of the world. He was perfectly
   happy in himself. But the happiness of others was what he aimed at.
   This was the joy set before him. And that he obtained.

   Answer 2. So Moses had respect to the recompense of reward. But was
   that his own comfort? Far from it. The recompense of reward was the
   salvation of the people of Israel. What did he say? When God proposed
   to destroy the nation, and make of him a great nation, had Moses been
   selfish he would have said, "That is right, Lord; be it unto thy
   servant according to thy word." But what does he say? Why, his heart
   was so set on the salvation of his people, and the glory of God, that
   he would not think of it for a moment, but said, "If thou wilt, forgive
   their sin; and if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy book, which thou
   hast written." And in another case, when God said he would destroy
   them, and make of Moses a greater and a mightier nation, Moses thought
   of God's glory, and said, "Then the Egyptians shall hear of it, and all
   the nations will say, Because the Lord was not able to bring this
   people into the land."

   He could not bear to think of having his own interest exalted at the
   expense of God's glory. It was really a greater reward, to his
   benevolent mind, to have God glorified, and the children of Israel
   saved, than any personal advantage whatever to himself could be.

   Answer 3. Where it is said, "We love him because he first loved us" the
   language plainly bears two interpretations; either that his love to us
   has provided the way for our return and the influence that brought us
   to love him, or that we love him for his favor shown to ourselves. That
   the latter is not the meaning is evident, because Jesus Christ has so
   expressly reprobated the principle, in his sermon on the mount: "If ye
   love them which love you, what thank have ye? Do not the publicans the
   same?" If we love God, not for his character but for his favors to us,
   Jesus Christ has written us reprobate.

   Objection 3. "Does not the Bible offer happiness as the reward of
   virtue?"

   Answer. The Bible speaks of happiness as the result of virtue, but no
   where declares virtue to consist in the pursuit of one's own happiness.
   The Bible is every where inconsistent with this, and represents virtue
   to consist in doing good to others. We can see by the philosophy of the
   mind, that it must be so. If a person desires the good of others, he
   will be happy in proportion as he gratifies that desire. Happiness is
   the result of virtue, but virtue does not consist in the direct pursuit
   of one's own happiness, but is wholly inconsistent with it.

   Objection 4. "God aims at our happiness, and shall we be more
   benevolent than God? Should we not be like God? May we not aim at the
   same thing that God aims at? Should we not be seeking the same end that
   God seeks?"

   Answer. This objection is specious, but futile and rotten. God is
   benevolent to others. He aims at the happiness of others, and at our
   happiness. And to be like him, we must aim at, that is, delight in his
   happiness and glory and the honor and glory of the universe, according
   to their real value.

   Objection 5. "Why does the Bible appeal continually to the hopes and
   fears of men, if a regard to our own happiness is not a proper motive
   to action?"

   Answer l. The Bible appeals to the constitutional susceptibilities of
   men, not to their selfishness. Man dreads harm, and it is not wrong to
   avoid it. We may have a due regard to our own happiness, according to
   its value.

   Answer 2. And again; mankind are so besotted with sin, that God cannot
   get their attention to consider his true character, and the reasons for
   loving him, unless he appeals to their hopes and fears. But when they
   are awakened, then he presents the gospel to them. When a minister has
   preached the terrors of the Lord till he has got his hearers alarmed
   and aroused, so that they will give attention, he has gone far enough
   in that line; and then he ought to spread out all the character of God
   before them, to engage their hearts to love him for his own excellence.

   Objection 6. "Do not the inspired writers say, Repent, and believe the
   gospel, and you shall be saved?"

   Answer. Yes; but they require "true" repentance that is, to forsake sin
   because it is hateful in itself. It is not true repentance, to forsake
   sin on condition of pardon, or to say, "I will be sorry for my sins, if
   you will forgive me." So they require true faith, and true submission
   not conditional faith, or partial submission.

   This is what the Bible insists on. It says he shall be saved, but it
   must be disinterested repentance, and disinterested submission.

   Objection 7. "Does not the gospel hold out pardon as a motive to
   submission."

   Answer. This depends on the sense in which you must the term motive. If
   you mean that God spreads out before men his whole character, and the
   whole truth of the case, as reasons to engage the sinner's love and
   repentance, I say, Yes; his compassion, and willingness to pardon, are
   reasons for loving God, because they are a part of his glorious
   excellence, which we are bound to love. But if you mean by "motive" a
   condition, and that the sinner is to repent on condition he shall be
   pardoned, then I say, that the Bible no where holds out any such view
   of the matter. It never authorizes a sinner to say, "I will repent if
   you will forgive," and no where offers pardon as a motive to
   repentance, in such a sense as this.

   With two short remarks I will close.

   1. We see, from this subject, why it is that professors of religion
   have such different views of the nature of the gospel.

   Some view it as a mere matter of accommodation to mankind, by which God
   is rendered less strict than he was under the law; so that they may be
   fashionable or worldly, and the gospel will come in and make up the
   deficiencies and save them. The other class view the gospel as a
   provision of divine benevolence, having for its main design to destroy
   sin and promote holiness; and that therefore so far from making it
   proper for them to be less holy than they ought to be under the law,
   its whole value consists in its power to make them holy.

   2. We see why some people are so much more anxious to convert sinners,
   than to see the church sanctified and God glorified by the good works
   of his people.

   Many feel a natural sympathy for sinners, and wish to have them saved
   from hell; and if that is gained, they have no farther concern. But
   true saints are most affected by sin as dishonoring God. And they are
   most distressed to see Christians sin, because it dishonors God more.
   Some people seem to care but little how the church live, if they can
   only see the work of conversion go forward. They are not anxious to
   have God honored. It shows that they are not actuated by the love of
   holiness, but by a mere compassion for sinners.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Submit yourselves therefore to God. James 4:7.

   The subject of this lecture is, "What constitutes True Submission?"

   Before I enter on the discussion of this subject, I wish to make two
   remarks, introductory to the main question.

   1. The first remark is this: If any of you are deceived in regard to
   your hopes, and have built on a false foundation, the fundamental error
   in your case was your embracing what you thought was the gospel plan of
   salvation from selfish motives. Your selfish hearts were unbroken This
   is the source of your delusion, if you are deceived. If your
   selfishness was subdued, you are not deceived in your hope. If it was
   not, all your religion is vain, and your hope is vain.

   2. The other remark I wish to make is, that if any of you are deceived,
   and have a false hope, you are in the utmost danger of reviving your
   old hope, whenever you are awakened to consider your condition. It is a
   very common thing for such professors, after a season of anxiety and
   self-examination, to settle down again on the old foundation. The
   reason is, their habits of mind have become fixed in that channel, and
   therefore, by the laws of the mind it is difficult to break into a new
   course. It is indispensable, therefore, if you ever mean to get right,
   that you should see clearly that you have hitherto been wholly wrong,
   so that you need not multiply any more the kind of efforts that have
   deceived you heretofore.

   Who does not know that there is a great deal of this and of deception?
   How often will a great part of the church lie cold and dead, till a
   revival commences? Then you will see them bustling about, and they get
   engaged, as they call it, in religion, and renew their efforts and
   multiply their prayers for a season; and this is what they call getting
   revived. But it is only the same kind of religion that they had before.
   Such religion lasts no longer than the public excitement. As soon as
   the body of the church begin to diminish their efforts for the
   conversion of Sinners, these individuals relapse into their former
   worldliness, and get as near to what they were before their supposed
   conversion, as their pride and their fear of the censures of the church
   will let them. When a revival comes again, they renew the same round;
   and so they live along by spasms over and over again, revived and
   backslidden, revived and backslidden, alternately, as long as they
   live. The truth is, they were deluded at first, by a spurious
   conversion, in which selfishness never was broken down; and the more
   they multiply such kind of efforts, the more sure they are to be lost.

   I will now enter upon the direct discussion of the subject, and
   endeavor to show you what true gospel submission is, in the following
   order, viz.;

   I. I shall show what is not true submission. II. Show what true
   submission is.

   I. I am to show what true submission is not.

   1. True submission to God is not indifference. No two things can be
   more unlike than indifference and true submission.

   2. It does not consist in being willing to be sinful for the glory of
   God.

   Some have supposed that true submission included the idea of being
   willing to be sinful for the glory of God. But this is a mistake. To be
   willing to be sinful is itself a sinful state of mind. And to be
   willing to do anything for the glory of God, is to choose not to be
   sinful. The idea of being sinful for the glory of God is absurd.

   3. It does not consist in a willingness to be punished.

   If we were now in hell, true submission would require that we should be
   willing to be punished. Because then it would be certain that it was
   God's will we should be punished. So, if we were in a world where no
   provision was made for the redemption of sinners, and where our
   punishment was therefore inevitable, it would be our duty to be willing
   to be punished. If a man has committed murder, and there is no other
   way to secure the public interest but for him to be hung, it is his
   duty to be willing to be hung for the public good. But if there was any
   other way in which the murderer could make the public interest whole,
   it would not be his duty to be willing to be hung. So if he were in a
   world solely under law, where there was no plan of salvation, and no
   measure to secure the stability of government in the forgiveness of
   sinners, it would be the duty of every man to be willing to be
   punished. But as it is in this world, genuine submission does not imply
   a willingness to be punished. Because we know it is not the will of God
   that all shall be punished, but on the other hand, we know it is his
   will that all who truly repent and submit to God shall be saved.

  II. I am to show what genuine submission is.

   1. It consists in perfect acquiescence in all the providential dealings
   and dispensations of God; whether relating to ourselves, or to others,
   or to the universe. Some persons suppose they do acquiesce in the
   abstract, in the providential government of God. But yet, if you
   converse with them you see they will find fault with God's arrangements
   in many things. They wonder why God suffered Adam to sin? Or why he
   suffered sin to enter the universe at all? Or why he did this or that?
   Or why he made this or that, thus or so? In all these cases, supposing
   we could assign no reason at all that would be satisfactory, true
   submission implies a perfect acquiescence in what ever he has suffered
   or done; and feeling that, so far as his providence is concerned, it is
   all right.

   2. True submission implies acquiescence in the precept of God's moral
   law. The general precept of God's moral law is, "Thou shalt love the
   Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all
   thy soul, and with all thy strength, and thou shalt love thy neighbor
   as thyself." Perhaps some will say, "I do acquiesce in this precept, I
   feel that it is right, and I have no objection to this law." Here I
   want you to make the distinction carefully between a constitutional
   approbation of God's law, and actual submission to it. There is no mind
   but what naturally, and by its own common sense of what is right,
   approves of this law. There is not a devil in hell that does not
   approve of it. God has so constituted mind that it is impossible to be
   a moral agent, and not approve of his law. But this is not the
   acquiescence I am speaking of. A person may feel this approbation to so
   great a degree as to be even delighted without having true submission
   to it. There are two ideas included in genuine submission, to which I
   wish your particular attention.

   (1.)The first idea is, that true acquiescence in God's moral law
   includes actual obedience. It is vain for a child to pretend a real
   acquiescence in his father's commands, unless he actually obeys them.
   It is in vain for a citizen to pretend an acquiescence in the laws of
   the land, unless he obeys the laws.

   (2.)The main idea of submission is the yielding up of that which
   constitutes the great point in controversy. And that is this; that men
   have taken off their supreme affection from God and his kingdom, and
   set up self-interest as the paramount object of regard. Instead of
   laying themselves out in doing good, as God requires, they have adopted
   the maxim that "Charity begins at home." This is the very point in
   debate, between God and the sinner. The sinner aims at promoting his
   own interest, as his supreme object. Now, the first ideal implied in
   submission is the yielding up of this point. We must cease placing our
   own interest as supreme, and let the interests of God and his kingdom
   rise in our affections just as much above our own interests as their
   real value is greater. The man who does not do this is a rebel against
   God.

   Suppose a civil ruler were to set himself to promote the general
   happiness of his nation; and should enact laws wisely adapted to this
   end, and should embark all his own resources in this object; and that
   he should then require every subject to do the same. Then suppose an
   individual should go and set up his own private interest in opposition
   to the general interest. He is a rebel against the government, and
   against all the interest which the government is set to promote. Then
   the first idea of submission, on the part of the rebel, is giving up
   that point, and falling in with the ruler and the obedient subjects in
   promoting the public good. Now the law of God absolutely requires that
   you should make your own happiness subordinate to the glory of God and
   the good of the universe. And until you do this, you are the enemy of
   God and the universe, and a child of hell.

   And the gospel requires the same as the law. It is astonishing that
   many, within a few years, have maintained that it is right for a man to
   aim directly at his own salvation, and make his own happiness the great
   object of pursuit. But it is plain that God's law is different from
   this, and requires every one to prize God's interest supremely. And the
   gospel requires the same with the law. Otherwise, Jesus Christ is the
   minister of sin, and carne into the world to take up arms against God's
   government.

   It is easy to show, from the Bible, that the gospel requires
   disinterested benevolence, or love to God and love to man, the same as
   the law. The first passage I shall quote is this, "Seek first the
   kingdom of God and his righteousness." What does that mean? Strange as
   it may seem, a writer has lately quoted this very text to prove that it
   is right to seek first our own salvation, or our own happiness, and to
   make that the leading object of pursuit. But; that is not the meaning.
   It requires every one to make the promotion of the kingdom of God his
   great object. I suppose it to enjoin the duty of aiming at being Holy,
   and not at our own happiness. Happiness is connected with holiness, but
   it is not the same thing, but to seek holiness or obedience to God, and
   to honor and glorify him, is a very different thing from seeking
   supremely our own happiness.

   Another passage is, "Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
   all to the glory of God." Indeed! What! may we not eat and drink to
   please ourselves? No. We may not even gratify our natural appetite for
   food, but as subordinate to the glory of God. This is what the gospel
   requires, for the apostle wrote this to the Christian church.

   Another passage is, "Look not on your own things, but every man on the
   things of another." But it is vain to attempt to quote all the passages
   that teach this. You may find, on almost every page of the Bible, some
   passage that; means the same thing, requiring us not to seek our own
   good, but the benefit of others.

   Our Savior says, "Whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and
   whosoever will lose his life shall save it." That is, If a man aim at
   his own interest, he shall lose his own interest; if he aim at saving
   his soul, as his supreme object, be will lose his own soul; he must go
   out of himself and make the good of others his supreme object, or he
   will be lost.

   And again he says, "There is no man that hath left house, or brethren,
   or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife or children, or lands, for my
   sake and the gospels, but he shall receive a hundred-fold now in this
   time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and
   lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come, eternal life." Here
   some people may stumble, and say, There is a reward held out as a
   motive. But, mark! What are you to do? Forsake self for the sake of a
   reward to self? No; but to forsake self for the sake of Christ and his
   gospel; and the consequence will be as stated. Here is the important
   distinction.

   In the 13th chapter of Corinthians Paul gives a full description of
   this disinterested love, or charity, without which a person is nothing
   in religion. It is remarkable how much he says a person may do, and yet
   be nothing. "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and
   have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
   And though I have the gift of prophecy and understand all mysteries,
   and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
   mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all
   my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and
   have not charity, it profiteth me nothing "But true gospel benevolence
   is of this character: "Charity suffereth long and is kind; charity
   envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not be
   have itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked,
   thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the
   truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hope that things,
   endureth all things." "Seeketh not her own." Mark that. It has no
   selfish end, but seeks the happiness of others as its great end.
   Without this kind of benevolence, we know there is not a particle of
   religion. You see, I might stand here all night quoting and explaining
   passages to the same point, showing that all pure religion consists in
   disinterested benevolence.

   Before I go farther, I wish to mention several objections to this view,
   which may arise in your minds. I do this more particularly because some
   of you may stumble right here, and after all get the idea that it is
   right to have our religion consist in aiming at our own salvation as
   our great object.

   Objection l. "Why are the threatenings of the word of God given, if it
   is selfishness to be influenced by a fear of the wrath to come?"

   Many answers may be given to this objection.

   Answer. Man is so constituted that by the laws of his being he dreads
   pain. The Scripture threatenings, therefore, answer many purposes. One
   is, to arrest the attention of the selfish mind, and lead it to examine
   the reason there are for loving and obeying God. When the Holy Spirit
   thus gets the attention, then he rouses the sinner's conscience, and
   engages that to consider and decide on the reasonableness and duty of
   submitting to God.

   Objection 2. "Since God has given us these susceptibilities to pleasure
   and pain, is it wrong to be influence by them?"

   Answer. It is neither right nor wrong. These susceptibilities have no
   moral character. If I had time tonight, I might make all plain to you.
   In morals, there is a class of actions that come under the denomination
   of prudential considerations.

   For instance: Suppose you stand on a precipice, where, if you throw
   yourself down, you will infallibly break your neck. You are warned
   against it. Now, if you do not regard the warning, but throw yourself
   down, and destroy your life, that will be sin. But regarding it is no
   virtue. It is simply a prudential act. There is no virtue in avoiding
   danger, although it may often be sinful not to avoid it. It is sinful
   for men to brave the wrath of God. But to be afraid of hell is not
   holy, no more than the fear of breaking your neck down a precipice is
   holy. It is simply a dictate of the constitution.

   Objection 3. "Does not the Bible make it our immediate duty to seek our
   own happiness?"

   Answer. It is not sinful to seek our own happiness, according to its
   real value. On the contrary, it is a real duty to do so. And he that
   neglects to do this, commits sin. Another answer is, that although it
   is right to seek our own happiness, and the constitutional laws of the
   mind require us to regard our own happiness, still our constitution
   does not indicate that to pursue our own happiness as the chief good,
   is right. Suppose any one should argue, that because our constitution
   requires food, therefore it is right to seek food as the supreme good
   would that be sound? Certainly not; for the Bible expressly forbids any
   such thing, and says "Whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of
   God."

   Objection 4. "Each one's happiness is put particularly in his own
   power; and if every one should seek his own happiness, the happiness of
   the whole will be secured, to the greatest amount that is possible."

   This objection is specious, but not sound. I deny the conclusion
   altogether. For,

   (1.) The laws of the mind are such, that it is impossible for one to be
   happy while he makes his own happiness the supreme object. Happiness
   consists in the gratification of virtuous desires. But to be gratified,
   the thing must be obtained "that is desired." To be happy, therefore,
   the desires that are gratified must be right, and therefore they must
   be disinterested desires. If your desires terminate on yourself; for
   instance if you desire the conversion of sinners for the sake of
   promoting your own happiness, when sinners are converted it does not
   make you happy, because it is not the thing on which your desire
   terminated. The law of the mind therefore, renders it impossible, if
   each individual pursues his own happiness, that he should ever obtain
   it. To be more definite. Two things are indispensable to true
   happiness. First, there must be virtuous desire. If the desire be not
   virtuous, conscience will remonstrate against it, and therefore a
   gratification would be attended with pain. Secondly, this desire must
   be gratified in the attainment of its object. The object must be
   desired for its own sake, or the gratification would not be complete,
   even should the object be obtained. If the object is desired as a means
   to an end, the gratification would depend on obtaining the end by this
   means. But if the thing was desired as an end, or for its own sake,
   obtaining it would produce unmingled gratification. The mind must,
   therefore, desire not its own happiness, for in this way it can never
   be attained, but the desire must terminate on some other object which
   is desired for its own sake, the attainment of which would be a
   gratification, and thus result in happiness.

   (2.) If each one pursues his own happiness as his supreme end, the
   interests of different individuals will clash, and destroy the
   happiness of all. This is the very thing we see in the world. This is
   the reason of all the fraud, and violence, and oppression, and
   wickedness in earth and hell. It is because each one is pursuing his
   own interest, and their interests clash. The true way to secure our own
   happiness is, not to pursue that as an end but to pursues another
   object, which, when obtained, will afford complete gratification the
   glory of God and the good of the universe. The question is not, whether
   it is right to desire and pursue our own happiness at all, but whether
   it is right to make our own happiness our supreme end.

   Objection 5. "Happiness consists in gratifying virtuous desire. Then
   the thing I aim at, is gratifying virtue desire. Is not that aiming at
   my own happiness?"

   Answer. The mind does not aim at gratifying the desire, but at
   accomplishing the thing desired. Suppose you see a beggar, as mentioned
   last week, and you give him a loaf of bread. You aim at relieving the
   beggar. That is the object desired, and when that is done, your desire
   is gratified, and you are happy. But if, in relieving the beggar, the
   object you aimed at was your own happiness, then relieving the beggar
   will not gratify the desire, and you render it impossible to gratify
   it.

   Thus you see, that both the law and the gospel require disinterested
   benevolence, as the only condition on which man can be happy.

   3. True submission implies acquiescence in the penalty of God's law.

   I again advert to the distinction, which I have made before. We are
   not, in this world, simply under a government of naked law. This world
   is a province of Jehovah empire, that stands in a peculiar relation to
   God's government. It has rebelled, and a new and special provision has
   been made, by which God offers us mercy. The conditions are, that we
   obey the precepts of the law, and submit to the justice of the penalty.
   It is a government of law, with the gospel appended to it. The gospel
   requires the same obedience with the law. It maintains the ill desert
   of sin, and requires the sinner's acquiescence in the justice of the
   penalty. If the sinner were under mere law, it would require that he
   should submit to the infliction of the penalty. But man is not, and
   never has been since the fall, under the government of mere law, but
   has always known, more or less clearly, that mercy is offered. It has,
   therefore, never been required, that men should be willing to be
   punished. In this respect it is that gospel submission differs from
   legal submission. Under naked law, submission would consist in
   willingness to be punished. In this world, submission consists in
   acquiescence in the justice of the penalty, and regarding himself as
   deserving the eternal wrath of God.

   4. True submission implies acquiescence in the sovereignty of God.

   It is the duty of every sovereign to see that all his subjects submit
   to his government. And it is his duty to enact such laws, that every
   individual, if he obeys perfectly, will promote the public good, in the
   highest possible degree. And then, if any one refuses to obey, it is
   his duty to take that individual by force, and make him subserve the
   public interest in the best way that is possible with a rebellious
   subject, If he will not subserve the public good voluntarily he should
   be made to do it involuntarily. The government must either hang him, or
   shut him up, or in some way make him an example of suffering; or if the
   public good admits of mercy, it may show mercy in such a way as will
   best subserve the general interest. Now God is a sovereign ruler, and
   the submission witch he requires is just what he is bound to require.
   He would be neglecting his duty as a ruler, if he did not require it.
   And since you have refused to obey this requirement, you are now bound
   to throw yourself into his hands, for him to dispose of you, for time
   and eternity, in the way that will most promote the interests of the
   universe. You have forfeited all claim to any portion in the happiness
   of the universe or the favor of God. And the thing which is now
   required of you is, that since you cannot render obedience for the
   past, you should acknowledge the justice of his law, and leave your
   future destiny entirely and unconditionally at his disposal, for time
   and for eternity. You must submit all you have and all you are to him.
   You have justly forfeited all, and are bound to give up all at his
   bidding, in any way that he calls for them, to promote the interests of
   his kingdom.

   5. Finally, it requires submission to the terms of the gospel. The
   terms of the gospel are

   (1.) Repentance, hearty sorrow for sin, justifying God and taking his
   part against yourself.

   (2.) Faith, perfect trust and confidence towards God, such as leads you
   without hesitation to throw yourself, body and soul, and all you have
   and are, into his hand, to do with you as he thinks good.

   (3.) Holiness, or disinterested benevolence.

   (4.) To receive salvation as a mere matter of pure grace, to which you
   have no claim on the score of justice.

   (5.) To receive Christ as your mediator and advocate, your atoning
   sacrifice, your ruler and teacher, and in all the offices in which he
   is presented to you in God's word. In short, you are to be wholly
   acquiescent in God's appointed way of salvation.

    REMARKS.

  I. You see why there are so many false hopes in the church.

   The reason is, that so many persons embrace what they consider the
   gospel, without yielding obedience to the law. They look at the law
   with dread, and regard the gospel as a scheme to get away from the law.
   These tendencies have always been manifested among men. There is a
   certain class that hold to the gospel and reject the law; and another
   class that take the law and neglect the gospel. The Antinomians think
   to get rid of the law altogether. They suppose the gospel rule of life
   is different from the law; whereas, the truth is, that the rule of life
   is the same in both, and both require disinterested benevolence. Now,
   if a person thinks that, under the gospel, he may give up the glory of
   God as his supreme object, and instead of loving God with all his
   heart, and soul, and strength, may make his own salvation his supreme
   object, his hopes are false. He has embraced another gospel which is no
   gospel at all.

  II. The subject shows how we are to meet the common objection, that faith in
  Christ implies making our own salvation our object or motive.

   Answer. What is faith? It is not believing that you shall be saved, but
   believing God's word concerning his Son. It is no where revealed that
   you shall be saved. He has revealed the fact that Jesus Christ came
   into the world to save sinners. What you call faith, is more properly
   hope. The confident expectation that you shall be saved is an inference
   from the act of faith; and an inference which you have a right to draw
   when you are conscious of obeying the law and believing the gospel.
   That is, when you exercise the feelings required in the law and gospel,
   you have a right to trust in Christ for your own salvation.

  III. It is an error to suppose that despair of mercy is essential to true
  submission.

   This is plain from the fact that, under the gospel, every body knows it
   is the will of God that every soul should be saved that will exercise
   disinterested benevolence. Suppose a man should come to me and ask,
   "What shall I do to be saved?" and I should tell him, "If you expect to
   be saved you must despair of being saved," what would he think? What
   inspired writer ever gave any such direction as this? No, the inspired
   answer is, "Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," "Repent,"
   "Believe the Gospel," and so on. Is there any thing here that implies
   despair?

   It is true that sinners sometimes do despair, before they obtain true
   peace. But what is the reason? It is not because despair is essential
   to true peace; but because of their ignorance, or of wrong instructions
   given to them, or misapprehension of the truth. Many anxious sinners
   despair because they get a false impression that they have sinned away
   their day of grace, or that they have committed the unpardonable sin,
   or that their sins are peculiarly aggravated, and the gospel provision
   does not reach them. Sometimes they despair for this reason they know
   that there is mercy provided, and ready to be bestowed as soon as they
   will comply with the terms, but they find all their efforts at true
   submission vain. They find they are so proud and obstinate, that they
   cannot get their own consent to the terms of salvation. Perhaps most
   individuals who do submit, do in fact come to a point where they give
   up all as lost. But is that necessary? That is the question. Now, you
   see, it is nothing but their own wickedness drives them to despair.
   They are so unwilling to take hold of the mercy that is offered. Their
   despair, then, instead of being essential to true submission under the
   gospel, is inconsistent with it, and no man ever embraced the gospel
   while in that state. It is horrid unbelief then, it is sin to despair;
   and to say it is essential to true submission, is saying that sin is
   essential to true submission.

  IV. True submission is acquiescing in the whole government of God.

   It is acquiescing in his providential government, in his moral
   government, in the precept of his law, and in the penalty of his law,
   so that he is himself deserving of an exceeding great and eternal
   weight of damnation; and submission to the terms of salvation in the
   gospel. Under the gospel, it is no man's duty to be willing to be
   damned. It is wholly inconsistent with his duty to be willing to be
   damned. The man who submits to the naked law, and consents to be
   damned, is as much in rebellion as ever; for it is one of God's express
   requirements that he should obey the gospel.

  V. To call on a sinner to be willing to be punished is a grand mistake, for
  several reasons.

   It is to set aside the gospel, and place him under another government
   than that which exists. It sets before him a partial view of the
   character of God, to which he is required to submit. It keeps back the
   true motives to submission. It presents not the real and true God, but
   a different being. It is practicing a deception on him, by holding out
   the idea that God desires his damnation, and he must submit to it; for
   God has taken his solemn oath that he desires not the death of the
   wicked, but that he turn from his wickedness and live. It is a slander
   upon God, and charging God with perjury. Every man under the gospel,
   knows that God desires sinners to be saved, and it is impossible to
   hide the fact. The true ground on which salvation should be placed is,
   that he is not to seek his own salvation, but to seek the glory of God;
   not to told out the idea that God desires or means he should go to
   hell.

   What did the apostles tell sinners, when they inquired what they must
   do to be saved? What did Peter tell them at the Pentecost? What did
   Paul tell the jailer? To repent and forsake their selfishness, and
   believe the gospel. This is what men must do to be saved.

   There is another difficulty in attempting to convert mention this way.
   It is attempting to convert them by the law, and setting aside the
   gospel. It is attempting to make them holy, without the appropriate
   influences to make them holy. Paul tried this way, thoroughly, and
   found it never would answer. In the 7th of Romans, he gives us the
   result in his own case. It drove him to confess that the law was holy
   and good, and he ought to obey it; and there it left him in distress,
   and crying, "The good that I would, I do not, but the evil that I would
   not, that I do."

   The law was not able to convert him, and he cries out, "O wretched man
   that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" Just here
   the love of God in sending his Son Jesus Christ, is presented to his
   mind, and that did the work. In the next chapter he explains it: "What
   the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
   his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin
   in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in
   us, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit." The whole Bible
   testifies that it is only the influence of the gospel which can bring
   sinners to obey the law. The law will never do it. Shutting out from
   the soul that class of motives which cluster around it from the gospel,
   will never convert a sinner.

   I know there may be some persons who suppose they were converted in
   this way, and that they have submitted to the law, absolutely, and
   without any influence from the gospel. But was it ever concealed from
   them for a moment, that Christ had died for sinners, and that if they
   should repent and believe, they should be saved? These motives must
   have had their influence, for all the time that they think they were
   looking at the naked law they expected that if they believed they
   should be saved.

   I suppose the error of attempting to convert men by the law, without
   the gospel, lies here; in the old Hopkinsian notion that men, in order
   to be saved must be willing to be damned. It sets aside the fact, that
   this world is, and since the fall always has been, under a dispensation
   of mercy. If we were under a government of mere law, true submission to
   God would require this. But men are not, in this sense, under the law,
   and never have been; for immediately after the fall, God revealed to
   Adam the intimations of mercy.

   An objection arises here in the mind of some, which I will remove.

   Objection. "Is not the offer of mercy, in the gospel calculated to
   produce a selfish religion?"

   Answer. The offer of mercy may be perverted, as every other good thing
   may be, and then it may give rise to a selfish religion. And God knew
   it would be so, when he revealed the gospel. But observe: Nothing is
   calculated to subdue the rebellious heart of man, but this very
   exhibition of the benevolence of God, in the offer of mercy.

   There was a father who had a stubborn and rebellious son, and he tried
   long to subdue him by chastisement. He loved his son, and lodged to
   have him virtuous and obedient. But the child seemed to harden his
   heart against his repeated efforts. At length the poor father was quite
   discouraged, and burst out into a flood of convulsive weeping "My son!
   my son! what shall I do? Can I save you? I have done all that I could
   to save you; O what can I do more? "The son had looked at the rod with
   a brow of brass, but when he saw the tears rolling down his father's
   furrowed cheeks, and heard the convulsive sobs of anguish from his aged
   bosom, he too burst into tears, and cried out, "Whip me father! do whip
   me, as much as you please, but don't cry!" Now the father had found out
   the way to subdue that stubborn heart. Instead of holding over him
   nothing but the iron hand of law, he let out his soul before him; and
   what was the effect? To crash him into hypocritical submission? No, the
   rod did that. The gushing tears of his father's love broke him down at
   once to true submission to his father's will.

   So it is with sinners. The sinner braves the wrath of Almighty God, and
   hardens himself to receive the heaviest bolt of Jehovah's thunder; but
   when he sees the love of his Heavenly Father's heart, if there is
   anything that will make him abhor and execrate himself, that will do
   it, when he sees God manifested in the flesh, stooping to take human
   nature, hanging on the cross, and pouring out his soul in tears, and
   bloody sweat, and death. Is this calculated to make hypocrites?

   No, the sinner's heart melt, and he cries out, "O, do any thing else,
   and I can bear it; but the love of the blessed Jesus overwhelms me."
   This is the very nature of the mind, to be thus influenced. Instead,
   therefore, of being afraid of exhibiting the love of God to sinners, it
   is the only way to make them truly submissive and truly benevolent. The
   law may make hypocrites; but nothing but the gospel can draw out the
   soul so true love to God.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Seeketh not her own. 1 Corinthians 13:5.

   That is, Charity, or Christian love, seeketh not her own.

   The proposition which I design to establish this evening, is the
   following:

   That a supreme regard to our own happiness is inconsistent with true
   religion.

   This proposition is naturally the first in the series that I have been
   laboring to illustrate in the present lectures, and would have been the
   first to be discussed, had I been aware that it was seriously called in
   question by any considerable number of professed Christians. But I can
   honestly say, that when I commenced these lectures, I did not expect to
   meet any serious difficulty here; and therefore I took it in a great
   measure for granted, that selfishness is not; religion. And hence, I
   passed over this point with but a slight attempt at proving it. But
   since, I learn that there are many professed Christians who maintain
   that a supreme regard to our own happiness is true religion, I think it
   necessary to examine the subject more carefully, and give you the
   arguments in favor of what I suppose to be the truth. In establishing
   my proposition, I wish to distinguish between things that differ; I
   shall therefore,

   I. Show what is not intended by the proposition, that a supreme regard
   to our own happiness is not religion. II. Show what is meant by it.
   III. Attempt to prove it.

  I. I am to explain what is not meant by the proposition.

   1. The point in dispute is not, whether it is lawful to have any regard
   to our own happiness. On the contrary; it is admitted and maintained to
   be a part of our duty to have a due regard to our own happiness,
   according to its real value, in the scale with other interests. God has
   commanded us to love our neighbor as ourselves. This plainly makes it a
   duty to love ourselves or regard our own happiness, by the same rule
   that we regard that of others.

   2. The proposition is not that we ought to have no regard to the
   promises and threatenings of God, as affecting ourselves. It is plainly
   right to regard the promises of God and threatenings of evil, as
   affecting ourselves, according to the relative value of our own
   interests. But who does not see that a threatening against us is not so
   important as a threatening against a large number of individuals.
   Suppose a threatening of evil against yourself as an individual. This
   is plainly not so important as if it included your family. Then suppose
   it extends to the whole congregation, or to the state, or the whole
   nation, or the world. Here, it is easy to see, that the happiness of an
   individual, although great, ought not to be regarded as supreme.

   I am a minister. Suppose God says to me, "If you do not do your duty,
   you shall be sent to hell." This is a great evil, and I ought to avoid
   it. But suppose him to say, "If your people do not do their duty, they
   will all be sent to hell; but if you do your duty faithfully, you will
   probably save the whole congregation. "Is it right for me to be as much
   influenced by the fear of evil to myself, as by the fear of having a
   whole congregation sent to hell? Plainly not.

   3. The question is not whether our own eternal internal interests ought
   to be pursued in preference to our temporal interests. It is expressly
   maintained by myself, and so it is by the Bible, that we are bound to
   regard our eternal interests as altogether of more consequence than our
   temporal interest.

   Thus the Bible tells us "Labor not for the meat that perisheth, but for
   that which endureth unto everlasting life." This teaches that we are
   not to regard or value our temporal interests at all, in comparison
   with eternal life.

   So, where our Savior says, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the
   earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break
   through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where
   neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break not through
   nor steal." Here the same duty is enjoined, of preferring eternal to
   temporal interests.

   There is another. When Christ sent out his disciples, two and two, to
   preach and to work miracles, they came back full of joy and exultation,
   because they found even the devils yielding to their power. "Lord, even
   the devils are subject to us." Jesus saith, "Rejoice not that the
   devils are subject to you; but rather rejoice in this, that your names
   are written in heaven." Here he teaches, that it is a greater good to
   have our names written in heaven, than to enjoy the greatest temporal
   power, even authority over devils themselves.

   The Bible everywhere teaches, that eternal good is to be preferred in
   all our conduct to temporal good. But this is very different from
   maintaining that our own individual eternal interest is to be aimed at
   as the supreme object of regard.

   4. The proposition is not, that hope and fear should not influence our
   conduct. All that is implied is, that when we are influenced by hope
   and fear, the things that are hoped or feared should be put into the
   scale according to their real value, in comparison with other
   interests.

   5. The question is not, whether the persons did right, who are spoken
   of in the Bible, as having been at least in some degree influenced by
   hope and fear, or having respect unto the recompense of reward, or to
   the joy that was set before them. This is admitted. Noah was moved with
   fear and built the ark. But was it the fear of being drowned himself,
   or fear for his own personal safety that chiefly moved him? The Bible
   does not say it. He feared for the safety of his family; yea, more, he
   dreaded the destruction of the whole human race, with all the interest
   depending thereon.

   Whenever it is said that good men were influenced by hope and fear, it
   is admitted. But in order to make it bear on this subject, it must be
   shown that this hope or fear respecting their own personal interest was
   the controlling motive. Now, this is no where affirmed in the Bible. It
   was right for them to be influenced by promises and threatenings.
   Otherwise they could not obey the second part of the law: "Thou shalt
   love thy neighbor as thyself."

  II. I am to show what is meant by the proposition, that supreme regard to our
  own interest is inconsistent with true religion.

   The question is, whether supreme regard to our own happiness is
   religion. It is, whether we are to fear our own damnation more than the
   damnation of all other men, in the dishonor of God thereby. And whether
   we are to aim at securing our own happiness more than the happiness of
   all other men, and the glory of God. And whether, if we do this, we act
   according to the requirements of the true religion, or inconsistent
   with true religion. This is the proper point of inquiry, and I wish you
   to bear it constantly in mind, and not to confound it with any of the
   other points that I have referred to.

  III. For the proof of the proposition.

   Before proceeding to the proof of the proposition, that a supreme
   regard to our own happiness is inconsistent with true religion, I will
   observe that all true religion consists in being like God; in acting on
   the same principles and grounds, and having the same feelings towards
   different objects. I suppose this will not be denied. Indeed, if cannot
   be, by any sane mind. I then observe, as the first proof of the
   proposition,

   1. That a supreme regard to our own happiness is not according to the
   example of God; but is being totally unlike him.

   The Bible tells us that "God is love." That is, benevolence is the sum
   total of his character. All his other moral attributes, such as
   justice, mercy, and the like, are but modifications of his benevolence.
   His love is manifested in two forms. One is that of benevolence, good
   willing, or desiring the happiness of others. The other complacency, or
   approving the character of others who are holy. God's benevolence
   regards all beings that are capable of happiness. This is universal.
   Towards all holy beings, he exercises the love of complacency. In other
   words, God loves his neighbor as himself. He regards he interests of
   all beings, according to their relative value, as much as his own. He
   seeks his own happiness, or glory, as the supreme good. But not because
   it is his own, but because it is the supreme good. The sum total of his
   happiness, as an infinite being, is infinitely greater than the sum
   total of the happiness of all other beings, or of and possible number
   of finite creatures.

   Take a very familiar illustration. Here is a man that is kind to
   brutes. This man and his horse fall into the river. Now, does true
   benevolence require the man to drown himself in order to extricate his
   horse? No. It would be true disinterested benevolence in him, to save
   himself, and, if need be, leave his horse to perish; because his
   happiness is of so much greater value than that of the horse. You see
   this at a glance. But the difference between God and all created beings
   is infinitely greater than between a man and a horse, or between the
   highest anger and the meanest insect, God, therefore, regards the
   happiness of all creatures precisely according to its real value. And
   unless we do the same we are not like God. If we are like God, we must
   regard God's happiness and glory in the same light that he does; that
   is, as the supreme good, beyond every thing else in the universe. And
   if we desire our own happiness more than God's happiness, we are
   infinitely unlike God.

   2. To aim at our own happiness supremely is inconsistent with true
   religion, because it is contrary to the spirit of Christ.

   We are told, that "if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none
   of his." And it is repeatedly said of him as a man, that he sought not
   his own, that he sought not his own glory, and the like. What was he
   seeking? Was it his own personal salvation? No. Was it his own personal
   happiness?

   No. It was the glory of his Father, and the good of the universe,
   through the salvation of men. He came on an errand of pure benevolence,
   to benefit the kingdom of God, not to benefit himself. This was "the
   joy that was set before him," for which "he endured the cross,
   despising the shame." It was the great good he could do by thus
   throwing himself out to labor and suffer for the salvation of men.

   3. To regard our own happiness as the supreme object of pursuit is
   contrary to the law of God.

   I have mentioned this before, but recur to it again for the sake of
   making my present demonstration complete. The sum of that law is this
   "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy
   soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; and thou shalt
   love thy neighbor as thyself."

   This is the great thing required; benevolence towards God and man. The
   first thing is really to love the happiness and glory of God, above all
   other things, because it is so infinitely lovely and desirable, and is
   properly the supreme good. Some have objected that it was not our duty
   to seek the happiness of God, because his happiness is already secured.
   Suppose, now, that the king of England is perfectly independent of me,
   and has his happiness secured without me; does that make it any the
   less my duty to wish him well, to desire his happiness, and to rejoice
   in it? Because God is happy, in himself, independent of his creatures,
   is that a reason why we should not love his happiness, and rejoice in
   it? Strange.

   Again: We are bound by the terms of God's law to exercise complacency
   to God, because he is holy, infinitely holy.

   Again: This law binds us to exercise the same good will, or
   benevolence, towards others that we do to ourselves; that his, to seek
   both their interests and our own, according to their relative value.
   Who of you is doing this? And we are bound to exercise the love of
   complacency toward those who are good and holy.

   Thus we see that the sum of the law of God is to exercise benevolence
   towards God and all beings, according to their relative value, and
   complacency in all that are holy. Now I say that to regard our own
   happiness supremely, or to seek it as our supreme end, is contrary to
   that law, to its letter and to its spirit. And,

   4. It is as contrary to the gospel as it is to the law.

   In the chapter from which the text is taken, the apostle begins "Though
   I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I
   am become as sounding brass, of a tinkling cymbal. And though I have
   the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge;
   and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have
   not charity, I am nothing." Charity here means love. In the original it
   is the same word that is rendered love. "And though I bestow all my
   goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and
   have not charity, it profiteth me nothing."

   Now mark! In no stronger language could he have expressed the idea that
   charity, or benevolence, is essential to true religion. See how he
   throws out his guards on every side, so that it is impossible to
   mistake his views. If a person has not true charity, he is nothing. He
   then proceeds and shows what are the characteristics of this true
   charity. "Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not;
   charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself
   unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no
   evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth
   all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things endureth all
   things." Here you see that one leading peculiarity of this love is,
   that charity "seeketh not her own." Mark that. If this is true
   religion, and without it there is no religion, then one peculiarity of
   true religion is, that it "seeketh not her own."

   Those of you who have Bibles with marginal references can follow out
   these references and find a multitude of passages that plainly teach
   the same thing. Recollect the passages I quoted in the last lecture. I
   will just refer to one of them "Whosoever will save his life shall lose
   it." Here you see it laid down as an established principle of God's
   government, that if a person aims supremely at his own interest he will
   lose his own interest.

   The same is taught in the tenth chapter of this epistle, verse 24: "Let
   no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth."

   If you look at the passage, you will see that word "wealth" is in
   italic letters, to show that it is a word added by the translators,
   that is not in the Greek. They might just as well have used the word
   happiness, or welfare, as wealth. So in the 33rd verse: "Even as I
   please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit, but the profit
   of many, that they may be saved."

   Therefore I say, that to make our own interest the supreme object of
   pursuit, is as contrary to the gospel as it is to the law.

   5. It is contrary to conscience.

   The universal conscience of mankind has decided that a supreme regard
   to our own happiness is not virtue. Men have always known that to serve
   God and benefit mankind is what is right, and to seek supremely their
   own personal interest is not right. They have always regarded it mean
   and contemptible for individuals to seek their own happiness as the
   supreme object, and consequently, we see how much pains men take to
   conceal their selfishness and to appear benevolent. It is impossible
   for any man, unless his conscience is strangely blunted by sin, or
   perverted by false instruction, not to see that it is sinful to regard
   his own happiness above other interests of more importance.

   6. It is contrary to right reason.

   Right reason teaches us to regard all things according to their real
   value. God does this, and we should do the same. God has given us
   reason for this very purpose, that we should weigh and compare the
   relative value of things. It is a mockery of reason, to deny that it
   teaches us to regard things according to their real value. And if so,
   then to aim at and prefer our own interest, as the supreme end, is
   contrary to reason.

   7. It is contrary to common sense.

   That has the common sense of mankind decided on this point? Look at the
   common sense of mankind in regard to what is called patriotism. No man
   was ever regarded as a true patriot, in fighting for his country, if
   his object was to subserve his own interest. Suppose it should appear
   that his object in fighting was to get himself crowned king; would
   anybody give him credit for patriotism? No. All men agree that it is
   patriotism when a man is disinterested, like Washington; and fights for
   his country, for his country's sake. The common sense of mankind has
   written reprobation on that spirit that seeks its own things, and
   prefers its own interest, to the greater interests of others. It is
   evident that all men so regard it. Otherwise, how is it that every one
   is anxious to appear disinterested.

   8. It is contrary to the constitution of the mind.

   I do not mean, by this, that it is impossible, by our very
   constitution, for us to seek our own happiness as the supreme object.
   But we are so constituted that if we do this, we never can attain it.
   As I have said in a former lecture, happiness is the gratification of
   desire. We must desire something, and gain the object we desire. Now,
   suppose a man to desire his own happiness, the object of his desire
   will always keep just so far before him, like his shadow, and the
   faster he pursues it the faster it flies. Happiness is inseparably
   attached to the attainment of the object desired. Suppose I desire a
   thousand dollars. That is the thing on which my desire fastens, and
   when I get it that desire is gratified, and I am happy, so far as
   gratifying this desire goes to make me happy. But if I desire the
   thousand dollars for the purpose of getting a watch, a dress, and such
   like things, the desire is not gratified till I get those things.

   But now suppose the thing I desired was my own happiness. Getting the
   thousand dollars then does not make me happy, because that is not the
   thing my desire was fixed on. And so getting the watch, and dress, and
   other things, do not make me happy, for they gratify not my desire. God
   has so constituted things, and given such laws to the mind, that man
   never can gain happiness by pursuing it. This very constitution plainly
   indicates the duty of disinterested benevolence. Indeed, he has made it
   impossible for them to be happy, but in proportion as they are
   disinterested.

   Here are two men walking along the street together. They come across a
   man that has just been run over by a cart, and lies weltering in his
   gore. They take him up, and carry him to the surgeon, and relieve him.
   Now it is plain that their gratification is in proportion to the
   intensity of their desire for his relief. If one of them felt but
   little and cared but little about the sufferings of the poor man, he
   will be but little gratified. But if his desire to have the man
   relieves amounted to agony, his gratification would be accordingly. Now
   suppose a third individual that had no desire to relieve the distressed
   man; certainly relieving him could be no gratification to that person.
   He could pass right by him, and see him die. Then he is not gratified
   at all. Therefore you see, happiness is just in proportion as the
   desires are gratified by obtaining the things desired.

   Here observe, that in order to make the happiness of gratified desire
   complete, the desire itself must be virtuous. Otherwise, if the desire
   is selfish, the gratification will be mingled with pain, from the
   conflict of the mind.

   That all this is true, is a matter of consciousness, and is proved to
   us by the very highest kind of testimony we can have. And for any one
   to deny it, is to charge God foolishly, as if he had given us a
   constitution that would not allow us to be happy in obeying him.

   9. It is also inconsistent with our own happiness, to make our own
   interest the supreme object. This follows from what I have just said.
   Men may enjoy a certain kind of pleasure, but not true happiness. The
   pleasure which does not spring from the gratification of virtuous
   desire, is a deceptive delusion. The reason why all mankind do not find
   happiness, when they are all so anxious for it, is that they are
   seeking it. If they would seek the glory of God, and the good of the
   universe as their supreme end, it would pursue them.

   10. It is inconsistent with the public happiness. If each individual is
   to aim at his own happiness as his chief end, these interests will
   unavoidably clash and come into collision, and universal war and
   confusion will follow in the train of universal selfishness.

   11. To maintain that a supreme regard to our own interest is true
   religion, is to contradict the experience of all real saints. I aver,
   that every real saint knows that his supreme happiness consists in
   going out of himself, and regarding the glory of God and the good of
   others. If he does not know this he is no saint.

   12. It is also inconsistent with the experience of all those who have
   had a selfish religion, and have found out their mistake and got true
   religion. This is a common occurrence. I suppose I have known hundreds
   of cases. Some members in this church have recently made this
   discovery; and they can all testify that they now know, by experience,
   that benevolence is true religion.

   13. It is contrary to the experience of all the impenitent. Every
   impenitent sinner knows that he is aiming supremely at the promotion of
   his own interest, and knows that he has not true religion. The very
   thing that his conscience condemns him for is this, that he is
   regarding his own interest instead of the glory of God.

   Now just turn the leaf over, for a moment, and admit that a supreme
   regard for our own happiness is true religion; and then see what will
   follow.

   1. Then it will follow that God is not holy. That is, if a supreme
   regard to our own interest, because it is our own, is true religion,
   then it will follow that God is not holy. God regards his own
   happiness, but it is because it is the greatest good, not because it is
   his own. But he is love, or benevolence; and if benevolence is not true
   religion, God's nature must be changed.

   2. The law of God must be altered. If a supreme regard to our own
   happiness is religion, then the law should read, "Thou shalt love
   thyself with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with all thy
   mind, and with all thy strength, and God and thy neighbor infinitely
   less than thyself."

   3. The gospel must be reversed. Instead of saying "Whether ye eat or
   drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God," it should
   read, "Do all for your own happiness." Instead of "He that will save
   his life shall lose it," we should find it saying, "He that is
   supremely anxious to save his own life shall save it; but he that is
   benevolent, and willing to lose his life for the good of others, shall
   lose it."

   4. The consciences of men should be changed so as to testify in favor
   of selfishness, and condemn and reprobate every thing like uninterested
   benevolence.

   5. Right reason must be made not to weigh things according to their
   relative value, but to decide our own little interest to be of more
   value than the greatest interests of God and the universe.

   6. Common sense will have to decide, that true patriotism consists in
   every man's seeking his own interest instead of the public good, and
   each one seeking to build himself up as high as he can.

   7. The human constitution must be reversed. If supreme selfishness is
   virtue, the human constitution was made wrong. It is so made, that man
   can be happy only by being benevolent. And if this doctrine is true,
   that religion consists in seeking our own happiness as a supreme good,
   then the more religion a man has the more miserable he is.

   8. And the whole frame-work of society will have to be changed. Now it
   is so, that the good of the community depends on the extent to which
   every one regards the public interest. And if this doctrine holds, it
   must be changed, so that the public good will be best promoted when
   every man is scrambling for his own interest regardless of the
   interests of others.

   9. The experience of the saints will have to be reversed. Instead of
   finding, as they now do, that the more benevolence they have, the more
   religion and the more happiness, they should testify that the more they
   aim at their own good, the more they enjoy of religion and the favor of
   God.

   10. The impenitent should be found to testify that they are supremely
   happy in supreme selfishness, and that they find true happiness in it.

   I will not pursue this proof any farther; it would look like trifling.

   If there is any such thing as proof to be had, it is fully proved, that
   to aim at our own happiness supremely, is inconsistent with true
   religion.

    REMARKS.

   I. We see why it is, that while all are pursuing happiness, so few find
   it.

   The fact is plain. The reason is this; the greater part of mankind do
   not know in what true happiness consists, and they are seeking it in
   that which can never afford it. They do not find it because they are
   pursuing it. If they would turn round and pursue holiness, happiness
   would pursue them. If they would become disinterested, and lay
   themselves out to do good, they could not but be happy. If they choose
   happiness as an end, it flies before them. True happiness consists in
   the gratification of virtuous desires; and if they would set themselves
   to glorify God, and do good, they would find it. The only class of
   persons that never do final it, in this world, or the world to come,
   are those who seek it as an end.

   II. The constitution of the human mind and of the universe, affords a
   beautiful illustration of the economy of God.

   Suppose man could find happiness, only by pursuing his own happiness.
   Then each individual would have only the happiness that himself had
   gained, and all the happiness in the universe would be only the sum
   total of what individuals had gained, with the offset of all the pain
   and misery produced by conflicting interests. Now mark! God has so
   constituted things, that while each lays himself out to promote the
   happiness of others, his own happiness is secured and made complete.
   How vastly greater then is the amount of happiness in the universe,
   than it would have been, had selfishness been the law of Jehovah's
   kingdom. Because each one who obeys the law of God, fully secures his
   own happiness by his benevolence, and the happiness of the whole is
   increased by how much each receives from all others.

   Many say, "Who will take care of my happiness if I do not? If I am to
   care only for my neighbor's interest, and neglect my own, none of us
   will be happy." That would be true, if your care for your neighbor's
   happiness were a detraction from your own. But if your happiness
   consists in doing good and promoting the happiness of others, the more
   you do for others, the more you promote your own happiness.

   III. When I gave out the subject of this lecture, I avoided the use of
   the term, selfishness, lest it should be thought invidious. But I now
   affirm, that a supreme regard to our own interest is selfishness, and
   nothing else. It would be selfishness in God, if he regarded his own
   interest; supremely because it is his own. And it is selfishness in
   man. And whoever maintains that a supreme regard to our own interest is
   true religion, maintains that selfishness is true religion.

   IV. If selfishness is virtue, then benevolence is sin. They are direct
   opposites and cannot both be virtue. For a man to set up his own
   interest over God's interest, giving it a preference, and placing it in
   opposition to God's interest is selfishness. And if this is virtue,
   then Jesus Christ, in seeking the good of mankind as he did, departed
   from the principles of virtue. Who will pretend this?

   V. Those who regard their own interest as supreme, and yet think they
   have true religion, are deceived. I say it solemnly, because I believe
   it is true, and I would say it if it were the last word I was to speak
   before going to the judgment. Dear hearer, whoever you are, if you are
   doing this, you are not a Christian. Don't call this being censorious.
   I am not censorious. I would not denounce any one.

   But as God is true, and your soul is going to the judgment, you have
   not the religion of the Bible.

   VI. Some will ask here, "What! are we to have no regard to our
   happiness, and if so, how are we to decide whether it is supreme or
   not?" I do not say that. I say, you may regard it according to its
   relative value. And now I ask, is there any real practical difficulty
   here? I appeal to your consciousness. You cannot but know, if you are
   honest, what it is that you regard supremely. Are these interests, your
   own interest on one side, and God's glory and the good of the universe
   on the other, so nearly balanced in your mind, that you cannot tell
   which you prefer? It is impossible! If you are not as conscious that
   you prefer the glory of God to your own interest, as you are that you
   exist, you may take it for granted that you are all wrong.

   VII. You see why the enjoyment of so many professors of religion
   depends on their evidences. These persons are all the time hunting
   after evidence; and just in proportion as that varies, their enjoyments
   wax and wane. Now, mark! If they really regarded the glory of God and
   the good of mankind, their enjoyment would not depend on their
   evidences. Those who are purely selfish, may enjoy much in religion,
   but it is by anticipation. The idea of going to heaven is pleasing to
   them. But those who go out of themselves, and are purely benevolent,
   have a present heaven in their breasts.

   VIII. You see, here, that all of you who had no peace and joy in
   religion before you had a hope, are deceived. Perhaps I can give an
   outline of your experience. You were awakened, and were distressed, as
   you had reason to be, by the fear of going to hell. By and by, perhaps
   while you were engaged in prayer, or while some person was conversing
   with you, your distress left you. You thought your sins were pardoned.
   A gleam of joy shot through your mind, and warmed up your heart into a
   glow, that you took for evidence, and this again increased your joy.
   How very different is the experience of a true Christian! His peace
   does not depend on his hope; but true submission and benevolence
   produce peace and joy, independent of his hope.

   Suppose the case of a man in prison, condemned to be hung the nest day.
   He is in great distress, walking his cell, and waiting for the day. By
   and by, a messenger comes with a pardon. He seizes the paper, turns it
   up to the dim light that comes through his grate, reads the word
   pardon, and almost faints with emotion, and leaps for joy. He supposes
   the paper to be genuine. Now suppose it turns out that the paper is
   counterfeit. Suddenly his joy is all gone. So in the case of a deceived
   person. He was afraid of going to hell, and of course he rejoices if he
   believes he is pardoned. If the devil should tell him so, and he
   believed it, his joy would be just as great, while the belief lasts, as
   if it was a reality. True Christian joy does not depend on evidence. He
   submits himself into the hands of God with such confidence, and that
   very act gives him peace. He had a terrible conflict with God, but all
   at once he yields the controversy, and says, "God will do right, let
   God's will be done." Then he begins to pray, he in subdued, he melts
   down before God, and that very act affords sweet, calm, and heavenly
   joy. Perhaps he has not thought of a hope. Perhaps he may go for hours,
   or even for a day or two, full of joy in God, without thinking of his
   own salvation. You ask him if he has a hope, he never thought of that.
   His joy does not depend on believing that he is pardoned, but consists
   in a state of mind, acquiescing in the government of God. In such a
   state of mind, he should not but be happy.

   Now let me ask which religion have you? If you exercise true religion,
   suppose God should put you into hell, and there let you exercise
   supreme love to God, and the same love to your neighbor as to yourself,
   that itself is a state of mind inconsistent with being miserable.

   I wish this to be fully understood. These hope-seekers will be always
   disappointed. If you run after hope, you will never have a hope good
   for anything. But if you pursue holiness, hope, and peace, and joy,
   will come of course.

   Is your religion the love of holiness, the love of God and of souls? Or
   is it only a hope?

   IX. You see why it is that anxious sinners do not find peace.

   They are looking at their own guilt and danger. They are regarding God
   as an avenger, and shrinking from his terrors. This will render it
   impossible they should ever come at peace. While looking at the wrath
   of God, making them wither and tremble, they cannot love him, they hide
   from him. Anxious sinners, let me tell you a secret. If you keep
   looking at that feature of God's character, it will drive you to
   despair, and that is inconsistent with true submission. You should look
   at his whole character, and see the reasons why you should love him,
   and throw yourself upon him without reserve, and without distrust; and
   instead of shrinking from him, come right to him, and say, "O, Father
   in heaven, thou art not inexorable, thou art sovereignty, but thou art
   good, I submit to thy government, and give myself to thee, with all I
   have and all I am, body and soul, for time and for eternity."

   The subject for the next lecture will be, the distinction between legal
   submission and gospel submission, or between the religion of the law
   and the religion of faith. And here let me observe, that when I began
   to preach on the subject of selfishness in religion, I did not dream
   that it would be regarded by any one as a controversial subject at all.
   I have no fondness for controversy, and I should as soon think of
   calling the doctrine of the existence of God a controversial subject,
   as this. The question is one of the greatest importance, and we ought
   to weigh the arguments, and decide according to the word of God. Soon
   we shall go together to the bar of God, and you must determine whether
   you will go there with selfishness in your hearts, or with that
   disinterested benevolence that seeketh not her own. Will you now be
   honest? For as God is true, if you are seeking your own, you will soon
   be in hell, unless you repent. O be honest! and lay aside prejudice,
   and act for eternity.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Knowing that a man is not justified by the work of the law, but by the
      faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
      might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
      law; for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. Galatians
      2:16.

   This last sentiment is expressed in the same terms, in the third
   chapter of Romans. The subject of the present lecture, as I announced
   last week, is Justification by Faith. The order which I propose to
   pursue in the discussion is this:

   I. Show what justification by law, or legal justification is. II. Show
   that by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified. III. Show what
   gospel justification is. IV. Show what is the effect of gospel
   justification, or the state into which it brings a person that is
   justified. V. Show that gospel justification is by faith. VI. Answer
   some inquiries which arise in many minds on this subject.

  I. I am to show what legal justification is.

   1. In its general legal sense it means not guilty. To justify an
   individual in this sense, is to declare that he is not guilty of any
   breach of the law. It is affirming that he has committed no crime. It
   is pronouncing him innocent.

   2. More technically, it is a form of pleading to a charge of crime,
   where the individual who is charged admits the fact, but brings forward
   an excuse, on which he claims that he had a right to do as he did, or
   that he is not blameworthy. Thus, if a person is charged with murder,
   the plea of justification admits that he killed the man, but alleges
   either that it was done in self-defense and he had a right to kill him,
   or that it was by unavoidable accident, and he could not help it. In
   either case, the plea of justification admits the fact, but denies the
   guilt, on the ground of a sufficient excuse.

  II. I am to show that by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
  justified. And this is true under either form of justification.

   1. Under the first, or general form of justification. In this case, the
   burden of proof is on the accuser, who is held to prove the facts
   charged. And in this case, he only needs to prove that a crime has been
   committed once. If it is proved once, the individual is guilty. He
   cannot be justified, in this way, by the law. He is found guilty. It is
   not available for him to urge that he has done more good than hurt, or
   that he has kept God's law longer than he has broken it, but he must
   make it out that he has fulfilled every jot and tittle of the law. Who
   can be justified by the law in this way? No one.

   2. Nor under the second, or technical form of justification. In this
   case, the burden of proof lies on him who makes the plea. When he
   pleads in justification he admits the fact alleged, and therefore he
   must make good his excuse, or fail. There are two points to be
   regarded. The thing pleaded as an excuse must be true, and it must be a
   good and sufficient excuse or justification, not a frivolous apology,
   or one that does not meet the case. If it is not true, or if it is
   insufficient, and especially if it reflects on the court or government,
   it is an infamous aggravation of his offense. You will see the bearing
   of this remark, by and by.

   I will now mention some of the prominent reasons which sinners are in
   the habit of pleading as a justification, and will show what is the
   true nature and bearing of these excuses, and the light in which they
   stand before God. I have not time to name all these pleas, but will
   only refer to two of each of the classes I have described, those which
   are good if true, and those which are true but unavailing.

   1. Sinners often plead their sinful nature, as a justification.

   This excuse is a good one, if it is true. If it is true, as they
   pretend, that God has given them a nature which is itself sinful, and
   the necessary actings of their nature are sin, it is a good excuse for
   sin, and in the face of heaven and earth, and at the day of judgment,
   will be a good plea in justification. God must annihilate the reason of
   all the rational universe, before they will ever blame you for sin if
   God made you sin, or if he gave you a nature that is itself sinful. How
   can your nature be sinful? What is sin? Sin is a transgression of the
   law. There is no other sin but this. Now, does the law say you must not
   have such a nature as you have? Nothing like it.

   The fact is, this doctrine overlooks the distinction between sin and
   the occasion of sin. The bodily appetites and constitutional
   susceptibilities of body and mind, when strongly excited, become the
   occasion of sin. So it was with Adam. No one will say that Adam had a
   sinful nature. But he had, by his constitution, an appetite for food
   and a desire for knowledge. These were not sinful, but were as God made
   them, and were necessary to fit him to live in this world as a subject
   of God's moral government; but being strongly excited, as you know, led
   to prohibited indulgence, and thus became the occasions of his sinning
   against God. They were innocent in themselves, but he yielded to them
   in a sinful manner, and that was his sin. When the sinner talks about
   his sinful nature as a justification, he confounds these innocent
   appetites and susceptibilities, with sin itself. By so doing, he in
   fact, charges God foolishly, and accuses him of giving him a sinful
   nature, when in fact his nature, in all its elements, is essential to
   moral agency, and God has made it as well as it could be made, and
   perfectly adapted to the circumstances in which he lives in this world.
   The truth is man's nature is all right, and is as well fitted to love
   and obey God as to hate and disobey him. Sinner! the day is not far
   distant, when it will be known whether this is a good excuse or not.
   Then you will see whether you can face your Maker down in this way; and
   when he charges you with sin, turn round and throw the blame back upon
   him.

   Do you inquire what influence Adam's sin has then had in producing the
   sin of his posterity? I answer, it has subjected them to aggravated
   temptation, but has by no means rendered their nature in itself sinful.

   2. Another excuse coming under the same class, is inability. This also
   is a good excuse if it is true. If sinners are really unable to obey
   God, this is a good plea in justification. When you are charged with
   sin, in not obeying the laws of God, you have only to show, if you can,
   by good proof, that God has required what you were not able to perform,
   and the whole intelligent universe will resound with the verdict of
   "not guilty." If you have not natural power to obey God, they must give
   this verdict, or cease to be reasonable beings. For it is a first law
   of reason, that no being has a right to do what he has no power to do.

   Suppose God should require you to undo something which you have done.
   This, every one will see, is a natural impossibility. Now, are you to
   blame for not doing it? God requires repentance of past sins, and not
   that you should undo them. Now, suppose it was your duty, on the first
   of January, to warn a certain individual, who is now dead. Are you
   under obligation to warn that individual? No. That is an impossibility.
   All that God can now require is, that you should repent. It never can
   be your duty, now, to warn that sinner. God may hold you responsible
   for not doing your duty to him when it was in your power. But it would
   be absurd to make it your duty to do what is not in your power to do.
   This plea being false, and throwing the blame of tyranny on God, is an
   infamous aggravation of the offense. If God requires you to do what you
   have no power to do, it is tyranny. And what God requires is on penalty
   of eternal death he threatens an infinite penalty for not doing what
   you have no power to do, and so he is an infinite tyrant. This plea,
   then, charges God with infinite tyranny, and is not only insufficient
   for the sinner's justification, but is a horrible aggravation of his
   offense.

   Let us vary the case a little, suppose God requires you to repent for
   not doing what you never had natural ability to do. You must either
   repent, then, of not doing what you had no natural power to do, or you
   must go to hell. Now, you can neither repent of this, nor can he make
   you repent of it. What is repentance? It is to blame yourself and
   justify God. But if you had no power, you can do neither. It is a
   natural impossibility that a rational being should ever blame himself
   for not doing what he is conscious he had not power to do. Nor can you
   justify God. Until the laws of mind are reversed, the verdict of all
   intelligent beings must pronounce it infinite tyranny to require that
   which there is no power to perform.

   Suppose God should call you to account, and require you to repent for
   not flying. By what process can he make you blame yourself for not
   flying, when you are conscious that you have no wings, and no power to
   fly? If he could cheat you into the belief that you had the power, and
   make you believe a lie, then you might repent. But that sort of a way
   is that for God to take with his creatures?

   What do you mean, sinner, by bringing such an excuse? Do you mean to
   have it go, that you have never sinned? It is a strange contradiction
   you make, when you admit that you ought to repent, and in the next
   breath say you have no power to repent. You ought to take your ground,
   one way or the other. If you mean to rely on this excuse, come out with
   it in full, and take your ground before God's bar, and say, "Lord I am
   not going to repent at all I am not under any obligation to repent, for
   I have not power to obey thy law, and therefore I plead not guilty
   absolutely, for I have never sinned!"

   In which of these ways can any one of you be justified? Will you, dare
   you, take ground on this excuse, and throw back the blame upon God?

   3. Another excuse which sinners offer for their continued impenitence
   is their wicked heart.

   This excuse is true, but it is not sufficient. The first two that I
   mentioned, you recollect, were good if they had been true, but they
   were false. This is true, but is no excuse. What is a wicked heart? It
   is not the bodily organ which we call the heart, but the affection of
   the soul, the wicked disposition, the wicked feelings, the actings of
   the mind. If these will justify you, they will justify the devil
   himself. Has he not as wicked a heart as you have? Suppose you had
   committed murder, and you should be put on trial and plead this plea.
   "It is true," you would say, "I killed the man but then I have such a
   thirst for blood, and such a hatred of mankind, that I cannot help
   committing murder, whenever I have an opportunity." "Horrible!" the
   judge would exclaim, "Horrible! Let the gallows be set up immediately,
   and let this fellow be hung before I leave the bench; such a wretch
   ought not to live an hour. Such a plea! Why, that is the very reason he
   ought to be hung, if he has such a thirst for blood, that no man is
   safe." Such is the sinner's plea of a wicked heart in justification of
   sin. "Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee, thou wicked servant."

   4. Another great excuse which people make is, the conduct of
   Christians.

   Ask many a man among your neighbors why he is not religious, and he
   will point you at once to the conduct of Christians as his excuse.
   "These Christians," he will say, "are no better than anybody else; when
   see them live as they profess, I shall think it time for me to attend
   to religion." Thus he is hiding behind the sins of Christians. He shows
   that he knows how Christians ought to live, and therefore he cannot
   plead that he has sinned through ignorance. But what does it amount to
   as a ground of justification? I admit the fact that Christians behave
   very badly, and do much that is entirely contrary to their profession.
   But is that a good excuse for you? So far from it, this is itself one
   of the strongest reasons why you ought to be religious. You know so
   well how Christians ought to live, you are bound to show an example. If
   you had followed them ignorantly because you did not know any better,
   and had fallen into sin in that way, it would be a different case. But
   the plea, as it stands, shows that you knew they are wrong, which is
   the very reason why you ought to be right, and exert a better influence
   than they do. Instead of following them, and doing wrong because they
   do, you ought to break off from them, and rebuke them, and pray for
   them, and try to lead them in a better way. This excuse, then, is true
   in fact, but unavailing in justification. You only make it an excuse
   for charging God foolishly, and instead of clearing you, it only adds
   to your dreadful, damning guilt. A fine plea this, to get behind some
   deacon, or some elder in the church, and there shoot your arrows of
   malice and caviling at God!

   Who among you, then, can be justified by the law? Who has kept it? Who
   has got a good excuse for breaking it? Who dare go to the bar of God on
   these pleas, and face his Maker with such apologies?

  III. I am to show what gospel justification is.

   First Negatively.

   1. Gospel justification is not the imputed righteousness of Jesus
   Christ.

   Under the gospel, sinners are not justified by having the obedience of
   Jesus Christ set down to their account, as if he had obeyed the law for
   them, or in their stead. It is not an uncommon mistake to suppose, that
   when sinners are justified under the gospel, they are accounted
   righteous in the eye of the law, by having the obedience or
   righteousness of Christ imputed to them. I have not time to enter into
   an examination of this subject now. I can only say this idea is absurd
   and impossible, for this reason, that Jesus Christ was bound to obey
   the law for himself, and could no more perform works of supererogation,
   or obey on our account, than anybody else. Was it not his duty to love
   the Lord his God, with all his heart, and soul, and mind, and strength,
   and to love his neighbor as himself? Certainly; and if he had not done
   so, it would have been sin. The only work of supererogation he could
   perform was to submit to sufferings that were not deserved. This is
   called his obedience unto death, and this is set down to our account.
   But if his obedience of the law is set down to our account, why are we
   called on to repent and obey the law ourselves? Does God exact double
   service, yes, triple service first to have the law obeyed by the surety
   for us, then that he must suffer the penalty for us, and then that we
   must repent and obey ourselves? No such thing is demanded. It is not
   required that the obedience of another should be imputed to us. All we
   owe is perpetual obedience to the law of benevolence. And for this
   there can be no substitute. If we fail of this, we must endure the
   penalty, or receive a free pardon.

   2. Justification by faith does not mean that faith is accepted as a
   substitute for personal holiness, or that by an arbitrary constitution,
   faith is imputed to us instead of personal obedience to the law.

   Some suppose that justification is this, that the necessity of personal
   holiness is set aside, and that God arbitrarily dispenses with the
   requirement of the law, and imputes faith as a substitute. But this is
   not the way, faith is accounted for just what it is, and not something
   else that it is not. Abraham's faith was imputed unto him for
   righteousness, because it was itself an act of righteousness, and
   because it worked by love, and thus produced holiness. Justifying faith
   is holiness, so far as it goes and produces holiness of heart and life,
   and is imputed to the believer as holiness, not instead of holiness.

   Nor does justification by faith imply that a sinner is justified by
   faith without good works, or personal holiness.

   Some suppose that justification by faith only, is with out any regard
   to good works, or holiness. They have understood this from what Paul
   has said, where he insists so largely on justification by faith. But it
   should be borne in mind that Paul was combating the error of the Jews,
   who expected to be justified by obeying the law. In opposition to this
   error, Paul insists on it that justification is by faith, without works
   of law. He does not mean that good works are unnecessary to
   justification, but that works of law are not good works, because they
   spring from legal considerations, from hope and fear, and not from
   faith that works by love. But inasmuch as a false theory had crept into
   the church on the other side, James took up the matter, and showed them
   that they had misunderstood Paul. And to show this, he takes the case
   of Abraham our father justified by words when he had offered Isaac his
   son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by
   works was faith made perfect? And the scripture was fulfilled, which
   saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
   righteousness: and he was called the Friend of God. Ye see then how
   that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only." This epistle
   was supposed to contradict Paul, and some of the ancient churches
   rejected it on that account. But they overlooked the fact that Paul was
   speaking of one kind of works, and James of another. Paul was speaking
   of works performed from legal motives. But he has everywhere insisted
   on good works springing from faith, or the righteousness of faith, as
   indispensable to salvation. All that he denies is that works of law, or
   works grounded on legal motives, have anything to do in the matter of
   justification. And James teaches the same thing, when he teaches that
   men are justified, not by works nor by faith alone, but by faith
   together with the works of faith: or as Paul expresses it, faith that
   works by love. You will bear in mind that I am speaking of gospel
   justification, which is very different from legal justification.

   Secondly Positively.

   4. Gospel justification, or justification by faith, consists in pardon
   and acceptance with God.

   When we say that men are justified by faith and holiness, we do not
   mean that they are accepted on the ground of law, but that they are
   treated as if they were righteous, on account of their faith and works
   of faith. This is the method which God takes, in justifying a sinner.
   Not that faith is the foundation of justification. The foundation is in
   Christ. But this is the manner in which sinners are pardoned, and
   accepted, and justified, that if they repent, believe, and become holy,
   their past sins shall be forgiven, for the sake of Christ.

   Here it will be seen how justification under the gospel differs from
   justification under the law. Legal justification is a declaration of
   actual innocence and freedom from blame. Gospel justification is pardon
   and acceptance, as if he was righteous, but on other grounds than his
   own obedience. When the apostle says, "By deeds of law shall no flesh
   be justified, he uses justification as a lawyer, in a strictly legal
   sense." But when he speaks of justification by faith, he speaks not of
   legal justification, but of a person's being treated as if he were
   righteous.

  IV. I will now proceed to show the effect of this method of justification; or
  the state into which it brings those who are justified.

   1. The first item to be observed is, that when an individual is
   pardoned, the penalty of the law is released. The first effect of a
   pardon is to arrest and set aside the execution of the penalty. It
   admits that the penalty was deserved, but sets it aside. Then, so far
   as punishment is concerned, the individual has no more to fear from the
   law, than if he had never transgressed. He is entirely released. Those,
   then, who are justified by true faith, as soon as they are pardoned,
   need no more be influenced by fear or punishment. The penalty is as
   effectually set aside, as if it had never been incurred.

   2. The next effect of pardon is, to remove all the liabilities incurred
   in consequence of transgression, such as forfeiture of goods, or
   incapacity for being a witness, or holding any office under government.
   A real pardon removes all these, and restores the individual back to
   where he was before he transgressed. So, under the government of God,
   the pardoned sinner is restored to the favor of God. He is brought back
   into a new relation, and stands before God and is treated by him, so
   far as the law is concerned, as if he were innocent. It does not
   suppose or declares him to be really innocent, but the pardon restores
   him to the same state as if he were.

   3. Another operation of pardon under God's government is that the
   individual is restored to sonship. In other words, it brings him into
   such a relation to God, that he is received and treated as really a
   child of God.

   Suppose the son of a sovereign on the throne had committed murder, and
   was convicted and condemned to die. A pardon, then, would not only
   deliver him from death, but restore him to his place in the family.
   God's children have all gone astray, and entered into the service of
   the devil; but the moment a pardon issues to them, they are brought
   back; they receive a spirit of adoption, are sealed heirs of God, and
   restored to all the privileges of children of God.

   4. Another thing effected by justification is to secure all needed
   grace to rescue themselves fully out of the snare of the devil, and all
   the innumerable entanglements in which they are involved by sin.

   Beloved, if God were merely to pardon you, and then leave you to get
   out of sin as you could by yourselves, of what use would your pardon be
   to you? None in the world. If a child runs away from his father's
   house, and wanders in a forest, and falls into a deep pit, and the
   father finds him and undertakes to save him; if he merely pardons him
   for running away, it will be of no use unless he lifts him up from the
   pit, and leads him out of the forest So in the scheme of redemption,
   whatever helps and aids you need, are all guaranteed, if you believe.
   If God undertakes to save you, he pledges all the light and grace and
   help that are necessary to break the chains of Satan and the
   entanglements of sin, and leads you back to your Father's house.

   I know when individuals are first broken down under a sense of sin, and
   their hearts gush out with tenderness, they look over their past lives
   and feel condemned and see that it is all wrong, and then they break
   down at God's feet and give themselves away to Jesus Christ; they
   rejoice greatly in the idea that they have done with sin. But in a
   little time they begin to feel the pressure of old habits and former
   influences, and they see so much to be done before they overcome them
   all, that they often get discouraged and cry, "O, what shall I do, with
   so many enemies to meet, and so little strength of resolution or
   firmness of purpose to overcome them?" Let me tell you, beloved, that
   if God has undertaken to save you, you have only to keep near to him,
   and he will carry you through. You need not fear your enemies. Though
   the heavens should thunder and the earth rock, and the elements melt,
   you need not tremble, nor fear for enemies without or enemies within.
   God is for you, and who can be against you? "Who is he that condemneth?
   It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at
   the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us."

   6. Justification enlists all the divine attributes in your favor, as
   much as if you had never sinned.

   See that holy angel, sent on an errand of love to some distant part of
   the universe. God's eye follows him, and if he sees him likely to be
   injured in any way, all the divine attributes are enlisted at once to
   protect and sustain him. Just as absolutely are they all pledged for
   you, if you are justified, to protect, and support, and save you.
   Notwithstanding you are not free from remaining sin, and are so totally
   unworthy of God's love, yet if you are truly justified, the only wise
   and eternal God is pledged for your elevation. And shall you tremble
   and be faint-hearted with such support?

   If a human government pardons a criminal, it is then pledged to protect
   him as a subject, as much as if he had never committed a crime. So it
   is when God justifies a sinner. The Apostle says, "Being justified by
   faith, we have peace with God." Henceforth God is on his side, and
   pledged as his faithful and eternal Friend.

   Gospel justification differs from legal justification, in this respect:
   If the law justifies an individual, it holds no longer than he remains
   innocent. As soon as he transgresses once, his former justification is
   of no more avail. But when the gospel justifies a sinner, it is not so;
   but "if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
   the righteous." A new relation is now constituted, entirely peculiar.
   The sinner is now brought out from under the covenant of works, and
   placed under the covenant of grace. He no longer retains God's favor by
   the tenure of absolute and sinless obedience. If he sins, now, he is
   not thrust back again under the law, but receives the benefit of the
   new covenant. If he is justified by faith, and so made a child of God,
   he receives the treatment of a child, and is corrected, and chastised,
   and humbled, and brought back again. "The gifts and callings of God are
   without repentance." The meaning of that is not, that God calls and
   saves the sinner without his repenting, but that God never changes his
   mind when once he undertakes the salvation of a soul

   I know this is thought by some to be very dangerous doctrine, to teach
   that believers are perpetually justified because, say they, it will
   embolden men to sin. Indeed. To tell a man that has truly repented of
   sin, and heartily renounced sin, and sincerely desires to be free from
   sin, that God will help him and certainly give him the victory over
   sin, will embolden him to commit sin! Strange logic that! If this
   doctrine emboldens any man to commit sin, it only shows that he never
   did repent; that he never hated sin, and never loved God for his own
   sake, but only feigned repentance, and if he loved God it was only a
   selfish love, because he thought God was going to do him a favor. If he
   truly hated sin, the consideration that notwithstanding all his
   unworthiness, God had received him as a child, and would give him a
   child's treatment, is the very thing break him down and melt his heart
   in the most godly sorrow. O, how often has the child of God, melted in
   adoring wonder at the goodness of God in using means to bring him back,
   instead of sending him to hell, as he deserved! What consideration is
   calculated to bring him lower in the dust, than the thought that
   notwithstanding all God had done for him, and the gracious help God was
   always ready to afford him, he should wander away again, when his name
   was written in the Lamb's book of life!

   6. It secures the discipline of the covenant. God has pledged himself
   that if any who belong to Christ go astray, he will use the discipline
   of the covenant, and bring them back. In the eighty-ninth psalm, God
   says, putting David for Christ, "If his children forsake my law, and
   walk not in my judgments: if they break my statutes, and keep not my
   commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and
   their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
   utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant
   will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips."

   Thus you see that professors of religion may always expect to be more
   readily visited with God's judgments, if they get out of the way, than
   the impenitent. The sinner may grow fat, and live in riches, and have
   no bands in his death, all according to God's established principles of
   government. But let a child of God forsake his God, and go after riches
   or any other worldly object, and as certain as he is a child, God will
   smite him with his rod. And when he is smitten and brought back, he
   will say with the Psalmist,' It is good for me that I have been
   afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Before I was afflicted, I
   went astray, but now have I kept thy word." Perhaps some of you have
   known what it is to be afflicted in this way, and to feel that it was
   good.

   7. Another effect of gospel justification is, to insure sanctification.
   It not only insures all the means of sanctification, but the actual
   accomplishment of the work, so that the individual who is truly
   converted, will surely persevere in obedience till he is fitted for
   heaven and actually saved.

  V. I am to show that this is justification by faith.

   Faith is the medium by which the blessing is conveyed to the believer.
   The proof of this is in the Bible. The text declares it expressly.
   "Knowing that a man is no justified by the works of the law, but by the
   faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
   might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
   law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh he justified." The
   subject is too often treated of in the New Testament to be necessary to
   go into a labored proof. It is manifest, from the necessity of the
   case, that if men are saved at all, they must be justified in this way,
   and not by works of law, for "by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be
   justified."

  VI. I will now answer several inquiries which may naturally arise in your
  minds, growing out of this subject.

   1. "Why is justification said to be by faith, rather than by
   repentance, or love, or any other grace."

   Answer. It is no where said that men are justified or saved for faith,
   as the ground of their pardon, but only that they are justified by
   faith, as the medium or instrument. If it is asked why faith is
   appointed as the instrument, rather than any other exercise of the
   mind, the answer is, because of the nature and effect of faith. No
   other exercise could be appointed. What is faith? It is that confidence
   in God which leads us to love and obey him. We are therefore justified
   by faith because we are sanctified by faith. Faith is the appointed
   instrument of our justification, because it is the natural instrument
   of sanctification. It is the instrument of bringing us back to
   obedience, and therefore is designated as the means of obtaining the
   blessings of that return. It is not imputed to us, by an arbitrary act,
   for what it is not, but for what it is, as the foundation of all real
   obedience to God. This is the reason why faith is made the medium
   through which pardon comes. It is simply set down to us for what it
   really is; because it first leads us to obey God, from a principle of
   love to God.

   We are forgiven our sins on account of Christ. It is our duty to repent
   and obey God, and when we do so, this is imputed to us as what it is,
   holiness, or obedience to God. But for the forgiveness of our past
   sins, we must rely on Christ. And therefore justification is said to be
   by faith in Jesus Christ.

   2. The second query is of great importance: "What is justifying faith?
   What must I believe, in order to be saved?"

   Answer

   (1) Negatively, justifying faith does not consist in believing that
   your sins are forgiven. If that were necessary, you would have to
   believe it before it was done, or to believe a lie. Remember your sins
   are not forgiven until you believe. But if saving faith is believing
   that they are already forgiven, it is believing a thing before it takes
   place, which is absurd. You cannot believe your sins are forgiven,
   before you have the evidence that they are forgiven; and you cannot
   have the evidence that they are forgiven until it is true that they are
   forgiven, and they cannot be forgiven until you exercise saving faith.
   Therefore saving faith must be believing something else.

   (2) Nor does saving faith consist in believing that you shall be saved
   at all. You have no right to believe that you shall be saved at all,
   until after you have exercised justifying or saving faith.

   (3) But justifying faith consists in believing the atonement of Christ,
   or believing the record which God has given of his Son.

   The correctness of this definition has been doubted by some; and I
   confess my own mind has undergone a change on this point. It is said
   that Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.
   But what did Abraham believe? He believed that he should have a son.
   Was this all? By no means. But his faith included the great blessing
   that depended on that event, that the Messiah, the Savior of the world,
   should spring from him. This was the great subject of the Abrahamic
   covenant, and it depended on his having a son. Of course, Abraham's
   faith included the "Desire of all Nations," and was faith in Christ.
   The apostle Paul has showed this, at full length, in the third chapter
   of Galatians, that the sum of the covenant was, "In thee shall all
   nations be blessed." In verse 16, he says, "Now to Abraham and his seed
   were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as
   of one: And to thy seed, which is Christ."

   It is said that in the 11th of Hebrews, the saints are not all spoken
   of as having believed in Christ. But if you examine carefully, you will
   find that in all cases, faith in Christ is either included in what they
   believe, or fairly implied by it. Take the case of Abel. "By faith Abel
   offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he
   obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts:
   and by it he being dead yet speaketh." Why was his sacrifice more
   excellent? Because, by offering the firstlings of his flock, he
   recognized the necessity of the atonement, and that "without the
   shedding of blood there is no remission." Cain was a proud infidel, and
   offered the fruits of the ground, as a mere thank offering, for the
   blessings of Providence, without any admission that he was a sinner,
   and needed an atonement, as the ground on which he could hope for
   pardon.

   Some suppose that an individual might exercise justifying faith while
   denying, the divinity and atonement of Jesus Christ. I deny this. The
   whole sum and substance of revelation, like converging rays, all center
   on Jesus Christ, his divinity and atonement. All that the prophets and
   other writers of the Old Testament say about salvation comes to him.
   The Old Testament and the New, all the types and shadows, point to him.
   All the Old Testament saints were saved by faith in him. Their faith
   terminated in the coming Messiah, as that of the New Testament saints
   did in the Messiah already come. In the 15th chapter of 1st Corinthians
   the apostle Paul shows what place he would assign to this doctrine:
   "For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how
   that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that he
   was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
   scriptures." Mark that expression, "first of all." It proves that Paul
   preached that Christ died for sinners, as the "first," or primary
   doctrine of the gospel. And so you will find it, from one end of the
   Bible to the other that the attention of men was directed to this new
   and living way, as the only way of salvation. This truth is the only
   truth that can sanctify men. They may believe a thousand other things,
   but this is the great source of sanctification, "God in Christ,
   reconciling the world unto himself." And this alone can therefore be
   justifying faith.

   There may be many other acts of faith, that may be right and acceptable
   to God. But nothing is justifying faith but believing the record that
   God has given of his Son. Simply believing what God has revealed on any
   point, is an act of faith; but justifying faith fastens on

   Christ, takes hold of his atonement, and embraces him as the only
   ground of pardon and salvation. There may be faith in prayer, the faith
   that is in exercise in offering up prevailing prayer to God. But that
   is not properly justifying faith.

   3. "When are men justified?"

   This is also an inquiry often made. I answer Just all soon as they
   believe in Christ, with the faith which worketh by love. Sinner, you
   need not go home from this meeting under the wrath of Almighty God. You
   may be justified here, on the spot, now, if you will only believe in
   Christ. Your pardon is ready, made out and sealed with the broad seal
   of heaven; and the blank will be filled up, and the gracious pardon
   delivered, as soon as by one act of faith, you receive Jesus Christ as
   he is offered in the gospel.

   4. "How can I know whether I am in a state of justification or not?""

   Answer. You can know it in no way, except by inference. God has not
   revealed it in the Scriptures, that you, or any other individuals, are
   justified; but he has set down the characteristics of a justified
   person, and declared that all who have these characteristics are
   justified.

   (1.) Have you the witness of the Spirit? All who are justified have
   this. They have intercourse with the Holy Ghost, he explains the
   Scriptures to them, and leads them to see their meaning, he leads them
   to the Son and to the Father; and reveals the Son in them, and reveals
   the Father. Have you this? If you have, you are justified. If not, you
   are yet in your sins.

   (2.) Have you the fruits of the Spirit? They are love, joy, peace, and
   so on. These are matters of human consciousness; have you them? If so,
   you are justified.

   (3.) Have you peace with God? The apostle says, "Being justified by
   faith, we have peace with God." Christ says to his disciples, "My peace
   I give unto you; not as the world giveth give I unto you." And again,
   "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
   you rest." Do you find rest in Christ? Is your peace like a river,
   flowing gently through your son, and filling you with calm and heavenly
   delight? Or do you feel a sense of condemnation before God?

   Do you feel a sense of acceptance with God, of pardoned sin, of
   communion with God? This must be a matter of experience, if it exists.
   Don't imagine you can be in a justified state, and yet have no evidence
   of it. You may have great peace in reality, filling your soul, and yet
   not draw the inference that you are justified. I remember the time,
   when my mind was in a state of such sweet peace, that it seemed to me
   as if all nature was listening for God to speak; but yet I was not
   aware that this was the peace of God, or that it was evidence of my
   being in a justified state. I thought I had lost all my conviction, and
   actually undertook to bring back the sense of condemnation that I had
   before. I did not draw the inference that I was justified, till after
   the love of God was so shed abroad in my soul by the Holy Ghost, that I
   was compelled to cry out, "Lord, it is enough, I can bear no more." I
   do not believe it possible for the sense of condemnation to remain,
   where the act of pardon is already past.

   (4.) Have you the spirit of adoption? If you are justified, you are
   also adopted, as one of God's dear children, and he has sent forth his
   Spirit into your heart, so that you naturally cry, "Abba, Father!" He
   seems to you just like a father, and you want to call him father. Do
   you know any thing of this? It is one thing to call God your father in
   heaven, and another thing to feel towards him as a father. This is one
   evidence of a justified state, when God gives the spirit of adoption.

    REMARKS.

  I. I would go around to all my dear hearers tonight, and ask them one by one,
  "Are you in a state of justification? Do you honestly think you are
  justified?"

   I have briefly run over the subject, and showed what justification is
   not, and what it is, how you can be saved, and the evidences of
   justification.

   Have you it? Would you dare to die now? Suppose the loud thunders of
   the last trumpet were now to shake the universe, and you should see the
   Son of God coming to judgment are you ready? Could you look up calmly
   and say. "Father, this is a solemn sight, but Christ has died, and God
   has justified me, and who is he that shall condemn me?"

   II. If you think you ever was justified, and yet have not at present
   the evidence of it, I want to make an inquiry. Are you under the
   discipline of the covenant? If not, have you any reason to believe you
   ever were justified? God's covenant with you, if you belong to Christ,
   is this

   "If they backslide, I will visit their iniquity with the rod, and
   chasten them with stripes." Do you feel the stripes? Is God awakening
   your mind, and convicting your conscience, is he smiting you? If not,
   where are the evidences that he is dealing with you as a son? If you
   are not walking with God, and at the same time are not under
   chastisement, you cannot have any good reason to believe you are God's
   children.

   III. Those of you who have evidence that you are justified, should
   maintain your relation to God, and live up to your real privileges.
   This is immensely important. There is no virtue in being distrustful
   and unbelieving. It is important to your growth in grace. One reason
   why many Christians do not grow in grace is, that they are afraid to
   claim the privileges of God's children which belong to them. Rely upon
   it, beloved, this is no virtuous humility, but criminal unbelief. If
   you have the evidence that you are justified, take the occasion from it
   to press forward to holiness of heart, and come to God with all the
   boldness that an angel would, and know how near you are to him. It is
   your duty to do so. Why should you hold back? Why are you afraid to
   recognize the covenant of grace, in its full extent? Here are the
   provisions of your Father's house, all ready and free; and are you
   converted and justified, and restored to his favor, and yet afraid to
   sit down at your Father's table? Do not plead that you are so unworthy.

   This is nothing but self-righteousness and unbelief. True, you are so
   unworthy. But if you are justified, that is no longer a bar.

   It is now your duty to take hold of the promises as belonging to you.
   Take any promise you can find in the Bible, that is applicable, and go
   with it to your Father, and plead it before him, believing. Do you
   think he will deny it? These exceeding great and precious promises were
   given you for this very purpose, that you may become a partaker of the
   divine nature. Why then should you doubt? Come along, beloved, come
   along up to the privileges that belong to you, and take hold of the
   love, and peace, and joy, offered to you in this holy gospel.

   IV. If you are not in a state of justification, however much you have
   done, and prayed, and suffered, you are nothing. If you have not
   believed in Christ, if you have not received and trusted in him, as he
   is set forth in the gospel, you are yet in a state of condemnation and
   wrath. You may have been, for weeks and months, and even for years,
   groaning with distress, but for all that, you are still in the gall of
   bitterness. Here you see the line drawn; the moment you pass this, you
   are in a state of justification.

   Dear hearer, are you now in a state of wrath? Now believe in Christ.
   All your waiting and groaning will not bring you any nearer. Do you say
   you want more conviction? I tell you to come now to Christ. Do you say
   you must wait till you have prayed more? What is the use of praying in
   unbelief? Will the prayers of a condemned rebel avail? Do you say you
   are so unworthy? But Christ died for such as you. He comes right to you
   now, on your seat. Where do you sit? Where is that individual I am
   speaking to? Sinner, you need not wait You need not go home in your
   sins, with that heavy load on your heart. Now is the day of salvation.
   Hear the word of God. "If thou believe in thine heart in the Lord Jesus
   Christ, and if thou confess with thy mouth that God raised him from the
   dead, thou shalt be saved."

   Do you say, "What must I believe?" Believe just what God says of his
   Son; believe any of those great fundamental truths which God has
   revealed respecting the way of salvation, and rest your soul on it, and
   you shall be saved. Will you now trust Jesus Christ to dispose of you?
   Have you confidence enough in Christ to leave yourself with him, to
   dispose of your body and your soul, for time and eternity? Can you say

   "Here, Lord, I give myself away; This all that I can do?"

   Perhaps you are trying to pray yourself out of your difficulties before
   coming to Christ. Sinner, it will do no good. Now, cast yourself down
   at his feet, and leave your soul in his hands. Say to him, "Lord, I
   give myself to thee, with all my powers of body and of mind; use me and
   dispose of me as thou wilt, for thine own glory; I know thou wilt do
   right, and that is all I desire." Will you do it?
     __________________________________________________________________

      Do are then make void the law through faith? God forbid; yea, we establish
      the law. Romans 3:31.

   The apostle had been proving that all mankind, both Jews and Gentiles,
   were in their sins, and refuting the doctrine so generally entertained
   by the Jews, that they were a holy people and saved by their works. He
   showed that justification can never be by works, but by faith. He then
   anticipates an objection like this, "Are we to understand you as
   teaching that the law of God is abrogated and set aside by this plan of
   justification?" "By no means," says the apostle, "we rather establish
   the law." In treating of this subject, I design to pursue the following
   order:

   I. Show that the gospel method of justification does not set aside or
   repeal the law. II. That it rather establishes the law, by producing
   true obedience to it, and as the only means that does this.

   The greatest objection to the doctrine of Justification by Faith has
   always been, that it is inconsistent with good morals, conniving at
   sin, and opening the flood-gates of iniquity. It has been said, that to
   maintain that men are not to depend on their own good behavior for
   salvation, but; are to be saved by faith in another, is calculated to
   make men regardless of good morals, and to encourage them to live in
   sin, depending on Christ to justify them. By others, it has been
   maintained that the gospel does in fact release from obligation to obey
   the moral law, so that a more lax morality is permitted under the
   gospel than was allowed under the law.

  I. I am to show that the gospel method of justifications does not set aside
  the moral law.

   1. It cannot be that this method of justification sets aside the moral
   law, because the gospel everywhere enforces obedience to the law, and
   lays down the same standard of holiness.

   Jesus Christ adopted the very words of the moral law, "Thou shalt love
   the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
   all thy mind, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thyself."

   2. The conditions of the gospel are designed to sustain the moral law.

   The gospel requires repentance as the condition of salvation. What is
   repentance? The renunciation of sin. The man must repent of his
   breaches of the law of God, and return to obedience to the law. This is
   tantamount to a requirement of obedience.

   3. The gospel maintains that the law is right.

   If it did not maintain the law to its full extent, it might be said
   that Christ is the minister of sin.

   4. By the gospel plan, the sanctions of the gospel are added to the
   sanctions of the law, to enforce obedience to the law.

   The apostle says, "He that despised Moses' law, died without mercy
   under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,
   shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God,
   and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was
   sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of
   grace?"

   Thus adding the awful sanctions of the gospel to those of the law, to
   enforce obedience to the precepts of the law.

  II. I am to show that the doctrine of justification by faith produces
  sanctification, by producing the only true obedience to the law.

   By this I mean, that when the mind understands this plan, and exercises
   faith in it, it naturally produces sanctification. Sanctification is
   holiness, and holiness is nothing but obedience to the law, consisting
   in love to God and love to man.

   In support of the proposition that justification by faith produces true
   obedience to the law of God, my first position is, that sanctification
   never can be produced among selfish or wicked beings, by the law
   itself, separate from the considerations of the gospel, or the motives
   connected with justification by faith.

   The motives of the law did not restrain those beings from committing
   sin, and it is absurd to suppose the same motives can "reclaim" them
   from sin, when they have fallen under the power of selfishness, and
   when sin is a confirmed habit. The motives of the law lose a part of
   their influence, when a being is once fallen. They even exert an
   opposite influence. The motives of the law, as viewed by a selfish
   mind, have a tendency to cause sin to abound. This is the experience of
   every sinner. When he sees the spirituality of the law, and does not
   see the incentives of the gospel, it raises the pride of his heart, and
   hardens him in his rebellion. The case of the devil is an exhibition of
   what the law can do, with all its principles and sanctions, upon a
   wicked heart. He understands the law, sees its reasonableness, has
   experienced the blessedness of obedience, and knows full well that to
   return to obedience would restore his peace of mind. This he knows
   better than any sinner of our race, who never was holy, can know it,
   and yet it presents to his mind no such motives as reclaim him, but on
   the contrary, drive him to a returnless distance from obedience.

   When obedience to the law is held forth to the sinner as the condition
   of life, immediately it sets him upon making self-righteous efforts. In
   almost every instance, the first effort of the awakened sinner is to
   obey the law. He thinks he must first make himself better, in some way,
   before he may embrace the gospel. He has no idea of the simplicity of
   the gospel plan of salvation by faith, offering eternal life as a mere
   gratuitous gift. Alarm the sinner with the penalty of the law, and he
   naturally, and by the very laws of his mind, sets himself to do better,
   to amend his life, and in some self-righteous manner obtain eternal
   life, under the influence of slavish fear. And the more the law presses
   him, the greater are his pharisaical efforts, while hope is left to
   him, that if he obeys he may be accepted. What else could you expect of
   him? He is purely selfish, and though he ought to submit at once to
   God, yet, as he does not understand the gospel terms of salvation, and
   his mind is of course first turned to the object of getting away from
   the danger of the penalty, he tries to get up to heaven some other way.
   I do not believe there is an instance in history, of a man who has
   submitted to God, until he has seen that salvation must be by faith,
   and that his own self-righteous strivings have no tendency to save him.

   Again; if you undertake to produce holiness by legal motives, the very
   fear of failure has the effect to divert attention from the objects of
   love, from God and Christ. The sinner is all the while compassing Mount
   Sinai, and taking heed to his footsteps, to see how near he comes to
   obedience; and how can he get into the spirit of heaven?

   Again; the penalty of the law has no tendency to produce love in the
   first instance. It may increase love in those who already have it, when
   they contemplate it as an exhibition of God's infinite holiness. The
   angels in heaven, and good men on earth, contemplate its propriety and
   fitness, and see in it the expression of the good will of God to his
   creatures, and it appears amiable and lovely, and increases their
   delight in God and their confidence toward him. But it is right the
   reverse with the selfish man. He sees the penalty hanging over his own
   head, and no way of escape, and it is not in mind to become enamored
   with the Being that holds the thunderbolt over his devoted head. From
   the nature of mind, he will flee from him, not to him. It seems never
   to have been dreamed of, by the inspired writers, that the law could
   sanctify men. The law is given rather to slay than to make alive, to
   cut off men's self-righteous hopes for ever, and compel them to flee to
   Christ.

   Again; Sinners, under the naked law, and irrespective of the gospel I
   say, sinners, naturally and necessarily, and of right, under such
   circumstances, view God as an irreconcilable enemy. They are wholly
   selfish; and apart from the considerations of the gospel, they view God
   just as the devil views him. No motive in the law can be exhibited to a
   selfish mind that will beget love. Can the influence of penalty do it?

   A strange plan of reformation this, to send men to hell to reform them!
   Let them go on in sin and rebellion to the end of life, and then be
   punished until he becomes holy. I wonder the devil has not become holy!
   He has suffered long enough, he has been in hell these thousands of
   years, and he is no better than he was. The reason is, there is no
   gospel there, and no Holy Spirit to apply the truth, and the penalty
   only confirms his rebellion.

   Again: The doctrine of justification can relieve these difficulties. It
   can produce, and has produced, real obedience to the precept of the
   law. Justification by faith does not set aside the law as a rule of
   duty, but only sets aside the penalty of the law. And the preaching of
   justification as a mere gratuity, bestowed on the simple act of faith,
   is the only way in which obedience to the law is ever brought about.
   This I shall now show from the following considerations:

   1. It relieves the mind from the pressure of those considerations that
   naturally tend to confirm selfishness.

   While the mind is looking only at the law, it only feels the influence
   of hope and fear, perpetuating purely selfish efforts. But
   justification by faith annihilates this spirit of bondage. The apostle
   says, "We have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear." This
   plan of salvation begets love and gratitude to God, and leads the souls
   to taste the sweets of holiness.

   2. It relieves the mind also from the necessity of making its own
   salvation its supreme object.

   The believer in the gospel plan of salvation finds salvation, full and
   complete, including both sanctification and eternal life, already
   prepared; and instead of being driven to the life of a Pharisee in
   religion, of laborious and exhausting effort, he receives it as a free
   gift, a mere gratuity, and is now left free to exercise disinterested
   benevolence, and to live and labor for the salvation of others, leaving
   his own soul unreservedly to Christ.

   3. The fact that God has provided and given him salvation as a
   gratuity, is calculated to awaken in the believer a concern for others,
   when he sees them dying for the want of this salvation, that they may
   be brought to the knowledge of the truth and be saved. How far from
   every selfish motive are those influences. It exhibits God, not as the
   law exhibits him, as an irreconcilable enemy, but as a grieved and
   offended Father, willing to be reconciled, nay, very desirous that his
   subjects should become reconciled, to him and live.

   This is calculated to beget love. It exhibits God as making the
   greatest sacrifice to reconcile sinners to himself; and from no other
   motive than a pure and disinterested regard to their happiness. Try
   this in your own family. The law represents God as armed with wrath,
   and determined to punish the sinner, without hope or help. The gospel
   represents him as offended, indeed, but yet so anxious they should
   return to him, that he has made the greatest conceivable sacrifices,
   out of pure disinterested love to his wandering children.

   I once heard a father say, that he had tried in his family to imitate
   the government of God, and when his child did wrong he reasoned with
   him and showed him his faults; and when he was fully convinced and
   confounded and condemned, so that he had not a word to say, then the
   father asked him, Do you deserve to be punished? Yes, sir. I know it,
   and now if I were to let you go, what influence would it have over the
   other children? Rather than do that, I will take the punishment myself.
   So he laid the ferule on himself, and it had the most astonishing
   effect on the mind of the child. He had never tried anything so
   perfectly subduing to the mind as this. And from the laws of mind, it
   must be so. If affects the mind in a manner entirely different from the
   naked law.

   4. It brings the mind under an entire new set of influences, and leaves
   it free to weigh the reasons for holiness, and decide accordingly.

   Under the law, none but motives of hope and fear can operate on the
   sinner's mind. But under the gospel, the influence of hope and fear are
   set aside, and a new set of considerations presented, with a view of
   God's entire character, in all the attractions he can command. It gives
   the most heart-breaking, sin-subduing views of God. It presents him to
   the senses in human nature. It exhibits his disinterestedness. The way
   Satan prevailed against our first parents was by leading them to doubt
   God's disinterestedness. The gospel demonstrates the truth, and
   corrects this lie.

   The law represents God as the inexorable enemy of the sinner, as
   securing happiness to all who perfectly obey, but thundering down wrath
   on all who disobey. The gospel reveals new features in God's character,
   not known before. Doubtless the gospel increases the love of all holy
   beings, and gives greater joy to the angels in heaven, greatly
   increasing their love, and confidence, and admiration, when they see
   God's amazing pity and forbearance towards the guilty. The law drove
   the devils to hell, and it drove Adam and Eve from Paradise. But when
   the blessed spirits see the same holy God waiting on rebels, nay
   opening his own bosom, and giving his beloved Son for them, and taking
   such unwearied pains for thousands of years to save sinners, do you
   think it has no influence in strengthening the motives in their minds
   to obedience and love?

   The devil, who is a purely selfish being, is always accusing others of
   being selfish. He accused Job of this: "Doth Job fear God for naught?"
   He accused God to our first parents, of being selfish, and that the
   only reason for his forbidding them to eat of the tree of knowledge was
   the fear that they might come to know as much as himself. The gospel
   shows what God is. If he were selfish, he would not take such pains to
   save those whom he might, with perfect ease, crush to hell. Nothing is
   so calculated to make selfish persons ashamed of their selfishness, as
   to see disinterested benevolence in others. Hence the wicked are always
   trying to appear disinterested. Let the selfish individual who has any
   heart, see true benevolence in others, and it is like coals of fire on
   his head. The wise men understood this, when he said, "If thine enemy
   hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing, thou
   shalt heap coals of fire on his head." Nothing is so calculated to cut
   down an enemy, and win him over, and make him a friend.

   This is what the gospel does to sinners. It shows that notwithstanding
   all that they have done to God, God still exercises toward them
   disinterested love. When he sees God stooping from heaven to save him,
   and understands that it is indeed true, oh, how it melts and breaks
   down the heart, strikes a death-blow to selfishness, and wins him over
   to unbounded confidence and holy love. God has so constituted the mind,
   that it must necessarily do homage to virtue. It must do this, as long
   as it retains the powers of moral agency. This is as true in hell as in
   heaven. The devil feels this. When an individual sees that God has no
   interested motives to condemn him, when he sees that God offers
   salvation as a mere gratuity, through faith, he cannot but feel
   admiration of God's benevolence. His selfishness is crushed, the law
   has done its work, he sees that all his selfish endeavors have done no
   good; and the next step is for his heart to go out in disinterested
   love.

   Suppose a man was under sentence of death for rebel lion, and had tried
   many expedients to recommend himself to the government, but failed,
   because they were all hollow hearted and selfish. He sees that the
   government understands his motives, and that he is not really
   reconciled. He knows himself that they were all hypocritical and
   selfish, moved by the hope of favor or the fear of wrath, and that the
   government is more and more incensed at his hypocrisy. Just now let a
   paper be brought to him from the government, offering him a free pardon
   on the simple condition that he would receive it as mere gratuity,
   making no account of his own works what influence will it have on his
   mind? The moment he finds the penalty set aside, and that he has no
   need to go to work by any self-righteous efforts, his mind is filled
   with admiration. Now, let it appear that the government has made the
   greatest sacrifices to procure this; his selfishness is slain, and he
   melts down like a child at his sovereign's feet, ready to obey the law
   because he loves his sovereign.

   5. All true obedience turns on faith. It secures all the requisite
   influences to produce sanctification. It gives the doctrines of
   eternity access to the mind and a hold on the heart. In this world the
   motives of time are addressed to the senses. The motives that influence
   the spirits of the just in heaven do not reach us through the senses.
   But when faith is exercised, the wall is broken down, and the vast
   realities of eternity act on the mind here with the same kind of
   influence that they have in eternity. Mind is mind, every where. And
   were it not for the darkness of unbelief, men would live here just as
   they do in the eternal world. Sinners here would rage and blaspheme,
   just as they do in hell; and saints would love and obey and praise,
   just as they do in heaven. Now, faith makes all these things realities,
   it swings the mind loose from the clogs of the world, and he beholds
   God, and apprehends his law and his love. In no other way can these
   motives take hold on the mind. What a mighty action must it have on the
   mind, when it takes hold of the love of Christ! What a life-giving
   power, when the pure motives of the gospel crowd into the mind and stir
   it up with energy divine! Every Christian knows, that in proportion to
   the strength of his faith, his mind is buoyant and active, and when his
   faiths flags, his soul is dark and listless. It is faith alone that
   places the things of time and eternity in their true comparison, and
   sets down the things of time and sense at their real value. It breaks
   up the delusions of the mind, the soul shakes itself from its errors
   and clogs, and it rises up in communion with God.

      REMARKS.

  I. It is as unphilosophical as it is unscriptural to attempt to convert and
  sanctify the minds of sinners without the motives of the gospel.

   You may press the sinner with the law, and make him see his own
   character, the greatness and justice of God, and his ruined condition.
   But hide the motives of the gospel from his mind, and it is all in
   vain.

  II. It is absurd to think that the offers of the gospel are calculated to
  beget a selfish hope.

   Some are afraid to throw out upon the sinner's mind all the character
   of God; and they try to make him submit to God, by casting him down in
   despair. This is not only against the gospel, but it is absurd in
   itself. It is absurd to think that, in order to destroy the selfishness
   of a sinner, you must hide from him the knowledge of how much God loves
   and pities him, and how great sacrifices he has made to save him.

  III. So far is it from being true that sinners are in danger of getting false
  hopes if they are allowed to know the real compassion of God, while you hide
  this, it is impossible to give him any other than a false hope.

   Withholding from the sinner who is writhing under conviction, the fact
   that God has provided salvation as a mere gratuity, is the very way to
   confirm his selfishness; and if he gets any hope, it must be a false
   one. To press him to submission by the law alone, is to set him to
   build a self-righteous foundation.

  IV. So far as we can see, salvation by grace, not bestowed in any degree for
  our own works, is the only possible way of reclaiming selfish beings.

   Suppose salvation was not altogether gratuitous, but that some degree
   of good works was taken into the account, and for those good works in
   part we were justified just so far as this consideration is in the
   mind, just so far there is a stimulus to selfishness. You must bring
   the sinner to see that he is entirely dependent on free grace, and that
   a full and complete justification is bestowed, on the first act of
   faith, as a mere gratuity, and no part of it as an equivalent for any
   thing he is to do. This alone dissolves the influence of selfishness,
   and secures holy action.

  V. If all this is true, sinners should be put in the fullest possible
  possession, and in the speediest manner, of the whole plan of salvation.

   They should be made to see the law, and their own guilt, and that they
   have no way to save themselves; and then, the more fully the whole
   length and breadth, and height, and depth of the love of God should be
   opened, the more effectually will you crush his selfishness, and subdue
   his soul in love to God. Do not be afraid, in conversing with sinners,
   to show the whole plan of salvation, and give the fullest possible
   exhibition of the infinite compassion of God. Show him that,
   notwithstanding his guilt, the Son of God is knocking at the door and
   beseeching him to be reconciled to God.

  VI. You see why so many convicted sinners continue so long compassing Mount
  Sinai, with self-righteous efforts to save themselves by their own works.

   How often you find sinners trying to get more feeling, or waiting till
   they have made more prayers and made greater efforts, and expecting to
   recommend themselves to God in this way. Why is all this? The sinner
   needs to be driven off from this, and made to see that he is all the
   while looking for salvation under the law. He must be made to see that
   all this is superseded by the gospel offering him all he wants as a
   mere gratuity. He must hear Jesus saying, "Ye will not come unto me
   that ye may have life:

   O, no, you are willing to pray, and go to meeting, and read the Bible,
   or anything, but come unto me. Sinner, this is the road; I am the way,
   and the truth, and the life. No man cometh to the Father but by me. I
   am the resurrection and the life. I am the light of the world. Here,
   sinner, is what you want.

   Instead of trying your self-righteous prayers and efforts, here is what
   you are looking for, only believe and you shall be saved."

  VII. You see why so many professors of religion are always in the dark.

   They are looking at their sins, confining their observations to
   themselves, and losing sight of the fact, that there have only to take
   right hold of Jesus Christ, and throw themselves upon him, and all is
   well.

  VIII. The law is useful to convict men; but, as a matter of fact, it never
  breaks the heart.

   The Gospel alone does that. The degree in which a convert is broken
   hearted, is in proportion to the degree of clearness with which he
   apprehends the gospel.

  IX. Converts, if you call them so, who entertain a hope under legal preaching,
  may have an intellectual approbation of the law, and a sort of dry zeal, but
  never make mellow, broken hearted Christians.

   If theyhave not seen God in the attitude in which he is exhibited in
   the gospel, they are not such Christians as you will see sometimes,
   with the tear trembling in their eye, and their frames shaking with
   emotion, at the name of Jesus.

  X. Sinners under conviction, and professors in darkness, must be led right to
  Christ, and made to take hold of the plan of salvation by faith.

   You cannot do them good in any other way.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.

   I have more than once had occasion to refer to this chapter, and have
   read some portions of it and made remarks. But I have not been able to
   go into a consideration of it so fully as I wished, and therefore
   thought I would make it the subject of a separate lecture. In giving my
   views I shall pursue the following order:

   I. Mention the different opinions that have prevailed in the church
   concerning this passage.

   II. Show the importance of understanding this portion of scripture
   aright, or of knowing which of these prevailing opinions is the true
   one.

   III. Lay down several facts and principles which have a bearing on the
   exposition of this passage.

   IV. Refer to some rules of interpretation which ought always to be
   observed in interpreting either the Scripture or any other writing or
   testimony.

   V. Give my own views of the real meaning of the passage, with the
   reasons.

   I shall confine myself chiefly to the latter part of the chapter, as
   that has been chiefly the subject of dispute. You see from the manner
   in which I have laid out my work, that I design to simplify the subject
   as much as possible, so as to bring it within the compass of a single
   lecture. Otherwise I might make a volume, so much having been written
   to show the meaning of this chapter.

  I. I am to show what are the principal opinions that have prevailed concerning
  the application of this chapter.

   1. One opinion that has extensively prevailed, and still prevails, is,
   that the latter part of the chapter is an epitome of Christian
   experience.

   It has been supposed to describe the situation and exercises of a
   Christian, and designed to exhibit the Christian warfare with
   indwelling sin. It is to be observed, however, that this is,
   comparatively, a modern opinion. No writer is known to have held this
   view of the chapter, for centuries after it was written. According to
   Professor Stuart, who has examined the subject more thoroughly than any
   other man in America, Augustine was the first writer that exhibited
   this interpretation, and he resorted to it in his controversy with
   Pelagius.

   2. The only other interpretation given is that which prevailed in the
   first centuries, and which is still generally adopted on the continent
   of Europe, as well as by a considerable number of writers in England
   and in America, that; this passage describes the experience of a sinner
   under conviction, who was acting under the motives of the law, and not
   yet brought to the experience of the gospel. In this country, the most
   prevalent opinion is, that the seventh chapter of Romans delineates the
   experience of a Christian.

  II. I am to show the importance of a right understanding of this passage.

   A right understanding of this passage must be fundamental. If this
   passage in fact describes a sinner under conviction, or a purely legal
   experience, and if a person supposing that it is a Christian
   experience, finds his own experience to correspond with it, his mistake
   is a fatal one. It must be a fatal error, to rest in his experience as
   that of a real Christian, because it corresponds with the seventh of
   Romans, if Paul in fact is giving only the experience of a sinner under
   legal motives and considerations.

  III. I will lay down some principles and facts that have a bearing on the
  elucidation of this subject.

   1. It is true that mankind act, in all cases, and frost the nature of
   mind, must always act, as on the whole they feel to be preferable

   Or, in other words, the will governs the conduct. Men never act against
   their will. The will governs the motion of the limbs. Voluntary beings
   cannot act contrary to their will.

   2. Men often desire what, on the whole they do not choose.

   The desires and the will are often opposed to each other. The conduct
   is governed by the choice, not by the desires. The desires may be
   inconsistent with the choice. You may desire to go to some other place
   tonight, and yet on the whole choose to remain here. Perhaps you desire
   very strongly to be somewhere else, and yet choose to remain in
   meeting. A man wishes to go a journey to some place. Perhaps he desires
   it strongly. It may be very important to his business or his ambition.
   But his family are sick, or some other object requires him to be at
   home, and on the whole he chooses to remain. In all cases, the conduct
   follows the actual choice.

   3. Regeneration, or conversion, is a change in the choice.

   It is a change in the supreme controlling choice of the mind. The
   regenerated or converted person prefers God's glory to everything else.
   He chooses it as the supreme object of affection. This is a change of
   heart. Before, he chose his own interest or happiness, as his supreme
   end. Now, he chooses God's service in preference to his own interest.
   When a person is truly born again, his choice is habitually right, and
   of course his conduct is in the main right.

   The force of temptation may produce an occasional strong choice, or
   even a succession of wrong choices, but his habitual course of action
   is right. The will, or choice, of a converted person is habitually
   right, and of course his conduct is so. If this is not true, I ask, in
   what does the converted differ from the unconverted person? If it is
   not, the character of the converted person, that he habitually does the
   commandments of God, what is his character? But I presume this position
   will not be disputed by any one who believes in the doctrine of
   regeneration.

   4. Moral agents are so constituted, that they naturally and necessarily
   approve of what is right.

   A moral agent is one who possesses understanding, will, and conscience.
   Conscience is the power of discerning the difference of moral objects.
   It will not be disputed that a moral agent can be led to see the
   difference between right and wrong, so that his moral nature shall
   approve of what is right. Otherwise, a sinner never can be brought
   under conviction. If he has not a moral nature, that can see and highly
   approve the law of God, and justify the penalty, he cannot be
   convicted.

   For this is conviction, to see the goodness of the law that he has
   broken and the justice of the penalty he has incurred. But in fact,
   there is not a moral agent, in heaven, earth, or hell, that cannot be
   made to see that the law of God is right, and whose conscience does not
   approve the law.

   5. Men may not only approve the law, as right, but they may often, when
   it is viewed abstractly and without reference to its bearing on
   themselves, take real pleasure in contemplating it.

   This is one great source of self-deception. Men view the law of God in
   the abstract, and love it. When no selfish reason is present for
   opposing it, they take pleasure in viewing it. They approve of what is
   right, and condemn wickedness, in the abstract. All men do this, when
   no selfish reason is pressing on them. Who ever found a man so wicked,
   that he approved of evil in the abstract? Where was a moral being ever
   found that approved the character of the devil, or that approved of
   other wicked men, unconnected with himself? How often do you hear
   wicked men express the greatest abhorrence and detestation of enormous
   wickedness in others. If their passions are in no way enlisted in favor
   of error or of wrong, men always stand up for what is right. And this
   merely constitutional approbation of what is right, may amount even to
   delight, when they do not see the relations of right interfering in any
   manner with their own selfishness.

   6. In this constitutional approbation of truth and the law of God, and
   the delight which naturally arises from it, there is no virtue.

   It is only what belongs to man's moral nature. It arises naturally from
   the constitution of the mind. Mind is constitutionally capable of
   seeing the beauty of virtue. And so far from there being any virtue in
   it, it is in fact only a clearer proof of the strength of their
   depravity, that when they know the right, and see its excellence, they
   do not obey it. It is not then that impenitent sinners have in them
   something that is holy. But their wickedness is herein seen to be so
   much the greater. For the wickedness of sin is in proportion to the
   light that is enjoyed. And when we find that men may not only see the
   excellence of the law of God, but even strongly approve of it and take
   delight in it, and yet not obey it, it shows how desperately wicked
   they are, and makes sin appear exceeding sinful.

   7. It is a common use of language for persons to say, "I would do so
   and so, but cannot," when they only mean to be understood as desiring
   it, but not as actually choosing to do it. And so to say, "I could not
   do so," when they only mean that they would not do it, and, they could
   if they would.

   Not long since, I asked a minister to preach for me next Sabbath. He
   answered, "I can't." I found out afterwards that he could if he would.
   I asked a merchant to take a certain price for a piece of goods. He
   said, "I can't do it." What did he mean? That he had not power to
   accept of such a price? Not at all. He could if he would, but he did
   not choose to do it. You will see the bearing of these remarks, when I
   come to read the chapter. I proceed now.

   To give several rules of interpretation, that are applicable to the
   interpretation not only of the Bible, but of all written instruments,
   and to all evidence whatever.

   There are certain rules of evidence which all men are bound to apply,
   in ascertaining the meaning of instruments and the testimony of
   witnesses, and of all writings.

   1. We are always to put that construction on language which is required
   by the nature of the subject.

   We are bound always to understand a person's language as it is
   applicable to the subject of discourse. Much of the language of common
   life may be tortured into any thing, if you lose sight of the subject,
   and take the liberty to interpret it without reference to what they are
   speaking of. How much injury has been done, by interpreting separate
   passages and single expressions in the scriptures, in violation of this
   principle. It is chiefly by overlooking this simple rule, that the
   scriptures have been tortured into the support of errors and
   contradictions innumerable and absurd beyond all calculation. This rule
   is applicable to all statements. Courts of justice never would allow
   such perversions as have been committed upon the Bible.

   2. If a person's language will admit, we are bound always to construe
   it so as to make him consistent with himself.

   Unless you observe this rule, you can scarcely converse five minutes
   with any individual on any subject and not make him contradict himself.
   If you do not hold to this rule, how can one man ever communicate his
   ideas so that another man will understand them? How can a witness ever
   make known the facts to the jury, if his language is to be tortured at
   pleasure, without the restraints of this rule?

   3. In interpreting a person's language, we are always to keep in view
   the point to which he is speaking.

   We are to understand the scope of his argument, the object he has in
   view, and the point to which he is speaking. Otherwise we shall of
   course not understand his language. Suppose I were to take up a book,
   any book, and not keep my eye on the object the writer had in view in
   making it, and the point at which he is aiming, I never can understand
   that book. It is easy to see how endless errors have grown out of a
   practice of interpreting the Scriptures in disregard of the first
   principles of interpretation.

   4. When you understand the point to which a person is speaking, you are
   to understand him as speaking to that point; and not put a construction
   on his language unconnected with his object, or inconsistent with it.

   By losing sight of this rule, you may make nonsense of every thing. You
   are bound always to interpret language in the light of the subject to
   which it is applied, or about which it is spoken.

  V. Having laid down these rules and principles, I proceed, in the light of
  them, to give my own view of the meaning of the passage, with the reasons for
  it. But first I will make a remark or two.

   1st. Remark. Whether the apostle was speaking of himself in this
   passage, or whether he is supposing a case, is not material to the
   right interpretation of the language.

   It is supposed by many, that because he speaks in the first person, he
   is to be understood as referring to himself. But it is a common
   practice, when we are discussing general principles, or arguing a
   point, to suppose a case by way of illustration, or to establish a
   point. And it is very natural to state it in the first person, without
   at all intending to be understood, and in fact without ever being
   understood, as declaring an actual occurrence, or an experience of our
   own. The apostle Paul was here pursuing a close train of argument, and
   he introduces this simply by way of illustration. And it is no way
   material whether it is his own actual experience, or a case supposed.

   If he is speaking of himself, or if he is speaking of another person,
   or if he is supposing a case, he does it with a design to show a
   general principle of conduct, and that all persons under like
   circumstances would do the same. Whether he is speaking of a Christian,
   or of an impenitent sinner, he lays down a general principle.

   The apostle James, in the 3rd chapter, speaks in the first person; even
   in administering reproof. "My brethren, be not many masters, knowing
   that we shall receive the greater condemnation. For in many things we
   offend all."

   "Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men,
   which are made after the similitude of God."

   The apostle Paul often says, "I," and uses the first person, when
   discussing and illustrating general principles: "All things are lawful
   unto me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for
   me, but I will not be brought under the power of any." And again,
   "Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my
   liberty judged of another man's conscience? For if I by grace be a
   partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks? For
   now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know
   in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. And now abideth
   faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is
   charity." So also, "For if I build again the things which I destroyed,
   I make myself a transgressor." In 1 Corinthians 4:6, he explains
   exactly how he uses illustrations, "And these things, brethren, I have
   in a figure transferred to myself, and to Apollos, for your sakes: that
   ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is written,
   that no one of you be puffed up for one against another."

   2nd. Remark. Much of the language which the apostle uses here, is
   applicable to the case of a backslider, who has lost all but the form
   of religion. He has left his first love, and has in fact fallen under
   the influence of legal motives, of hope and fear, just like an
   impenitent sinner. If there be such a character as a real backslider,
   who has been a real convert, he is then actuated by the same motives as
   the sinner, and the same language may be equally applicable to both.
   And therefore the fact that some of the language before us is
   applicable to a Christian who has become a backslider, does not prove
   at all that the experience here described is Christian experience, but
   only that a backslider and a sinner are in many respects alike. I do
   not hesitate to say this much, at least: that no one, who was conscious
   that he was actuated by love to God could ever have thought of applying
   this chapter to himself. If any one is not in the exercise of love to
   God, this describes his character; and whether he is backslider or
   sinner, it is all the same thing.

   3rd. Remark. Some of the expressions here used by the apostle are
   supposed to describe the case of a believer who is not an habitual
   backslider, but who is overcome by temptation and passion for a time,
   and speaks of himself as if he were all wrong. A man is tempted, we are
   told, when he is drawn away by his own lusts, and enticed. And in that
   state, no doubt, he might find expressions here that would describe his
   own experience, while under such influence. But that proves nothing in
   regard to the design of the passage, for while he is in this state, he
   is so far under a certain influence, and the impenitent sinner is all
   the time under just such influence. The same language, therefore, may
   be applicable to both, without inconsistency.

   But although some expressions may bear this plausible construction, yet
   a view of the whole passage makes it evident that it cannot be a
   delineation of Christian experience. My own opinion therefore is, that
   the apostle designed here to represent the experience of a sinner, not
   careless, but strongly convicted, and yet not converted, The reasons
   are these:

   1. Because the apostle is here manifestly describing the habitual
   character of some one; and this one is wholly under the dominion of the
   flesh. It is not as a whole a description of one who, under the power
   of present temptation, is acting inconsistently with his general
   character, but his general character is so. It is one who uniformly
   falls into sin, notwithstanding his approval of the law.

   2. It would have been entirely irrelevant to his purpose, to state the
   experience of a Christian as an illustration of his argument. That was
   not what was needed. He was laboring to vindicate the law of God, in
   its influence on a carnal mind. In a previous chapter he had stated the
   fact, that justification was only by faith, and not by works of law. In
   this seventh chapter, he maintains not only that justification is by
   faith, but also that sanctification is only by faith. "Know ye not
   brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law) how that the law hath
   dominion over a man as long as he liveth? So then, if while her husband
   liveth, she be married to another man, she shall be called an
   adulteress; but if her husband be dead, she is free from that law; so
   that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man." What
   is the use of all this? Why, this,

   "Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body
   of Christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who is
   raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God." While
   you were under the law you were bound to obey the law, and hold to the
   terms of the law for justification. But now being made free from the
   law, as a rule of judgment, you are no longer influenced by legal
   considerations, of hope and fear, for Christ to whom you are married,
   has set aside the penalty, that by faith ye might be justified before
   God.

   "For when we were in the flesh," that is, in an unconverted state, "the
   motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to
   bring forth fruit unto death. But now we are delivered from the law,
   that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness
   of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter." Here he is stating
   the real condition of a Christian, that he serves in newness of spirit
   and not in the oldness of the letter. He had found that the fruit of
   the law was only death and by the gospel he had been brought into true
   subjection to Christ. What is the objection to this? "What shall we say
   then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the
   law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not
   covet. And the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be
   unto death." The law was enacted that people might live by it, if they
   would perfectly obey it; but when we were in the flesh, we found it
   unto death. "For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me,
   and by it slew me. Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy,
   and just, and good." Now he brings up the objection again. How can
   anything that is good be made death unto you? "Was, then, that which is
   good made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might appear sin,
   working death in me by that which is good; that sin by the commandment
   might be exceeding sinful." And he vindicates the law, by showing that
   it is not the fault of the law, but the fault of sin, and that this
   very result shows at once the excellence of the law and the exceeding
   sinfulness of sin. Sin must be a horrible thing, if it can work such a
   perversion, as to take the good law of God and make it the means of
   death.

   "For we know that the law is spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under
   sin." Here is the hinge, on which the whole questions turns. Now mark;
   the apostle is here vindicating the law against the objection, that if
   the law is means of death to sinners it cannot be good. Against this
   objection, he goes to show, that all its action on the mind of the
   sinner proves it to be good. Keeping his eye on this point, he argues,
   that the law is good, and that the evil comes from the motions of sin
   in our members. Now he comes to that part which is supposed to
   delineate a Christian experience, and which is the subject of
   controversy. He begins by saying "the law is spiritual but I am
   carnal." This word "carnal" he uses once, and only once, in reference
   to Christians, and then it was in reference to persons who were in a
   low state in religion. "For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is
   among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
   walk as men." These Christians had backslidden, and acted as if they
   were not converted persons, but were carnal. The term itself is
   generally used to signify the worst of sinners. Paul here defines it
   so; "carnal, sold under sin." Could that be said of Paul himself, at
   the time he wrote this epistle? Was that his own experience? Was he
   sold under sin? Was that true of the great apostle? No, but he was
   vindicating the law, and he uses an illustration, by supposing a case.
   He goes on, "For that which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that I
   do not; but what I hate, that do I."

   Here you see the application of the principles I have laid down. In the
   interpretation of this word "would," we are not to understand it of the
   choice or will, but only a desire. Otherwise the apostle contradicts a
   plain matter of fact, which every body knows to be true, that the will
   governs the conduct. Professor Stuart has very properly rendered the
   word desire; what I desire, I do not, but what I disapprove, that I do.
   Then comes the conclusion, "If, then, I do that which I would not, I
   consent unto the law, that it is good. "If I do that which I
   disapprove, if I disapprove of my own conduct, if I condemn myself, I
   thereby bear testimony that the law is good. Now, keep your eye on the
   object the apostle has in view and read the next verse, "Now then it is
   no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me." Here he, as it
   were, divides himself against himself, or speaks of himself as
   possessing two natures, or, as some of the heathen philosophers taught,
   as having two souls, one which approves the good and another which
   loves and chooses evil. "For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh)
   dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to
   perform that which is good I find not." Here "to will" means to
   approve, for if men really will to do a thing, they do it. This
   everybody knows. Where the language will admit, we are bound to
   interpret it so as to make it consistent with known facts. If you
   understand "to will" literally, you involve the apostle in the
   absurdity of saying that he willed what he did not do, and so acted
   contrary to his own will, which contradicts a notorious fact. The
   meaning must be desire. Then it coincides with the experience of every
   convicted sinner. He knows what he ought to do, and he strongly
   approves it, but he is not ready to do it. Suppose I were to call on
   you to do some act. Suppose, for instance, I were to call on those of
   you who are impenitent, to come forward and take that seat, that we
   might see who you are, and pray for you, and should show you your sins
   and that it is your duty to submit to God, some of you would exclaim,
   "I know it is my duty, and I greatly desire to do it, but I cannot."
   What do you mean by it? Why, simply, that on the whole, the balance of
   your will is on the other side.

   In the 20th verse he repeats what he had said before, "Now if I do that
   I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me."
   Is that the habitual character and experience of a Christian? I admit
   that a Christian may fall so low that this language may apply to him;
   but if this is his general character, how does it differ from that of
   an impenitent sinner? If this is the habitual character of a Christian,
   there is not a word of truth in the scripture representations, that the
   saints are those who really obey God; for here is one called a
   Christian, of whom it is said expressly that he never does obey.

   "I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
   me." Here he speaks of the action of the carnal propensities, as being
   so constant and so prevalent that he calls it a "law." "For I delight
   in the law of God after the inward man." Here is the great stumbling
   block. Can it be said of an impenitent sinner that he "delights" in the
   law of God? I answer, Yes. I know the expression is strong, but the
   apostle was using strong language all along, on both sides.

   It is no stronger language than the prophet Isaiah uses in chapter 58.
   He was describing as wicked and rebellious a generation as ever lived.
   He says, "Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
   show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins."
   Yet he goes on to say of this very people, "Yet they seek me daily, and
   delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and
   forsook not the ordinance of their God; they ask of me the ordinances
   of justice; they take delight in approaching to God." Here is one
   instance of impenitent sinners manifestly delighting in approaching to
   God. So in Ezekiel 33:32. "And lo thou art unto them as a very lovely
   song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
   instrument: for they hear thy words, but do them not." The prophet had
   been telling how wicked they were. "And they come unto thee as the
   people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy
   words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much
   love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness." Here were
   impenitent sinners, plainly enough, yet they love to hear the eloquent
   prophet. How often do ungodly sinners delight in eloquent preaching or
   powerful reasoning, by some able minister! It is to them an
   intellectual feast. And sometimes they are so pleased with it, as
   really to think they love the word of God. This is consistent with
   entire depravity of heart, and enmity against the true character of
   God. Nay, it sets their depravity in a stronger light, because they
   know and approve the right, and yet do the wrong.

   So, notwithstanding this delight in the law, he say, "But I see another
   law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me
   into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O wretched man
   that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" Here the
   words, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord," are plainly a
   parenthesis, and a break in upon the train of thought, Then he sums up
   the whole matter, "So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of
   God, but with the flesh the law of sin."

   It is as if he had said, My better self, my unbiased judgment, my
   conscience, approves the law of God; but the law in my members, my
   passions, have such a control over me, that I still disobey. Remember,
   the apostle was describing the habitual character of one who was wholly
   under the dominion of sin. It was irrelevant to his purpose to adduce
   the experience of a Christian. He was vindicating the law, and
   therefore it was necessary for him to take the case of one who was
   under the law. If it is Christian experience, he was reasoning against
   himself; for if it is Christian experience, this would prove, not only
   that the law is inefficacious for the subduing of passion and the
   sanctification of men, but that the gospel also is inefficacious.
   Christians are under grace, and it is irrelevant, in vindicating the
   law, to adduce the experience of those who are not under the law, but
   under grace.

   Another conclusive reason is, that he here actually states the case of
   a believer as entirely different. In verses four and six, he speaks of
   those who are not under law and not in the flesh; that is, not carnal,
   but delivered from the law, and actually serving, or obeying God, in
   spirit.

   Then, in the beginning of the eighth chapter, he goes on to say, "There
   is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
   walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the
   Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sin
   and death." He had alluded to this in the parenthesis above, "I thank
   God," etc. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through
   the flesh, God sending his own Son in the flesh, and for sin, condemned
   sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled
   in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit." Who is this
   of whom he is now speaking? If the person in the last chapter was one
   who had a Christian experience whose experience is this? Here is
   something entirely different. The other was wholly under the power of
   sin, and under the law, and while he knew his duty, never did it.

   Here we find one for whom what the law could not do, through the power
   of passion, the gospel has done, so that the righteousness of the law
   is fulfilled, or what the law requires is obeyed. "For they that are
   after, the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are
   after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. For to be carnally minded
   is death; but to be spiritually-minded is life and peace: because the
   carnal mind is enmity to God: for it is not subject to the law of God,
   neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please
   God." There it is. Those whom he had described in the seventh chapter,
   as being carnal, cannot please God. "But ye are not in the flesh, but
   in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if
   any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ
   be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life
   because of righteousness." But here is an individual whose body is
   dead. Before the body had the control, and dragged him away from duty
   and from salvation; but now the power of passion is subdued.

   Now I will give you the sum of the whole matter:

   (1.) The strength of the apostle's language cannot decide this
   question, for he uses strong language on both sides. If it be objected
   that the individual he is describing is said to "delight in the law,"
   he is also said to be "carnal, sold under sin." When a writer uses
   strong language, it must be so understood as not to make it irrelevant
   or inconsistent.

   (2.) Whether he spoke of himself, or of some other person, or merely
   supposed a case by way of illustration, is wholly immaterial to the
   question.

   (3.) It is plain that the point he wished to illustrate was the
   vindication of the law of God, as to its influence on a carnal mind.

   (4.) The point required by way of illustration, the case of a convicted
   sinner, who saw the excellence of the law, but in whom the passions had
   the ascendancy.

   (5.) If this is spoken of Christian experience it is not only
   irrelevant, but proves the reverse of what he intended. He intended to
   show that the law though good, would not break the power of passion.
   But if this is Christian experience, then it proves that the gospel,
   instead of the law cannot subdue passion and sanctify men.

   (6.) The contrast between the state described in the seventh chapter,
   and that described in the eighth chapter, proves that the experience of
   the former has not that of a Christian.

    REMARKS.

   I. Those who find their own experience written in the eleventh chapter
   of Romans, are not converted persons. If that is their habitual
   character, they are not regenerated; they are under conviction, but not
   Christians.

   II. You see the great importance of using the law in dealing with
   sinners, to make them prize the gospel, to lead them to justify God and
   condemn themselves. Sinners are never made truly to repent but as they
   are convicted by the law.

   III. At the same time, you see the entire insufficiency of the law to
   convert men. The case of the devil illustrates the highest efficacy of
   the law, in this respect.

   IV. You see the danger of mistaking mere desires for piety. Desire,
   that does not result in right choice, has nothing good in it. The devil
   may have such desires.

   The wickedest men on earth may desire religion, and no doubt often do
   desire it, when they see that it is necessary to their salvation, or to
   control their passions.

   V. Christ and the gospel present the only motives that can sanctify the
   mind. The law only convicts and condemns.

   VI. Those who are truly converted and brought into the liberty of the
   gospel, do find deliverance from the bondage of their own corruptions.

   They do find the power of the body over the mind broken. They may have
   conflicts and trials, many and severe; but as an habitual thing, they
   are delivered from the thralldom of passion, and get the victory over
   sin, and find it easy to serve God. His commandments are not grievous
   to them. His yoke is easy, and his burden light.

   VII. The true convert finds peace with God. He feels that he has it. He
   enjoys it. He has a sense of pardoned sin, and of victory over
   corruption.

   VIII. You see, from this subject, the true position of a vast many
   church members They are all the while struggling under the law. They
   approve of the law, both in its precept and its penalty, they feel
   condemned, and desire relief. But still they are unhappy. They have no
   spirit of prayer, no communion with God, no evidence of adoption. They
   only refer to the 7th of Romans as their evidence. Such a one will say,
   "There is my experiences exactly." Let me tell you, that if this is
   your experience, you are yet in the gall of bitterness and the bonds of
   iniquity. You feel that you are in the bonds of guilt, and you are
   overcome by iniquity, and surely you know that it is bitter as gall.
   Now, don't cheat your soul by supposing that with such an experience as
   this, you can go and sit down by the side of the apostle Paul. You are
   yet carnal, gold under sin, and unless you embrace the gospel, you will
   be damned.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
      perfect. Matthew 5:48.

   In the 43rd verse, the Savior says, "Ye have heard that it hath been
   said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I say
   unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
   that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and
   persecute you, that ye may be the children of your Father which is in
   heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
   sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which
   love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? And
   if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not
   even the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
   which is in heaven is perfect."

   In discoursing on the subject of Christian Perfection, it is my design
   to pursue this order:

   I. I shall show what is not to be understood by the requirement, "Be ye
   therefore perfect;" or, what Christian Perfection is not. II. Show what
   is the perfection here required. III. That this perfection is a duty.
   IV. That it is attainable; and, V. Answer some of the objections which
   are commonly argued against the doctrine of Christian Perfection.

  I. I am to show you what Christian Perfection is not.

   1. It is not required that we should have the same natural perfections
   that God has.

   God has two kinds of perfections, natural and moral his natural
   perfections constitute his nature, essence, of constitution. They are
   his eternity, immutability, omnipotence, etc. These are called natural
   perfections, because they have no moral character. They are not
   voluntary. God has not given them to himself, because he did not create
   himself but existed from eternity, with all these natural attributes in
   full possession. All these God possesses in an infinite degree. These
   natural perfections are not the perfection here required. The
   attributes of our nature were created in us, and we are not required to
   produce any new natural attributes, nor would it be possible. We are
   not required to possess any of them in the degree that God possesses
   them.

   2. The perfection required in the text is not perfection of knowledge,
   even according to our limited faculties.

   3. Christian Perfection, as here required, is not freedom from
   temptation, either from our constitution or from things that are about
   us. The mind may be ever so sorely tried with the animal appetites, and
   yet not sin. The apostle James says, "Every man is tempted, when he is
   drawn away of his own lust, and enticed." The sin is not in the
   temptations, but in yielding to them. A person may be tempted by Satan,
   as well as by the appetites, or by the world, and yet not have sin. All
   sin consists in voluntary consenting to the desires.

   4. Neither does Christian perfection imply a freedom from what ought to
   be understood by the Christian warfare.

   5. The perfection required is not the infinite moral perfection which
   God has; because man, being a finite creature, is not capable of
   infinite affections. God being infinite in himself for him to be
   perfect is to be infinitely perfect. But this is not required of us.

  II. I am to show what Christian perfection is; or what is the duty actually
  required in the text.

   It is perfect obedience to the law of God. The law of God requires
   perfect, disinterested, impartial benevolence, love to God and love to
   our neighbor. It requires that we should be actuated by the same
   feeling, and to act on the same principles that God acts upon; to leave
   self out of the question as uniformly as he does, to be as much
   separated from selfishness as he is; in a word, to be in our measure as
   perfect as God is. Christianity requires that we should do neither more
   nor less than the law of God prescribes. Nothing short of this is
   Christian perfection. This is being, morally, just as perfect as God.
   Every thing is here included, to feel as he feels, to love what he
   loves and hate what he hates, and for the same reasons that he loves
   and hates.

   God regards every being in the universe according to its real value. He
   regards his own interests according to their real value in the scale of
   being, and no more. He exercises the same love towards himself that he
   requires of us, and for the same reason. He loves himself supremely,
   both with the love of benevolence and the love of complacency, because
   he is supremely excellent. And he requires us to love him just so, to
   love him as perfectly as he loves himself. He loves himself with the
   love of benevolence, or regards his own interest, and glory, and
   happiness, as the supreme good, because it is the supreme good. And he
   requires us to love him in the same way. He loves himself with infinite
   complacency, because he knows that he is infinitely worthy and
   excellent, and he requires the same of us. He also loves his neighbor
   as himself, not in the same degree that he loves himself, but in the
   same proportion according to their real value. From the highest angel
   to the smallest worm, he regards their happiness with perfect love,
   according to their worth. It is his duty to conform to these
   principles, as much as it is our duty. He can no more depart from this
   rule than we can, without committing sin; and for him to do it would be
   as much worse than for us to do it, as he is greater than we. God is
   infinitely obligated to do this. His very nature, not depending on his
   own volition, but uncreated, binds him to this. And he has created us
   moral beings in his own image, capable of conforming to the same rule
   with himself. This rule requires as to have the same character with
   him, to love as impartially, with as perfect love to seek the good of
   others with as single an eye as he does. This, and nothing less than
   this, is Christian Perfection.

  III. I am to show that Christian Perfection is a duty.

   1. This is evident from the fact that God requires it, both under the
   law and under the gospel.

   The command in the text, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is
   in heaven is perfect," is given under the gospel. Christ here commands
   the very same thing that the law requires. Some suppose that much less
   is required of us under the gospel, than was required under the law. It
   is true that the gospel does not require perfection, as the condition
   of salvation. But no part of the obligation of the law is discharged.
   The gospel holds those who are under it to the same holiness as those
   under the law.

   2. I argue that Christian Perfection is a duty, because God has no
   right to require anything less.

   God cannot discharge us from the obligation to be perfect, as I have
   defined perfection. If he were to attempt it, he would just so far give
   a license to sin. He has no right to give any such license. While we
   are moral beings, there is no power in the universe that can discharge
   us from the obligation to be perfect. Can God discharge us from the
   obligation to love him with all our heart, and soul, and mind, and
   strength? That would be saying that God does not deserve such love. And
   if he cannot discharge us from the whole law, he cannot discharge from
   any part of it, for the same reason.

   3. Should any one contend that the gospel requires less holiness than
   the law, I would ask him to say just how much less it requires.

   If we are allowed to stop short of perfect obedience, where shall we
   stop? How perfect are we required to be? Where will you find a rule in
   the Bible, to determine how much less holy you are allowed to be under
   the gospel, than you would be under the law? Shall we say each one must
   judge for himself? Then I ask if you think it is your duty to be any
   more perfect than you are now? Probably all would say, Yes. Can you lay
   down any point at which, when you have arrived, you can say, "Now I am
   perfect enough; it is true, I have some sin left, but I have gone as
   far as it is my duty to go in this world?" Where do you get your
   authority for any such notion? No; the truth is, that all who are truly
   pious, the more pious they are, the more strongly they feel the
   obligation to be perfect, as God is perfect.

  IV. I will now show that Christian Perfection is attainable, or practicable,
  in this life.

   1. It may be fairly inferred that Christian Perfection is attainable,
   from the fact that it is commanded.

   Does God command us to be perfect as he is perfect, and still shall we
   say it is an impossibility? Are we not always to infer, when God
   commands a thing, that there is a natural possibility of doing that
   which he commands? I recollect hearing an individual say, he would
   preach to sinners that they ought to repent, because God commands it;
   but he would not preach that they could repent, because God has nowhere
   said that they can. What consummate trifling! Suppose a man were to say
   he would preach to citizens, that they ought to obey the laws of the
   country because the government had enacted them, but he would not tell
   them that they could obey, because it is now where in the statute book
   enacted that they have the ability. It is always to be understood, when
   God requires anything of men, that they possess the requisite faculties
   to do it. Otherwise God requires of us impossibilities, on pain of
   death, and sends sinners to hell for not doing what they were in no
   sense able to do.

   2. That there is natural ability to be perfect is a simple matter of
   fact.

   There can be no question of this. What is perfection. It is to love the
   Lord our God with all our heart, and soul, and mind, and strength, and
   to love our neighbor as ourselves. That is, it requires us not to exert
   the powers of somebody else, but our own powers. The law itself goes no
   farther than to require the right use of the powers you possess. So
   that it is a simple matter of fact that you possess natural ability, or
   power, to be just as perfect as God requires.

   Objection. Here some may object, that if there is a natural ability to
   be perfect, there is a moral inability, which comes to the same thing,
   for inability is inability, call it what you will, and if we have moral
   inability, who are as really unable as if our inability was natural.

   Answer 1. There is no more moral inability to be perfectly holy, than
   there is to be holy at all. So far as moral ability is concerned, you
   can as well be perfectly holy as you can be holy at all. The true
   distinction between natural ability and moral ability, is this: Natural
   ability relates to the powers and faculties of the mind; Moral ability
   only to the will. Moral inability is nothing else than unwillingness to
   do a thing.

   So it is explained by President Edwards, in his treatise on the Will,
   and by other writers on the subject. When you ask whether you have
   moral ability to be perfect, if you mean by it whether you are willing
   to be perfect, I answer, No. If you were willing to be perfect, you
   would be perfect; for the perfection required is only a perfect
   conformity of the will to God's law, or willing right. If you ask then,
   Are we able to will right? I answer, the question implies a
   contradiction, in supposing that there can be such a thing as a moral
   agent unable to choose, or will. President Edwards says expressly, in
   his chapter on Moral Inability, as you may see, if you will read it,
   that strictly speaking, there is no such thing as Moral Inability. When
   we speak of inability to do a, thing, if we mean to be understood of a
   real inability, it implies a willingness to do it, but a want of power.
   To say therefore, we are unable to will, is absurd. It is saying we
   will and yet are unable to will, at the same time.

   Answer 2. But I admit and believe, that there is desperate
   unwillingness in the case. And if this is what you mean by Moral
   Inability, it is true. There is a pertinacious unwillingness in sinners
   to become Christians, and in Christians to become perfect, or to come
   up to the full perfection required both by the law and gospel. Sinners
   may strongly wish to become Christians, and Christians may strongly
   wish or desire to be rid of all their sins, and may pray for it, even
   with agony. They may think they are willing to be perfect, but they
   deceive themselves. They may feel, in regard to their sins taken all
   together, or in the abstract, as if they are willing to renounce them
   all. But take them up in the detail, one by one, and there are many
   sins they are unwilling to give up. They wrestle against sin in
   general, but cling to it in the detail.

   I have known cases of this kind where individuals will break down in
   such a manner that they think they never will sin again; and then
   perhaps in one hour, something will come up that they are ready to
   fight for the indulgence, and need to be broken down again and again.
   Christians actually need to be hunted from one sin after another, in
   this way, before they are willing to give them up, and after all, are
   unwilling to give up all sins. When they are truly willing to give up
   all sin, when they have no will of their own, but merge their own will
   entirely in the will of God, then their bonds are broken. When they
   will yield absolutely to God's will, then they are filled with all the
   fullness of God.

   After all, the true point of inquiry is this: Have I any right to
   expect to be perfect in this world? Is there any reason for me to
   believe that I can be so completely subdued, that my soul shall burn
   with a steady flame, and I shall love God wholly, up to what the law
   requires? That it is a real duty, no one can deny. But the great query
   is, is it attainable?

   I answer, Yes, I believe it is.

   Here let me observe, that so much has been said within a few years
   about Christian Perfection, and individuals who have entertained the
   doctrine of Perfection have run into so many wild notions, that it
   seems as if the devil had anticipated the movements of the church, and
   created such a state of feeling, that the moment the doctrine of the
   Bible respecting sanctification is crowded on the church, one and
   another cries out, "Why, this is Perfectionism." But I will say,
   notwithstanding the errors into which some of those called
   Perfectionists have fallen, there is such a thing held forth in the
   Bible as Christian Perfection, and that the Bible doctrine on the
   subject is what nobody need to fear, but what every body needs to know.
   I disclaim, entirely, the charge of maintaining the peculiarities,
   whatever they be, of modern Perfectionists. I have read their
   publications, and have had much knowledge of them as individuals, and I
   cannot assent to many of their views. But the doctrine that Christian
   Perfection is a duty, is one which I have always maintained, and I have
   been more convinced of it within a few months, that it is attainable in
   this life. Many doubt this, but I am persuaded it is true, on various
   grounds.

   1. God wills it.

   The first doubt which will arise in many minds, is this; "Does God
   really will my sanctification in this world?" I answer: He says he
   does. The law of God is itself as strong an expression as he can give
   of his will on the subject, and it is backed up by an infinite
   sanction. The gospel is but a republication of the same will, in
   another form. How can God express his will more strongly on this point
   than he has in the text? "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
   which is in heaven is perfect." In the 1 Thessalonians 4:3, we are told
   expressly, "For this is the will of God, even your sanctification."

   If you examine the Bible carefully, from one end to the other, you will
   find that it is every where just as plainly taught that God wills the
   sanctification of Christians in this world, as it is that he wills
   sinners should repent in this world. And if we go by the Bible, we
   might just as readily question whether he wills that men should repent,
   as whether he wills that Christians should be holy. Why should he not
   reasonably expect it? He requires it. What does he require? When he
   requires men to repent, he requires that they should love God with all
   the heart, soul, mind, and strength. What reasons have we to believe
   that he wills they should repent at all, or love him at all, which is
   not a reason for believing that he wills they should love him
   perfectly? Strange logic, indeed! to teach that he wills it in one
   case, because he requires it, and not admit the same inference in the
   other. No man can show, from the Bible, that God does not require
   perfect sanctification in this world, nor that he does not will it, nor
   that it is not lust as attainable as any degree of sanctification.

   I have turned over the Bible with special reference to this point, and
   thought I would note down on my card, where I have the plan of my
   discourse, the passages that teach this doctrine. But I found they were
   too numerous altogether to admit of its being done, and that if I
   collected them all, I should do nothing else this evening but stand and
   read passages of scripture. If you have never looked into the Bible
   with this view, you will be astonished to see how many more passages
   there are that speak of deliverance from the commission of sin, than
   there are that speak of deliverance from the punishment of sin. The
   passages that speak only of deliverance from punishment, are as
   nothing, in comparison of the others.

   2. All the promises and prophecies of God, that respect the
   sanctification of believers in this world, are to be understood of
   course, of their perfect sanctification.

   What is sanctification, but holiness? When a prophecy speaks of the
   sanctification of the church, are we to understand that it is to be
   sanctified only partially? When God requires holiness, are we to
   understand that of partial holiness? Surely not. By what principle,
   then, will you understand it of partial holiness when he promises
   holiness. We have been so long in the way of understanding the
   scriptures with reference to the existing state of things, that we lose
   sight of the real meaning. But if we look only at the language of the
   Bible, I defy any man to prove that the promises and prophecies of
   holiness mean any thing short of perfect sanctification, unless the
   requirements of both the law and gospel are to be understood of partial
   obedience which is absurd.

   3. Perfect sanctification is the great blessing promised, throughout
   the Bible.

   The apostle says we have exceeding great and precious promises, and
   what are they, and what is their use? "Whereby are given unto us
   exceeding great and precious promises, that by these ye might be
   partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is
   in the world through lust." 2 Peter 1:4.

   If that is not perfect sanctification, I beg to know what is. It is a
   plain declaration that these "exceeding great and precious promises"
   are given for this object, that by believing and appropriating and
   using them, we might become partakers of the divine nature. And if we
   will use them for the purposes for which they were put in the Bible, we
   may become perfectly holy.

   Let us look at some of these promises in particular. I will begin with
   the promise of the Abrahamic covenant. The promise is that his
   posterity should possess the land of Canaan, and that through him by
   the Messiah, all nations should be blessed. The seal of the covenant,
   circumcision, which every one knows is a type of holiness, shows us
   what was the principal blessing intended. It was holiness. So the
   apostle tells us, in another place, Jesus Christ was given, that he
   might sanctify unto himself a peculiar people.

   All the purifications and other ceremonies of the Moasic ritual
   signified the same thing; as they are all pointed forward to a Savior
   to come. Those ordinances of purifying the body were set forth, every
   one of them, with reference to the purifying of the mind, or holiness.

   Under the gospel, the same thing is signified by baptism; the washing
   of the body representing the sanctification of the mind.

   In Ezekiel 36:25, this blessing is expressly promised, as the great
   blessing of the gospel: "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
   ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols,
   will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit
   will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your
   flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit
   within you: and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
   judgments, and do them."

   So it is in Jeremiah 33:8: "And I will cleanse them from all their
   iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all
   their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
   transgressed against me." But it would take up too much time to quote
   all the passages in the Old Testament prophecies, that represent
   holiness to be the great blessing of the covenant. I desire you all to
   search the Bible for yourselves, and you will be astonished to find how
   uniformly the blessing of sanctification is held up as the principal
   blessing promised to the world through the Messiah.

   Why, who can doubt that the great object of the Messiah's coming was to
   sanctify his people? Just after the fall it was predicted that Satan
   would bruise his heel, but that he should bruise Satan's head. And the
   apostle John tells us that "For this purpose the Son of God was
   manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil." He has
   undertaken to put Satan under his feet. His object is to win us back to
   our allegiance to God, to sanctify us, to purify our minds. As it is
   said in Zecheriah 13:1, "In that day there shall be a fountain opened
   to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and
   for uncleanness."

   And Daniel says, "Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon
   thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins,
   and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
   righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint
   the Most Holy." But it is in vain to name the multitude of these texts.
   The Old Testament is full of it.

   In the New Testament, the first account we have of the Savior, tells
   us, that he was called "Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
   sins." So it is said, "He was manifested to take away our sins," and "
   to destroy the works of the devil." In Titus 2:13, the apostle Paul
   speaks of the grace of God, or the gospel, as teaching us to deny
   ungodliness.

   "Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
   God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he
   might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
   people, zealous of good works." And in Ephesians 5:26, we learn that
   "Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it; that he might
   sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he
   might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or
   wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without
   blemish." I only quote these few passages by way of illustration, to
   show that the object for which Christ came is to sanctify the church to
   such a degree that it should be absolutely "holy and without blemish."
   So in Romans 11:26, "And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is
   written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn
   away ungodliness from Jacob; for this is my covenant unto them, when I
   shall take away their sins." And in 1 John 1:9, it is said, "If we
   confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
   cleanse us from all unrighteousness." What is it to "cleanse us from
   all unrighteousness," if it is not perfect sanctification? I presume
   all of you who are here tonight, if there is such a thing promised in
   the Bible as perfect sanctification, wise to know it. Now what do you
   think? In 1 Thessalonians 5:23, the apostle Paul prays a very
   remarkable prayer: "And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and
   I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved
   blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ." What is that?
   "Sanctify you wholly." Does that mean perfect sanctification? You may
   think it does not mean perfect sanctification in this world. But the
   apostle says not only that your whole soul and spirit, but that your
   "body be preserved blameless." Could an inspired apostle make such a
   prayer, if he did not believe the blessing prayed for to be possible?
   But he goes on to say, in the very next verse, "Faithful is he that
   calleth you, who also will do it." Is that true, or is it false?

   4. The perfect sanctification of believers is the very object for which
   the Holy Spirit is promised.

   To quote the passages that show this, would take up too much time." The
   whole tenor of scripture respecting the Holy Spirit proves it. The
   whole array of gospel means through which the Holy Spirit works, is
   aimed at this, and adapted to the end of sanctifying the church. All
   the commands to be holy, all the promises, all the prophecies, all the
   ordinances, all the providences, the blessings and the judgments, all
   the duties of religion, are the means which the Holy Ghost is to employ
   for sanctifying the church.

   5. If it is not a practicable duty to be perfectly holy in this world,
   then it will follow that the devil has so completely accomplished his
   design in corrupting mankind that Jesus Christ is at fault, and his no
   way to sanctify his people but by taking them out of the world.

   Is it possible that Satan has so got the advantage of God, that God's
   kingdom cannot be reestablished in this world, and that the Almighty
   has no way but to back out, and take his saints to heaven, before he
   can make them holy? Is God's kingdom to be only partially established,
   and is it to be always so, that the best saints shall one-half of their
   time be serving the devil? Must the people of God always go drooping
   and drivelling along in religion, and live in sin till they get to
   heaven? What is that stone out of a mountain without hands, that is to
   fill the earth, if it does not show that there is yet to be a universal
   triumph of the love of God in the world?

   6. If perfect sanctification is not attainable in this world, it must
   be either from a want of motives in the gospel, or want of sufficient
   power in the Spirit of God.

   It is said that in another life we may be like God, for we shall see
   him as he is. But why not here, if we have that faith which is the
   "substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen?"
   There is a promise to those who "hunger and thirst after righteousness"
   that "they shall be filled."

   What is it to be "filled" with righteousness, but to be perfectly holy?
   And are we never to be filled with righteousness till we die? Are we to
   go through life hungry, and thirsty and unsatisfied? So the Bible has
   been understood, but it does not read so.

  OBJECTIONS

   l. "The power of habit is so great. that we ought not to expect to be
   perfectly sanctified in this life."

   Answer. If the power of habit can be so far encroached upon that an
   impenitent sinner can be converted, why can it not be absolutely
   broken, so that a converted person may be wholly sanctified? The
   greatest difficulty, surely, if when selfishness has the entire control
   of the mind, and when the habits of sin are wholly unbroken. This
   obstacle is so great, in all cases, that no power but that of the Holy
   Ghost can overcome it: and so great, in many instances, that God
   himself cannot, consistently with his wisdom, use the means necessary
   to convert the soul. But is it possible to suppose, that after he has
   begun to overcome it, after he has broken the power of selfishness and
   the obstinacy of habit, and actually converted the individual, that
   after this God has not resources sufficient to sanctify the soul
   altogether?

   2. "Many physical difficulties have been created by a life of sin, that
   cannot be overcome or removed by moral means."

   This is a common objection. Men feel that they have fastened upon
   themselves appetites and physical influences, which they do not believe
   it possible to overcome of moral means. The apostle Paul, in the 7th of
   Romans, describes a man in great conflict with the body. But in the
   next chapter he speaks of one who had gotten the victory over the
   flesh. "And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but
   the spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of Him
   that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up
   Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
   Spirit that dwelleth in you." This quickening of the body is not spoken
   of the resurrection of the body, but of the influence of the Spirit of
   God upon the body the sanctification of the body.

   You will ask, "Does the Spirit of God produce a physical change in the
   body?" I will illustrate it by the case of the drunkard. The drunkard
   has brought upon himself a diseased state of the body, an unnatural
   thirst, which is unsuitable, and so strong that it seems impossible he
   should be reclaimed. But very likely you know cases in which they have
   been reclaimed, and have entirely overcome this physical appetite. I
   have heard of cases, where drunkards have been made to see the sin of
   drunkenness in such a strong light, that they abhorred strong drink,
   and forever renounced it, with such a loathing that they never had the
   least desire for strong drink again.

   I once knew an individual who was a slave to the use of tobacco. At
   length he became convinced that it was a sin for him to use it, and the
   struggle against it finally drove him to God in such an agony of
   prayer, that he got the victory at once over the appetite, and never
   had the least desire for it again. I am not now giving you philosophy,
   but facts. I have heard of individuals over whom a life of sin had
   given to certain appetites a perfect mastery, but in time of revival
   they have been subdued into perfect quiescence, and these appetites
   have ever after been as dead as if they had no body. I suppose the fact
   is, that the mind may be so occupied and absorbed with greater things,
   as not to give a thought to the things that would revive the vicious
   appetite. If a drunkard goes by a grocery, or sees people drinking and
   allows his mind to run upon it, the appetite will be awakened.

   The wise man, therefore, tells him to "Look not upon the wine when it
   is red." But there is no doubt that any appetite of the body may be
   subdued, if a sufficient impression is made upon the mind to break it
   up.

   I believe every real Christian will be ready to admit that this is
   possible, from his own experience. Have you not, beloved, known times
   when one great absorbing topic has so filled your mind and controlled
   your soul. that the appetites of the body remained, for the time,
   perfectly neutralized? Now, suppose this state of mind to continue to
   become constant, would not all these physical difficulties be overcome,
   which you speak of as standing in the way of perfect sanctification?

   3. "The Bible is against this doctrine, where it says, there is not a
   just man on the earth that liveth, and sinneth not."

   Answer. Suppose the Bible does say that there is not one on earth, it
   does not say there cannot be one. Or, it may have been true at that
   time, or under that dispensation, that there was not one man in the
   world who was perfectly sanctified; and yet it may not follow that at
   this time, or under the gospel dispensation, there is no one who lives
   without sin. "For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of
   a better hope did." Hebrews 7:9. That is, the gospel did.

   4. "The apostles admit that they were not perfect."

   Answer. I know the apostle Paul says, in one place, "Not as though I
   had already attained, either were already perfect." But it is not said
   that he continued so till his death, or that he never did attain to
   perfect sanctification, and the manner in which he speaks in the
   remainder of the verse, looks as if he expected to become so: "But I
   follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
   apprehended of Christ Jesus." Nor does it appear to me to be true that
   in this passage referred to, he is speaking of perfect sanctification,
   but rather of perfect knowledge.

   And the apostle John speaks of himself as if he loved God perfectly.
   But whatever may be the truth as to the actual character of the
   apostles it does not follow, because they were not perfect that no
   others can be. They clearly declare it to be a duty, and that they were
   aiming at it, just as if they expected to attain it in this life. And
   they command us to do the same.

   5. "But is it not presumption for us to think we can be better than the
   apostles and primitive Christians?"

   Answer. What is the presumption in the case? Is it not a fact that we
   have far greater advantages for religious experience, than the
   primitive churches. The benefit of their experience, the complete
   scriptures, the state of the world, the near approach of the
   millennium, all give us the advantage over the primitive believers. Are
   we to suppose the church is always to stand in regard to religious
   experience, and never to go ahead in any thing? What scripture is there
   for this? Why should not the church be always growing better? It seems
   to be the prevailing idea that the church is to be always looking back
   to the primitive saints as the standard. I suppose the reverse of this
   is a duty, and that we ought to be always aiming at a much higher
   standard than theirs. I believe the church must go far ahead of the
   primitive Christians before the millennium can come. I leave out of
   view the apostles, because it does not clearly appear but that they
   became fully sanctified.

   6. "But so many profess to be perfect, who are not so, that I cannot
   believe in perfection in this life."

   Answer. How many people profess to be rich, who are not;. Will you
   therefore say, you cannot believe any body is rich? Fine logic!

   7. "So many who profess perfection have run into error and fanaticism,
   that I am afraid to think of it."

   Answer. I find in history, that a sect of Perfectionists has grown out
   of every great and general revival that ever took place. And this is
   exactly one of the devil's masterpieces, to counteract the effects of a
   revival. He knows that if the church were brought to the proper
   standard of holiness, it would be a speedy death blow to his power on
   earth, and he takes this course to defeat the efforts of the church for
   elevating the standard of piety, by frightening Christians from
   marching right up to the point, and aiming at living perfectly
   conformed to the will of God. And so successful has he been, that the
   moment you begin to crowd the church up to be holy, and give up all
   their sins, somebody will cry out, "Why, this leads to Perfectionism;"
   and thus give it a bad name and put it down.

   8. "But do you really think any body ever has been perfectly holy in
   this world?"

   Answer. I have reason to believe there have been many. It is highly
   probable that Enoch and Elijah were free from sin, before they were
   taken out of the world. And in different ages of the church there have
   been numbers of Christians who were intelligent and upright, and had
   nothing that could be said against them, who have testified that they
   themselves lived free from sin. I know it is said, in reply, that they
   must have been proud, and that no man would say he was free from sin
   for any other motive but pride. But I ask, why may not a man say he is
   free from sin, if it is so, without being proud, as well as he can say
   he is converted without being proud? Will not the saints say it in
   heaven, to the praise of the grace of God, which has thus crowned his
   glorious work? And why may they not say it now, from the same motive? I
   do not myself profess now to have attained perfect sanctification, but
   if I had attained it, if I felt that God had really given me the
   victory over the world, the flesh and the devil, and made me free from
   sin, would I keep it a secret, locked up in my own breast, and let my
   brethren stumble on in ignorance of what the grace of God can do?
   Never. I would tell them, that they might expect complete deliverance,
   if they would only lay hold on the arm of help which Christ reaches
   forth, to save his people from their sins.

   I have heard people talk like this, that if a Christian really was
   perfect, he would be the last person that would tell of it. But would
   you say of a person who professed conversion, "If he was really
   converted, he would be the last person to tell of it?" On the contrary,
   is it not the first impulse of a converted heart to say, "come and
   hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my
   soul!" Why then should not the same desire exist in one who feels that
   he has obtained sanctification? Why all these suspicions, and refusing
   to credit evidence? If anyone gives evidence of great piety, if his
   life is irreproachable, and his spirit not to be complained of, if he
   shows the very spirit of the Son of God, and if such a person testifies
   that after great struggles and agonizing prayer God has given him the
   victory, and his soul is set at liberty by the power of divine grace;
   why are we not bound to receive his testimony, just as much, as when he
   says he is converted. We always take such testimony, so far. And now,
   when he says he has gone farther, and got the victory over all sin, and
   that Christ has actually fulfilled his promise in this respect, why
   should we not credit this also?

   I have recently read Mr. Wesley's "Plain Account of Christian
   Perfection," a book I never saw until lately. I find some expressions
   in it to which I should object, but I believe it is rather the
   expression than the sentiments. And I think, with this abatement, it is
   an admirable book, and I wish every member of this church to read it.
   An edition is in the press, in this city. I would also recommend the
   memoir of James Brainerd Taylor, and I wish every Christian would get
   it, and study it. I have read the most of it three times within a few
   months.

   From many things in that book, it is plain that he believed in the
   doctrine that Christian perfection is a duty, and that it is attainable
   by believers in this life. There is nothing published which shows that
   he professed to have attained it, but it is manifest that he believed
   it to be attainable. But I have been told that much which is found in
   his diary on this subject, as well as some things in his letters, were
   suppressed by his biographers, as not fitted for the eye of the church
   in her present state. I believe if the whole could come to light, that
   it would be seen that he was a firm believer in this doctrine. These
   books should be read and pondered by the church.

   I have now in my mind an individual, who was a member of the church,
   but very worldly, and when a revival came he opposed it, at first; but
   afterwards he was awakened, and after an awful conflict, he broke down,
   and has ever since lived a life of the most devoted piety, laboring and
   praying incessantly, like his blessed Master, to promote the kingdom of
   God. I have never heard this man say he thought he was perfect, but I
   have often heard him speak of the duty and practicability of being
   perfectly sanctified. And if there is a man in the world who is so, I
   believe he is one.

   People have the strangest notions on this subject. Sometimes you will
   hear them argue against Christian Perfection on this ground, that a man
   who was perfectly holy could not live, could not exist in this world. I
   believe I have talked just so myself, in time past. I know I have
   talked like a fool on the subject. Why, a saint who was perfect would
   be more alive than ever, to the good of his fellow men. Could not Jesus
   Christ live on earth? He was perfectly holy. It is thought that if a
   person was perfectly sanctified, and loved God perfectly, he would be
   in such a state of excitement, that he could not remain in the body,
   could neither eat nor sleep, nor attend to the ordinary duties of life.
   But there is no evidence of this. The Lord Jesus Christ was a man,
   subject to all the temptations of other men, He also loved the Lord his
   God with all his heart and soul and strength. And yet it does not
   appear that he was in such a state of excitement that he could not both
   eat and sleep, and work at his trade as a carpenter, and maintain
   perfect health of body and perfect composure of mind. And why needs a
   saint that is perfectly sanctified, to be carried away with
   uncontrollable excitement, or killed with intense emotion, any more
   than Jesus Christ? There is no need of it, and Christian Perfection
   implies no such thing.

      REMARKS

   We can see now the reasons why there is no more perfection in the
   world.

   1. Christians do not believe that it is the will of God, or that God is
   willing they should be perfectly sanctified in this world.

   They know he commands them to be perfect, as he is perfect, but they
   think that he is secretly unwilling, and does not really wish them to
   be so; "Otherwise," say they, "why does he not do more for us, to make
   us perfect?" No doubt, God prefers their remaining as they are, to
   using any other means or system of influences to make them otherwise;
   because he sees that it would be a greater evil to introduce a new
   system of means than to let them remain as they are. Where one of the
   evils is unavoidable, he chooses the least of the two evils, and whom
   doubt that he prefers their being perfect in the circumstances in which
   they are, to their sinning in these circumstances. Sinners reason just
   as these professors reason. They say, "I don't believe he wills my
   repentance; if he did, he would make me repent." Sinner, God may prefer
   your continued impenitence, and your damnation, to using any other
   influences than he does use to make you repent.

   But for you to infer from this, that he does not wish you to yield to
   the influences he does use, is strange logic! Suppose your servant
   should reason so, and say, "I don't believe my master means I should
   obey him, because he don't stand by me all day, to keep me at work." Is
   that a just conclusion? Very likely, the master's time is so valuable,
   that it would be a greater evil to his business, than for that servant
   to stand still all day.

   So it is in the government of God. If God were to bring all the power
   of his government to bear on one individual, he might save that
   individual, while at the same time, it would so materially derange his
   government, that it would be a vastly greater evil than for that
   individual to go to hell. In the same way, in the case of a Christian,
   God has furnished him with all the means of sanctification, and
   required him to be perfect, and now he turns round and says, "God does
   not really prefer my being perfect; if he did, he would make me so."
   This is just the argument of the impenitent sinner, and no better in
   one case than the other. The plain truth is, God does desire, of both,
   that in the circumstances in which they are placed, they should do just
   what he commands them to do.

   2. They do not expect it themselves.

   The great part of the church do not really expect to be any more pious
   than they are.

   3. Much of the time, they do not even desire perfect sanctification.

   4. They are satisfied with their hunger and thirst after righteousness,
   and do not expect to be filled.

   Here let me say, that hunger and thirst after holiness is not holiness.
   The desire of a thing is not the thing desired. If they hunger and
   thirst after holiness, they ought to give God no rest, till he comes up
   to his promise, that they shall be filled with holiness, or made
   perfectly holy.

   5. They overlook the great design of the gospel.

   Too long has the church been in the habit of thinking that the great
   design of the gospel is, to save men from the punishment of sin,
   whereas its real design and object is to deliver men from sin. But
   Christians have taken the other ground, and think of nothing but that
   they are to go on in sin, and all they hope for is to be forgiven, and
   when they die made holy in heaven. Oh, if they only realized that the
   whole framework of the gospel is designed to break the power of sin,
   and fill men on earth with all the fullness of God, how soon there
   would be one steady blaze of love in the hearts of God's people all
   over the world!

   6. The promises are not understood, and not appropriated by faith.

   If the church would read the Bible, and lay hold of every promise
   there, they would find them exceeding great and precious. But now the
   church loses its inheritance, and remains ignorant of the extent of the
   blessings she may receive. Had I time tonight I could lead you to some
   promises which, if you would only get hold of and appropriate, you
   would know what I mean.

   7. They seek it by the law, and not by faith.

   How many are seeking sanctification by their own resolutions and works,
   their fastings and prayers, their endeavors and activity, instead of
   taking right hold of Christ, by faith, for sanctification, as they do
   for justification. It is all work, work, work, when it should be by
   faith in "Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
   righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption." When they go and
   take right hold of the strength of God, they will be sanctified.

   Faith will bring Christ right into the soul, and fill it with the same
   spirit that breathes through himself. These dead works are nothing. It
   is faith that must sanctify, it is faith that purifies the heart; that
   faith which is the substance of things hoped for, takes hold of Christ
   and brings him into the soul, to dwell there the hope of glory; that
   the life which we live here should be by the faith of the Son of God.
   It is from not knowing, or not regarding this, that there is so little
   holiness in the church.

   And finally,

   8. From the want of the right kind of dependence.

   Instead of taking scriptural views of their dependencies and seeing
   where their strength is, and realizing how willing God is to give his
   Holy Spirit to them that ask, now and continually, and thus taking
   hold, and holding on, by the arm of God, they sit down, in unbelief and
   sin, to wait God's time, and call this depending on God. Alas how
   little is felt, after all this talk about dependence on the Holy
   Spirit; how little is really felt of it; and how little is there of the
   giving up of the whole soul to his control and guidance, with faith in
   his power to enlighten, to lead, to sanctify, to kindle the affections,
   and fill the soul continually with all the fullness of God!
     __________________________________________________________________

      Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect
      Matthew 5:48.

   In speaking from these words, previously, I pursued the following
   order.

   1. I showed what is implied in being perfect.

   2. What Christian perfection is.

   3. That it is a duty.

   4. That it is attainable in this life.

   5. Answered some objections, and then gave some reasons why so many
   persons are not perfect. Tonight my object is to mention some
   additional causes which prevent the great body of Christians from
   attaining perfect sanctification. As a matter of fact, we know that the
   church is not sanctified, and we ought to know the reasons. If the
   defect is in God, we ought to know it. If he has not provided a
   sufficient revelation, or if the power of the Holy Spirit is not
   adequate to sanctify his people in this world, we ought to understand
   it, so as not to perplex ourselves with idle endeavors after what is
   unattainable. And if the fault is in us, we ought to know it, and the
   true reasons ought to be understood, lest by any means we should charge
   God foolishly, even in thought, by imagining that he has required of us
   that which he has furnished us no adequate means of attaining.

  I. The first general reason which I shall mention, for persons not being
  sanctified, is that they seek sanctification "by works," and not "by faith."

   The religion of works assumes a great variety of forms and it is
   interesting to see the ever-varying, shifting forms it takes:

   1. One form is where men are aiming to live so as to render their
   damnation unjust. It matters not, in this case, whether they deem
   themselves Christians or not, if they are in fact trying to live so as
   to render it unjust for God to send them to hell. This was the religion
   of the ancient Pharisees. And there are not a few, in the present day,
   whose religion is purely of this character. You will often find them
   out of the church and perhaps ready to confess that they have never
   been born again. But yet they speak of their own works in a way that
   makes it manifest that they think themselves quite too good to be
   damned.

   2. Another form of the religion of works is, where persons are not
   aiming so much to render it unjust in God to damn them, but are seeking
   by their works to recommend themselves to the mercy of God. They know
   they deserve to be damned, and will for ever deserve it. But they also
   know that God is merciful; and they think that if they live honest
   lives, and do many kind things to the poor, it will so recommend them
   to the general mercy of God, that he will not impute their iniquities
   to them, but will forgive their sins and save them. This is the
   religion of most modern moralists. Living under the gospel, they know
   they cannot be saved by their works, and yet they think that if they go
   to meeting, and help to support the minister, and do this and that and
   the other kind of good works, it will recommend them to God's mercy
   sufficiently for salvation. So far as I understand the system of
   religion held by modern Unitarians, this must be their system. Whether
   they understand it so, or admit it to be so, or not, as far as I can
   see, it comes to this.

   They set aside the atonement of Christ, and do not expect to be saved
   by the righteousness of Jesus Christ; and I know not on what they do
   depend, but this. They seem to have a kind of sentimental religion, and
   on this, with their morality and their liberality, they depend to
   recommend them to the mercy of God. On this ground they expect to
   receive the forgiveness of their sins, and to be saved.

   3. Another form of the religion of works is, where persons are
   endeavoring to prepare themselves to accept of Christ.

   They understand that salvation is only through Jesus Christ. They know
   that they cannot be saved by works, nor by the general mercy of God,
   without an atonement, and that the only way to be saved is by faith in
   Christ. But they have heard the relations of the experience of others,
   who went through a long process of distress before they submitted to
   Christ and found peace in believing. And they think a certain
   preparatory process is necessary, and that they must make a great many
   prayers and run hither and thither to attend meetings, and lie awake
   many nights, and suffer so much distress, and perhaps fall into
   despair, and then they shall be in a situation to accept of Christ.

   This is the situation of many convicted sinners. When they are
   awakened, and get so far as to find that they cannot be saved by their
   own works, then they set themselves to prepare to receive Christ.
   Perhaps some of you, who are here tonight, are in just this case. You
   dare not come to Christ just as you are, when you have made so few
   prayers, and attended so few meetings, and felt so little distress, and
   done so little and been so little engaged. And so, instead of going
   right to Christ for all you need, as a poor lost sinner, throwing
   yourself unreservedly into his hands, you set yourself to lash your
   mind into more conviction and distress, in order to prepare you to
   accept of Christ. Such cases are just about as common as convicted
   sinners are. How many there are, who abound in such works, and seem
   determined they will not fall down at once at the feet of Christ. It is
   not necessary to go into an argument here, to show that they are
   growing no better by all this process. There is no love to God in it,
   and no faith, and no religion. It is all mere mockery of God, and
   hypocrisy, and sin. There may be a great deal of feeling, but it is of
   no use; it brings them in fact no nearer to Christ; and after all, they
   have to do the very thing at last, which they might have done just as
   well at first.

   Now suppose an individual should take it into his head that this is the
   way to become holy. Every Christian can see that it is very absurd, and
   that however he may multiply such works, he is not beginning to
   approach to holiness. The first act of holiness is to believe, to take
   hold of Christ by faith. And if a Christian, who is awakened to feel
   the need of sanctification, undertakes to go through a preparatory
   process of self-created distress, before he applies to Christ it is
   just as absurd as for an awakened sinner to do it.

   4. Another form of the religion of works is, where individuals perform
   works to beget faith and love.

   The last mentioned class was where individuals are preparing to come to
   Christ. Here we suppose them to have come to Christ, and that they have
   accepted him, and are real Christians; but having backslidden they set
   them selves to perform many works to beget faith and love, or to beget
   and perfect a right state of feeling. This is one of the most common
   and most subtle forms in which the religion of works shows itself at
   the present day.

   Now this is very absurd. It is an attempt to produce holiness by sin.
   For if the feelings are not right, the act is sin. If the act does not
   proceed from faith and love, whatever they may do is sin. How idle, to
   think that a person, by multiplying sins, can beget holiness! And yet
   it is perfectly common for persons to think they can beget holiness by
   a course of conduct that is purely sinful. For certainly, any act that
   does not spring from love already existing, is sinful. The individual
   acts not from the impulse of faith that works by love and purifies the
   heart, but he acts without faith and love, with a design to beget those
   affections by such acts as these.

   It is true, when faith and love exist, and are the propelling motive to
   action, the carrying of them out in action has a tendency to increase
   them. This arises from the known laws of mind, by which every power and
   every faculty gains strength by exercise. But the case supposed is
   where individuals have left their first love, if ever they had any, and
   then set themselves, without faith or love, to bustle about and warn
   sinners, or the like, under the idea that this is the way to wake up,
   or to become holy, or to get into the state of feeling that God
   requires. It is really most unphilosophical and absurd, and ruinous, to
   think of waking up faith in the soul, where it does not exit, by
   performing outward acts from some other motive. It is mocking God, to
   pretend, by doing things from wrong motives, to produce a holy frame of
   mind. By and by, I shall show where the deception lies, and how it
   comes to pass that any persons should ever dream of such a way of
   becoming sanctified. The fact is too plain to be proved that pretending
   to serve God in such a way, so far from having any tendency to produce
   a right spirit, is in fact grieving the Holy Ghost, and insulting God.

   So far as the philosophy of the thing is concerned, it is just like the
   conduct of convicted sinners. But there is one difference; the sinner,
   in spite of all his wickedness, may by and by learn his own
   helplessness, and actually renounce all his own works, and feel that
   his continued refuse to come to Christ, so far from being a preparation
   for coming, is only heaping up so many sins against God. But it is
   otherwise with those who think themselves to be already Christians, as
   I will explain by and by.

   It is often remarked, by careful observers in religion, that many
   persons who abound in religious acts, are often the most hardened, and
   the farthest removed from spiritual feeling. If performing religious
   duties was the way to produce religious feeling, we should expect that
   ministers, and leaders in the church, would be always the most
   spiritual. But the fact is, that where faith and love are not in
   exercise, in proportion as persons abound in outward acts without the
   inward life, they become hardened and cold, and full of iniquity. They
   may have been converted but have backslidden, and so long as they are
   seeking sanctification in this way, by multiplying their religious
   duties, running round to protracted meetings, or warning sinners,
   without any spiritual life, they will never find it, but will in fact
   become more hardened and stupid. Or if they get into an excitement in
   this way, it is a spurious superficial state of mind that has nothing
   holy in it.

  II. Another reason why so many persons are not sanctified is this: They do not
  receive Christ in all his relations, as he is offered in the gospel.

   Most people are entirely mistaken here and they will never go ahead in
   sanctification, until they learn that there is a radical error in the
   manner in which they attempt to attain it. Take a case: Suppose an
   individual who is convinced of sin. He sees that God might in justice
   send him to hell, and that he has no way in which he can make
   satisfaction. Now tell him of Christ's atonement, show him how Christ
   died to make satisfaction, so that God can be just and yet the
   justifier of them that believe in Jesus, he sees it to be right and
   sufficient, and exactly what he needs, and he throws himself upon
   Christ, in faith, for justification. He accepts him as his
   justification, and that is as far as he understands the gospel. He
   believes, and is justified, and feels the pardon of his sins.

   Now, here is the very attitude in which most convicted sinners stop.
   They take up with Christ in the character in which, as sinners, they
   most feel the need of a Savior, as the propitiation of their sins, to
   make atonement and procure forgiveness, and there they stop. And after
   that, it is often exceedingly difficult to get their attention to what
   Christ offers beyond. Say what you will in regard to Christ as the
   believer's wisdom and righteousness and his sanctification, and all his
   relations as a Savior from sin they do not feel their need of him
   sufficiently to make them really throw themselves upon him in these
   relations. The converted person feels at peace with God, joy and
   gratitude fill his heart, he rejoices in having found a Savior that can
   stand between him and his Judge, he may have really submitted, and for
   a time, he follows on in the way of obedience to God's commandments.
   But, by and by, he finds the workings of sin in his members, unsubdued
   pride, his old temper breaking forth, and a multitude of enemies
   assaulting his soul, from within and without, and he is not prepared to
   meet them.

   Hitherto, he has taken up Christ and regarded him, mainly, in one of
   his relations, that of a Savior to save him from hell. If I am not
   mistaken, the great mass of professing Christians lose sight, almost
   altogether, of many of the most interesting relations which Christ
   sustains to believers. Now, when the convert finds himself thus brought
   under the power of temptation, and drawn into sin, he needs to receive
   Christ in a new relation, to know more of the extent of his provision,
   to make a fresh application to him, and give a new impulse to his mind
   to resist temptation. This is not fully apprehended by many Christians.
   They never really view Christ, under his name Jesus, because he saves
   his people from their sins. They need to receive him as a king, to take
   the throne in their hearts, and rule over them with absolute and
   perfect control, bringing every faculty and every thought into
   subjection. The reason why the convert thus falls under the power of
   temptation, is that he has not submitted his own will to Christ, as a
   king, in every thing, as perfectly as he ought, but is, after all
   exercising his own self-will in some particulars.

   Again: There are a multitude of what are called sign of ignorance,
   which need not be. Christians complain that they cannot understand the
   Bible, and there are many things concerning which they are always in
   doubt. Now, what they need is, to receive Christ as wisdom, to accept
   him in his relation as the source of light and knowledge. Who of you
   now attach a full and definite idea to the text which says, "We are in
   Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
   sanctification, and redemption?" What do you understand by it? It does
   not say he is a justifier, and a teacher, and a sanctifier, and a
   redeemer; but that he is wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
   and redemption. What does that mean? Until Christians shall find out by
   experience, and know what that scripture meaneth, how can the church be
   sanctified? The church is now just like a branch plucked off from a
   vine; "Except ye abide in me, ye cannot bear fruit." Suppose a branch
   had power voluntarily to separate itself from the vine, and then should
   undertake to bring forth fruit, what would you think? So with the
   church; until Christians will go to the Eternal Source of
   sanctification, and wisdom, and redemption, it will never become holy.
   If they would become, by faith, absolutely united with him, in all
   those offices and relations in which he is offered, they would know
   what sanctification is.

   I may, at some other time take this text as the foundation of a
   separate discourse, and discuss these points, one by one, and show what
   this means. I will only say, at present, as much as this: that it means
   just what it says, and there is no need of explaining it away, as has
   too commonly been done. And when the church shall once take hold of
   Christ, in all his relations, as here set forth, they will know what it
   is, and will see that he is the light and the life of the world. To be
   sanctified by him, they must so embrace him, as to receive from him
   those supplies of grace and knowledge, which alone can purify the soul
   and give the complete victory over sin and Satan. I will mention some
   reasons why Christians do not receive Christ in all his relations.

   (1.) They may not have those particular convictions, that are
   calculated to make them deeply feel the necessity of a Savior in those
   relations.

   If an individual is not deeply convicted of his own depravity, and has
   not learned intimately his own sinfulness, and if he does not know
   experimentally, as a matter of fact, that he needs help to overcome the
   power of sin, he will never receive Jesus Christ into his soul as a
   king.

   When men undertake to help themselves out of sin, and feel strong in
   their own strength to cope with their spiritual enemies, they never
   receive Christ fully, nor rely on him solely to save them from sin. But
   when they have tried to keep themselves by their own watchfulness and
   prayers, and binding themselves by resolution and oaths to obey God,
   and find that, after all, if left to themselves, there is nothing in
   them but depravity, then they feel their own helplessness, and begin to
   inquire what they shall do? The Bible teaches all this plainly enough,
   and if people would believe the Bible, converts would know their own
   helplessness, and their need of a Savior to save from sin at the
   outset. But, as a matter of fact, they do not receive nor believe the
   Bible on this subject, until they have set themselves to work out a
   righteousness of their own, and thus have found out by experiment that
   they are nothing without Christ. And therefore they do not receive him
   in this relation, till after they have spent, it may be, years, in
   these vain and self-righteous endeavors to do the work of
   sanctification themselves. Having began in the Spirit they are trying
   to be made perfect by the flesh.

   (2.) Others when they see their own condition, do not receive Christ as
   a Savior from sin, because they are, after all unwilling to abandon all
   sin.

   They know that if they give themselves up entirely to Christ, all sin
   must be abandoned; and they have some idol which they are unwilling to
   give up.

   (3.) Sometimes, when persons are deeply convinced, and anxious to know
   what they shall do to get rid of sin, they do not apply to Christ in
   faith, because they do not know what they have a right to expect from
   him.

   There are many who seem to suppose they are under a fatal necessity to
   sin, and that there is no help for it, but they must drag along this
   load of sin till their death. They do not absolutely charge God
   foolishly, and say in words that he has made no provision for such a
   case as this. But they seem to suppose that Christ's atonement being so
   great as to cover all sins, and God's mercy being so great, if they do
   go on in sin all their days, as they expect they shall, he will forgive
   all at last, and it will be just about as well in the end, as if they
   had been really sanctified. They do not see that the gospel has made
   provision sufficient to rid us forever of the commission of all sin.
   They look at it as merely a system of pardon, leaving the sinner to
   drag along his load of sin to the very gate of heaven; instead of a
   system to break up the very power of sin in the mind. The consequence
   is they make very little account of the promises. O, how little use do
   Christians make of those exceeding great and precious promises, in the
   Bible, which were given expressly for this purpose, that we might
   become partakers of the divine nature! Here God has suited his promises
   to our exigencies for this end, and we have only to draw upon him for
   all we want, and we shall have whatever we need for our sanctification.
   Hear the Savior say, "What things soever ye desire when ye pray,
   believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them."

   The fact is, Christians do not really believe much that is in the
   Bible. Now, suppose you were to meet God, and you knew it was God
   himself, speaking to you, and he should reach out a book in his hand,
   and tell you to take that book, and that the book contains exceeding
   great and precious promises, of all that you need, or ever can need, to
   resist temptation, to overcome sin, and to make you perfectly holy, and
   fit you for heaven; and then he tells you that whenever you are in want
   of anything for this end, you need only take the appropriate promise,
   and present it to him at any time, and he will do it. Now, if you were
   to receive such a book, directly from the hand of God, and knew that
   God had written it for you, with his own hand, would you not believe
   it? And would you not read it a great deal more than you now read the
   Bible? How eager you would be to know all that was in it? And how ready
   to apply the promises in time of need! You would want to get it all by
   heart, and often repeat it all through, that you might keep your mind
   familiar with its contents and be always ready to apply the promises
   you read! Now, the truth is, the Bible is that book. It is written just
   so and filled with just such promises; so that the Christian by laying
   hold of the right promise, and pleading it, can always find all that he
   needs for his spiritual benefit.

   Christ is a complete Savior. All the promises of God are in him. Yea,
   and in him Amen, to the glory of God the Father. That is, God has
   promised in the second person of the Trinity, in the person of Jesus
   Christ, and made them all certain through him. Now, the thing which is
   needed is, that Christians, should understand these promises, and
   believe them, and in every circumstance of need apply them, for
   sanctification. Suppose they lack wisdom. Let them go to God, and plead
   the promise. Suppose they cannot understand the scriptures, or the path
   of duty is not plain. The promise is plain enough, take that. Whatever
   they lack of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
   only let them go to God in faith, and take hold of the promise, and if
   he does not prove false, they will assuredly receive all that they
   need.

   4.) Another reason why many do not receive Christ in all his relations
   is, that they are too proud to relinquish all self-dependence or
   reliance on their own wisdom and their own will.

   How great a thing it is, for the proud heart of man to give up its own
   wisdom, and knowledge, and will, and every thing, to God. I have found
   this the greatest of all difficulties. Doubtless all find it so. The
   common plea is, "Our reason was given us, to be exercised in religion
   but what is the use, if we may not rely on it, or follow it?" But there
   is one important discrimination to be made, which many overlook. Our
   reason was given us to use in religion; but it is not in the proper
   province of reason to ask whether what God says is reasonable, but to
   show us the infinite reasonableness of believing that all which God
   says must be true, whether we in our ignorance and blindness can see
   the reasonableness of it or not. And if we go beyond this, we go beyond
   the proper province of reason. But how unwilling the proud heart of man
   is to lay aside all its own vain wisdom, and become like a little
   child, under the teaching of God! The apostle says, "If any man think
   that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know."
   There is a vast meaning in this. He that does not receive Christ alone
   as his wisdom, knows nothing in religion to any purpose. If he is not
   taught by Jesus Christ, he has not learned the first lesson of
   Christianity. So again, "No man knoweth the Father but the Son, and he
   to whomsoever the Son revealeth him." The individual who has learned
   this lesson, feels that he has not one iota of knowledge in religion,
   that is of any value, only as he is taught by Jesus Christ. For it is
   written, "And they shall all be taught of God."

      REMARKS

  I. You see what kind of preaching the church now needs.

   The church needs to be searched thoroughly, shown their great defects,
   and brought under conviction, and then pointed to where their great
   strength lies.

   With their everlasting parade of dead works, they need to be shown how
   poor they are. "Thou sayest I am rich, and increased with goods, and
   have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou art wretched, and
   miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." Until Christians are shown
   their poverty, and the infinite emptiness and abominable wickedness of
   their dead works, and then shown just where their help is, and that it
   is by faith alone, they can never be sanctified, the church will go
   farther and farther from God, till it will have only the form of
   godliness, denying the power thereof.

  II. When you see the Christian character defective in any particular, you may
  always know that the individual needs to receive Christ more fully in the very
  relation that is calculated to supply this defect.

   The defect, whatever it be, in the character of any believer, will
   never be remedied, until he sees the relation of Christ to that part of
   his character, so as by faith to take hold of Christ, and bring him in
   to remedy that defect. Suppose a person is naturally penurious and
   selfish, and reluctant to act in a disinterested manner: he will never
   remedy that defect, until he receives Christ as his pattern, and the
   selfishness is driven out of his heart by imbuing his very soul with
   the infinite benevolence of the Savior. So it is with regard to any
   other defect; he will never conquer it, until you make him see that the
   infinite fullness of Christ is answerable to that very want.

  III. You see the necessity there is that ministers should be persons of deep
  experience in religion.

   It is easy for even a carnal mind to preach so as to bring sinners
   under conviction. But until the tone of sanctification is greatly
   raised among ministers, it is not to be expected that the piety of the
   church will be greatly elevated. Those Christians who have experience
   of these things should therefore be much in prayer for ministers, that
   the sons of Levi may be purified, that the leaders of Israel may take
   hold of Christ for the sanctification of their own hearts, and then
   they will know what to say to the church on the subject of holiness.

  IV. Many seek sanctification by works, who do not know that they are seeking
  in this way.

   They profess that they are seeking sanctification only by faith. They
   tell you they know very well that it is in vain to seek it in their own
   strength. But yet the results show how conclusively, that they are
   seeking by works, and not by faith. It is of the last importance that
   you should know, whether you are seeking sanctification by works, or by
   faith for all seeking of it by works is absurd, and never will lead to
   any good results. How will you know?

   Take again the case of a convicted sinner. Sinner! how are you seeking
   salvation? The sinner replies, "By faith, of course; everybody knows
   that no sinner can be saved by works." I say, No, you are seeking
   salvation by works. How shall I show it to him? Sinner! do you believe
   in Christ? "I do." But does he give you peace with God? "O no, not yet;
   but I am trying to get more conviction, and to pray more, and be more
   in earnest in seeking, and I hope he will give me peace if I
   persevere." Nay, every Christian sees, at a glance, that with all his
   pretensions to the contrary, this man is seeking salvation by works.
   And the way to prove it to him is exceedingly simple. It is evident he
   is seeking by works, because he is relying on certain preparatory steps
   and processes to be gone through, before he exercises saving faith. He
   is not ready now to accept of Christ, he is conscious he is not, but
   thinks he must bring himself into a different state of mind as a
   preparation, and it is at this he is aiming.

   That is works. No matter what the state of mind is that he aims at as
   preparatory to his coming to Christ, if it is anything that must
   precede faith, or any preparatory process for faith, and he is trying
   without faith to get into a proper state of mind to have faith, it is
   all the religion of works.

   Now, how common is just such a state of mind among those Christians who
   profess to be seeking sanctification. You say you must mortify sin; but
   the way you go about it, is by a self-righteous preparation, seeking to
   recommend yourselves to Christ as worthy to receive the blessing,
   instead of coming right to Christ, as an unworthy and ruined beggar, to
   receive at once, by faith, the very blessing you need. No efforts of
   your own are going to make you any better. Like a person in a horrible
   pit of miry clay, every struggle of your own sinks you deeper in the
   clay. You have no need of any such thing, and all your endeavors,
   instead of bringing you any nearer to Christ, are only sinking you down
   in the filth, farther and farther from God. It is not so much as the
   beginning of help.

   The sinner, by his preparatory seeking, gains no advantage. There he
   lies, dead in trespasses and sins, as far removed from spiritual life,
   or holiness, as ever a dead corpse was from natural life; until at
   length, ceasing from his own works, he comes to the conviction that
   there is nothing he can do for himself but go now, just as he is, and
   submit to Christ. As long as he thinks there is something he must do
   first, he never feels that now is God's time of salvation. And as long
   as the Christian is seeking sanctification in the way of works, he
   never feels that now is God's time to give him the victory over sin.

  V. Multitudes deceive themselves in this matter, by the manner in which they
  have seen certain old-fashioned, Antinomian churches roused up, who were
  dragging along in death.

   Where such a church has been found, that had been fed on dry doctrine
   till they were about as stupid as the seats they sat on, the first
   thing has been to rouse them up to do something, and that very fact
   perhaps would bring such a church under conviction, and lead them to
   repentance. It is not because there is any religion in these doings of
   professors in such a state; but it shows them their deficiencies, and
   their unfitness to be members of the church, and awakens their
   consciences. So it is, sometimes, when a careless sinner has been set
   to praying. Everybody knows there is no piety in such prayers, but it
   calls his attention to the subject of religion, and gives the Holy
   Spirit an opportunity to bring the truth full upon his conscience. But
   if you take a man who has been in the habit of praying from his
   childhood, and whose formal prayers have made him as cold as a stone,
   praying will never bring that man under conviction, till you show him
   what is the true character of his prayers, and stop his ungodly and
   heaven-daring praying.

   In many cases, where a church has sunk down in stupidity, the most
   effectual way to rouse them has been found to be, setting them to
   warning sinners of their danger. This would get the attention of the
   church to the subject of religion, and perhaps bring many of them to
   repentance. Hence many have formed a general rule, that the way for a
   church to wake up, always is, to go to work, and warn sinners. They do
   not discriminate, here, between the habits of different churches, and
   the different treatment they consequently require. Whereas, if you take
   what is called a "working church," where they have been in the habit of
   enjoying revivals and holding protracted meetings, you will find there
   is no difficulty in rousing up the church to act and bustle about and
   make a noise. But as a general rule, unless there is great wisdom and
   faithfulness in dealing with the church, every succeeding revival will
   make their religion more and more superficial; and their minds will be
   more hardened instead of being convicted, by their efforts.

   Tell such a church they are self-righteous and that there is no Holy
   Ghost in their bustling, and they will be affronted and stare at you,
   "Why, don't you know that the way to wake up is to go to work in
   religion?" Whereas, the very fact that activity has become a habit with
   them, shows that they require a different course. They need first to be
   thoroughly probed and searched, and made sensible of their
   deficiencies, and brought humble and believing to the foot of the
   cross, for sanctification.

   When I was an Evangelist, I labored in a church that had enjoyed many
   revivals, and it was the easiest thing in the world to get the church
   to go out and bring in sinners to the meetings; and the impenitent
   would come in and hear, but there was no deep feeling, and no faith in
   the church. The minister saw that this way of proceeding was ruining
   the church, and that each revival brought about in this manner, made
   the converts more and more superficial, and unless we came to a stand,
   and got more sanctification in the church, we should defeat our object.
   We began to preach with that view, and the church members writhed under
   it. The preaching ran so directly across all their former notions,
   about the way to promote religion, that some of them were quite angry.
   They would run about and talk but would do nothing else. But after a
   terrible state of things many of them broke down, and became as humble
   and as teachable as little children.

   Now there are multitudes in the churches who insist upon it that the
   way to get sanctification is to go to work, and they think that, by
   dint of mere friction, they can produce the warm love of God in their
   hearts. This is all wrong. Mere driving about and bustle and noise will
   never produce sanctification. And least of all, when persons have been
   accustomed to this course.

  VI. You that are in the habit of performing many religious duties, and yet
  fall short of holiness, can see what is the matter.

   The truth is, you have gone to work to wake up, instead of at once
   throwing yourself on the Lord Jesus Christ for sanctification, and then
   going to work to serve him. You have gone to work for your life instead
   of working from a principle of life within, impelling you to the work
   of the Lord. You have undertaken to get holiness by a lengthened
   process, like that of the convicted sinner, who is preparing to come to
   Christ. But the misfortune is, that you have not half the perseverance
   of the sinner. The sinner is driven by the fear of going to hell, and
   he exerts himself in the way of works till his strength is all
   exhausted, and all his self-righteousness is worked up, and then,
   feeling that he is helpless and undone, he throws himself into the arms
   of Christ. But you have not so much perseverance, because you have not
   so much fear. You think you are a Christian, and that however you may
   come short of sanctification, yet you are safe from hell, and can go to
   heaven without it. And so you will not persevere and put forth your
   efforts for holiness by works, till you have used up all your
   self-righteousness, and are driven to Christ as your only hope for
   sanctification. This is the reason why convicted Christians so
   generally fall short of that submission to Christ for holiness which
   the convicted sinner exercises for forgiveness. You say to the sinner,
   who is seeking salvation by works, "Why don't you yield up all your
   self-righteous efforts, and come right to Christ for salvation? He is
   ready to receive you now!" And why don't you do so too? When will you
   learn the first lesson in religion, that you have no help in yourselves
   without Christ, and that all your exertions without Christ, for
   sanctification, are just as fruitless as are those of the wretch who is
   in the horrible pit and miry clay, who is struggling to get himself
   out.

  VII. The growth of works in the church is not a certain sign of growth in
  holiness.

   If the church grows in holiness, it will grow in works. But it does not
   follow, that growth in works always proves growth in holiness.

   It may be that works of religion may greatly increase, while the power
   of religion is actually and rapidly declining. It often happens in a
   church, that when a revival of religion begins to lose its power, the
   church may be willing to do even more than before, in works, but it
   will not arrest the decline, unless they get broken down before God.

   I see I must take up this subject again. O that I could convince the
   whole church that they need no other help but Christ, and that they
   would come at once to Christ for all they want, and receive him as
   their wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
   How soon would all their wants be supplied from his infinite fullness.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus
      Christ. Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
      sanctification, and redemption, Acts 26:30, 31, with 1 Corinthians 1:30.

   There can be no objection to putting these texts together in this
   manner as only a clause in the first of them is omitted, which is not
   essential to the sense, and which is irrelevant to my present purpose.

   In the passage first quoted, the apostle tells the inquiring jailer,
   who wished to know what he must do to be saved, "Believe on the Lord
   Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved." And in the other he adds the
   explanatory remark, telling what a Savior Jesus Christ is, "Who of God
   is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
   redemption." The following is the order in which I design to discuss
   the subject tonight:

   I. Show what salvation is. II. Show the way of salvation.

  I. What is salvation?

   Salvation includes several things sanctification, justification, and
   eternal life and glory. The two prime ideas, are sanctification and
   justification. Sanctification is the purifying of the mind, or making
   it holy. Justification relates to the manner in which we are accepted
   and treated by God.

  II. The way of salvation.

   1. It is by faith, in opposition to works.

   Here I design to take a brief view of the gospel plan of salvation, and
   exhibit it especially in contrast with the original plan on which it
   was proposed to save mankind.

   Originally, the human race was put on the foundation of law for
   salvation; so that, if saved at all, they were to be saved on the
   ground of perfect and eternal obedience to the law of God. Adam was the
   natural head of the race. It has been supposed by many, that there was
   a covenant made with Adam such as this, that if he continued to obey
   the law for a limited period all his posterity should be confirmed in
   holiness and happiness forever. What the reason is for this belief, I
   am unable to ascertain; I am not aware that the doctrine is taught in
   the Bible. And if it is true, the condition of mankind now does not
   differ materially from what it was at first. If the salvation of the
   race originally turned wholly on the obedience of one man, I do not see
   how it could be called a covenant of works so far as the race is
   concerned. For if their weal or woe was suspended on the conduct of one
   head, it was a covenant of grace to them, in the same manner that the
   present system is a covenant of grace. For according to that view, all
   that related to works depended on one man just as it does under the
   gospel; and the rest of the race had no more to do with works, than
   they have now, but all that related to works was done by the
   representative. Now, I have supposed, and there is nothing in the Bible
   to the contrary, that if Adam had continued in obedience forever, his
   posterity would have stood forever on the same ground, and must have
   obeyed the law themselves forever in order to be saved. It may have
   been, that if he had obeyed always, the natural influence of his
   example would have brought about such a state of things, that as a
   master of fact all his posterity would have continued in holiness. But
   the salvation of each individual would still have depended on his own
   works. But if the works of the first father were to be so set to the
   account of the race, that on account of his obedience they were to be
   secured in holiness and happiness forever, I do not see wherein it
   differs materially from the covenant of grace, or the gospel.

   As a matter of fact, Adam was the natural head of the human race, and
   his sin has involved them in its consequences, but not on the principle
   that his sin is literally accounted their sin. The truth is simply
   this; that from the relation in which he stood as their natural head,
   as a matter of fact his sin has resulted in the sin and ruin of his
   posterity, I suppose that mankind were originally all under a covenant
   of works, and that Adam was not so their head or representative, that
   his obedience or disobedience involved them irresistibly in sin and
   condemnation, irrespective of their own acts. As a fact it resulted so,
   that "by one man's disobedience many were made sinners;" as the apostle
   tells us in the 5th of Romans. So that, when Adam had fallen, there was
   not the least hope, by the law, of saving any of mankind. Then was
   revealed the plan, which had been provided in the counsels of eternity,
   on foresight of this event, for saving mankind by a proceeding of mere
   grace. Salvation was now placed on an entire new foundation, by a
   Covenant of Redemption. You will find this covenant in the 89th Psalm,
   and other places in the Old Testament. This, you will observe, is a
   covenant between the Father and the Son, regarding the salvation of
   mankind, and is the foundation of another covenant, the covenant of
   grace. In the covenant of redemption, man is no party at all, but
   merely the subject of the covenant; the parties being God the Father
   and the Son. In this covenant, the Son is made the head or
   representative of his people. Adam was the natural head of the human
   family, and Christ is the covenant head of his church.

   On this covenant of redemption was founded the covenant of grace. In
   the covenant of redemption, the Son stipulated with the Father, to work
   out an atonement; and the Father stipulated that he should have a seed,
   or people, gathered out of the human race. The covenant of grace was
   made with men and was revealed to Adam, after the fall, and more fully
   revealed to Abraham. Of this covenant, Jesus Christ was to be the
   Mediator, or he that should administer it. It was a covenant of grace,
   in opposition to the original covenant of works, under which Adam and
   his posterity were placed at the beginning; and salvation was now to be
   by faith, instead of works, because the obedience and death of Jesus
   Christ were to be regarded as the reason why any individual was to be
   saved, and not each one's personal obedience. Not that his obedience
   was, strictly speaking, performed for us. As a man, he was under the
   necessity of obeying, for himself; because he had not put himself under
   the law, and if he did not obey it he became personally a transgressor.
   And yet there is a sense in which it may be said that his obedience is
   reckoned to our account. His obedience has so highly honored the law,
   and his death has so fully satisfied the demands of public justice,
   that grace (not justice,) has reckoned his righteousness to us. If he
   had obeyed the law strictly for us, and had owed no obedience for
   himself, but was at liberty to obey only for us, then I cannot see why
   justice should not have accounted his obedience to us, and we could
   have obtained salvation on the score of right instead of asking it on
   the score of grace or favor. But it is only in this sense accounted
   ours, that he, being God and man, having voluntarily assumed our
   nature, and then voluntarily laying down his life to make atonement,
   casts such a glory on the law of God, that grace is willing to consider
   obedience in such a sense ours, as, on his account, to treat us as if
   we were righteous.

   Christ is also the covenant head of those that believe. He is not the
   natural head, as Adam was, but our covenant relation to him is such,
   that whatever is given to him is given to us. Whatever he is, both in
   his divine and human nature; whatever he has done, either as God or
   man, is given to us by covenant, or promise, and is absolutely ours. I
   desire you should understand this.

   The church, as a body, has never yet understood the fullness and
   richness of this covenant, and that all there is in Christ is made over
   to us in the covenant of grace.

   And here let me say, that we receive this grace by faith. It is not by
   works, by anything we do, more or less, previous to the exercise of
   faith, that we become interested in this righteousness. But as soon as
   we exercise faith, all that Christ has done, all there is of Christ,
   all that is contained in the covenant of grace, becomes ours by faith.
   Hence it is, that the inspired writers make so much of faith. Faith is
   the voluntary compliance on our part, with the condition of the
   covenant. It is the eye that discerns, the hand that takes hold, the
   medium by which we possess the blessings of the covenant. By the act of
   faith, the soul becomes actually possessed of all that is embraced is
   that act of faith. If there is not enough received to break the bonds
   of sin and set the soul at once at liberty, it is because the act has
   not embraced enough of what Christ is, and what he has done.

   I have read the verse from Corinthians, for the purpose of remarking on
   some of the fundamental things contained in this covenant of grace. "Of
   him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
   righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption." When Christ is
   received and believed on, he is made to us what is meant by these
   several particulars. But what is meant? How and in what sense is Christ
   our wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption? I
   will dwell a few moments on each.

   This is a very peculiar verse, and my mind has long dwelt on it with
   great anxiety to know its exact and full meaning. I have prayed over it
   as much as over any passage in the Bible, that I might be enlightened
   to understand its real import. I have long been in the habit, when my
   mind fastened on any passage that I did not understand, to pray over it
   till I felt satisfied. I have never dared to preach on this verse,
   because I never felt fully satisfied that I understood it. I think I
   understand it now. At all events, I am willing to give my opinion on
   it. And if I have any right knowledge respecting its meaning, I am sure
   I have received it from the Spirit of God.

   1. In what sense is Christ our wisdom?

   He is often called "the Wisdom of God." And in the Book of Proverbs he
   is called Wisdom. But how is he made to us wisdom.

   One idea contained in it is, that we have absolutely all the benefits
   of his wisdom; and if we exercise the faith we ought, we are just as
   certain to be directed by it, and it is in all respects just as well
   for us, as if we had the same wisdom, originally, of our own. Else it
   cannot be true that he is made unto us wisdom. As he is the infinite
   source of wisdom, how can it be said that he is made unto us wisdom,
   unless we are partakers of his wisdom, and have it guaranteed to us; so
   that at any time, if we trust in him, we may have it as certainly, and
   in any degree we need, to guide us infallibly, as if we had it
   originally ourselves? That is what we need from the gospel, and what
   the gospel must furnish, to be suited to our necessities. And the man
   who has not learned this, has not known anything as he ought. If he
   thinks his own theorizing and speculating are going to bring him to any
   right knowledge on the subject of religion, he knows nothing at all, as
   yet. His carnal, earthly heart, can no more study out the realities of
   religion so as to get any available knowledge of them than the heart of
   a beast. "What man knoweth the thing of a man, save the spirit of a man
   which is in him?

   Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." What
   can we know, without experience, of the character or Spirit of God? Do
   you say, "We can reason about God." What if we do reason? What can
   reason do here?

   Suppose here was a mind that was all pure intellect, and had no other
   powers, and I should undertake to teach that pure intellect what it was
   to love. I could lecture on it, and instruct that pure intellect in the
   words, so that it could reason and philosophize about love, and yet
   anybody can see that it is impossible to put that pure intellect in
   possession of the idea of what love is, unless it not only has power to
   exercise love, but has actually exercised it! It is just as if I should
   talk about colors to a man born blind. He hears the word, but what idea
   can he attach to it, unless he has seen? It is impossible to get the
   idea home to his mind, of the difference of colors. The term is a mere
   word.

   Just so it is in religion. One whose mind has not experienced it, may
   reason upon it. He may demonstrate the perfections of God, as he would
   demonstrate a proposition in Euclid. But that which is the spirit and
   life of the gospel, can no more be carried to the mind by mere words,
   without experience, than love to a pure intellect, or colors to a man
   born blind. You may so far give him the letter, as to crush him down to
   hell with conviction; but to give the spiritual meaning of things,
   without the Spirit of God, is as absurd as to lecture a blind man about
   colors.

   These two things, then are contained in the idea of wisdom. 1. As
   Christ is our representative, we are interested in all his wisdom, and
   all the wisdom he has is exercised for us. His infinite wisdom is
   actually employed for our benefit. And, 2. That his wisdom, just as
   much as is needed, is guaranteed to be always ready to be imparted to
   us, whenever we exercise faith in him for wisdom. From his infinite
   fullness, in this respect, we may receive all we need. And if we do not
   receive from him the wisdom which we need, in any and every case, it is
   because we do not exercise faith.

   2. He is made unto us righteousness. What is the meaning of this?

   Here my mind has long labored to understand the distinction which the
   apostle intended to make between righteousness and sanctification.

   Righteousness means holiness, or obedience to law; and sanctification
   means the same.

   My present view of the distinction aimed at is, that by his being made
   unto us righteousness, the apostle meant to be understood, that Christ
   is our outward righteousness; or that his obedience is, under the
   covenant of grace, accounted to us. Not in the sense that on the
   footing of justice he obeyed "for us," and God accounts us just,
   because our substitute has obeyed; but that we are so interested in his
   obedience, that as a matter of grace, we are treated as if we had
   ourselves obeyed.

   You are aware there is a view of this subject, which is maintained by
   some, different from this; that the righteousness of Christ is so
   imputed to us, that we are considered as having been always holy. It
   was at one time extensively maintained that righteousness was so
   imputed to us, that we had a right to demand salvation, on the score of
   justice. My view of the matter is entirely different. It is, that
   Christ's righteousness becomes ours by gift. God has so united us to
   Christ, as on his account to treat us with favor. It is just like a
   case, where a father had done some signal service to his country, and
   the government thinks it proper to reward such signal service with
   signal reward; and not only is the individual himself rewarded, but all
   his family receive favors on his account, because they are the children
   of a father who had greatly benefited his country. Human governments do
   this, and the ground of it is very plain. It is just so in the divine
   government.

   Christ's disciples are in such a sense considered one with him, and God
   is so highly delighted with the single service he has done the kingdom,
   from the circumstances under which he became a Savior, that God
   accounts his righteousness to them as if it were their own; or in other
   words, treats them just as he would treat Christ himself. As the
   government of the country, under certain circumstances, treats the son
   of a father who had greatly benefited the country, just as they would
   treat the father, and bestow on him the same favors. You will bear in
   mind, that I am now speaking of what I called the outward
   righteousness; I mean, the reason out of the individual, why God
   accepts and saves them that believe in Christ. And this reason includes
   both the obedience of Christ to the law, and his obedience unto death,
   or suffering upon the cross to make atonement.

   3. In what sense is Christ made unto us sanctification?

   Sanctification is inward purity. And the meaning is, that he is our
   inward purity. The control which Christ himself exercises over us, his
   Spirit working in us, to will and to do, his shedding his love abroad
   in our hearts, so controlling us that we are ourselves, through the
   faith which is of the operation of God, made actually holy.

   I wish you to get the exact idea here. When it is said that Christ is
   our sanctification, or our holiness, it is meant that he is the author
   of our holiness. He is not only the procuring cause, by his atonement
   and intercession, but by his direct intercourse with the soul he
   himself produces holiness. He is not the remote but the immediate cause
   of our being sanctified. He works our works in us, not by suspending
   our own agency, but he so controls our minds, by the influences of his
   Spirit in us in a way perfectly consistent with our freedom, as to
   sanctify us. And this, also, is received by faith. It is by faith that
   Christ is received and enthroned as king in our hearts; when the mind,
   from confidence in Christ, just yields itself up to him, to be led by
   his Spirit, and guided and controlled by his hand. The act of the mind,
   that thus throws the soul into the hand of Christ for sanctification,
   is faith. Nothing is wanting, but for the mind to break off from any
   confidence in itself, and to give itself up to him, to be led and
   controlled by him, absolutely: just as the child puts out its little
   hand to its father, to have him lead it anywhere he pleases. If the
   child is distrustful, or not willing to be led, or if it has confidence
   in its own wisdom and strength, it will break away and try to run
   alone. But if all that self-confidence fails, it will cease from its
   own efforts, and come and give itself up to its father again, to be led
   entirely at his will. I suppose this is similar to the act of faith, by
   which an individual gives his mind up to be led and controlled by
   Christ. He ceases from his own efforts to guide, and control, and
   sanctify himself; and just gives himself up, as yielding as air, and
   leaves himself in the hands of Christ as his sanctification.

   4. It is said Christ is made of God unto us redemption. What are we to
   understand by that?

   Here the apostle plainly refers to the Jewish practice of redeeming
   estates, or redeeming relatives that had been sold for debt. When an
   estate had been sold out of the family, or an individual had been
   deprived of liberty for debt, they could be redeemed, by paying the
   price of redemption. There are very frequent allusions in the Bible to
   this practice of redemption. And where Christ is spoken of as our
   redemption, I suppose it means just what it says. While we are in our
   sins, under the law, we are sold as slaves, in the hand of public
   justice, bound over to death, and have no possible way to redeem
   ourselves from the curse of the law. Now, Christ makes himself the
   price of our redemption. In other words, he is our redemption money; he
   buys us out from under the law, by paying himself as a ransom. Christ
   hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us;
   and thus, also, redeems us from the power of sin. But I must leave this
   train of thought, and return to a consideration of the plan of
   salvation.

   Under this covenant of grace, our own works, or anything that we do, or
   can do, as works of law, have no more to do with our salvation, than if
   we had never existed. I wish your minds to separate entirely between
   salvation by works, and salvation by grace. Our salvation by grace is
   founded on a reason entirely separate from and out of ourselves.
   Before, it depended on ourselves. Now we receive salvation, as a free
   gift, solely on account of Jesus Christ. He is the sole author, ground,
   and reason of our salvation. Whether we love God or do not love God so
   far as it is a ground of our salvation, is of no account. The whole is
   entirely a matter of grace, through Jesus Christ. You will not
   understand me as saying that there is no necessity for love to God or
   good works. I know that "without holiness no man shall see the Lord."
   But the necessity of holiness is not at all on this ground. Our own
   holiness does not enter at all into the ground or reason for our
   acceptance and salvation. We are not going to be indebted to Christ for
   a while, until we are sanctified, and all the rest of the time stand in
   our own righteousness. But however perfect and holy we may become, in
   this life, or to all eternity, Jesus Christ will for ever be the sole
   reason in the universe why we are not in hell. Because, however holy we
   may become, it will be forever true that we have sinned, and in the eye
   of justice, nothing in us, short of our eternal damnation can satisfy
   the law. But now, Jesus Christ has undertaken to help, and he forever
   remains the sole ground of our salvation.

   According to this plan, we have the benefit of his obedience to the
   law, just as if he had obeyed for us. Not that he did obey for us, in
   the distinction from himself, but we have the benefits of his
   obedience, by the gift of grace, the same as if he had done so.

   I meant to dwell on the idea of Christ as our "Light," and our "Life,"
   and our "Strength." But I perceive there is not time tonight. I wish to
   touch a little on this question, "How does faith put us in possession
   of Christ, in all these relations?"

   Faith in Christ puts us in possession of Christ, as the sum and
   substance of the blessings of the gospel. Christ was the very blessing
   promised in the Abrahamic covenant. And throughout the scriptures he is
   held forth as the sum and substance of all God's favors to man. He is
   "the Bread of Life," "the Water of Life," "our Strength," "our All,"
   The gospel has taxed all the powers of language to describe the vast
   variety of his relations, and to show that faith is to put believers in
   possession of Jesus Christ, in all these relations.

   The manner in which faith puts the mind in possession of all these
   blessings is this: It annihilates all those things that stand in the
   way of our intercourse with Christ. He says, "Behold, I stand at the
   door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come
   in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." Here is a door, an
   obstacle to our intercourse with Christ, something that stands in the
   way. Take the particular of wisdom. Why do we not receive Christ as our
   wisdom? Because we depend on our own wisdom, and think we have
   ourselves some available knowledge of the things of God, and as long as
   we depend on this we keep the door shut. That is the door. Now, let us
   just throw this all away, and give up all wisdom of our own, and see
   how infinitely empty we are of any available knowledge, as much so as a
   beast that perisheth, as to the way of salvation, until Christ shall
   teach us. Until we feel this, there is a door between us and Christ. We
   have something of our own, instead of coming and throwing ourselves
   perfectly into the hands of Christ, we just come to him to help out our
   own wisdom.

   How does faith put us in possession of the righteousness of Christ?
   This is the way. Until our mind takes hold of the righteousness of
   Christ, we are alive to our own righteousness. We are naturally engaged
   in working out a righteousness of our own, and until we cease entirely
   from our own works, by absolutely throwing ourselves on Christ for
   righteousness, we do not come to Christ. Christ will not patch up our
   own righteousness, to make it answer the purpose. If we depend on our
   prayers, our tears, our charities, or anything we have done, or expect
   to do, he will not receive us. We must have none of this. But the
   moment an individual takes hold on Christ, he receives and appropriates
   all Christ's righteousness as his own; as a perfect and unchangeable
   reason for his acceptance with God, by grace.

   It is just so with regard to sanctification and redemption. I cannot
   dwell on them so particularly as I wished. Until an individual receives
   Christ, he does not cease from his own works. The moment he does that,
   by this very act he throws the entire responsibility upon Christ. The
   moment the mind does fairly yield itself up to Christ, the
   responsibility comes upon him, just as the person who undertakes to
   conduct a blind man is responsible for his safe conduct. The believer,
   by the act of faith, pledges Christ for his obedience and
   sanctification. By giving himself up to Christ, all the veracity of the
   Godhead is put at stake, that he shall be led right and made holy.

   And with regard to redemption, as long as the sinner supposes that his
   own sufferings, his prayers, or tears, or mental agony, are of any
   avail, he will never receive Christ. But as soon as he receives Christ,
   he sinks down as lost and condemned as in fact a dead person, unless
   redeemed by Christ.

      REMARKS

   I. There is no such thing as spiritual life in us, or anything
   acceptable to God, until we actually believe in Christ.

   The very act of believing, receives Christ as just that influence which
   alone can wake up the mind to spiritual life.

   II. We are nothing, us Christians, any farther than we believe in
   Christ.

   III. Many seem to be waiting to do something first, before they receive
   Christ.

   Some wait to become more dead to the world. Some to get a broken heart.
   Some to get their doubts cleared up before they come to Christ. This is
   a grand mistake. It is expecting to do that first, before faith, which
   is only the result of faith. Your heart will not be broken, your doubts
   will not be cleared up, you will never die to the world, until you
   believe. The moment you grasp the things of Christ, your mind will see,
   as in the light of eternity, the emptiness of the world, of reputation,
   riches, honor, and pleasure. To expect this first, preparatory to the
   exercise of faith, is beginning at the wrong end. It is seeking that as
   a preparation for faith, which is always the result of faith.

   IV. Perfect faith will produce perfect love.

   When the mind duly recognizes Christ, and receives him, in his various
   relations; when the faith is unwavering and the views clear, there will
   be nothing left in the mind contrary to the law of God.

   V. Abiding faith would produce abiding love.

   Faith increasing, would produce increasing love. And here you ought to
   observe, that love may be perfect at all times, and yet be in different
   degrees at different times. An individual may love God perfectly and
   eternally, and yet his love may increase in vigor to all eternity, as I
   suppose it will.

   As the saints in glory see more and more of God's excellencies, they
   will love him more and more, and yet will have perfect love all the
   time. That is, there will be nothing inconsistent with love in the
   mind, while the degrees of love will be different as their views of the
   character of God unfold. As God opens to their view the wonders of his
   glorious benevolence, they will have their souls thrilled with new love
   to God. In this life, the exercises of love vary greatly in degree.
   Sometimes God unfolds to his saints the wonders of his government, and
   gives them such views as well-nigh prostrate the body, and then love is
   greatly raised in degree. And yet the love may have been perfect
   before; that is, the love of God was supreme and single, without any
   mixture of inconsistent affections. And it is not unreasonable to
   suppose, that it will be so to all eternity; that occasions will occur
   in which the love of the saints will be brought into more lively
   exercise by new unfoldings of God's glory. As God develops to them
   wonder after wonder, their love will be increased indefinitely, and
   they will have continually enlarged accessions of its strength and
   fervor, to all eternity.

   I designed to mention some things on the subject of instantaneous and
   progressive sanctification. But there is not time tonight, and they
   must be postponed.

   VI. You see, beloved, from this subject, the way in which you can be
   made holy, and when you can be sanctified.

   Whenever you come to Christ, and receive him for all that he is, and
   accept a whole salvation by grace, you will have all that Christ is to
   you, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
   There is nothing but unbelief to hinder you from now enjoying it all.
   You need not wait for any preparation. There is no preparation that is
   of any avail. You must receive a whole salvation, as a free gift. When
   will you thus lay hold on Christ? When will you believe? Faith, true
   faith, always works by love, and purifies the heart, and overcomes the
   world. Whenever you find any difficulty in your way, you may know what
   is the matter. It is a want of faith. No matter what may befall you
   outwardly: if you find yourself thrown back in religion, or your mind
   thrown all into confusion, unbelief is the cause, and faith the remedy.
   If you lay hold on Christ, and keep hold, all the devils in hell can
   never drive you away from God, or put out your light. But if you let
   unbelief prevail, you may go on in this miserable, halting way, talking
   about sanctification, using words without knowledge, and dishonoring
   God, till you die.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away;
      for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
      depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will reprove the
      world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment; of sin, because they
      believe not on me; of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see
      me no more; of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. I
      have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit
      when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth;
      for he shall not speak of himself, but whatever he shall hear, that shall
      he speak: and he will show you things to come. John 16:7-13.

   The doctrine of the necessity of Divine Influence, to enlighten and
   sanctify the minds of men, is very abundantly taught in the Bible, and
   is generally maintained, as a matter of opinion at least, in all
   orthodox churches. But, as a matter of fact, there seems to be very
   little available knowledge of the gospel among mankind; so little that
   it exerts comparatively little influence. The great ends of the gospel
   have hardly begun to be realized, in the production of holiness on the
   earth. It is a grand question, whether we do need Divine Influence to
   attain the ends of the gospel; and if we do need it, then in what
   degree do we need it, and why? If our minds are unsettled on this
   question, we shall be unsettled on all the subjects that practically
   concern our sanctification.

   In discoursing on this subject tonight, I design to pursue the
   following order:

   I. Inquire how far the reason of man, unaided by Divine illumination,
   is capable of understanding the things of religion.

   II. Show wherein the reason of man is defective, in regard to the
   capacity of gaining any available knowledge of the gospel.

   III. That the spirit of God alone can supply the illumination that is
   needed.

   IV. That every one may have the influence of the Spirit, according to
   his necessities.

   V. The reasons why any individual fails to receive this divine aid to
   the extent of his necessities.

   VI. That men are responsible for the light which they might have, as
   well as for that which they actually enjoy.

   I. I shall inquire how far the reason of man, unaided by Divine
   illumination, is capable of apprehending the things of religion.

   1. The mind of man is capable of understanding the historical facts of
   religion, just as it comprehends any other historical facts.

   2. It is capable of understanding the doctrinal propositions of the
   gospel.

   That is, it can understand those abstractions which make up the
   skeleton of the gospel; such as the being and character of God, the
   divine authority and inspiration of the scriptures, and other
   fundamental doctrines which make up the framework of the gospel.

   That is, it can understand them as propositions, and see the evidence
   that supports them as true, just as it can understand any propositions
   in science.

   For instance, to enter a little into detail A man, by his reason, may
   understand the law of God. He can understand that it requires him to
   exercise perfect love towards God and all other beings. He can see the
   ground of his obligation to do this, because he is a moral being. He
   knows, by experience, what love is, for he has exercised love towards
   different objects. And he can, therefore, form or comprehend the idea
   of love, so far as to see the reasonableness of the requirement. He can
   understand the foundation and the force of moral obligation, and see,
   in some measure, the extent of his obligation to love God.

   So, likewise, he can see that he is a sinner, and that he cannot be
   saved by his own works. He has broken the law, so that the law can
   never justify him. He can see, that if he is ever saved, he must be
   justified through mere mercy, by an act of pardon.

   I might go through the whole circle of theology, and show that the
   human understanding is capable of knowing it, in the abstract, as a
   system of propositions, to be received and believed, on evidence, like
   any other science. I do not mean to be understood as saying, that
   unaided reason can attain any available knowledge of the things of
   religion, or any such knowledge as will be effectual to produce a
   sanctifying change.

   II. I am to show wherein our knowledge of the things of religion is
   necessarily defective, without the aids of the Holy Spirit.

   In other words, I am to show what our knowledge of the gospel lacks, to
   make it available to salvation.

   And here it is necessary to distinguish between knowledge which might
   be available to one that was himself disposed to love and obey God; and
   what will be available, in fact, to a sinner, who is wholly indisposed
   to holiness. It is easy to see that one who is disposed to do right
   would be influenced to duty by a far less amount of illumination, or a
   far less clear and vivid view of motives, than one who is disposed to
   do wrong. What we are now inquiring after respects the matter of fact,
   in this world. Whether the knowledge attainable by our present
   faculties would be available to influence us to do right, were there no
   sin in the world, is more than I can say. As a matter of fact, the
   knowledge which Adam had when in a state of innocency did not avail to
   influence him to do right. But we are now speaking of things as they
   are in this world, and to show what is the reason that men, as sinners,
   can have no available knowledge of divine things; no such knowledge as
   will, as a matter of fact, influence them to love and serve God.

   Knowledge, to avail anything towards effecting its object, must be such
   as will influence the mind. The will must be controlled. And to do
   this, the mind must have such a view of things as to excite emotion,
   corresponding to the object in view. Mere intellect never will move the
   soul to act. A pure scientific abstraction of the intellect, that does
   not touch the feelings, or excite any emotion, is wholly unavailable to
   move the will. It is so every where. It would be so in heaven. You must
   bring the mind under a degree of excitement, to influence the will in
   any case. In the case of sinners, to influence sinners to love God, you
   must have a great degree of light, such as will powerfully excite the
   mind, and produce strong emotions. The reasons for obedience must be
   made to appear with great strength and vividness, so as to subdue their
   rebellious hearts and bring them voluntarily to obey God. This is
   available knowledge. This men never have, and never can have, without
   the Spirit of God.

   If men were disposed to do right, I know not how far their knowledge,
   attainable by unaided reason, might avail. But, as they are universally
   and totally indisposed, this knowledge will never do it. I will mention
   some of the reasons:

   1. All the knowledge we can have here of spiritual things, is by
   analogy, or comparison.

   Our minds are here shut up in the body, and we derive all our ideas
   from external objects, through the senses. Now, we never can of
   ourselves obtain knowledge of spiritual or eternal things in this way
   sufficient to rightly influence our wills. Our bodily powers were not
   created for this. All the ideas we can have of the spiritual world is
   by analogy, or comparing them with the things around us. It is easily
   seen that all ideas conveyed to our minds in this way, must be
   extremely imperfect, and that we do not, after all, get the true idea
   in our minds. The Jewish types were probably the most forcible means
   which God could then use, for giving to the Jews a correct idea of the
   gospel. Considering how the eastern nations were accustomed, by their
   education, to the use of figures, and parables, and types, probably the
   system of types was the most impressive and happy mode that could be
   devised to gain a more ready access for the truth to their minds, and
   give them a more full idea of the plan of redemption than could be
   communicated in any other way. And yet it is manifest that the ideas
   which were communicated in this way were extremely imperfect; and that
   without divine illumination to make them see the reality more fully
   than they could by unaided reason, they never would have got any
   available knowledge in this way.

   So words are merely signs of ideas. They are not the ideas, but the
   representatives of ideas. It is often very difficult, and sometimes
   impossible to convey ideas by words. Take a little child, and attempt
   to talk with him, and how difficult it is, on many subjects, to get
   your ideas into his little mind. He must have some experience of the
   things you are trying to teach, before you can convey ideas to him by
   words.

   Suppose this congregation were all blind, and had never seen colors.
   Then suppose that on that wall hung a most grand and beautiful
   painting, and that I was a perfect master of the subject, and should
   undertake to describe it to you. No language that I could use would
   give you such an idea of the painting, as to enable you to form a
   picture of it in your minds. Where, on any subject, we are obliged,
   from the nature of the case, to use figurative language, analogies, and
   resemblances, the knowledge we communicate is necessarily defective and
   inadequate. Who of you have not heard descriptions of persons and
   places, till you thought you had an accurate knowledge of them; but
   when you come to see them you find you had no true idea of the reality?

   Suppose an individual were to visit this world, from another planet,
   where all things are constituted on the most opposite principles from
   those which are adopted here. Suppose him to remain here long enough to
   learn our language, and that then he should undertake to give us a
   description of the world he had left. We should understand it according
   to our ideas and experience. Now, if the analogy between the two worlds
   is very imperfect, it is plain that our knowledge of things there, from
   his description, must be imperfect in proportion. So, when we find in
   the Bible descriptions of heaven and hell, or anything in the invisible
   world, it is plain that from mere words we can get no true ideas at all
   adequate to the reality.

   2. The wickedness of our hearts is so great, as to pervert our
   judgment, and shut out from our minds much that we might understand of
   the things of religion.

   When a man's mind is so perverted on any subject, that he will not take
   up the evidence concerning it, he cannot, of course, come at the
   knowledge of the truth on that subject. This is our case in regard to
   religion. Perverseness of heart so shuts out the light, that the
   intellect does not, and from the nature of things cannot, get even the
   ideas it might otherwise gain, respecting divine things.

   3. Prejudice is a great obstacle to the reception of correct knowledge
   concerning religion.

   Take the case of the disciples of Christ. They had strong Jewish
   prejudices respecting the plan of salvation so strong that all the
   instructions of Christ himself could not make them understand the
   truth. After teaching them personally, for three years, with all the
   talent, and simplicity, and skill he was master of, he could never get
   their minds in possession of the first principles of the gospel. Up to
   his very death, he could not make them see that he should die, and rise
   from the dead. Therefore he says in his last conversation "If I go not
   away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will
   send him unto you." This was the very design of his going away from
   them, that the Spirit of Truth might come, and put them in possession
   of the things which he meant by the words he had used in teaching them.

   The general truth is this; that without divine illumination, men can
   understand from the Bible enough to convict and condemn them, but not
   enough to sanctify and save them.

   Some may ask, What, then, is the use of revelation?

   It is of much use. The Bible is as plain as it can be. Who doubts that
   our Lord Jesus Christ gave instructions to his disciples, as plainly as
   he could? See the pains which he took to illustrate his teaching; how
   simple his language; how he brings it down to the weakest
   comprehension, as a parent would to a little child. And yet it remains
   true, that without divine illumination, the unaided reason of man never
   did, and never will attain any available knowledge of the gospel. The
   difficulty lies in the subject. The Bible contains the gospel, as plain
   as it can be made. That is, it contains the signs of the ideas, as far
   as language can represent the things of religion. No language but
   figurative language can be used for this purpose. And this will forever
   be inadequate to put our minds in real possession of the thing
   themselves. The difficulty is in our ignorance and sin, and in the
   nature of the subject. This is the reason why we need divine
   illumination, to get any available knowledge of the gospel.

   III. The Spirit of God alone, can give us this illumination.

   The Bible says, "No man can say that Jesus Christ is Lord, but by the
   Holy Ghost." Now the abstract proposition of the Deity of Christ, can
   be proved, as a matter of science, so as to gain the assent of any
   unbiased mind to the truth, that Jesus is Lord. But nothing but the
   Holy Ghost can so put the mind in possession of the idea of Christ, as
   God, as to fix the soul in the belief of the fact, and make it
   available to sanctify the heart.

   Again, it is said that "No man can come to me, except the Father which
   hath sent me draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day. It is
   written in the prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. Every
   man, therefore, that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh
   unto me." Here it is evident that the drawing spoken of, is the
   teaching of the Holy Spirit. They must be taught of God, and learn of
   the Father, before they can ever have such a knowledge of the things of
   religion as actually to come to Christ.

   Christ says, "It is expedient for you that I go away for if I go not
   away, the Comforter will not come unto you. "The word Paracletos, here
   translated Comforter, properly means a Helper, or Teacher. "When he is
   come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness and of
   judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me; of righteousness,
   because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; of judgment because
   the prince of this world is judged. I have yet many things to say unto
   you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of
   Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not
   speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak;
   and he will show you things to come."

   So in the fourteenth chapter the Savior says, "I will pray the Father
   and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you
   forever; even the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive,
   because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him, for he
   dwelleth with you, and shall be in you." And again, in the 26th verse,
   "But the comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send
   in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
   remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." Here you see the office
   of the Spirit of God is, to instruct mankind in regard to the things of
   religion.

   Now, it is manifest that none but the Spirit of God can supply this
   defect, from a single consideration that all teaching by words, whether
   by Jesus Christ, or by apostles, or by any inspired or uninspired
   teacher coming merely through the senses, can never put the mind in
   possession of the idea of spiritual things. The kind of teaching that
   we need is this; we want someone to teach us the things of religion,
   who is not obliged to depend on words, or to reach our minds through
   the medium of the senses. We want some way in which the ideas
   themselves can be brought to our minds, and not merely the signs of the
   ideas. We want a teacher who can directly approach the mind itself, and
   not through the senses; and who can exhibit the ideas of religion,
   without being obliged to use words. This the Spirit of God can do.

   The manner in which the Spirit of God does this, is what we can never
   know in this world. But the fact is undeniable, that he can reach the
   mind without the use of words, and can put our minds in possession of
   the ideas themselves, of which the types, or figures, or words, of the
   human teacher, are only the signs or imperfect representatives. The
   human teacher can only use words to our senses, and finds it impossible
   to possess us of the ideas of that which we have never experienced. But
   the Spirit of God, having direct access to the mind, can, through the
   outward sign, possess us of the actual idea of things. What Christian
   does not know this, as a matter of fact? What Christian does not know,
   from his own experience, that the Spirit of God does lead him instantly
   to see that in a passage of scripture, which all his study and effort
   of mind to know the meaning of could never have given him in the world?

   Take the case again, of a painting on the wall there, and suppose that
   all the congregation were blind, and I was trying to describe to them
   this painting. How, suppose, while I was laboring to make them
   understand the various distinctions and combination of colors, and they
   are bending their minds to understand it, all at once their eyes are
   opened! You can then see for yourselves the very things which I was
   vainly trying to bring to your minds by words. Now, the office of the
   Spirit of God, and what he alone can do, is to open the spiritual eye,
   and bring the things which we try to describe by analogy and signs, in
   all their living reality before the mind, so as to put the mind in
   complete possession of the thing as it is.

   It is evident, too, that no one but the Spirit of God so knows the
   things of God as to be able to give us the idea of those things
   correctly. "What man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of
   man that is in him?" What can a beast know of the things of a man, of a
   man's character, designs, etc.? I can speak to your consciousness being
   a man, and knowing the things of a man. But I cannot speak these things
   to the consciousness of a beast, neither can a beast speak of these
   things, because he has not the spirit of a man in him, and cannot know
   them. In like manner the Bible says, "The things of God knoweth no man,
   but the Spirit of God."

   The Spirit of God, knowing from consciousness the things of God,
   possesses a different kind of knowledge of these things from what other
   beings can possess; and therefore, can give us the kind of instruction
   we need, and such as no other being can give.

   IV. The needed influences of the Spirit of God may be possessed by all
   men, freely, and under the gospel.

   A few passages from the Bible will show this:

   Jesus Christ says God is more willing to give his Holy Spirit to them
   that ask him, than parents are to give their children bread. "Ask, and
   it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
   opened unto you." "And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
   believing, ye shall receive." "Therefore I say unto you, What things
   soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
   shall have them." James says, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask
   of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it
   shall be given him." If it be true, that God has made these unlimited
   promises, that all men, who will ask of him may have divine
   illumination as much as they will ask for, then it is true that all men
   may have as much of divine illumination as they need.

   V. I will show the reasons why any do not have as much divine
   illumination as they need.

   1. They do not ask for it in such a manner or degree as they need it.

   2. They ask amiss, or from selfish motives.

   The apostle James says, "Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
   that ye may consume it on your lusts." When an individual has a selfish
   motive for asking, or some other reason than a desire to glorify God,
   he need not expect to receive divine illumination. If his object in
   asking for the Holy Ghost, is that he may always be happy in religion,
   or that he may be very wise in the scriptures, or be looked upon as an
   eminent Christian, or have his experience spoken of as remarkable, or
   any other selfish view, that is a good reason why he should not receive
   even what he asks.

   3. They do not use the proper means to attain what they ask.

   Suppose a person neglects his Bible, and yet asks God to give him a
   knowledge of the things of religion: that in tempting God. The manner
   in which God gives knowledge is through the Bible, and the other
   appointed means of instruction. If a person will not use these means,
   when they are in his power, however much he may pray, he need not
   expect divine instruction. "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the
   word of God."

   There is an important difference to be observed, between the cases of
   those who possess these means, and those who do not. I suppose that a
   person may learn the gospel, and receive all the illumination he needs,
   under any circumstances of privation of means. As if he was on a
   desolate island, he might receive direct illumination from the Spirit
   of God. And so he might, in any other circumstances, where he
   absolutely could not have access to any means of instruction. Some very
   remarkable cases of this kind have occurred within a few years. I have
   known one case, which I looked upon at the time as miraculous, and for
   that reason have seldom mentioned it, feeling that even the church were
   not prepared to receive it. When I was an evangelist, I labored once in
   a revival, in a neighborhood where there were many Germans.

   They had received but little instruction, and many of them could not
   read. But when the gospel was preached among them, the Spirit of God
   was poured out, and a most powerful revival followed. In the midst of
   the harvest, if a meeting, was appointed at any place, the whole
   neighborhood would come together, and fill the house, and hang upon the
   preacher's lips, while he tried to possess their minds with the truth
   of the gospel. One poor German woman naturally intelligent, but who
   could not read, in relating her experience in one of these meetings,
   told this fact which was certified to by her neighbors. With many tears
   and a heart full of joy, she said, "When I loved God, I longed to read
   the Bible, and I prayed to Jesus Christ, I said and felt, O Jesus! thou
   canst teach me to read thy Holy Bible, and the Lord taught me to read.
   There was a Bible in the house, and when I had prayed, I thought I
   could read the Bible, and I got the book, and opened it, and the words
   were just what I had heard people read. I said, O Lord Jesus Christ,
   thou canst teach me to read,' and I believed he could, and I thought I
   did read, but I went and asked the school-madam if I read, and she said
   I read it right, and the Lord has taught me to read my Bible, blessed
   be his name for it." I do not know but the school-madam to whom she
   referred was in the house and heard her relation. At all events she was
   a woman of good character among her neighbors, and some of the most
   respectable of them afterwards told me, they did not doubt the truth of
   what she said. I have no doubt it was true.

   At the time, I thought it was a miracle; but since the facts which have
   been developed within a few years, respecting the indestructibleness of
   the memory, I have thought this case might be explained in that way;
   and that she had probably been told the names of letters and their
   powers, when young, and now the Spirit of God, in answer to her prayer,
   had quickened her mind, and brought it all to her remembrance, so that
   she could read the Bible.

   Some of you will recollect the facts which were stated here, one
   evening, by President Mahan, which show that every impression which is
   made on the mind of man, remains there forever indelible. One case that
   he mentioned was that of an old lady, who, when she was young, had read
   some lines of poetry, relating a little story; and afterwards, when
   old, she wished to tell the story to some children, to whom she thought
   it would be useful, and to her surprise the whole of the lines came up
   fresh in her memory, and she repeated them word for word, although she
   had never committed them to memory at all, but only read them when she
   was young. Another was the case of an ignorant servant girl. She had
   once lived with a learned minister, who was accustomed to read aloud
   the Hebrew Bible, in his study, which was in hearing of the place where
   this girl did her work. Of course she understood nothing of the words,
   but only heard the sounds. Long afterwards when she was on her
   death-bed, she astonished the bystanders by reciting whole chapters of
   Hebrew and Chaldaic. The neighbors at first thought it was a miracle,
   but at length learned the explanation. It is plain from this, that even
   unintelligible sound may be so impressed on the memory, as afterwards
   to recur with entire distinctness. I suppose that was the case with
   this poor German woman, and that the Spirit of God, in answer to her
   fervent prayer, so refreshed her memory as to recall the sounds and
   forms of letters, she had been told when a child, and thus enable her
   at once to read the Bible.

   I say, therefore, that while those who do not possess any outward means
   of instruction may obtain directly from the Spirit of God whatever
   degree or kind of illumination they need in the things of religion;
   those who possess of can obtain the outward means, and do not use them,
   tempt God, when they pray for divine illumination and neglect the use
   of means for obtaining knowledge. To those who have the opportunity,
   "faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." If any man
   keeps away from the means within his reach, he can expect illumination
   in no other way.

   Whereas, if he is shut out from the use of means, as God is true to his
   promises, we must believe that he can be illuminated without means, to
   any extent he needs.

   4. Another reason why many do not receive that illumination from the
   Spirit of God which they need is, because they grieve the Spirit in
   many ways.

   They live in such a manner as to grieve, or offend, the Holy Spirit, so
   that he cannot consistently grant them his illuminating grace.

   5. Another reason is, that they depend on the instructions and means,
   as available without divine influence.

   How many rely on the instructions they receive from ministers, or
   commentaries, or books, or their own powers of inquiry, not feeling
   that all these things, without the Spirit of God, will only kill, but
   can never make alive can only damn, but never save. It seems as though
   the whole church was in error on this point; depending on means for
   divine knowledge, without feeling, that no means are available, without
   the Spirit of God. Oh! if the church felt this if they really felt that
   all the means in creation are unavailing without the teaching of the
   Holy Ghost, how they would pray, and cleanse their hands, and humble
   their hearts, until the Comforter would descend to teach them all
   things that they need to know of religion.

   6. Self-confidence is another reason why so little is experienced of
   divine illumination.

   So long as professing Christians place confidence in learning, or
   criticism, or their natural ingenuity, to learn the things of religion,
   rely on it, they are not likely to enjoy much of the illumination of
   the Spirit of God.

   VI. I am to show that men are responsible for what they might have of
   divine illumination.

   This is a universal truth, and is acknowledged by all mankind, that a
   man is just as responsible for what light he might have, as for that he
   actually has. The common law, which is the voice of common reason,
   adopts it as a maxim that no man who breaks the law is to be excused
   for ignorance of the law, because all are held bound to know what the
   law is. So it is with your children, in a case where they might know
   your will you consider them so much the more blameworthy, if they
   offend. So it is in religion: where men have both the outward means of
   instruction, and the inward teachings of the Holy Spirit, absolutely
   within their reach, if they sin ignorantly, they are not only without
   excuse on that score, but their ignorance is itself a crime, and is an
   aggravation of their guilt. And all men are plainly without excuse for
   not possessing all the knowledge which would be available for their
   perfect and immediate sanctification.

      REMARKS

   I. You see what is the effect of all other instructions on a
   congregation where no divine influence is enjoyed.

   It may convince the church of duty, but will never produce
   sanctification. It may harden the heart, but will never change it.
   Without divine influence, it is but a savor of death unto death.

   II. You see that it is important to use all the appropriate means of
   religious instruction in our power, as the medium through which the
   Spirit of God conveys divine illumination to the mind.

   There is no reason why we should not use the means in our power, and
   apply our natural faculties to acquire knowledge of religion, as
   faithfully as if we could understand the whole subject without divine
   influence. And if we do not use means, when within our power, we have
   no reason to expect divine aid. When we help ourselves, God helps us.
   When we use our natural faculties to understand these things, we may
   expect God will enlighten us. To turn our eyes away from the light, and
   then pray that we may be made to see, is to tempt God.

   III. They are blind leaders of the blind, who attempt to teach the
   things of religion without being themselves taught of God.

   No degree of learning, or power of discrimination as to the didactics
   of theology, will ever make a man a successful teacher of religion,
   unless he enjoys the illuminating powers of the Holy Ghost. He is blind
   if he supposes he understands the Bible without this, and if he
   undertakes to teach religion, he deceives himself, and all who depend
   on him, and both will fall into the ditch together.

   IV. If an individual teaches the gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down
   from heaven, he will be understood.

   He may understand the gospel himself, and yet not make his hearers
   understand it, because the Holy Ghost in not sent on them as well as on
   himself. But if the Spirit of God is on them, precisely in proportion
   as he understands the real meaning of the gospel, he will make his
   hearers understand it.

   V. In preaching the gospel, ministers should never use texts, the
   meaning of which they have not been taught by the Spirit of the God.

   They should not attempt to explain passages of which they are not
   confident they have been taught the meaning by the Holy Spirit. It is
   presumption. And they need not do it, for they may always have the
   teachings of the Spirit, by asking. God is always more ready to bestow
   divine illumination than an earthly parent is to give bread to his
   child; and if they ask as a child when he is hungry asks its mother for
   bread, they may always receive all the light they need. This is
   applicable both to preachers and to teachers in Sabbath schools and
   Bible classes. If any of them attempt to teach the scriptures without
   being themselves taught, they are no more fit to teach without divine
   teaching, than the most ignorant person in the streets is fit to teach
   astronomy. I fear both minister and teachers generally, have understood
   very little of their need of this divine teaching, and have felt very
   little of the necessity of praying over their sermons and bible
   lessons, till they feel confident that the Spirit of God has possessed
   their minds with the true idea of the word of God. If this was done as
   it ought to be, their instructions would be far more effectual than we
   now see them.

   Do you, who are teachers of Bible and Sabbath-school classes in this
   church, believe this? Are you in the habit, conscientiously and
   uniformly, of seeking the true idea of every lesson on your knees? Or
   do you go to some commentary, and then come and peddle out your dry
   stuff to your classes, that you get out of the commentaries and books,
   without any of the Holy Ghost in your teaching? If you do this, let me
   tell you, that you had better be doing something else. What would you
   say of a minister, if you knew he never prayed over his texts? You
   might as well have Balaam's ass for a minister, and even the dumb beast
   in such a case might speak with man's voice and rebuke the madness of
   such a man. He could give just as much available instruction to reach
   the deep fountains of the heart, as such a preacher. Well, now, this is
   just as important for a Sunday-school teacher as for a minister.

   If you do not pray over your lesson, until you feel that God has taught
   you the idea contained in it, beware! How dare you go and teach that
   for religion, which you do not honestly suppose you have been taught of
   God?

   VI. It is a vast error in theological students, when they study to get
   the views of all the great teachers, the tones of the fathers and
   doctors, and everybody's opinion as to what the Bible means, but the
   opinion of the Holy Ghost.

   With hearts as cold as marble, instead of going right to the source of
   light, they go and gather up the husks of learning, and peddle it out
   among the churches as religious instruction. Horrible! While they do
   thus, we never shall have an efficient ministry. It is right they
   should get all the help they can from learning, to understand the word
   of God. But they ought never to rest in anything they get from book
   learning, until they are satisfied that God has put them in possession
   of the very idea which he would have them receive.

   I have tried hard to make this impression, and I believe I have
   succeeded in some degree, on the theological students under my care.
   And if I had done it more, I have no doubt I might have succeeded
   better. And I can say, that when I studied theology, I spent many hours
   on my knees, and perhaps I might say weeks, often with the Bible before
   me, laboring and praying to come at the very mind of the Spirit. I do
   not say this boastingly, but as a matter of fact, to how that the
   sentiment here advanced is no novel opinion with me. And I have always
   got my texts and sermons on my knees. And yet I am conscious that I
   have gained very little knowledge in religion, compared with what I
   might have had, if I had taken right hold of the source of light as I
   ought to have done.

   VII. How little knowledge have the great body of the church respecting
   the word of God !

   Put them, for instance, to read the epistles, and other parts, and
   probably they will not have knowledge enough to give an opinion as to
   the real meaning of one-tenth of the Bible. No wonder the church is not
   sanctified! They need more truth. Our Savior says, "Sanctify them
   through thy truth." This grand means of sanctification must be more
   richly enjoyed before the church will know what entire sanctification
   means. The church do not understand the Bible. And the reason is they
   have not gone to the author to explain it. Although they have this
   blessed privilege every day, and just as often as they choose, of
   carrying the book right to the author for his explanation; yet how
   little, how very little, do the church know of the Bible, which they
   are conscious they have been taught to know by the Holy Ghost! Read the
   text again, read other similar passages, and then say if Christians are
   not exceedingly to blame for not understanding the Bible.

   VIII. You see the necessity that we should all give ourselves up to the
   study of the Bible, under divine teaching.

   I have recently recommended several books to you to read, such as
   Wesley's Thoughts on Christian Perfection, the Memoirs of Brainerd
   Taylor, Payson, Mrs. Rogers, and others. I have found that, in a
   certain state of mind, such books are useful to read. But I never
   pretend to make but one book my study. I read them occasionally, but
   have little time or inclination to read other books much while I have
   so much to learn of my Bible. I find it like a deep mine, the more I
   work it, the richer it grows. We must read that more than any or all
   other books. We must pause and pray over it, verse after verse, and
   compare part with part, dwell on it, digest it, and get it into our
   minds, till we feel that the Spirit of God has filled us with the
   spirit of holiness.

   Will you do it? Will you lay your hearts open to God, and not give him
   rest, till he has filled you with divine knowledge? Will you search the
   scriptures? I have often been asked by young converts, and young men
   preparing for the ministry, what they should read. Read the Bible. I
   would give the same answer five hundred times. Over and above all other
   things, study the Bible. It is a sad fact, that most young men, when
   they enter the ministry often know less of the Bible than of any other
   book the study. Alas! alas! O, if they had the spirit of James Brainerd
   Taylor, his love for the scriptures, his prayer for divine teaching, we
   should no longer hear the groans of the churches over the barrenness of
   so many young preachers, who come out of our seminaries full of
   booklearning and almost destitute of the Holy Ghost.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Love worketh no ill to his neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of
      the law. Romans 13:10.

   In speaking from these words, I design,

   I. To make some remarks on the nature of love. II. To show that love is
   the whole of religion. III. Some things that are not essential to
   perfect love. IV. Some things that are essential. V. Some of the
   effects of perfect love.

   I. I am to make some remarks on the nature of love.

   1. The first remark I have to make is, that there are various forms
   under which love may exist.

   The two principal forms, so far as religion is concerned, are
   benevolence and complacency. Benevolence is an affection of the mind,
   or an act of the will. It is willing good, or a desire to promote the
   happiness of its object. Complacency is esteem, or approbation of the
   character of its object. Benevolence should be exercised towards all
   beings, irrespective of their moral character. Complacency is due only
   to the good and holy.

   2. Love may exist either as an affection or as an emotion.

   When love is an affection, it is voluntary, or consists in the act of
   the will. When it is an emotion, it is involuntary. What we call
   feelings, or emotions, are involuntary. They are not directly dependent
   on the will, or controlled by a direct act of will. The virtue of love
   is mostly when it is in the form of an affection. The happiness of love
   is mostly when it is in the form of an emotion. If the affection of
   love be very strong, it produces a high degree of happiness, but the
   emotion of holy love is happiness itself.

   I said that the emotion of love is involuntary. I do not mean that the
   will has nothing to do with it, but that it is not the result of a mere
   or direct act of the will. No man can exercise the emotion of love by
   merely willing it. And the emotion may often exist in spite of the
   will. Individuals often feel emotions rising in their minds, which they
   know to be improper, and try by direct effort of will to banish them
   from their minds; and finding that impossible, therefore conclude that
   they have no control of these emotions. But they may always be
   controlled by the will in an indirect way. The mind can bring up any
   class of emotions it chooses, by directing the attention sufficiently
   to the proper object. They will be certain to rise in proportion as the
   attention is fixed, provided the will is right in regard to the object
   of attention. So of those emotions which are improper or disagreeable;
   the mind may be rid of them, by turning the attention entirely away
   from the object, and not suffering the thoughts to dwell on it.

   3. Ordinarily, the emotions of love towards God are experienced when we
   exercise love towards him in the form of affection.

   But this is not always the case. We may exercise good will towards any
   object, and yet at times feel no sensible emotions of love. It is not
   certain that even the Lord Jesus Christ exercised love towards God, in
   the form of emotion, at all times. So far as our acquaintance with the
   nature of the mind goes, we know that a person may exercise affection,
   and be guided and be governed by it, constantly, in all his actions,
   without any felt emotion of love towards its object at the time. Thus a
   husband and father may be engaged in laboring for the benefit of his
   family, and his very life controlled by affection for them while his
   thoughts are not so engaged upon them as to make him feel any sensible
   emotions of love to them at the time.

   The things about which he is engaged may take up his mind so much, that
   he has scarcely a thought of them, and so he may have no felt emotion
   towards them, and yet he is all the time guided and governed by
   affection for them. Observe here, that I use the term, affection, in
   the sense of President Edwards, as explained by him in his celebrated
   Treatise on the Will. An affection in his treatise is an act of the
   will or a volition.

   4. Love to our neighbor naturally implies the existence of love to God,
   and love to God naturally implies love to our neighbor.

   The same is declared in the 8th verse, "Owe no man my thing, but to
   love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law.
   For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou
   shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not
   covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
   comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
   thyself." Here it is taken for granted that love to our neighbor
   implies the existence of love to God, otherwise it could not be said
   that "he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law." The apostle James
   recognizes the same principle, when he says, "If ye fulfill the royal
   law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
   thyself, ye do well." Here love to our neighbor is spoken of as
   constituting obedience to the whole law. Benevolence, that is, good
   will to our neighbor, naturally implies love to God. It is love to the
   happiness of being. So the love of complacency towards holy beings
   naturally implies love to God, as a being of infinite holiness.

   II. I am to show that love is the whole of religion.

   In other words, all that is required of man by God consists in love, in
   various modifications and results. Love is the sum total of all.

   1. The first proof I shall offer is, that the sentiment is taught in
   the text, and many other passages of scripture.

   The scriptures fully teach, that love is the sum total of all the
   requirements, both of the law and gospel. Our Savior declares that the
   great command, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
   soul, mind and strength, and thy neighbor as thyself, is the sum total
   of all the law and the prophets, or implies and includes all that the
   whole scriptures, the law and the gospel require.

   2. God is love, and to love is to be like God, and to be perfect in
   love is to be perfect as God is perfect.

   All God's moral attributes consist in love, acting under certain
   circumstances and for certain ends. God's justice in punishing the
   wicked, his anger at sin, and the like, are only exercises of his love
   to the general happiness of his kingdom. So it is in man. All that is
   good in man is some modification of love. Hatred to sin, is only love
   to virtue acting itself out in opposing whatever is opposed to virtue.
   So true faith implies and includes love, and faith which has no love in
   it, or that does not work by love, is no part of religion. The faith
   that belongs to religion is an affectionate confidence in God. There is
   a kind of faith in God, which has no love in it. The devil has that
   kind of faith. The convicted sinner has it. But there is no religion in
   it. Faith might rise even to the faith of miracles, and yet if there is
   no love in it, it amounts to nothing. The apostle Paul, in the 13th
   chapter of 1 Corinthians, says, "Though I have the gift of prophecy,
   and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all
   faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
   nothing."

   Just so it is with repentance. The repentance that does not include
   love is not "repentance towards God." True repentance implies obedience
   to the law of love, and consequent opposition to sin.

   III. I will mention some things that are not essential to perfect love.

   1. The highest degree of emotion is not essential to perfect love.

   It is manifest that the Lord Jesus Christ very seldom had the highest
   degree of emotion of love, and yet he always had perfect love. He
   generally manifested very little emotion, or excitement. Excitement is
   always proportioned to the strength of the emotions as it consists in
   them. The Savior seemed generally remarkably calm. Sometimes his
   indignation was strong, or his grief for the hardness of men's hearts;
   and sometimes we read that he rejoiced in spirit. But he was commonly
   calm, and manifested no high degree of emotion. And it is plainly not
   essential to perfect love, that the emotion of love should exist in a
   high degree.

   2. Perfect love does not exclude the idea of increase in love or growth
   in grace.

   I suppose the growth of the mind in knowledge, to all eternity,
   naturally implies growth in love to all eternity. The Lord Jesus
   Christ, in his human nature, grew in stature, and in favor with God and
   man. Doubtless, as a child, he grew in knowledge, and as he grew in
   knowledge, he grew in love toward God, as well as in favor with God.
   His love was perfect when he was a child, but it was greater when he
   became a man. As a human being, he probably always continued to
   increase in love to God as long as he lived. From the nature of mind,
   we see that it may be so with all the saints in glory, that their love
   will increase to all eternity, and yet it is always perfect love.

   3. It is not essential to perfect love, that love should always be
   exercised towards all individuals alike.

   We cannot think of all individuals at once. You cannot even think of
   every individual of your acquaintance at once. The degree of love
   towards an individual depends on the fact that the individual is
   present to the thoughts.

   4. It is not essential to perfect love, that there should be the same
   degree of the spirit of prayer for every individual, or for the same
   individual at all times.

   The spirit of prayer is not always essential to pure and perfect love.
   The saints in heaven have pure and perfect love for all beings, yet we
   know not that they have the spirit of prayer for any. You may love any
   individual with a very strong degree of love, and yet not have the
   spirit of prayer for that individual. That is, the Spirit of God may
   not lead you to pray for the salvation of that individual. You do not
   pray for the wicked in hell. The spirit of prayer depends on the
   influences of the Holy Ghost, leading the mind to pray for things
   agreeable to the will of God. You cannot pray in the Spirit, with the
   same clergy of fervor and faith, for all mankind. Jesus Christ said
   expressly, he did not pray for all mankind: "I pray not for the world."
   Here has been a great mistake in regard to the spirit of prayer.

   Some suppose that Christians have not done all their duty when they
   have not prayed in faith for every individual, as long as there is a
   sinner on the earth. Then Jesus Christ never did all his duty, for he
   never did this. God has never told us he will save all mankind, and
   never gave us any reason to believe he will do it. How then can we pray
   in faith for the salvation of all? What has that faith to rest on?

   5. Perfect love is not inconsistent with those feelings of languor or
   constitutional debility, which are the necessary consequence of
   exhaustion or ill health.

   We are so constituted, that excitement naturally and necessarily
   exhausts our powers. But love may be perfect, notwithstanding. Though
   one may feel more disposed to lie down and sleep than to pray, yet his
   love may be perfect The Lord Jesus Christ often felt this weariness and
   exhaustion, when the spirit was still willing, but the flesh was weak.

   IV. What is essential to perfect love.

   I. It implies that there is nothing in the mind inconsistent with love.

   No hatred, malice, wrath, envy, or any other malignant emotions that
   are inconsistent with pure and perfect love.

   2. That there is nothing in the life inconsistent with love.

   All the actions, words, and thoughts, continually under the entire and
   perfect control of love.

   3. That the love to God is supreme.

   The love to God is completely supreme, and so entirely above all other
   objects, that nothing else is loved in comparison with God.

   4. That love to God is disinterested.

   God is loved for what he is; not for his relation to us, but for the
   excellence of his character.

   5. That love to our neighbor should be equal, i.e. that his interest
   and happiness should be regarded by us of equal value with our own, and
   he and his interests are to he treated accordingly by us.

   V. I am to mention some of the effects of perfect love.

   1. One effect of perfect love to God and man will certainly be, delight
   in self-denial for the sake of promoting the interests of God's kingdom
   and the salvation of sinners.

   See affectionate parents, how they delight in self-denial for the sake
   of promoting the happiness of their children. There is a father; he
   gives himself up to exhausting labor, day by day, and from year to
   year, through the whole of a long life, rising early, and eating the
   bread of carefulness continually, to promote the welfare of his family.
   And he counts all this self-denial and toil not a grief or a burden,
   but a delight, because of the love he bears to his family. See that
   mother; she wishes to educate her son at college, and now, instead of
   finding it painful it is a joy to her to sit up late and labor
   incessantly to help him. That is because she really loves her son. Such
   parents rejoice more in conferring gifts on their children, than they
   would in enjoying the same things themselves. What parent does not
   enjoy a piece of fruit more in giving it to his little child, than in
   eating it himself? The Lord Jesus Christ enjoyed more solid
   satisfaction in working out salvation for mankind than any of his
   saints can ever enjoy in receiving favors at his hands. He testified
   that it is more blessed to give than to receive. This was the joy set
   before him, for which he endured the cross and despised the shame.

   His love was so great for mankind, that it constrained him to undertake
   this work, and sustained him triumphantly through it. The apostle Paul
   did not count it a grief and a hardship to be hunted from place to
   place, imprisoned, scourged, stoned, and counted the offscouring of all
   things, for the sake of spreading the gospel and saving souls. It was
   his joy. The love of Christ so constrained him, he had such a desire to
   do good, that it was his highest delight to lay himself on that altar
   as a sacrifice to the cause. Other individuals have had the same mind
   with the apostle. They have been known who would be willing to live a
   thousand years, or to the end of time, if they could be employed in
   doing good, in promoting the kingdom of God, and saving the souls of
   men, and willing to forego even sleep and food to benefit objects they
   so greatly love.

   2. It delivers the soul from the power of legal motives

   Perfect love leads a person to obey God, not because he fears the wrath
   of God, or hopes to be rewarded for doing this or that, but because he
   loves God and loves to do the will of God. There are two extremes on
   this subject. One class make virtue to consist in doing right, simply
   because it is right, without any reference to the will of God, or an
   influence from God. Another class makes virtue to consist in acting
   from love to the employment, but without reference to God's authority,
   as a Ruler and Law-giver. Both of these are in error. To do a thing
   simply because he thinks it right, and not out of love to God is not
   virtue. Neither is it virtue to do a thing because he loves to do it,
   with no regard to God's will. A woman might do certain things because
   she knew it would please her husband, but if she did the same thing
   merely because she loved to do it, and with no regard to her husband,
   it would be no virtue as it respects her husband. If a person loves
   God, as soon as he knows what is God's will, he will do it because it
   is God's will. Perfect love will lead to universal obedience, to do
   God's will in all things, because it is the will of God.

   3. The individual who exercises perfect love will be dead to the world.

   I mean by this that he will be cut loose from the influence of worldly
   considerations. Perfect love will so annihilate selfishness, that he
   will have no will but the will of God, and no interest but God's glory.
   He will not be influenced by public sentiment, or what this and that
   man will say or think. See that woman! what is she not willing to do
   from natural affection to her husband? She is willing to cut loose from
   all her friends, as much as if she was dead to them, and not pay the
   least regard to what they say, and leave all the riches, and honors,
   and delights they can offer, to join the individual whom she loves, and
   live with him in poverty, in disgrace, and in exile. Her affection is
   so great that she does it joyfully, and is ready to go from a palace to
   any cottage or cave in earth, and be perfectly happy. And all that her
   friends can say against the man of her affection has not the least
   influence on her mind, only to make her cling the more closely to him.
   This one all-absorbing affection has actually killed all the influences
   that used to act on her. To attempt to influence her by such things is
   in vain. There is only one avenue of approach to her mind only one
   class of motives move her, and that is through the object of her
   affection.

   So far as the philosophy of mind is concerned, the perfect love of God
   operates in the same way. The mind that is filled with perfect love, it
   is impossible to divert from God, while love continues in exercise.
   Take away his worldly possessions, his friends, his good name, his
   children, send him to prison, beat him with stripes, bind him to the
   stake, fill his flesh full of pine knots and set them on fire; and then
   leave him his God and he is happy. His strong affection can make him
   insensible to all things else. He is as if he were dead to all the
   world but his God. Cases have been known of martyrs who, while their
   bodies were frying at the stake, were so perfectly happy in God, as to
   lose their sense of pain.

   Put such a one in hell, in the lake of fire and brimstone, and as long
   as he enjoys God, and the love of God fills his soul, he is happy.

   Who has not witnessed or heard of cases of affection, approaching in
   degree to what I have described, where a person is in fact dead to all
   other things, and lives only for the loved object. How often do you see
   fond parents, who live for an only child, and when that child dies,
   wish themselves dead. Sometimes a husband and wife have such an
   absorbing affection for each other, that they live for nothing else;
   and if the husband dies, the wife pines away and dies also. The
   soul-absorbing object for which she lived is gone, and why should she
   live any longer? So, when an individual is filled with the perfect love
   of God, he wishes to live only to love and serve God; he is dead to the
   world, dead to his own reputation, and has no desire to live for any
   other reason, here, or in heaven, or any where else in the universe,
   but to glorify God. He is willing to live, here or any where else, and
   suffer and labor a thousand years, or to all eternity, if it will
   glorify God.

   I recollect hearing a friend say, often, "I don't know that I have one
   thought of living a single moment for any other purpose than to glorify
   God, any more than I should think of leaping right into hell." This was
   said soberly and deliberately, and the whole life of that individual
   corresponded with the declaration. He was intelligent, sober-minded,
   and honest, and I have no doubt expressed what had been the fullest
   conviction of his mind for years. What was this but perfect love? What
   more does any angel in heaven do than this? His love may be greater in
   degree, because his strength is greater. But the highest angel could
   not love more perfectly, than to be able to say in sincerity, "I should
   as soon think of leaping into hell as of living one moment for any
   other object but to glorify God." What could Jesus Christ himself say
   more than that?

   4. It is hardly necessary to say that perfect joy and peace are the
   natural results of perfect love.

   But I wish to turn your attention here to what the apostle says in the
   13th chapter of 1 Corinthians, speaking of charity, or love. You will
   observe that the word here translated "charity" is the same that is in
   other places rendered love. It means love. "Though I speak with the
   tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as
   sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of
   prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I
   have all faith so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity,
   I am nothing." He might have even the faith of miracles, so strong that
   he could move mountains from their everlasting foundations, and yet
   have no love. "And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
   though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth
   me nothing." You see how far he supposes a man may go without love.
   "Charity suffereth long." Long-suffering is meekness under opposition
   or injury. This is one of the effects of love, to bear great
   provocations, and not retaliate or revile again. Love is kind, or
   affectionate in all intercourse with others, never harsh or rude, or
   needlessly giving pain to any.

   Love envieth not, never dislikes others because they are more thought
   of or noticed, more honored or useful, or make greater attainments in
   knowledge, happiness or piety. Is not puffed up with pride, but always
   humble and modest. Doth not behave itself unseemly, but naturally
   begets a pleasant and courteous deportment towards all. However
   unacquainted the individual may be with the ways of society, who is
   actuated by perfect love, he always appears well, it is natural to him
   to be so kind and gentle and courteous. Seeketh not her own, or has no
   selfishness. Is not easily provoked. This is always the effect of love.
   See that mother, how long she bears with her children, because she
   loves them.

   If you see an individual that is testy, or crusty, easily flying into a
   passion when anything goes wrong he is by no means perfect in love, if
   he has any love. To be easily provoked is always a sign of pride. If a
   person is full of love, it is impossible to make him exercise sinful
   anger while love continues. He exercises such indignation as God
   exercises, and as holy angels feel, at what is base and wrong, but he
   will not be provoked by it. Thinketh no evil. Show me a man that is
   always suspicious of the motives of others, and forever putting the
   worst construction on the words and actions of his fellow men, and I
   will show you one who has the devil in him, not the Holy Ghost. He has
   that in his own mind which makes him think evil of others. If an
   individual is honest and simple-hearted himself, he will be the last,
   to think evil of others. He will not be always smelling heresy or
   mischief in others. On the contrary, such persons are often liable to
   be imposed on by designing men, not from any want of good sense, but
   from the effect of love. They do not suspect evil, where the exterior
   appears fair, nor without the strongest proof.

   Love rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth. See a man
   who exults at his neighbor's fall, or cries out, I told you so; and I
   tell you, that man is far enough from being perfect in love. Beareth
   all things, all provocations and injuries, without revenge, Believeth
   all things, instead of being hard to be convinced of what is in favor
   of others, is always ready to believe good wherever there is the least
   evidence of it. Hopeth all things; even where there is reason to
   suspect evil, as long as there is room for hope, by putting the best
   construction upon the thing which it will bear. Where you see an
   individual that has not this Spirit, rest assured, he is by no means
   sincerely in love. Nay, he has no love at all.

   I might pursue this course of thought farther, but have not time. Love
   worketh no ill to his neighbor. Mark that, no ill! Perfect love never
   overreaches, nor defrauds, nor oppresses, nor does any ill to a
   neighbor. Would a man under the influence of perfect love, sell his
   neighbor rum? Never. Would a man that loved God with all his heart,
   perfectly, hold his neighbor as a slave? Love worketh no ill to his
   neighbor; slavery denies him the wages that he has earned, and perhaps
   sells him, and tears him away from his family, deprives him of the
   Bible, and endeavors as far as possible to make him a brute. There
   cannot be greater falsehood and hypocrisy, than for a man who will do
   that, to pretend that he loves God, now that light is shed upon this
   subject, and the attention of men turned upon it. Will a man hate his
   own flesh? How can he love God that hates or injures his neighbor?

   I designed to remark on one other effect of perfect love. It uniformly
   shows itself in great efforts for the sanctification of the church and
   the salvation of souls. Where a person is negligent or deficient in
   either of these, he is by no means perfect in love, whatever may be his
   pretensions.

      REMARKS

   I. You see why it is true, what the apostle James says, "If any man
   among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
   deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain." The man that
   professes to be religious, and yet allows himself to speak against his
   neighbor with an unbridled tongue, to injure his neighbor, deceives
   himself, if he thinks he loves his neighbor as himself. Strange love!

   II. There may be much light in the mind concerning religion, without
   love.

   You often see individuals, who understand a great deal, intellectually,
   about religion, and can spread it out before others, while it is plain
   they are not actuated by the spirit of love. They have not the law of
   kindness on their lips.

   III. Those individuals who have much religious knowledge and zeal,
   without love, are most unlovely and dangerous persons.

   They are always censorious, proud, heady, high-minded. They may make a
   strong impression, but do not produce true religion. They zealously
   affect you, but not well.

   IV. The drift of a man's zeal will determine the character of his
   religion.

   It will show whether the light in his mind is accompanied with love. If
   it is, his zeal will not be sectarian in its character. Show me a man
   full of jealously towards all that do not belong to his sect or party,
   and there is a man far enough from perfect love.

   True love in never denunciatory or harsh. If it has occasion to speak
   of the faults of others, it does it in kindness, and with sorrow.
   Perfect love cannot speak in a rough or abusive manner, either to or of
   others. It will not lay great stress on the mere circumstantials of
   religion, nor be sticklish for particular measures or forms. Many will
   contend fiercely either for or against certain things, as for or
   against new measures; but if they were full of love they would not do
   it. The zeal that is governed by perfect love will not spend itself in
   contending for or against any forms in religion, nor attack minor
   errors and evils. Love leads to laying stress on the fundamentals in
   religion. It cleaves to warm-hearted Christians, no matter of what
   denomination they may be, and loves them, and delights to associate
   with them.

   This zeal is never disputatious, or full of controversy. Find a man who
   loves to attend ecclesiastical meetings, and enters into all the
   janglings of the day, and that man is not full of love. To a mind
   filled with holy love, it is exceedingly painful to go to such
   meetings, and see ministers dividing into parties, and maneuvering, and
   caucussing, and pettifogging, and striving for the mastery. Find an
   individual who loves controversy in the newspapers, he is not full of
   love. If he was, he would rather be abused, and reviled, and slandered,
   either in person or by the papers, than turn aside to defend himself or
   to reply. He would never return railing for railing, but contrariwise
   blessing. And as much as possible, he would live peaceably with all
   men.

   V. How much that is called religion has no love.

   How much of what passes for works of religion, is constrained by
   outward causes and influences, and not by the inward power of love. It
   ought to be better understood than it is, that unless love is the
   mainspring, no matter what the outward action may be, whether praying,
   praising, giving, or anything else, there is no religion in it.

   How much excitement that passes for religion, has no love. How much
   zeal has no religion in it. See that man always full of bitter zeal,
   and if reproved for it, flying to the example of Paul, when he said,
   "Thou child of the devil." If he was under the influence of perfect
   love, he would see that his circumstances are so different as not to
   justify the exercise of such a spirit.

   VI. Those religious excitements which do not consist in the spirit of
   love, are not revivals of religion.

   Perhaps the church may be much excited, and bustle about with a great
   show of zeal, and boisterous noise, but no tenderness of spirit.
   Perhaps, those who go about may show a spirit of insolence, and
   rudeness, and pick a quarrel with every family they visit. I once knew
   a young man who acknowledged that he aimed at making people angry, and
   the reason he assigned was, that it often brought them under
   conviction, and so issued in conversion. And so it might if he should
   go in and utter horrid blasphemies in their presence, until they were
   frightened into a consideration of their own character. But who would
   defend such a conduct on the ground that such was now and then the
   result? And if this be the character of the excitement, it may be a
   revival of wrath, and malice, and all uncharitableness, but it is not a
   revival of religion. I do not mean that when some or many are filled
   with wrath, it is certain proof that there is no revival of religion;
   but that when the excitement has this prevailing character, it is not a
   true revival of religion. Some among them may have the spirit of love,
   but certainly those who are filled with a bitter disputatious zeal are
   not truly religious. Religion may be in some persons revived, but in
   the main, in such cases, it is a revival of irreligion.

   VII. When persons profess to be converted, if love is not the ruling
   feature in their character they are not truly converted.

   However well they may appear in other respects, no matter how clear
   their views, or how deep their feelings, if they have not the spirit of
   love to God, and love to man, they are deceived. Let no such converts
   be trusted.

   VIII. See what the world will be, when mankind are universally actuated
   by a spirit of love.

   We learn that the time will come, when there shall be nothing to hurt
   or destroy, and when the spirit of love will universally prevail. What
   a change in society! What a change in all the methods of doing
   business, and in all the intercourse of mankind, when each shall love
   his neighbor as himself, and seek the good of others as his own. Could
   one of the saints of the present day revisit the earth at that period,
   he would not know the world in which he had lived, all things would be
   so altered. Is it possible, he would exclaim, "that this is the earth;
   the same earth that used to be so full of jailing, and oppression, and
   fraud?"

   IX. The thing on which the Lord Jesus Christ is bent, is to bring all
   mankind under the influence of love.

   Is it not a worthy object? He came to destroy the works of the devil;
   and this is the way to do it. Suppose the world was full of such men as
   Jesus Christ was in his human nature compare it with what it is now.
   Would not such a change be worthy of the Son of God? What a glorious
   end, to fill the earth with love.

   X. It is easy to see what makes heaven.

   It is love perfect love. And it is easy to see what makes heaven begun
   on earth, in those who are full of love. How sweet their temper; what
   delightful companions; how blessed to live near them: so full of
   candor, so kind, so gentle, so careful to avoid offense, so divinely
   amiable in all things!

   And is this to be attained by men? Can we love God, in this world with
   all the heart, and soul, and strength, and mind? Is it our privilege
   and our duty to possess the Spirit of Christ and shall we exhibit the
   spirit of the devil? Beloved, let our hearts be set on perfect love,
   and let us give God no rest till we feel our hearts full of love, and
   till all our thoughts and all our lives are full of love to God and
   love to man. O, when will the church come up to this ground? Only let
   the church be full of love, and she will be fair as the moon, clear as
   the sun, and terrible to all wickedness, in high places and low places,
   as an army with banners.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Exodus

   [1]32:26   [2]32:26

   Leviticus

   [3]19:17

   2 Kings

   [4]17:33

   Isaiah

   [5]50:11

   Jeremiah

   [6]33:8

   Ezekiel

   [7]33:32   [8]36:25

   Matthew

   [9]5:48   [10]5:48

   Luke

   [11]16:10

   John

   [12]12:48   [13]16:7-13

   Acts

   [14]26:30   [15]26:31

   Romans

   [16]3:31   [17]11:26   [18]12:2   [19]13:10   [20]14:28

   1 Corinthians

   [21]1:30   [22]4:6   [23]13:5

   2 Corinthians

   [24]7:10   [25]13:5

   Galatians

   [26]2:16

   Ephesians

   [27]5:26

   1 Thessalonians

   [28]4:3   [29]5:23

   Titus

   [30]2:13

   Hebrews

   [31]7:9

   James

   [32]1:22   [33]4:7

   2 Peter

   [34]1:4

   1 John

   [35]1:9
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=26#i.vii-p0.2
   2. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=26#i.viii-p0.2
   3. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=17#i.vi-p0.2
   4. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=33#i.iv-p0.2
   5. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=11#i.xiv-p0.2
   6. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=33&scrV=8#i.xx-p43.1
   7. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=32#i.xix-p56.1
   8. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#i.xx-p42.1
   9. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#i.xx-p0.2
  10. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#i.xxi-p0.2
  11. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=10#i.xii-p0.2
  12. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=48#i.ix-p0.2
  13. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#i.xxiii-p0.2
  14. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=30#i.xxii-p0.2
  15. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=31#i.xxii-p0.3
  16. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=31#i.xviii-p0.2
  17. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=26#i.xx-p47.2
  18. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#i.x-p0.2
  19. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#i.xxiv-p0.2
  20. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=28#i.v-p0.2
  21. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#i.xxii-p0.4
  22. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#i.xix-p44.1
  23. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#i.xvi-p0.2
  24. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#i.xi-p0.2
  25. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#i.xiii-p0.2
  26. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#i.xvii-p0.2
  27. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=26#i.xx-p47.1
  28. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i.xx-p31.1
  29. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#i.xx-p47.4
  30. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#i.xx-p46.1
  31. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=9#i.xx-p64.1
  32. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=22#i.iii-p0.2
  33. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#i.xv-p0.2
  34. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i.xx-p37.1
  35. file:///ccel/f/finney/toprofessingchristians/cache/toprofessingchristians.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.xx-p47.3
