     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Treatise on Grace
      Creator(s): Edwards, Jonathan (1703-1758)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

Treatise on Grace
     __________________________________________________________________

  Treatise on Grace

      by

  Jonathan Edwards
     __________________________________________________________________

  [SHEWING] THAT COMMON AND SAVING GRACE DIFFER, NOT ONLY IN DEGREE, BUT IN
  NATURE AND KIND."

   SUCH phrases as common grace, and special or saving grace, may be
   understood as signifying either diverse kinds of influence of God's
   Spirit on the hearts of men, or diverse fruits and effects of that
   influence. The Spirit of God is supposed sometimes to have some
   influence upon the minds of men that are not true Christians, and [it
   is supposed] that those dispositions, frames, and exercises of their
   minds that are of a good tendency, but are common to them with the
   saints, are in some respect owing to some influence or assistance of
   God's Spirit. But as there are some things in the hearts of true
   Christians that are peculiar to them, and that are more excellent than
   any thing that is to be found in others, so it is supposed that there
   is an operation of the Spirit of God different, and that the value
   which distinguishes them is owing to a higher influence and assistance
   than the virtues of others. So that sometimes the phrase common grace,
   is used to signify that kind of action or influence of the Spirit of
   God, to which are owing those religious or moral attainments that are
   common to both saints and sinners, and so signifies as much as common
   assistance; and sometimes those moral or religious attainments
   themselves that are the fruits of this assistance, are intended. So
   likewise the phrase, special or saving grace, is sometimes used to
   signify that peculiar kind or degree of operation or influence of God's
   Spirit, whence saving actions and attainments do arise in the godly,
   or, which is the same thing, special and saving assistance; or else to
   signify that distinguishing saving virtue itself, which is the fruit of
   this assistance. These phrases are more frequently understood in the
   latter sense, viz., nor for common and special assistance, but for
   common and special, or saving virtue, which is the fruit of that
   assistance, and so I would be understood by these phrases in this
   discourse.

   And that special or saving grace in this sense is not only different
   from common grace in degree, but entirely diverse in nature and kind,
   and that natural men not only have not a sufficient degree of virtue to
   be saints, but that they have no degree of that grace that is in godly
   men, is what I have now to shew.

   1. This is evident by what Christ says in John 3:6, where Christ,
   speaking of regeneration, says -- "That which is born of the flesh is
   flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." Now, whatever
   Christ intends by the terms flesh and spirit in the words, yet this
   much is manifested and undeniable, that Christ here intends to shew
   Nicodemus the necessity of a new birth, or another birth than his
   natural birth, and that, from this argument, that a man that has been
   the subject only of the first birth, has nothing of that in his heart
   which he must have in order to enter in the kingdom. He has nothing at
   all of that which Christ calls spirit, whatever that be. All that a man
   [has] that has been the subject only of a natural birth don't go beyond
   that which Christ calls flesh, for however it may be refined and
   exalted, yet it cannot be raised above flesh. 'Tis plain, that by flesh
   and spirit, Christ here intends two things entirely different in
   nature, which cannot be one from the other. A man cannot have anything
   of a nature superior to flesh that is not born again, and therefore we
   must be "born again." That by flesh and spirit are intended certain
   moral principles, natures, or qualities, entirely different and
   opposite in their nature one to another, is manifest from other texts,
   as particularly: Gal 5:17-- "For the flesh lusteth against the spirit,
   and the spirit against the flesh: and they are contrary the one to the
   other; so that ye cannot do the things which ye would;" Ver.19, "Now
   the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: Adultery,
   fornication," etc. Ver.22-- "But the fruit if the Spirit is love, joy,
   peace," etc; and by Gal. 6:8-- "For he that soweth to the flesh shall
   of the flesh reap corruption: but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of
   the Spirit reap life everlasting." Rom. 8:6-9-- "For to be carnally
   minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace" etc. 1
   Cor 3:1-- "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual,
   but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ." So that it is
   manifest by this, that men that have been the subjects only of the
   first birth, have no degree of that moral principle or quality that
   those that are new born have, whereby they have a title to the kingdom
   of heaven. This principle or quality comes out then no otherwise than
   by birth, and the birth that it must come by is not, cannot be, the
   first birth, but it must be a new birth. If men that have no title to
   the kingdom of heaven, could have something of the Spirit, as well as
   flesh, then Christ's argument would be false. It is plain, by Christ's
   reasoning, that those that are not in a state of salvation, cannot have
   these two opposite principle in their hearts together, some flesh and
   some spirit, lusting one against the other as the godly have, but that
   they have flesh only.

   2. That the only principle in those that are savingly converted, whence
   gracious acts flow, which in the language of Scripture is called the
   Spirit, and set in opposition to the flesh, is that which others not
   only have not a sufficient degree of, but have nothing at all of, is
   further manifest, because the Scripture asserts both negatively, that
   those that have not the Spirit are not Christ's. Romans 8:9-- "But ye
   are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God
   dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
   of his;" and also [positively] that those that have the Spirit are His.
   1 John 3:24-- "Hereby we know that he abideth in us by the Spirit which
   he hath given us." And our having the Spirit of God dwelling in our
   hearts is mentioned as a certain sign that persons are entitled to
   heaven, and is called the earnest of the future inheritance (2 Cor 1:22
   and v.5, Eph. 1:14;) which it would not be if others that had no title
   to the inheritance might have some of it dwelling in them.

   Yea, that those that are not true saints have nothing of the Spirit, no
   part nor portion of it, is still more evident, because not only a
   having any particular motion of the Spirit, but a being of the Spirit
   is given as a sure sign of being in Christ. 1 John 4:13-- "Hereby know
   we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his
   Spirit." If those that are not true saints have any degree of that
   spiritual principle, then though they have not so much, yet they have
   of it, and so that would be no sign that a person is in Christ. If
   those that have not a saving interest in Christ have nothing of the
   Spirit, then they have nothing; no degree of those graces that are the
   fruits of the Spirit, mentioned in Gal 5:22-- "But the fruit of the
   Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
   meekness, temperance." Those fruits are here mentioned with that very
   design, that we may know whether we have the Spirit or no.

   3. Those that are not true saints, and in a state of salvation, not
   only have not so much of that holy nature and Divine principle that is
   in the hearts of the saints, but they do not partake of it, because a
   being "partakers of the divine nature" is spoken of as the peculiar
   privilege of true saints, (2 Peter 1:4.) It is evident that it is the
   true saints that the apostle is there speaking of. The words in this
   verse with the foregoing are these: "According as his Divine power hath
   given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through
   the true knowledge of Him that hath called us to glory and virtue:
   whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises: that by
   these ye might be partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the
   corruption that is in the world through lust." The "Divine nature" and
   "lust" are evidently here spoken of as two opposite principles in man.
   Those that are in the world, and that are the men of the world, have
   only the latter principle; but to be partakers of the Divine nature is
   spoken of as peculiar to them that are distinguished and separated from
   the world, by the free and sovereign grace of God giving them all
   things that pertain to life and godliness, giving the knowledge of Him
   and calling them to glory and virtue, and giving them the exceeding
   great and precious promises of the gospel, and that have escaped the
   corruption of the world of wicked men. And a being partakers of the
   Divine nature is spoken of, not only as peculiar to the saints, but as
   one of the highest privileges of the saints.

   4. That those that have not a saving interest in Christ have no degree
   of that relish and sense of spiritual things or things of the Spirit,
   of their Divine truth and excellency, which a true saint has, is
   evident by 1 Cor. 2:14-- "The natural man receiveth not the things of
   the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he
   know them, because they are spiritually discerned." A natural man is
   here set in opposition to a spiritual one, or one that has the Spirit,
   as appears by the foregoing and following verses. Such we have shewn
   already the Scripture declares all true saints to be, and no other.
   Therefore by natural men are meant those that have not the Spirit of
   Christ and are none of His, and are the subjects of no other than the
   natural birth. But here we are plainly taught that a natural man is
   perfectly destitute of any sense, perception, or discerning of those
   things of the Spirit. [We are taught that] by the words "he neither
   does nor can know them, or discern them;" so far from this they are
   "foolishness unto him;" he is a perfect stranger, so that he does not
   know what the talk of such things means; they are words without a
   meaning to him; he knows nothing of the matter any more than a blind
   man of colours.

   Hence it will follow, that the sense of things of religion that a
   natural man has, is not only not to the same degree, but nothing of the
   same nature with that which a true saint has. And besides, if a natural
   person has the fruit of the Spirit, which is of the same kind with what
   a spiritual person has, then he experiences within himself the things
   of the Spirit of God; and how then can he be said to be such a stranger
   to them, and have no perception or discerning of them?

   The reason why natural men have no knowledge of spiritual things is,
   because they have nothing of the Spirit of God dwelling in them. This
   is evident by the context: for there we are told that it is by the
   Spirit that these things are taught, (verses 10-12;) godly persons in
   the next verse are called spiritual, because they have the Spirit
   dwelling in them. Hereby the sense again is confirmed, for natural men
   are in no degree spiritual; they have only nature and no Spirit. If
   they had anything of the Spirit, though not in so great a degree as the
   godly, yet they would be taught spiritual things, or things of the
   Spirit, in proportion to the measure of the Spirit that they had. The
   Spirit that searcheth all things would teach them in some measure.
   There would not be so great a difference that the one could perceive
   nothing of them, and that they should be foolishness to them, while to
   the other they appear divinely and remarkably wise and excellent, as
   they are spoken of in the context, (verses 6-9,) and as such the
   apostle spoke here of discerning them.

   The reason why natural men have no knowledge or perception of spiritual
   things is, because they have none of the anointing spoken of, (1 John
   2:27:) "The anointing which ye have received of him, abideth in you,
   and you need not that any man teach you." This anointing is evidently
   spoken of here, as a thing peculiar to true saints. Ungodly men never
   had any degree of that holy oil poured upon them, and therefore have no
   discerning of spiritual things. Therefore none of that sense that
   natural men have of things of religion, is of the same nature with what
   the godly have. But to these they are totally blind. Therefore in
   conversion the eyes of the blind are opened. The world is wholly
   unacquainted with the Spirit of God, as appears by John 14:17, where we
   read about "the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive, because
   it knoweth him not."

   5. Those that go for those in religion that are not true saints and in
   a state of salvation have no charity, as is plainly implied in the
   beginning of the 13th chapter of the 1st Epistle to the Corinthians.
   Therefore they have no degree of that kind of grace, disposition, or
   affection that is so called. So Christ elsewhere reproves the
   Pharisees, those high pretenders to religion among the Jews, that they
   had not the love of God in them, (John 5:42.)

   6. That those that are not true saints have no degree of that grace
   that the saints have is evident, because they have no communion or
   fellowship with Christ. If those that are not true saints partake of
   any of that Spirit, those holy inclinations and affections, and
   gracious acts of soul that the godly have from the indwelling of the
   Spirit of Christ, then they would have communion with Christ. The
   communion of saints with Christ does certainly very much consist in
   that receiving of His fulness and partaking of His grace spoken of,
   John 1:16-- "Of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace,"
   and in partaking of that Spirit which God gives not by measure unto
   Him. Partaking of Christ's holiness and grace, His nature,
   inclinations, tendencies, love, and desires, comforts and delights,
   must be to have communion with Christ. Yea, a believer's communion with
   the Father and the Son does mainly consist in his partaking of the Holy
   Ghost, as appears by 2 Cor. 13:14--"The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
   and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost."

   But that unbelievers have no fellowship or communion with Christ
   appears, (1.) because they are not united to Christ. They are not in
   Christ. For the Scripture is very plain and evident in this, that those
   that are in Christ are actually in a state of salvation, and are
   justified, sanctified, accepted of Christ, and shall be saved. Phil.
   3:8-9--"Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
   excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have
   suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may
   win Christ, and be found in Him." 2 Cor. 5:17-- "If any man be in
   Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away ; behold, all
   things are become new." 1 John 2:5--"But whoso keepeth his word, in him
   verily is the love of God perfected : hereby know we that we are in
   Him; and 3:24-- "He that keepeth His commandments dwelleth in Him, and
   He in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit
   which He hath given us." But those that are not in Christ, and are not
   united to Him, can have no degree of communion with Him. For there is
   no communion without union. The members can have no communion with the
   head or participation of its life and health unless they are united to
   it. The branch must be united with the vine, otherwise there can be no
   communication from the vine to it, nor any partaking of any degree of
   its sap, or life, or influence. So without the union of the wife to the
   husband, she can have no communion in his goods. (2.) The Scripture
   does more directly teach that it is only true saints that have
   communion with Christ, as particularly this is most evidently spoken of
   as what belongs to the saints, and to them only, in 1 John 1:3,
   together with verses 6-7-- "That which we have seen and heard declare
   we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our
   fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ." Ver.
   6--"If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness,
   we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in
   the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
   Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." Also in 1 Cor. 1:9--"God is
   faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Christ
   Jesus our Lord."

   7. The Scripture speaks of the actual being of a truly holy and
   gracious principle in the heart, as inconsistent with a man's being a
   sinner or a wicked man. 1 John 3:9-- "Whosoever is born of God doth not
   commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because
   he is born of God." Here it is needless to dispute what is intended by
   this seed, whether it be a principle of true virtue and a holy nature
   in the soul, or whether it be the word of God as the cause of that
   virtue. For let us understand it in either sense, it comes to much the
   same thing in the present argument ; for if by the seed is meant the
   word of God, yet when it is spoken of as abiding in him that is born
   again, it must be intended, with respect to its effect, as a holy
   principle in his heart : for the word of God does not abide in one that
   is born again more than another, any other way than in its effect. The
   word of God abides in the heart of a regenerate person as a holy seed,
   a Divine principle there, though it may be but as a seed, a small
   thing. The seed is a very small part of the plant, and is its first
   principle. It may be in the heart as a grain of mustard-seed, may be
   hid, and seem to be in great measure buried in the earth. But yet it is
   inconsistent with wickedness. The smallest degrees and first principles
   of a Divine and holy nature and disposition are inconsistent with a
   state of sin; whence it is said "he cannot sin." There is no need here
   of a critical inquiry into the import of that expression; for doubtless
   so much at least is implied through this, "his seed being in him," as
   is inconsistent with his being a sinner or a wicked man. So that this
   heavenly plant of true holiness cannot be in the heart of a sinner, no,
   not so much as in its first principle.

   8. This is confirmed by the things that conversion is represented by in
   the Scriptures, particularly its being represented as a work of
   creation. When God creates He does not merely establish and perfect the
   things which were made before, but makes wholly and immediately
   something entirely new, either out of nothing, or out of that which was
   perfectly void of any such nature, as when He made man of the dust of
   the earth. "The things that are seen are not made of things that do
   appear. Saving grace in man is said to be the new man or a new
   creature, and corrupt nature the old man. If that nature that is in the
   heart of a godly man be not different in its nature and kind from all
   that went before, then the man might possibly have had the same things
   a year before, and from time to time from the beginning of his life,
   but only not quite to the same degree. And how then is grace in him,
   the new man or the new creature?

   Again, conversion is often compared to a resurrection. Wicked men are
   said to be dead, but when they are converted they are represented as
   being by God's mighty and effectual power raised from the dead. Now
   there is no medium between being dead and alive. He that is dead has no
   degree of life ; he that has the least degree of life in him is alive.
   When a man is raised from the dead, life is not only in a greater
   degree, but it is all new.

   The same is manifest by conversion being represented as a new birth or
   as regeneration. Generation is not only perfecting what is old, but
   'tis a begetting from the new. Then nature and life that is then
   received has then its beginning: it receives its first principles.

   Again conversion in Scripture is represented as an opening of the eyes
   of the blind. In such a work those have light given them that were
   totally destitute of it before. So in conversion, stones are said to be
   raised up children to Abraham: while stones they are altogether
   destitute of all those qualities that afterwards render them the living
   children of Abraham, and not only had them not in so great a degree.
   Agreeably to this, conversion is said to be a taking away a heart of
   stone and a giving a heart of flesh. The man while unconverted has a
   heart of stone which has no degree of that life and sense that the
   heart of flesh has, because it yet remains a stone, than which nothing
   is further from life and sense.

   Inference 1. -- From what has been said, I would observe that it must
   needs be that conversion is wrought at once. That knowledge, that
   reformation and conviction that is preparatory to conversion may be
   gradual, and the work of grace after conversion may be gradually
   carried on, yet that work of grace upon the soul where by a person is
   brought out of a state of total corruption and depravity into a state
   of grace, to an interest in Christ, and to be actually a child of God,
   is in a moment.

   It must needs be the consequence; for if that grace or virtue that a
   person has when he is brought into a state of grace be entirely
   different in nature and kind from all that went before, then it will
   follow that the last instant before a person is actually a child of God
   and in a state of grace, a person has not the least degree of any real
   goodness, and of that true virtue that is in a child of God.

   Those things by which conversion is represented in Scripture hold forth
   the same thing. In creation something is brought out of nothing in an
   instant. God speaks and it is done, He commands and it stands fast.
   When the dead are raised, it is done in a moment. Thus when Christ
   called Lazarus out of his grave, it was not a gradual work. He said,
   "Lazarus, come forth," and there went life with the call. He heard His
   voice and lived. So Christ, John 5:25-- "Verily, verily, I say unto
   you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice
   of the Son of God : and they that hear shall live,"--which words must
   be understood of the work of conversion. In creation, being is called
   out of nothing and instantly obeys the call, and in the resurrection
   the dead are called into life: as soon as the call is given the dead
   obey.

   By reason of this instantaneousness of the work of conversion, one of
   the names under which conversion is frequently spoken of in Scripture,
   is calling: Rom. 8:28-30--"And we know that all things work together
   for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to
   his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
   conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among
   many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called;
   and whom he called, them he also justified ; and whom he justified,
   them he also glorified." Acts 2:37-39-- "Now when they heard this, they
   were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the
   apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto
   them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
   Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
   Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to
   all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call."
   Heb. 9:15, (last clause)--"That they which are called might receive the
   promise of eternal inheritance." 1 Thess. 5:23-24 --"And the very God
   of peace sanctify you wholly... Faithful is he that calleth you, who
   also will do it." Nothing else can be meant in those places by calling
   than what Christ does in a sinner's saving conversion. By which it
   seems evident that it is done at once and not gradually; whereby
   Christ, through His great power, does but speak the powerful word and
   it is done, He does but call and the heart of the sinner immediately
   comes. It seems to be symbolised by Christ's calling His disciples, and
   their immediately following Him. So when He called Peter, Andrew,
   James, and John, they were minding other things ; but at His call they
   immediately left all and followed Him. Matt. 4:18-22-- Peter and Andrew
   were casting a net into the sea, and Christ says to them as He passed
   by, Follow me ; and it is said, they straightway left their nets and
   followed Him. So James and John were in the ship with Zebedee their
   father mending their nets, and He called them, and immediately they
   left the ship and their father and followed Him. So when Matthew was
   called: Matt. 9:9-- "And as Jesus passed forth from thence, He saw a
   man, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and He saith unto
   him, Follow me. And he arose and followed Him." Now whether they were
   then converted or not, yet doubtless Christ in thus calling His first
   disciples to a visible following of Him, represents to us the manner in
   which He would call men to be truly His disciples and spiritually to
   follow Him in all ages. There is something immediately and
   instantaneously put into their hearts at that call that they had
   nothing of before, that effectually disposes them to follow.

   It is very manifest that almost all the miracles of Christ that He
   wrought when on earth were types of His great work of converting
   sinners, and the manner of His working those miracles holds forth the
   instantaneousness of the work of conversion. Thus when He healed the
   leper, which represented His healing us of our spiritual leprosy, He
   put forth His hand and touched him, and said, "I will; be thou clean."
   And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. Matt. 8:3; Mark 1:42; Luke
   5:13. And so, in opening the eyes of the blind, which represents His
   opening the eyes of our blind souls, (Matt. 20:30 etc., ) He touched
   their eyes, and immediately their eyes received sight, and they
   followed Him. So Mark 10:52; Luke 18:43-- So when He healed the sick,
   which represents His healing our spiritual diseases, or conversion, it
   was done at once. Thus when He healed Simon's wife's mother, (Mark
   1:31,) He took her by the hand and lifted her up; and immediately the
   fever left her, and she ministered unto them. So when the woman which
   had the issue of blood touched the hem of Christ's garment, immediately
   the issue of blood stanched, (Luke 8:44.) So the woman that was bowed
   together with the spirit of infirmity, when Christ laid His hands upon
   her, immediately she was made straight, and glorified God, (Luke
   13:12-13;) which represents that action on the soul whereby He gives an
   upright heart, and sets the soul at liberty from its bondage to glorify
   Him. So the man at the pool of Bethesda, when Christ bade him rise,
   take up his bed and walk, (he) was immediately made whole, (John
   5:8-9.) After the same manner Christ cast out devils, which represents
   His dispossessing the devil of our souls in conversion; and so He
   settled the winds and waves, representing His subduing, in conversion,
   the heart of the wicked, which is like the troubled sea, when it cannot
   rest; and so He raised the dead, which represented His raising dead
   souls.

   The same is confirmed by those things which conversion is compared to
   in Scripture. It is often compared to a resurrection. Natural men (as
   was said before) are said to be dead, and to be raised when they are
   converted by God's mighty effectual power from the dead. Now, there is
   no medium between being dead and alive ; he that is dead has no degree
   of life in him, he that has the least degree of life in him is alive.
   When a man is raised from the dead, life is not only in a greater
   degree in him than it was before, but it is all new. The work of
   conversion seems to be compared to a raising the dead to life, in this
   very thing, even its instantaneousness, or its being done, as it were,
   at a word's speaking. As in John 5:25, (before quoted)-- "Verily,
   verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
   shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live."
   He speaks here of a work of conversion, as appears by the preceding
   verse; and by the words themselves, which speak of the time of this
   raising the dead, not only as to come hereafter, but as what was
   already come. This shews conversion to be an immediate instantaneous
   work, like to the change made on Lazarus when Christ called him from
   the grave: there went life with the call, and Lazarus was immediately
   alive. Immediately before the call sinners are dead or wholly destitute
   of life, as appears by the expression, "The dead shall hear the voice,"
   and immediately after the call they are alive; yea, there goes life
   with the word, as is evident, not only because it is said they shall
   live, but also because it is said, they shall hear His voice. The first
   moment they have any life is the moment when Christ calls, and as soon
   as they are called, which further appears by what was observed before,
   even that a being called and converted are spoken of in Scripture as
   the same thing.

   The same is confirmed (as observed before) from conversion being
   compared to a work of creation, which is a work wherein something is
   made either out of nothing, or out of that having no degree of the same
   kind of qualities and principles, as when God made man of the dust of
   the earth. Thus it is said, "If any man be in Christ he is a new
   creature;" which obviously implies that he is an exceeding diverse kind
   of creature from what he was before he was in Christ, that the
   principle or qualities that he has by which he is a Christian, are
   entirely new, and what there was nothing of, before he was in Christ.

   Inference 2. Hence we may learn that it is impossible for men to
   convert themselves by their own strength and industry, with only a
   concurring assistance helping in the exercise of their natural
   abilities and principles of the soul, and securing their improvement.
   For what is gained after this manner is a gradual acquisition, and not
   something instantaneously begotten, and of an entirely different
   nature, and wholly of a separate kind, from all that was in the nature
   of the person the moment before. All that men can do by their own
   strength and industry is only gradually to increase and improve and
   new-model and direct qualities, principles, and perfections of nature
   that they have already. And that is evident, because a man in the
   exercise and improvement of the strength and principles of his own
   nature has nothing but the qualities, powers, and perfections that are
   already in his nature to work with, and nothing but them to work upon;
   and therefore 'tis impossible that by this only, anything further
   should be brought to pass, than only a new modification of what is
   already in the nature of the soul. That which is only by an improvement
   of natural qualities, principles, and perfections -- let these things
   be improved never so much and never so industriously, and never so
   long, they'll still be no more than an improvement of those natural
   qualities, principles, and perfections; and therefore not anything of
   an essentially distinct and superior nature and kind.

   'Tis impossible (as Dr Clarke observes) "that any effect should have
   any perfection that was not in the cause: for if it had, then that
   perfection would be caused by nothing." 'Tis therefore utterly
   impossible that men's natural perfections and qualities in that
   exercise, and however assisted in that exercise, should produce in the
   soul a principle or perfection of a nature entirely different from all
   of them, or any manner of improvement or modification of them.

   The qualities and principles of natural bodies, such as figure or
   motion, can never produce anything beyond themselves. If infinite
   comprehensions and divisions be eternally made, the things must still
   be eternally the same, and all their possible effects can never be
   anything but repetitions of the same. Nothing can be produced by only
   those qualities of figure and motion, beyond figure and motion: and so
   nothing can be produced in the soul by only its internal principles,
   beyond these principles or qualities, or new improvements and
   modifications of them. And if we suppose a concurring assistance to
   enable to a more full and perfect exercise of those natural principles
   and qualities, unless the assistance of influence actually produces
   something beyond the exercise of internal principle: still, it is the
   same thing. Nothing will be produced but only an improvement and new
   modification of those principles that are exercised. Therefore it
   follows that saving grace in the heart, can't be produced in man by
   mere exercise of what perfections he has in him already, though never
   so much assisted by moral suasion, and never so much assisted in the
   exercise of his natural principles, unless there be something more that
   all this, viz., an immediate infusion or operation of the Divine Being
   upon the soul. Grace must be the immediate work of God, and properly a
   production of His almighty power on the soul.
     __________________________________________________________________

  SHEWING WHEREIN ALL SAVING GRACE DOES SUMMARILY CONSIST"

   The next thing that arises for consideration is, What is the nature of
   this Divine principle in the soul that is so entirely diverse from all
   that is naturally in the soul? Here I would observe,--

   1. That that saving grace that is in the hearts if the saints, that
   within them [which is] above nature, and entirely distinguishes 'em
   from all unconverted men, is radically but one -- i.e., however various
   its exercises are, yet it is but one in its root; 'tis one individual
   principle in the heart.

   'Tis common for us to speak of various graces of the Spirit of God as
   though they were so many different principles of holiness, and to call
   them by distinct names as such, -- repentance, humility, resignation,
   thankfulness, etc. But we err if we imagine that these in their first
   source and root in the heart are properly distinct principles. They all
   come from the same fountain, and are, indeed, the various exertions and
   conditions of the same thing, only different denominations according to
   the various occasions, objects, and manners, attendants and
   circumstances of its exercise. There is some one holy principle in the
   heart that is the essence and sum of all grace, the root and source of
   all holy acts of every kind, and the fountain of every good stream,
   into which all Christian virtues may ultimately be resolved, and in
   which all duty and [all] holiness is fulfilled.

   Thus the Scripture represents it. Grace in the soul is one fountain of
   water of life, (John 4:14,) and not various distinct fountains. So God,
   in the work of regeneration, implants one heavenly seed in the soul,
   and not various different seeds. 1 John 3:9--"Whosoever is born of God
   doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him." ... The Day [that]
   has arisen on the soul is but one. The oil in the vessel is simple and
   pure, conferred by one holy anointing. All is "wrought" by one
   individual work of the Spirit of God. And thus it is there is a
   consentanation of graces. Not only is one grace in some way allied to
   another, and so tends to help and promote one another, but one is
   really implied in the other. The nature of one involves the nature of
   another. And the great reason of it is, that all graces have one common
   essence, the original principle of all, and is but one. Strip the
   various parts of the Christian soul of their circumstances,
   concomitants, appendages, means, and occasions, and consider that which
   is, as it were, their soul and essence, and all appears to be the same.
   [I observe]

   2. That principle in the soul of the saints, which is the grand
   Christian virtue, and which is the soul and essence and summary
   comprehension of all grace, is a principle of Divine Love. This is
   evident,

   (1.) Because we are abundantly taught in the Scripture that Divine Love
   is the sum of all duty; and that all that God requires of us is
   fulfilled in it, --i.e., That Love is the sum of all duty of the heart,
   and its exercises and fruits the sum of all [the] duty of life. But if
   the duty of the heart, or all due dispositions of the hearts, are all
   summed up in love, then undoubtedly all grace may be summed up in LOVE.

   The Scripture teaches us that all our duty is summed up in love;or,
   which is the same thing, that 'tis the sum of all that is required in
   the Law; and that, whether we take the Law as signifying the Ten
   Commandments, or the whole written Word of God. So, when by the Law is
   meant the Ten Commandments : Rom. 13:8--"Owe no man any thing, but to
   love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law" ;
   and, therefore, several of these commandments are there rehearsed. And
   again, in ver. 10, "Love is the fulfilling of the law." And unless love
   was the sum of what the law required, the law could not be fulfilled in
   love. A law is not fulfilled but by obedience to the sum of what it
   contains. So the same apostle again: 1 Tim. 1:5-- "Now the end of the
   commandment is charity" [love].

   If we take the law in a yet more extensive sense for the whole written
   Word of God, the Scripture still teaches us that love is the sum of
   what is required in it. [Thus] Matt. 22:40. There Christ teaches us
   that on these two precepts of loving God and our neighbour hang all the
   Law and the Prophets, --that is, all the written Word of God. So that
   what was called the Law and the Prophets was the whole written Word of
   God that was then extant. The Scripture teaches this of each table of
   the law in particular.

   Thus, the lawyer that we read of in the 10th chapter of Luke, vv.25-28,
   mentions the love of God and our neighbour as the sum of the two tables
   of the law; and Christ approves of what he says. When he stood up and
   tempted Christ with this question, "Master, what shall I do to inherit
   eternal life?" Christ asks him what was required of him "in the Law?"
   He makes answer, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
   and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
   mind, and thy neighbour as thyself;" and Christ replies, "Thou hast
   answered right: this do, and thou shalt live;" as much as to say, "Do
   this, then thou hast fulfilled the whole law."

   So in Matthew 22:36-38, that commandment, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
   God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind,"
   is given by Christ himself as the sum of the first Table of the Law, in
   answer to the question of the lawyer, who asked Him, "Which is the
   great commandment in the law!" And in the next verse, loving our
   neighbours as ourselves is mentioned as the sum of the second Table, as
   it is also in Romans 13:9, where most of the precepts of the second
   Table are rehearsed over in particular: "For this, Thou shalt not
   commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt
   not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet ; and if there be any
   other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely,
   Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."

   The Apostle James seems to teach the same thing. James 2:8-- "If ye
   fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself, ye do well."

   Thus frequent, express, and particular is the Scripture in teaching us
   that all duty is comprehended in Love. The Scripture teaches us, in
   like manner, of nothing else. This is quite another thing than if
   Religion in general had only sometimes gone under the name of the Love
   of God, as it sometimes goes by the name of the fearing of God, and
   sometimes the knowledge of God, and sometimes feeling of God.

   This argument does fully and irrefragably prove that all grace, and
   every Christian disposition and habit of mind and heart, especially as
   to that which is primarily holy and Divine in it, does summarily
   consist in Divine Love, and may be resolved into it: however, with
   respect to its kinds and manner of exercise and its appendages, it may
   be diversified. For certainly there is no duty of heart, or due
   disposition of mind, but what is included in the Law and the Prophets,"
   and is required by some precept of that law and rule which He has given
   mankind to walk by. But yet the Scripture affords us other evidences of
   the truth of this.

   (2.) The apostle speaks of Divine Love as that which is the essence of
   all Christianity in the thirteenth chapter of [the] 1st [Epistle to
   the] Corinthians. There the apostle evidently means a comparison
   between the gifts of the Spirit and the grace of the Spirit. In the
   foregoing chapter the apostle had been speaking of the gifts of the
   Spirit throughout, such as the gift of wisdom, the gift of knowledge,
   the gift of faith, the gift of healing or working miracles, prophecy,
   discerning spirits, speaking with tongues, etc.; and in the last verse
   in the chapter he exhorts the Corinthians to "covet earnestly the best
   gifts;" but adds, "and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way," and
   so proceeds to discourse of the saving grace of the Spirit under the
   name of a)ga/ph love, and to compare this saving grace in the heart
   with those gifts. Now, 'tis manifest that the comparison is between the
   gifts of the Spirit that were common to both saints and sinners, and
   that saving grace that distinguishes true saints; and, therefore,
   charity or love is here understood by divines as intending the same
   thing as sincere grace of heart.

   By love or charity here there is no reason to understand the apostle
   [as speaking] only of love to men, but that principle of Divine Love
   that is in the heart of the saints in the full extent, which primarily
   has God for its object. For there is no reason to think that the
   apostle doesn't mean the same thing by charity here as he does in the
   eighth chapter of the same Epistle, where he is comparing the same two
   things together, knowledge and charity, as he does here. But there he
   explains himself to mean by charity the love of God: [verses 1-3]
   --"Now as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have
   knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth. And if any man
   think that he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to
   know. But if any man love God, the same is known of him," etc.

   'Tis manifest that love or charity is here (Chap. 13) spoken of as the
   very essence of all Christianity, and is the very thing wherein a
   gracious sincerity consists. For the Apostle speaks of it as the most
   excellent, the most necessary, and essential thing of all, without
   which all that makes the greatest, and fairest, and most glittering
   show in Religion is nothing -- without which, "if we speak with the
   tongues of men and angels, we are become as sounding brass and tinkling
   cymbals" -and without which, though we have "the gift of prophecy, and
   understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and have all faith, so
   that we could remove mountains, and should bestow all our goods to feed
   the poor, and even give our bodies to be burned, we are nothing."
   Therefore, how can we understand the Apostle any otherwise than that
   this is the very thing whereof the essence of all consists; and that he
   means the same by charity as a gracious charity, as indeed it is
   generally understood. If a man does all these things here spoken, makes
   such glorious prophecies, has such knowledge, such faith, and speaks so
   excellently, and performs such excellent external acts, and does such
   great things in religion as giving all his goods to the poor and giving
   his body to be burned, what is wanting but one thing? The very
   quintessence of all Religion, the very thing wherein lies summarily the
   sincerity, spirituality, and divinity of Religion. And that, the
   Apostle teaches us, is LOVE.

   And further, 'tis manifestly the Apostle's drift to shew how this
   excellent principle does radically comprehend all that is good. For he
   goes on to shew how all essences of good and excellent dispositions and
   exercises, both towards God and towards man, are virtually contained
   and will flow from this one principle: "Love suffereth long, and is
   kind, envieth not, ... endureth all things" etc. The words of this last
   verse especially respects duties to God, as the former did duties to
   men, as I would shew more particularly afterwards.

   (Here it may be noted, by the way, that by charity 'believing all
   things, hoping all things,' the Apostle has undoubtedly respect to the
   same faith and hope that in other parts of the chapter are mentioned
   together and compared with charity, [as I think might be sufficiently
   made manifest, if it were proper here to spend time upon it.] And not
   believing and hoping, in the case of our neighbour, which the apostle
   has spoken of before, in the last words of verse 5th, and had plainly
   summed up all parts of charity towards our neighbour in the 6th verse.
   And then in this verse the apostle proceeds to mention other exercises
   or fruits of charity quite of another kind--viz., patience under
   suffering, faith and hope, and perseverance.)

   Thus the Apostle don't only represent love or charity as the most
   excellent thing in Christianity, and as the quintessence, life and soul
   of all Religion, but as that which virtually comprehends all holy
   virtues and exercises. And because love is the quintessence and soul of
   all grace, wherein the divinity and holiness of all that belongs to
   charity does properly and essentially consist, therefore, when
   Christians come to be in their most perfect state, and the Divine
   nature in them shall be in its greatest exaltation and purity, and be
   free from all mixtures, stripped of these appurtenances and that
   clothing that it has in the present state ; and [when] it shall lose
   many other of its denominations, especially from the peculiar manner
   and exercises accommodated to the imperfect circumstances of the
   present state, they will be what will remain. All other names will be
   swallowed up in the name of charity or love, as the apostle, agreeably
   to his chapter on this, (1 Cor. 13.,) observes in verses 8-10--
   "Charity never faileth.... But when that which is perfect is come, then
   that which is in part shall be done away." And, therefore, when the
   apostle, in the last verse, speaks of charity as the greatest grace, we
   may well understand him in the same sense as when Christ speaks of the
   command of love God, etc., as the greatest commandment --viz., that
   among the graces, that is the source and sum of all graces, as that
   commanded is spoken of as the sum of all commands, and requiring that
   duty which is the ground of all other duties.

   It must be because Charity is the quintessence and soul of all duty and
   all good in the heart that the apostle says that it is "the end of the
   commandment," for doubtless the main end of the commandment is to
   promote that which is most essential in Religion and constituent of
   holiness.

   3. Reason bears witness to the same thing.

   (1.)Reason testifies that Divine Love is so essential in Religion that
   all Religion is but hypocrisy and a "vain show" without it. What is
   Religion but the exercise and expressions of regard to the Divine
   Being? But certainly if there be no love to Him, there is no sincere
   regard to Him; and all pretences and show of respect to Him, whether it
   be in word or deed, must be hypocrisy, and of no value in the eyes of
   Him who sees the heart How manifest is it that without love there can
   be no true honour, no sincere praise! And how can obedience be hearty,
   if it be not a testimony of respect to God! The fear of God without
   love is no other than the fear of devils; and all that outward respect
   and obedience, all that resignation, that repentance and sorrow for
   sin, that form in religion, that outward devotion that is performed
   merely from such a fear without love, is all of it a practical lie, as
   in Psalm 66:3-- "...How terrible art Thou in Thy works! through the
   greatness of Thy power shall Thine enemies submit themselves unto
   Thee." In the original it is "shall thine enemies lie unto Thee" --
   i.e., shall yield a feigned or lying obedience and respect to Thee,
   when still they remain enemies in their hearts. There is never a devil
   in hell but what would perform all that many a man [has] performed in
   religion, that had no love to God; and a great deal more if they were
   in like circumstances and the like hope of gain by it, and be as much
   of a devil in this heart as he is now. The Devil once seemed to be
   religious from fear of torment: Luke 8:28-- "When he saw Jesus, he
   cried out and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What
   have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God most high? I beseech
   Thee, torment me not." Here is external worship. The Devil is
   religious; he prays -- he prays in a humble posture; he falls down
   before Christ, he lies prostrate; he prays earnestly, he cries with a
   loud voice; he uses humble expressions -- "I beseech Thee, torment me
   not;" he uses respectful, honourable, adoring expressions -- "Jesus,
   Thou Son of God most high." Nothing was wanting but LOVE.

   And with respect to duties towards men, no good offices would be
   accepted by men one from another, if they saw the heart, and knew they
   did not proceed from any respect in the heart. If a child carry it very
   respectfully to his father, either from a strong fear, or from hope of
   having the larger inheritance when his father is dead, or from the like
   consideration, and not at all from any respect to his father in his
   heart; if the child's heart were open to the view of his father, and he
   plainly knew that there was no real regard to him. Would the child's
   outward honour and obedience be acceptable to the parent? So if a wife
   should carry it very well to her husband, and not at all from any love
   to him, but from other considerations plainly seen, and certainly known
   by the husband, Would he at all delight in her outward respect any more
   than if a wooden image were contrived to make respectful motions in his
   presence?

   If duties towards men are [to be] accepted of God as a part of Religion
   and the service of the Divine Being, they must be performed not only
   with a hearty love to men, but that love must flow from regard to Him.

   (2.) Reason shews that all good dispositions and duties are wholly
   comprehended in, and will flow from, Divine Love. Love to God and men
   implies all proper respect or regard to God and men; and all proper
   acts and expressions of regard to both will flow from it, and therefore
   all duty to both. To regard God and men in our heart as we ought, is
   the same thing. And, therefore, a proper regard or love comprehends all
   virtue of heart; and he that shews all proper regard to God and men in
   his practice, performs all that in practice towards them which is his
   duty. The Apostle says, Romans 13:10-- "Love works no ill to his
   neighbor." 'Tis evident by his reasoning in that place, that he means
   more than is expressed -- that love works no ill but all good towards
   our neighbor; so, by a parity of reason, love to God works no ill, but
   all duty towards God.

   A Christian love to God, and Christian love to men, are not properly
   two distinct principles in the heart. These varieties are radically the
   same; the same principle flowing forth towards different objects,
   according to the order of their existence. God is the First Cause of
   all things, and the Fountain and Source of all good; and men are
   derived from Him, having something of His image, and are the objects of
   His mercy. So the first and supreme object of Divine love is God; and
   men are loved either as the children of God or His creatures, and those
   that are in His image, and the objects of His mercy, or in some
   respects related to God, or partakers of His loveliness, or at least
   capable of happiness.

   That love to God, and a Christian love to men, are thus but one in
   their root and foundation-principle in the heart, is confirmed by
   several passages in the First Epistle of John: chap. 3:16-17-- "Hereby
   perceive we the love of God, because He laid down His life for us: and
   we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. But whoso hath this
   world's goods,... how dwelleth the love of God in him?" Chap. 4:20,21--
   "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he
   that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom
   he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from him, That he who
   loveth God love his brother also." Chap. 5:1,2-- "Whosoever believeth
   that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one loveth Him that
   begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him. By this we know that we
   love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His commandments."

   Therefore to explain the nature of Divine Love, what is principally
   requisite is to explain the nature of love to God. For this may
   especially be called Divine Love; and herein all Christian love or
   charity does radically consist, for this is the fountain of all.

   As to a definition of Divine Love, things of this nature are not
   properly capable of a definition. They are better felt than defined.
   Love is a term as clear in its signification, and that does as
   naturally suggest to the mind the thing signified by it, as any other
   term or terms that we can find out or substitute in its room. But yet
   there may be a great deal of benefit in descriptions that may be given
   of this heavenly principle though they all are imperfect. They may
   serve to limit the signification of the term and distinguish this
   principle from other things, and to exclude counterfeits, and also more
   clearly to explain some things that do appertain to its nature.

   Divine Love, as it has God for its object, may be thus described. 'Tis
   the soul's relish of the supreme excellency of the Divine nature,
   inclining the heart to God as the chief good.

   The first thing in Divine Love, and that from which everything that
   appertains to it arises, is a relish of the excellency of the Divine
   nature; which the soul of man by nature has nothing of.

   The first effect that is produced in the soul, whereby it is carried
   above what it has or can have by nature, is to cause it to relish or
   taste the sweetness of the Divine relation. That is the first and most
   fundamental thing in Divine Love, and that from which everything else
   that belongs to the Divine Love naturally and necessarily proceeds.
   When one the soul is brought to relish the excellency of the Divine
   nature, then it will naturally, and of course, incline to God every
   way. It will incline to be with Him and to enjoy Him. It will have
   benevolence to God. It will be glad that He is happy. It will incline
   that He should be glorified, and that His will should be done in all
   things. So that the first effect of the power of God in the heart in
   REGENERATION, is to give the heart a Divine taste or sense; to cause it
   to have a relish of the loveliness and sweetness of the supreme
   excellency of the Divine nature; and indeed this is all the immediate
   effect of the Divine Power that there is, this is all the Spirit of God
   needs to do, in order to a production of all good effects in the soul.
   If God, by an immediate act of His, gives the soul a relish of the
   excellency of His own nature, other things will follow of themselves
   without any further act of the Divine power than only what is necessary
   to uphold the nature of the faculties of the soul. He that is once
   brought to see, or rather to taste, the superlative loveliness of the
   Divine Being, will need no more to make him long after the enjoyment of
   God, to make him rejoice in the happiness of God, and to desire that
   this supremely excellent Being may be pleased and glorified. (Love is
   commonly distinguished into a love of complacence and love of
   benevolence. Of these two a love of complacence is first, and is the
   foundation of the other,--i.e., if by a love of complacence be meant a
   relishing a sweetness in the qualifications of the beloved, and a being
   pleased and delighted in his excellency. This, in the order of nature,
   is before benevolence, because it is the foundation and reason of it. A
   person must first relish that wherein the amiableness of nature
   consists, before he can wish well to him on the account of that
   loveliness, or as being worthy to receive good. Indeed, sometimes love
   of complacence is explained something differently, even for that joy
   that the soul has in the presence and possession of the beloved, which
   is different from the soul's relish of the beauty of the beloved, and
   is a fruit of it, as benevolence is. The soul may relish the sweetness
   and the beauty of a beloved object, whether that object be present or
   absent, whether in possession or not in possession; and this relish is
   the foundation of love of benevolence, or desire of the good of the
   beloved. And it is the foundation of love of affection to the beloved
   object when absent; and it is the foundation of one's rejoicing in the
   object when present; and so it is the foundation of everything else
   that belongs to Divine Love.) And if this be true, then the main ground
   of true love to God is the excellency of His own nature, and not any
   benefit we have received, or hope to receive, by His goodness to us.
   Not but that there is such a thing as a gracious gratitude to God for
   mercies bestowed upon us; and the acts and fruits of His goodness to us
   may [be,] and very often are, occasions and incitements of the exercise
   of true love to God, as I must shew more particularly hereafter. But
   love or affection to God, that has no other good than only some benefit
   received or hoped for from God, is not true love. [If it be] without
   any sense of a delight in the absolute excellency of the Divine nature,
   [it] has nothing Divine in it. Such gratitude towards God requires no
   more to be in the soul than that human nature that all men are born
   with, or at least that human nature well cultivated and improved, or
   indeed not further vitiated and depraved than it naturally is. It is
   possible that natural men, without the addition of any further
   principle than they have by nature, may be affected with gratitude by
   some remarkable kindness of God to them, as that they should be so
   affected with some great act of kindness of a neighbour. A principle of
   self-love is all that is necessary to both. But Divine Love is a
   principle distinct from self-love, and from all that arises from it.
   Indeed, after a man is come to relish the sweetness of the supreme good
   there is in the nature of God, self-love may have a hand in an appetite
   after the enjoyment of that good. For self-love will necessarily make a
   man desire to enjoy that which is sweet to him. But God's perfections
   must first savour appetite and [be] sweet to men, or they must first
   have a taste to relish sweetness in the perfection of God, before
   self-love can have any influence upon them to cause an appetite after
   the enjoyment of that sweetness. And therefore that divine taste or
   relish of the soul, wherein Divine Love doth most fundamentally
   consist, is prior to all influence that self-love can have to incline
   us to God; and so must be a principle quite distinct from it, and
   independent of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

  SHEWING HOW A PRINCIPLE OF GRACE IS FROM THE SPIRIT OF GOD."

   I. That this holy and Divine principle, which we have shewn does
   radically and summarily consist in Divine Love, comes into existence in
   the soul by the power of God in the influences of the Holy Spirit, the
   Third Person in the blessed Trinity, is abundantly manifest from the
   Scriptures.

   Regeneration is by the Spirit: John 3:5-6--"Verily, verily, I say unto
   thee, Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
   into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and
   that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." And verse 8-- "The wind
   bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst
   not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that
   is born of the Spirit."

   The renewing of the soul is by the Holy Ghost: Titus 3:5-- "Not by
   works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
   he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
   Ghost." A new heart is given by God's putting His Spirit within us:
   Ezekiel 36:26,27-- "A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit
   will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your
   flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit
   within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
   judgments and do them." Quickening of the dead soul is by the Spirit:
   John 6:63-- "It is the Spirit that quickeneth." Sanctification is by
   the Spirit of God: 2 Thess. 2:13-- "God hath from the beginning chosen
   you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
   truth." Romans 15:16-- "That the offering up of the Gentiles might be
   acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost." 1 Cor. 6:11-- "Such
   were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
   justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God."
   1 Peter 1:2-- "Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
   through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of
   the blood of Jesus Christ." All grace in the heart is the fruit of the
   Spirit: Gal. 5:22, 23-- "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
   peace, long -suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
   temperance." Eph. 5:9-- "The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and
   righteousness and truth." Hence the Spirit of God is called the Spirit
   of grace, (Heb. 10:29.)

   This doctrine of a gracious nature being by the immediate influence of
   the Spirit of God, is not only taught in the Scriptures, but is
   irrefragable to Reason. Indeed there seems to be a strong disposition
   in men to disbelieve and oppose the doctrine of true disposition, to
   disbelieve and oppose the doctrine of immediate influence of the Spirit
   of God in the hearts of men, or to diminish and make it as small and
   remote a matter as possible, and put it as far out of sight as may be.
   Whereas it seems to me, true virtue and holiness would naturally excite
   a prejudice (if I may so say) in favour of such a doctrine; and that
   the soul, when in the most excellent frame, and the most lively
   exercise of virtue, --love to God and delight in Him,-- would naturally
   and unavoidably think of God as kindly communicating Himself to him,
   and holding communion with him, as though he did as it were see God
   smiling on him, giving to him and conversing with him; and that if he
   did not so think of God, but, on the contrary, should conceive that
   there was no immediate communication between God and him, it would tend
   greatly to quell his holy motions of soul, and be an exceeding damage
   to his pleasure.

   No good reason can be given why men should have such an inward
   disposition to deny any immediate communication between God and the
   creature, or to make as little of it as possible. 'Tis a strange
   disposition that men have to thrust God out of the world, or to put Him
   as far out of sight as they can, and to have in no respect immediately
   and sensibly to do with Him. Therefore so many schemes have been drawn
   to exclude, or extenuate, or remove at a great distance, any influence
   of the Divine Being in the hearts of men, such as the scheme of the
   Pelagians, the Socinians, etc. And therefore these doctrines are so
   much ridiculed that ascribe much to the immediate influence of the
   Spirit, and called enthusiasm, fanaticism, whimsy, and distraction; but
   no mortal can tell for what.

   If we make no difficulty of allowing that God did immediateiy make the
   whole Universe at first, and caused it to exist out of nothing, and
   that every individual thing owes its being to an immediate, voluntary,
   arbitrary act of Almighty power, why should we make a difficulty of
   supposing that He has still something immediately to do with the things
   that He has made, and that there is an arbitrary influence still that
   God has in the creation that He has made?

   And if it be reasonable to suppose it with respect to any part of the
   Creation, it is especially so with respect to reasonable creatures, who
   are the highest part of the Creation, next to God, and who are most
   immediately made for God, and have Him for their next Head, and are
   created for the business wherein they are mostly concerned. And above
   all, in that wherein the highest excellency of this highest rank of
   beings consist, and that wherein he is most conformed to God, is
   nearest to Him, and has God for his most immediate object.

   It seems to me most rational to suppose that as we ascend in the order
   of being we shall at last come immediately to God, the First Cause. In
   whatever respect we ascend, we ascend in the order of time and
   succession.

   II. The Scripture speaks of this holy and Divine principle in the heart
   as not only from the Spirit, but as being spiritual. Thus saving
   knowledge is called spiritual understanding: Col. 1:9-- "We desire that
   ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
   spiritual understanding." So the influences, graces, and comforts of
   God's Spirit are called spiritual blessings: Eph. 1:3-- "Blessed be the
   God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all
   spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." So the imparting of
   any gracious benefit is called the imparting of a spiritual gift: Rom.
   1:11-- "For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some
   spiritual gift." And the fruits of the Spirit which are offered to God
   are called spiritual sacrifices: 1 Peter 2:5-- "A spiritual priesthood
   to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ."
   And a spiritual person signifies the same In Scripture as a gracious
   person, and sometimes one that is much under the influence of grace: 1
   Cor. 2:15-- "He that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is
   judged of no man;" and 3:1-- "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you
   as unto spiritual but as unto carnal." Gal. 6:1-- "If a man be
   overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the
   spirit of meekness." And to be graciously minded is called in Scripture
   a being spiritually minded: Rom. 8:6-- "To be spiritually minded is
   life and peace."

   Concerning this, two things are to be noted.

   1. That this Divine principle in the heart is not called spiritual,
   because it has its seat in the soul or spiritual part of man, and not
   in his body. It is called spiritual, not because of its relation to the
   spirit of man, in which it is, but because of its relation to the
   Spirit of God, from which it is. That things are not called spiritual
   because they appertain not to the body but the spirit of man is
   evident, because gracious or holy understanding is called spiritual
   understanding in the forementioned passage, (Col. 1:9.) Now, by
   spiritual understanding cannot be meant that understanding which has
   its scat in the soul, to distinguish it from other understanding that
   has its seat in the body, for all understanding has its seat in the
   soul; and that things are called spiritual because of their relation to
   the Spirit of God is most plain, by the latter part of the 2d chapter
   of 1st Corinthians. There we have both those expressions, one
   immediately after another, evidently meaning the same thing: verses 13,
   14-- "Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
   teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things
   with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the things of the
   Spirit of God." And that by the spiritual man is meant one that has the
   Spirit is also as plainly evident by the context: verses 10-12-- "God
   hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all
   things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of
   a man," etc. Also ver. 15-- "He that is spiritual judgeth all things,"
   by which is evidently meant the same as he that hath the Spirit that
   "searcheth all things," as we find in the forgoing verses. So persons
   are said to be spiritually minded, not because they mind things that
   relate to the soul or spirit of man, but because they mind things that
   relate to the Spirit of God: Romans 8:5, 6-- "For they that are after
   the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the
   Spirit the things of the Spirit. For to be carnally minded is death;
   but to be spiritually minded is life and peace."

   2. It must be observed that where this holy Divine principle of saving
   grace wrought in the mind is in Scripture called spiritual, what is
   intended by the expression is not merely nor chiefly that it is from
   the Spirit of God, but that it is of the nature of the Spirit of God.
   There are many things in the minds of some natural men that are from
   the influence of the Spirit, but yet are by no means spiritual things
   in the scriptural sense of the word. The Spirit of God convinces
   natural men of sin, (John 16:8.) Natural men may have common grace,
   common illuminations, and common affections that are from the Spirit of
   God, as appears by Hebrews 6:4. Natural men have sometimes the
   influences of the Spirit of God in His common operations and gifts, and
   therefore God's Spirit is said to be striving with them, and they are
   said to resist the Spirit, (Acts 7:51;) to grieve and vex God's Holy
   Spirit, (Eph. 4:30; Isaiah 63:10;) and God is said to depart from them
   even as the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul: 1 Sam. 16:14-- "But
   the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the
   Lord troubled him."

   But yet natural men are not in any degree spiritual. The great
   difference between natural men and godly men seems to be set forth by
   this, that the one is natural and carnal, and the other spiritual; and
   natural men are so totally destitute of that which is Spirit, that they
   know nothing about it, and the reason given for it is because they are
   not spiritual, (1 Cor. 2:13-15.) Indeed sometimes those miraculous
   gifts of the Spirit that were common are called spiritual because they
   are from the Spirit of God; but for the most part the term seems to be
   appropriate to its gracious influences and fruits on the soul, which
   are no otherwise spiritual than the common influences of the Spirit
   that natural men have, in any other respect than this, that this saving
   grace in the soul, is not only from the Spirit, but it also partakes of
   the nature of that Spirit that it is from, which the common grace of
   the Spirit does not. Thus things in Scripture language are said to be
   earthly, as they partake of an earthly nature, partake of the nature of
   the earth; so things are said to be heavenly, as they in their nature
   agree with those things that are in heaven; and so saving grace in the
   heart is said to be spiritual, and therein distinguished from all other
   influences of the Spirit, that it is of the nature of the Spirit of
   God. It partakes of the nature of that Spirit, while no common gift of
   the Spirit doth so.

   But here an enquiry may be raised, viz.:--

   Enq. How does saving grace partake of the nature of that Spirit that it
   is from, so as to be called on that account spiritual, thus essentially
   distinguishing it from all other effects of the Spirit? for every
   effect has in some respect or another the nature of its cause, and the
   common convictions and illuminations that natural men have are in some
   respects [of] the nature of the Spirit of God; for there is light and
   understanding and conviction of truth in these common illuminations,
   and so they are of the nature of the Spirit of God--that is, a
   discerning spirit and a spirit of truth. But yet saving grace, by its
   being called spiritual, as though it were thereby distinguished from
   all other gifts of the Spirit, seems to partake of the nature of the
   Spirit of God in some very peculiar manner.

   Clearly to satisfy this enquiry, we must do these two things:-- 1. We
   must bear in mind what has already been said of the nature of saving
   grace, and what I have already shewn to be that wherein its nature and
   essence lies, and wherein all saving grace is radically and summarily
   comprised viz., a principle of Divine Love. 2. We must consider what
   the Scripture reveals to be in a peculiar manner the nature of the Holy
   Spirit of God, and in an enquiry of this nature I would go no further
   than I think the Scripture plainly goes before me. The Word of God
   certainly should be our rule in matters so much above reason and our
   own notions.

   And here I would say--

   (1.) That I think the Scripture does sufficiently reveal the Holy
   Spirit as a proper Divine Person; and thus we ought to look upon Him as
   a distinct personal agent. He is often spoken of as a person, revealed
   under personal characters and in personal acts, and it speaks of His
   being acted on as a person, and the Scripture plainly ascribes every
   thing to Him that properly denotes a distinct person; and though the
   word person be rarely used in the Scriptures, yet I believe that we
   have no word in the English language that does so naturally represent
   what the Scripture reveals of the distinction of the Eternal
   Three,--Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,--as to say they are one God but
   three persons.

   (2.) Though all the Divine perfections are to be attributed to each
   person of the Trinity, yet the Holy Ghost is in a peculiar manner
   called by the name of Love --A)ga/ph, the same word is that translated
   charity in the 13th chapter of 1st Corinthians. The Godhead or the
   Divine essence is once and again said to be Love: 1 John 4:8 -- "He
   that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love." So again, ver. 16--
   "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in
   him." But the Divine essence is thus called in a peculiar manner as
   breathed forth and subsisting in the Holy Spirit; as may be seen in the
   context of these texts, as in the 12th and 13th verses of the same
   chapter-- "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another,
   God dwelleth in us, and His love is perfected in us. Hereby know we
   that we dwell in Him, and He in us, because He hath given us of His
   Spirit." It is the same argument in both these verses: in the 12th
   verse the apostle argues that if we have love dwelling in us, we have
   God dwelling in us; and in the 13th verse he clears the face of the
   argument by this, that his love which is dwelling in us is God's
   Spirit. And this shews that the foregoing argument is good, and that if
   love dwells in us, we know God dwells in us indeed, for the Apostle
   supposes it as a thing granted and allowed that God's Spirit is God.
   The Scripture elsewhere does abundantly teach us that the way in which
   God dwells in the saints is by His Spirit, by their being the temples
   of the Holy Ghost. Here this apostle teaches us the same thing. He
   says, "We know that he dwelleth in us, that he hath given us his
   Spirit;" and this is manifestly to explain what is said in the
   foregoing verse-- viz., that God dwells in us, inasmuch as His love
   dwells in us; which love he had told us before--ver. 8--is God himself.
   And afterwards, in the 16th verse, he expresses it more fully, that
   this is the way that God dwells in the saint-- viz.. because this love
   dwells in them, which is God.

   Again the same is signified in the same manner in the last verses of
   the foregoing chapter. In the foregoing verses, speaking of love as a
   true sign of sincerity and our acceptance with God, beginning with the
   18th verse, he sums up the argument thus in the last verse: "And hereby
   we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us."

   We have also something very much like this in the apostle Paul's
   writings.

   Gal. 5:13-16-- "Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by
   love serve one another. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even
   in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. But if ye bite and
   devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.
   This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust
   of the flesh." Here it seems most evident that what the apostle exhorts
   and urges in the 13th, 14th, and 15th verses,-- viz., that they should
   walk in love, that they might not give occasion to the gratifying of
   the flesh,--he does expressly explain in the 16th verse by this, that
   they should walk in the Spirit, that they might not fulfil the lust of
   the flesh; which the great Mr Howe takes notice of in his "Sermons on
   the Prosperous State of the Christian Interest before the End of Time,"
   p. 185, published by Mr Evans. His words are, "Walking in the Spirit is
   directed with a special eye and reference unto the exercise of this
   love; as you may see in Galatians 5, the 14th, 15th, and 16th verses
   compared together. All the law is fulfilled in one word, (he means the
   whole law of the second table,) even in this, Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another, (the
   opposite to this love, or that which follows on the want of it, or from
   the opposite principle,) take heed that ye be not consumed one of
   another. This I say then, (observe the inference,) Walk in the Spirit,
   and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. To walk in the Spirit is
   to walk in the exercise of this love."

   So that as the Son of God is spoken of as the wisdom, understanding,
   and Logos of God, (Proverbs 8; Luke 11:49; John 1, at the beginning,)
   and is, as divines express things, the personal wisdom of God; so the
   Spirit of God is spoken of as the love of God, and may with equal
   foundation and propriety be called the personal love of God. We read in
   the beloved disciple's writings of these two --Logos and A)ga/ph, both
   of which are said to be God, (John 1:1; 1 John 4:8-16.) One is the Son
   of God, and the other the Holy Spirit. There are two things that God is
   said to be in this First Epistle of John--light and love: chap.
   1:5--"God is light." This is the Son of God, who is said to be the
   wisdom and reason of God, and the brightness of His glory; and in the
   4th chapter of the same epistle he says, "God is love," and this he
   applies to the Holy Spirit.

   Hence the Scripture symbol of the Holy Ghost is a dove, which is the
   emblem of love, and so was continually accounted (as is well known) in
   the heathen world, and is so made use of by their poets and
   mythologists, which probably arose partly from the nature and manner of
   the bird, and probably in part from the tradition of the story of
   Noah's dove, that came with a message of peace and love after such
   terrible manifestations of God's wrath in the time of the deluge. This
   bird is also made use of as an emblem of love in the Holy Scriptures;
   as it was on that message of peace and love that God sent it to Noah,
   when it came with an olive-leaf in its mouth, and often in Solomon's
   Song: Cant. 1:15-- "Thou hast doves' eyes": Cant. 5:12-- "His eyes are
   as the eyes of doves:" Cant. 5:2-- "Open to me, my love, my dove," and
   in other places in that song.

   This bird, God is pleased to choose as the special symbol of His Holy
   Spirit in the greatest office or work of the Spirit that ever it has or
   will exert--viz., in anointing Christ, the great Head of the whole
   Church of saints, from which Head this holy oil descends to all the
   members, and the skirts of His garments, as the sweet and precious
   ointment that was poured on Aaron's head, that great type of Christ. As
   God the Father then poured forth His Holy Spirit of love upon the Son
   without measure, so that which was then seen with the eye--viz., a dove
   descending and lighting upon Christ--signified the same thing as what
   was at the same time proclaimed to the Son--viz., This is my beloved
   Son, in whom I am well pleased. This is the Son on whom I pour forth
   all my love, towards whom my essence entirely flows out in love. See
   Matt. 3:16,17; Mark 1:10-11; Luke 3:22; John 1:32-33.

   This was the anointing of the Head of the Church and our great High
   Priest, and therefore the holy anointing oil of old with which Aaron
   and other typical high priests were anointed was the most eminent type
   of the Holy Spirit of any in the Old Testament. This holy oil, by
   reason of its soft-flowing and diffusive nature, and its unparalleled
   sweetness and fragrancy, did most fitly represent Divine Love, or that
   Spirit that is the deity, breathed forth or flowing out and softly
   falling in infinite love and delight. It is mentioned as a fit
   representation of holy love, which is said to be like the precious
   ointment on the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard,
   that went down to the skirts of his garments. It was from the fruit of
   the olive-tree, which it is known has been made use of as a symbol of
   love or peace, which was probably taken from the olive-branch brought
   by the dove to Noah in token of the Divine favour; so that the
   olive-branch and the dove that brought it, both signified the same
   thing--viz., love, which is specially typified by the precious oil from
   the olive-tree.

   God's love is primarily to Himself, and His infinite delight is in
   Himself, in the Father and the Son loving and delighting in each other.
   We often read of the Father loving the Son, and being well pleased in
   the Son, and of the Son loving the Father. In the infinite love and
   delight that is between these two persons consists the infinite
   happiness of God: Prov. 8:30.--"Then I was by him, as one brought up
   with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;"
   and therefore seeing the Scripture signifies that the Spirit of God is
   the Love of God, therefore it follows that Holy Spirit proceeds from or
   is breathed forth from, the Father and the Son in some way or other
   infinitely above all our conceptions, as the Divine essence entirely
   flows out and is breathed forth in infinitely pure love and sweet
   delight from the Father and the Son; and this is that pure river of
   water of life that proceeds out of the throne of the Father and the
   Son, as we read at the beginning of the 22nd chapter of the Revelation;
   for Christ himself tells us that by the water of life, or living water,
   is meant the Holy Ghost, (John 7:38, 39.) This river of water of life
   in the Revelation is evidently the same with the living waters of the
   sanctuary in Ezekiel, (Ezek. 47:1, etc.;) and this river is doubtless
   the river of God's pleasure, or of God's own infinite delight spoken of
   in Ps. 36:7-9-- "How excellent is thy loving-kindness, O God! therefore
   the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They
   shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou
   shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. For with thee is
   the fountain of life." The river of God's pleasures here spoken of is
   the same with the fountain of life spoken of in the next words. Here,
   as was observed before, the water of life by Christ's own
   interpretation is the Holy Spirit. This river of God's pleasures is
   also the same with the fatness of God's house, the holy oil of the
   sanctuary spoken of in the next preceding words, and is the same with
   God's love, or God's excellent loving-kindness, spoken of in the next
   preceding verse.

   I have before observed that the Scripture abundantly reveals that the
   way in which Christ dwells in the saint is by His Spirit's dwelling in
   them, and here I would observe that Christ in His prayer, in the 17th
   chapter of John, seems to speak of the way in which He dwells in them
   as by the indwelling of the love wherewith the Father has loved Him:
   John 17:26 "And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare
   it; that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
   them." The beloved disciple that wrote this Gospel having taken [such]
   particular notice of this, that he afterwards in his first epistle once
   and again speaks of love's dwelling in the saints, and the Spirit's
   dwelling in them being the same thing.

   Again, the Scripture seems in many places to speak of love in
   Christians as if it were the same with the Spirit of God in them, or at
   least as the prime and most natural breathing and acting of the Spirit
   in the soul. So Rom. 5:5-- "Because the love of God is shed abroad in
   our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us:" Col. 1:8-- "Who
   also declared unto us your love in the Spirit:" 2 Cor. 6:6-- "By
   kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned:" Phil. 2:1-- "If there
   be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
   fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy,
   that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of
   one mind."

   The Scripture therefore leads us to this conclusion, though it be
   infinitely above us to conceive how it should be, that yet as the Son
   of God is the personal word, idea, or wisdom of God, begotten by God,
   being an infinitely perfect, substantial image or idea of Himself, (as
   might be very plainly proved from the Holy Scripture, if here were
   proper occasion for it;) so the Holy Spirit does in some ineffable and
   inconceivable manner proceed, and is breathed forth both from the
   Father and the Son, by the Divine essence being wholly poured and
   flowing out in that infinitely intense, holy, and pure love and delight
   that continually and unchangeably breathes forth from the Father and
   the Son, primarily towards each other, and secondarily towards the
   creature. and so flowing forth in a different subsistence or person in
   a manner to us utterly inexplicable and inconceivable, and that this is
   that person that is poured forth into the hearts of angels and saints.

   Hence 'tis to be accounted for, that though we often read in Scripture
   of the Father loving the Son, and the Son loving the Father, yet we
   never once read either of the Father or the Son loving the Holy Spirit,
   and the Spirit loving either of them. It is because the Holy Spirit is
   the Divine Love itself, the love of the Father and the Son. Hence also
   it is to be accounted for, that we very often read of the love both of
   the Father and the Son to men, and particularly their love to the
   saints; but we never read of the Holy Ghost loving them, for the Holy
   Ghost is that love of God and Christ that is breathed forth primarily
   towards each other, and flows out secondarily towards the creature.
   This also will well account for it, that the apostle Paul so often
   wishes grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord
   Jesus Christ, in the beginning of his epistles, without even mentioning
   the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost is Himself the love and grace of
   God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. He is the deity wholly
   breathed forth in infinite, substantial, intelligent love: from the
   Father and Son first towards each other, and secondarily freely flowing
   out to the creature, and so standing forth a distinct personal
   subsistence.

   Both the holiness and happiness of the Godhead consists in this love.
   As we have already proved, all creature holiness consists essentially
   and summarily in love to God and love to other creatures; so does the
   holiness of God consist in His love, especially in the perfect and
   intimate union and love there is between the Father and the Son. But
   the Spirit that proceeds from the Father and the Son is the bond of
   this union, as it is of all holy union between the Father and the Son,
   and between God and the creature, and between the creatures among
   themselves. All seems to be signified in Christ's prayer in the 17th
   chapter of John, from the 21st verse. Therefore this Spirit of love is
   the "bond of perfectness" (Col. 3:14) throughout the whole blessed
   society or family in heaven and earth, consisting of the Father, the
   head of the family, and the Son, and all His saints that are the
   disciples, seed, and spouse of the Son. The happiness of God doth also
   consist in this love; for doubtless the happiness of God consists in
   the infinite love He has to, and delight He has in Himself; or in other
   words, in the infinite delight there is between the Father and the Son,
   spoken of in Prov. 8:30. This delight that the Father and the Son have
   in each other is not to be distinguished from their love of complacence
   one in another, wherein love does most essentially consist, as was
   observed before. The happiness of the deity, as all other true
   happiness, consists in love and society.

   Hence it is the Spirit of God, the third person in the Trinity, is so
   often called the Holy Spirit, as though "holy" were an epithet some way
   or other peculiarly belonging to Him, which can be no other way than
   that the holiness of God does consist in Him. He is not only infinitely
   holy as the Father and the Son are, but He is the holiness of God
   itself in the abstract. The holiness of the Father and the Son does
   consist in breathing forth this Spirit. Therefore He is not only called
   the Holy Spirit, but the Spirit of holiness: Rom. 1:4-- "According to
   the Spirit of holiness."

   Hence also the river of "living waters," or waters of life, which
   Christ explains in the 7th [chapter] of John, of the Holy Spirit, is in
   the forementioned Psalm [36:8] called the "river of God's pleasures;"
   and hence also that holy oil with which Christ was anointed, which I
   have shewn was the Holy Ghost, is called the "oil of gladness": Heb.
   1:9--"Therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of
   gladness above thy fellows." Hence we learn that God's fulness does
   consist in the Holy Spirit. By fulness, as the term is used in
   Scripture, as may easily be seen by looking over the texts that mention
   it, Is intended the good that any one possesses. Now the good that God
   possesses does most immediately consist in His joy and complacence that
   He has in Himself. It does objectively, indeed, consist in the Father
   and the Son; but it doth most immediately consist in the complacence in
   these elements. Nevertheless the fulness of God consists in the
   holiness and happiness of the deity. Hence persons, by being made
   partakers of the Holy Spirit, or having it dwelling in them, are said
   to be "partakers of the fulness of God" ar Christ. Christ's fulness, as
   mediator, consists in His having the Spirit given Him "not by measure,"
   (John 3:34.) And so it is that He is said to have "the fulness of the
   Godhead," [which] is said "to dwell in him bodily," (Col. 2:9.) And as
   we, by receiving the Holy Spirit from Christ, and being made partakers
   of His Spirit, are said "to receive of his fulness, and grace for
   grace." And because this Spirit, which is the fulness of God, consists
   in the love of God and Christ; therefore we, by knowing the love of
   Christ, are said "to be filled with all the fulness of God," (Eph.
   3:19.) For the way that we know the love of Christ, is by having that
   love dwelling in us, as 1 John 4:13; because the fulness of God
   consists in the Holy Spirit. Hence our communion with God the Father
   and God the Son consists in our possessing of the Holy Ghost, which is
   their Spirit. For to have communion or fellowship with either, is to
   partake with Them of Their good in Their fulness in union and society
   with Them. Hence it is that we read of the saints having fellowship and
   communion with the Father and with the Son; but never of their having
   fellowship with the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost is that common
   good or fulness which they partake of in which their fellowship
   consists. We read of the communion of the Holy Ghost; but not of
   communion with Him, which are two very different things.

   Persons are said to have communion with each other when they partake
   with each other in some common good; but any one is said to have
   communion of anything, with respect to that thing they partake of, in
   common with others. Hence, in the apostolical benediction, he wishes
   the "grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father,
   and the communion or partaking of the Holy Ghost." The blessing wished
   is but one--viz., the Holy Spirit. To partake of the Holy Ghost is to
   have that love of the Father and the grace of the Son.

   From what has been said, it follows that the Holy Spirit is the summum
   of all good. 'Tis the fulness of God. The holiness and happiness of the
   Godhead consists in it; and in communion or partaking of it consists
   all the true loveliness and happiness of the creature. All the grace
   and comfort that persons here have, and all their holiness and
   happiness hereafter, consists in the love of the Spirit, spoken of Rom.
   15:30; and joy in the Holy Ghost, spoken of Rom. 14:17; Acts 9:31,
   13:52. And, therefore, that which in Matt. 7:11-- "If ye then, being
   evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
   shall your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask
   Him?" is in Luke 11:13, expressed thus: "If ye then, being evil, know
   how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your
   heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?" Doubtless
   there is an agreement in what is expressed by each Evangelist: and
   giving the Holy Spirit to them that ask, is the same as giving good
   things to them that ask; for the Holy Spirit is the sum of all good.

   Hence we may better understand the economy of the persons of the
   Trinity as it appears in the part that each one has in the affair of
   redemption, and shews the equality of each Person concerned in that
   affair, and the equality of honour and praise due to each of Them. For
   that work, glory belongs to the Father and the Son, that They so
   greatly loved the world. To the Father, that He so loved the world,
   that He gave His only-begotten Son, who was all His delight, who is His
   infinite objective Happiness. To the Son, that He so loved the world,
   that He gave Himself. But there is equal glory due to the Holy Ghost on
   this account, because He is the Love of the Father and the Son, that
   flows out primarily towards God, and secondarily towards the elect that
   Christ came to save. So that, however wonderful the love of the Father
   and the Son appear to be, so much the more glory belongs to the Holy
   Spirit, in whom subsists that wonderful and excellent love.

   It shews the infinite excellency of the Father thus:--That the Son so
   delighted in Him, and prized His honour and glory, that when He had a
   mind to save sinners, He came infinitely low, rather than men's
   salvation should be the injury of that honour and glory. It shewed the
   infinite excellency and worth of the Son, that the Father so delighted
   in Him, that for His sake He was ready to quit His own; yea, and
   receive into favour those that had deserved infinitely ill at His
   hands. Both shews the infinite excellency of the Holy Spirit, because
   He is that delight of the Father and the Son in each other, which is
   manifested to be so great and infinite by these things.

   What has been said shews that our dependence is equally on each Person
   in this affair. The Father approves and provides the Redeemer, and
   Himself accepts the price of the good purchased, and bestows that good.
   The Son is the Redeemer, and the price that is offered for the
   purchased good. And the Holy Ghost is the good purchased; [for] the
   Sacred Scriptures seem to intimate that the Holy Spirit is the sum of
   all that Christ purchased for man, (Gal. 3:13-14.)

   What Christ purchased for us is, that we might have communion with God
   in His good, which consists in partaking or having communion of the
   Holy Ghost, as I have shewn. All the blessedness of the redeemed
   consists in partaking of the fulness of Christ, their Head and
   Redeemer, which, I have observed, consists in partaking of the Spirit
   that is given Him not by measure. This is the vital sap which the
   creatures derive from the true vine. This is the holy oil poured on the
   head, that goes down to the members. Christ purchased for us that we
   should enjoy the Love: but the love of God flows out in the proceeding
   of the Spirit; and He purchased for them that the love and joy of God
   should dwell in them, which is by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit.

   The sum of all spiritual good which the saints have in this world, is
   that spring of living water within them which we read of, (John 4:10;)
   and those rivers of living waters flowing from within them which we
   read of, (John 7:38,39,) which we are there told is the Holy Spirit.
   And the sum of all happiness in the other world, is that river of
   living water which flows from the throne of God and the Lamb, which is
   the river of God's pleasures, and is the Holy Spirit, which is often
   compared in Sacred Scripture to water, to the rain and dew, and rivers
   and floods of waters, (Isa. 44:3; 32:15; 41:17,18, compared with John
   4:14; Isa. 35:6,7; 43:19,20.)

   The Holy Spirit is the purchased possession and inheritance of the
   saints, as appears, because that little of it which the saints have in
   this world is said to be the earnest of that purchased inheritance,
   (Eph. 1:13,14; 2 Cor. 1:22, v.5.) 'Tis an earnest of that which we are
   to have a fulness of hereafter. The Holy Ghost is the great subject of
   all gospel promises, and therefore is called the Spirit of promise,
   (Eph.1:13.) He is called the promise of the Father, (Luke 24:49.)

   The Holy Ghost being a comprehension of all good things promised in the
   gospel, we may easily see the force of the Apostle's inquiry: Gal.
   3:2-- "This only would I learn of you. Received ye the Spirit by the
   works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? " So that in the offer of
   redemption 'tis of God of whom our good is purchased, and 'tis God that
   purchases it, and 'tis God also that is the thing purchased. Thus all
   our good things are of God, and through God, and in God, as Rom.
   11:36-- "For of him, and through him, and to him, and in him, [as ei/V
   is rendered in 1 Cor. 8:6,] are all things: to whom be glory for
   ever."All our good is of God the Father, and through God the Son, and
   all is in the Holy Ghost, as He is Himself all our good. And so God is
   Himself the portion and purchased inheritance of His people. Thus God
   is the Alpha and Omega in this affair of Redemption.

   If we suppose no more than used to be supposed about the Holy Ghost,
   the honour of the Holy Ghost in the work of Redemption is not equal in
   any sense to the Father and the Son's; nor is there an equal part of
   the glory of this work belonging to Him. Merely to apply to us, or
   immediately to give or hand to us blessing purchased, after it is
   purchased, is subordinate to the other two Persons,--is but a little
   thing to the purchaser of it by the paying an infinite price by Christ,
   by Christ's offering up Himself a sacrifice to procure it; and 'tis but
   a little thing to God the Father's giving His infinitely dear Son to be
   a sacrifice for us to procure this good. But according to what has now
   been supposed, there is an equality. To be the wonderful love of God,
   is as much as for the Father and the Son to exercise wonderful love;
   and to be the thing purchased, is as much as to be the price that
   purchases it. The price, and the thing bought with that price, answer
   each other in value; and to be the excellent benefit offered, is as
   much as to offer such an excellent benefit. For the glory that belongs
   to Him that bestows the gospel, arises from the excellency and value of
   the gift, and therefore the glory is equal to that excellency of the
   benefit. And so that Person that is that excellent benefit, has equal
   glory with Him that bestows such an excellent benefit.

   But now to return: from what has been now observed from the Holy
   Scriptures of the nature of the Holy Spirit, may be clearly understood
   why grace in the hearts of the saints is called spiritual, in
   distinction from other things that are the effects of the Spirit in the
   hearts of men. For by this it appears that the Divine principle in the
   saints is of the nature of the Spirit; for as the nature of the Spirit
   of God is Divine Love, so Divine Love is the nature and essence of that
   holy principle in the hearts of the saints.

   The Spirit of God may operate and produce effects upon the minds of
   natural men that have no grace, as He does when He assists natural
   conscience and convictions of sin and danger. The Spirit of God may
   produce effects upon inanimate things, as of old He moved on the face
   of the waters. But He communicates holiness in His own proper nature
   only, in those holy effects in the hearts of the saints. And,
   therefore, those holy effects only are called spiritual; and the saints
   only are called spiritual persons in Sacred Scripture.

   Men's natural faculties and principles may be assisted by the operation
   of the Spirit of God on their minds, to enable them to exert those acts
   which, to a greater or lesser degree, they exert naturally. But the
   Spirit don't at all communicate Himself in it in His own nature, which
   is Divine Love, any more than when He moved upon the face of the
   waters.

   Hence also we may more easily receive and understand a doctrine that
   seems to be taught us in the Sacred Scripture concerning grace in the
   heart--viz., that it is no other than the Spirit of God itself dwelling
   and acting in the heart of a saint,-- which the consideration of these
   things will make manifest:--

   (1.) That the Sacred Scriptures don't only call grace spiritual, but
   "spirit."

   (2.) That when the Sacred Scriptures call grace spirit, the Spirit of
   God is intended; and that grace is called "Spirit" no otherwise than as
   the name of the Holy Ghost, the Third Person in the Trinity is ascribed
   to it.

   1. This holy principle is often called by the name of "spirit" in
   Sacred Scripture. So in John 3:6-- "That which is born of the Spirit is
   spirit." Here by flesh and spirit, we have already shewn, are intended
   those two opposite principles in the heart, corruption and grace. So by
   flesh and spirit the same things are manifestly intended in Gal. 5:17--
   "For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
   flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot
   do the things that ye would." This that is here given as the reason why
   Christians cannot do the things that they would, is manifestly the same
   that is given for the same thing in the latter part of the 7th chapter
   of the Romans. The reason there given why they cannot do the things
   that they would is, that the law of the members war with [and] against
   the law of the mind; and, therefore, by the law of the members and the
   law of the mind are meant the same as the flesh and Spirit in
   Galatians. Yea, they are called by the same name of the flesh and
   Spirit there, in that context, in the continuation of the same
   discourse in the beginning of the next chapter:-- "Therefore there is
   no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after
   the flesh, but after the Spirit." Here the Apostle evidently refers to
   the same two opposite principles warring one against another, that he
   had been speaking of in the close of the preceding chapter, which he
   here calls flesh and Spirit as he does in his Epistle to the Galatians.

   This is yet more abundantly clear by the next words, which are, "For
   the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from
   the law of sin and death." Here these two things that in the preceding
   verse are called "flesh and spirit," are in this verse called "the law
   of the Spirit of life" and "the law of sin and death," evidently
   speaking still of the same law of our mind and the law of sin spoken of
   in the last verse of the preceding chapter. The Apostle goes on in the
   8th chapter to call aversation and grace by the names of flesh and
   Spirit, (verses 4-9, and again verses 12,13.) These two principles are
   called by the same names in Matt. 26:41-- "The spirit indeed is
   willing, but the flesh is weak." There can be no doubt but that the
   same thing is intended here by the flesh and spirit as (compare what is
   said of the flesh and spirit here and in these places) in the 7th and
   8th chapters of Romans, and Gal. 5. Again, these two principles are
   called by the same words in Gal. 6:8. If this be compared with the 18th
   verse of the foregoing chapter, and with Romans 8:6 and 13, none can
   doubt but the same is meant in each place.

   2. If the Sacred Scriptures be duly observed, where grace is called by
   the name of "spirit," it will appear that 'tis so called by an
   ascription of the Holy Ghost, even the third person in the Trinity, to
   that Divine principle in the hearts of the saints, as though that
   principle in them were no other than the Spirit of God itself, united
   to the soul, and living and acting in it, and exerting itself in the
   use and improvement of its faculties.

   Thus it is in the 8th chapter of Romans, as does manifestly appear by
   verses 9-16-- "But you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so
   be the Spirit of God dwell in you," etc. "Now if any man have not the
   Spirit of Christ, he is none of his," etc.

   Here the apostle does fully explain himself what he means when he so
   often calls that holy principle that is in the hearts of the saints by
   the name "spirit." This he means, the Spirit of God itself dwelling and
   acting in them. In the 9th verse he calls it the Spirit of God, and the
   Spirit of Christ in the 10th verse. He calls it Christ in them in the
   11th verse. He calls it the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the
   dead dwelling in them; and in the 14th verse he calls it the Spirit of
   God. In the 16th verse he calls it the Spirit itself. So it is called
   the Spirit of God in 1 Cor. 2:11,12. So that that holy, Divine
   principle, which we have observed does radically and essentially
   consist in Divine love, is no other than a communication and
   participation of that same infinite Divine Love, which is GOD, and in
   which the Godhead is eternally breathed forth; and subsists in the
   Third Person in the blessed Trinity. So that true saving grace is no
   other than that very love of God-- that is, God, in one of the persons
   of the Trinity, uniting Himself to the soul of a creature, as a vital
   principle, dwelling there and exerting Himself by the faculties of the
   soul of man, in His own proper nature, after the manner of a principle
   of nature.

   And we may look back and more fully understand what the apostle John
   means when he says once and again, "God is Love," and "He that dwelleth
   in Love dwelleth in God, and God in him," and "If we love one another,
   God dwelleth in us," and "His Love is perfected in us," [and] "Hereby
   we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of
   his Spirit."

   By this, also, we may understand what the apostle Peter means in his
   2nd Epistle 1:4, that the saints are made "partakers of the Divine
   nature." They are not only partakers of a nature that may, in some
   sense, be called Divine, because 'tis conformed to the nature of God;
   but the very deity does, in some sense, dwell in them. That holy and
   Divine Love dwells in their hearts, and is so united to human
   faculties, that 'tis itself become a principle of new nature. That
   love, which is the very native tongue and spirit of God, so dwells in
   their souls that it exerts itself in its own nature in the exercise of
   those faculties, after the manner of a natural or vital principle in
   them.

   This shews us how the saints are said to be the "temples of the Holy
   Ghost" as they are.

   By this, also, we may understand how the saints are said to be made
   "partakers of God's holiness," not only as they partake of holiness
   that God gives, but partake of that holiness by which He himself is
   holy. For it has been already observed, the holiness of God consists in
   that Divine Love in which the essence of God really flows out.

   This also shews us how to understand our Lord when He speaks of His joy
   being fulfilled in the saints: John 17:13-- "And now I come unto thee;
   and these things I speak in the world, that they might have My joy
   fulfilled in themselves." It is by the indwelling of that Divine
   Spirit, which we have shewn to be God the Father's and the Son's
   infinite Love and Joy in each other. In the 13th verse He says He has
   spoken His word to His disciples, "that His joy might be fulfilled;"
   and in verse 26th He says, "And I have declared unto them Thy name, and
   will declare it; that the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in
   them, and I in them."

   And herein lies the mystery of the vital union that is between Christ
   and the soul of a believer, which orthodox divines speak so much of,
   Christ's love--that is, His Spirit is actually united to the faculties
   of their souls. So it properly lives, acts, and exerts its nature in
   the exercise of their faculties. By this Love being in them, He is in
   them, (John 17:26;) and so it is said, 1 Cor. 6:17-- "But he that is
   joined unto the Lord is one spirit."

   And thus it is that the saints are said to live, "yet not they, but
   Christ lives in them," (Gal. 2:20.) The very promise of spiritual life
   in their souls is no other than the Spirit of Christ himself. So that
   they live by His life, as much as the members of the body live by the
   life of the Lord, and as much as the branches live by the life of the
   root and stock. "Because I live, ye shall live also," (John 14:19.) "We
   are dead: but our life is hid with Christ in God," (Col. 3:3.) "When
   Christ, who is our life, shall appear," (Col 3:4.)

   There is a union with Christ, by the indwelling of the Love of Christ,
   two ways. First, as 'tis from Christ, and is the very Spirit and life
   and fulness of Christ; and second, as it acts to Christ. For the very
   nature of it is love and union of heart to Him.

   Because the Spirit of God dwells as a vital principle or a principle of
   new life in the soul, therefore 'tis called the "Spirit of life," (Rom.
   8:2;) and the Spirit that "quickens." (John 6:63.)

   The Spirit of God is a vital principle in the soul, as the breath of
   life is in the body: Ezek. 37:5--"Thus saith the Lord God unto these
   bones, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live;" and
   so verses 9,10...

   That principle of grace that is in the hearts of the saints is as much
   a proper communication or participation of the Spirit of God, the Third
   Person in the Trinity, as that breath that entered into these bodies is
   represented to be a participation of the wind that blew upon them. The
   prophet says, "Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon
   these slain that they may live," is now the very same wind and the same
   breath; but only was wanted to these bodies to be a vital principle in
   them, which otherwise would be dead. And therefore Christ himself
   represents the communication of His Spirit to His disciples by His
   breathing upon them, and communicating to them His breath, (John
   20:22.)

   We often, in our common language about things of this nature, speak of
   a principle of grace. I suppose there is no other principle of grace in
   the soul than the very Holy Ghost dwelling in the soul and acting there
   as a vital principle. To speak of a habit of grace as a natural
   disposition to act grace, as begotten in the soul by the first
   communication of Divine light, and as the natural and necessary
   consequence of the first light, it seems in some respects to carry a
   wrong idea with it. Indeed the first exercise of grace in the first
   light has a tendency to future acts, as from an abiding principle, by
   grace and by the covenant of God; but not by any natural force. The
   giving one gracious discovery or act of grace, or a thousand, has no
   proper natural tendency to cause an abiding habit of grace for the
   future; nor any otherwise than by Divine constitution and covenant. But
   all succeeding acts of grace must be as immediately, and, to all
   intents and purposes, as much from the immediate acting of the Spirit
   of God on the soul, as the first; and if God should take away His
   Spirit out of the soul-- all habits and acts of grace would of
   themselves cease as immediately as light ceases in a room when a candle
   is carried out. And no man has a habit of grace dwelling in him any
   otherwise than as he has the Holy Spirit dwelling in him in his temple,
   and acting in union with his natural faculties, after the manner of a
   vital principle. So that when they act grace, 'tis, in the language of
   the apostle, "not they, but Christ living in them." Indeed the Spirit
   of God, united to human faculties, acts very much after the manner of a
   natural principle or habit. So that one act makes way for another, and
   so it now settles the soul in a disposition to holy acts; but that it
   does, so as by grace and covenant, and not from any natural necessity.

   Hence the Spirit of God seems in Sacred Scripture to be spoken of as a
   quality of the persons in whom it resided. So that they are called
   spiritual persons; as when we say a virtuous man, we speak of virtue as
   the quality of the man. 'Tis the Spirit itself that is the only
   principle of true virtue in the heart. So that to be truly virtuous is
   the same as to be spiritual.

   And thus it is not only with respect to the virtue that is in the
   hearts of the saints on earth, but also the perfect virtue and holiness
   of the saints in heaven. It consists altogether in the indwelling and
   acting of the Spirit of God in their habits. And so it was with man
   before the Fall; and so it is with the elect, sinless angels. We have
   shewn that the holiness and happiness of God consist in the Holy
   Spirit; and so the holiness and happiness of every holy or truly
   virtuous creature of God, in heaven or earth, consist in the communion
   of the same Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   1 Samuel

   [1]16:14

   Psalms

   [2]36:7-9   [3]66:3

   Proverbs

   [4]8   [5]8:30   [6]8:30

   Song of Solomon

   [7]1:15   [8]5:2   [9]5:12

   Isaiah

   [10]32:15   [11]35:6   [12]35:7   [13]41:17   [14]41:18   [15]43:19
   [16]43:20   [17]44:3   [18]63:10

   Ezekiel

   [19]36:26   [20]36:27   [21]37:5   [22]47:1

   Matthew

   [23]3:16   [24]3:17   [25]4:18-22   [26]7:11   [27]8:3   [28]9:9
   [29]20:30   [30]22:36-38   [31]22:40   [32]26:41

   Mark

   [33]1:10-11   [34]1:31   [35]1:42   [36]10:52

   Luke

   [37]3:22   [38]5:13   [39]8:28   [40]8:44   [41]11:13   [42]11:49
   [43]13:12-13   [44]18:43   [45]24:49

   John

   [46]1   [47]1:1   [48]1:16   [49]1:32-33   [50]3:5-6   [51]3:6
   [52]3:6   [53]3:34   [54]4:10   [55]4:14   [56]4:14   [57]5:8-9
   [58]5:25   [59]5:25   [60]5:42   [61]6:63   [62]6:63   [63]7:38
   [64]7:38   [65]7:39   [66]7:39   [67]14:17   [68]14:19   [69]16:8
   [70]17:13   [71]17:26   [72]17:26   [73]20:22

   Acts

   [74]2:37-39   [75]7:51   [76]9:13   [77]9:31

   Romans

   [78]1:4   [79]1:11   [80]5:5   [81]8:2   [82]8:5   [83]8:6   [84]8:6
   [85]8:6   [86]8:6-9   [87]8:9   [88]8:28-30   [89]11:36   [90]13:8
   [91]13:9   [92]13:10   [93]14:17   [94]15:16   [95]15:30

   1 Corinthians

   [96]1:9   [97]2:11   [98]2:12   [99]2:13-15   [100]2:14   [101]2:15
   [102]3:1   [103]6:11   [104]6:17   [105]8:6   [106]13

   2 Corinthians

   [107]1:22   [108]1:22   [109]5:17   [110]6:6   [111]13:14

   Galatians

   [112]2:20   [113]3:2   [114]3:13-14   [115]5   [116]5   [117]5:13-16
   [118]5:17   [119]5:17   [120]5:22   [121]5:22   [122]5:23   [123]6:1
   [124]6:8   [125]6:8

   Ephesians

   [126]1:3   [127]1:13   [128]1:14   [129]1:14   [130]3:19   [131]4:30
   [132]5:9

   Philippians

   [133]2:1   [134]3:8-9

   Colossians

   [135]1:8   [136]1:9   [137]1:9   [138]2:9   [139]3:3   [140]3:4
   [141]3:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [142]5:23-24

   2 Thessalonians

   [143]2:13

   1 Timothy

   [144]1:5

   Titus

   [145]3:5

   Hebrews

   [146]1:9   [147]6:4   [148]9:15   [149]10:29

   James

   [150]2:8

   1 Peter

   [151]1:2   [152]2:5

   2 Peter

   [153]1:4

   1 John

   [154]1:3   [155]2:5   [156]2:27   [157]3:9   [158]3:9   [159]3:24
   [160]4:8   [161]4:8-16   [162]4:13   [163]4:13
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=14#i.iv-p12.6
   2. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#i.iv-p27.5
   3. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=3#i.iii-p22.1
   4. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=0#i.iv-p23.2
   5. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=30#i.iv-p27.1
   6. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=30#i.iv-p32.2
   7. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=15#i.iv-p24.1
   8. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#i.iv-p24.3
   9. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=12#i.iv-p24.2
  10. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=15#i.iv-p41.5
  11. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=6#i.iv-p41.9
  12. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=7#i.iv-p41.10
  13. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=17#i.iv-p41.6
  14. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=18#i.iv-p41.7
  15. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=19#i.iv-p41.11
  16. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=20#i.iv-p41.12
  17. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=3#i.iv-p41.4
  18. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#i.iv-p12.5
  19. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#i.iv-p3.2
  20. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#i.iv-p3.3
  21. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=5#i.iv-p65.1
  22. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=47&scrV=1#i.iv-p27.4
  23. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#i.iv-p25.1
  24. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#i.iv-p25.2
  25. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#i.ii-p22.5
  26. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#i.iv-p36.5
  27. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=3#i.ii-p23.1
  28. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#i.ii-p22.6
  29. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=30#i.ii-p23.4
  30. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=36#i.iii-p10.1
  31. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=40#i.iii-p8.1
  32. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#i.iv-p52.1
  33. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=10#i.iv-p25.3
  34. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=31#i.ii-p23.7
  35. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=42#i.ii-p23.2
  36. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=52#i.ii-p23.5
  37. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#i.iv-p25.4
  38. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=13#i.ii-p23.3
  39. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=28#i.iii-p22.2
  40. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=44#i.ii-p23.8
  41. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#i.iv-p36.6
  42. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=49#i.iv-p23.3
  43. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=12#i.ii-p23.9
  44. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=43#i.ii-p23.6
  45. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=49#i.iv-p42.4
  46. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i.iv-p23.4
  47. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.iv-p23.7
  48. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i.ii-p12.1
  49. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=32#i.iv-p25.5
  50. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i.iv-p2.1
  51. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=6#i.ii-p3.1
  52. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=6#i.iv-p51.1
  53. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#i.iv-p34.2
  54. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i.iv-p41.1
  55. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#i.iv-p41.8
  56. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#i.iii-p4.1
  57. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=8#i.ii-p23.10
  58. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#i.ii-p21.1
  59. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#i.ii-p24.1
  60. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=42#i.ii-p11.1
  61. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=63#i.iv-p3.4
  62. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=63#i.iv-p64.2
  63. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=38#i.iv-p27.2
  64. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=38#i.iv-p41.2
  65. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#i.iv-p27.3
  66. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#i.iv-p41.3
  67. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=17#i.ii-p10.2
  68. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=19#i.iv-p62.2
  69. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#i.iv-p12.1
  70. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=13#i.iv-p60.1
  71. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=26#i.iv-p28.1
  72. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=26#i.iv-p61.1
  73. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#i.iv-p66.1
  74. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#i.ii-p22.2
  75. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#i.iv-p12.3
  76. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=13#i.iv-p36.4
  77. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=31#i.iv-p36.3
  78. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i.iv-p33.1
  79. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=11#i.iv-p9.3
  80. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#i.iv-p29.1
  81. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=2#i.iv-p64.1
  82. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=5#i.iv-p11.2
  83. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=6#i.iv-p9.7
  84. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=6#i.iv-p11.3
  85. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=6#i.iv-p52.4
  86. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=6#i.ii-p3.4
  87. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#i.ii-p4.1
  88. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#i.ii-p22.1
  89. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#i.iv-p43.2
  90. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=8#i.iii-p7.1
  91. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=9#i.iii-p10.2
  92. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#i.iii-p25.1
  93. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#i.iv-p36.2
  94. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=16#i.iv-p3.6
  95. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=30#i.iv-p36.1
  96. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.ii-p13.5
  97. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#i.iv-p55.1
  98. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#i.iv-p55.2
  99. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#i.iv-p13.1
 100. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#i.ii-p7.1
 101. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=15#i.iv-p9.5
 102. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#i.ii-p3.5
 103. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#i.iv-p3.7
 104. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#i.iv-p61.2
 105. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#i.iv-p43.4
 106. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#i.iii-p19.1
 107. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#i.ii-p4.3
 108. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#i.iv-p42.3
 109. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#i.ii-p13.2
 110. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=6#i.iv-p29.3
 111. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=14#i.ii-p12.2
 112. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#i.iv-p62.1
 113. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=2#i.iv-p43.1
 114. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#i.iv-p39.1
 115. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i.iv-p22.2
 116. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i.iv-p52.2
 117. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#i.iv-p22.1
 118. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#i.ii-p3.2
 119. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#i.iv-p51.2
 120. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#i.ii-p5.2
 121. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#i.iv-p3.9
 122. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=23#i.iv-p3.10
 123. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#i.iv-p9.6
 124. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=8#i.ii-p3.3
 125. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=8#i.iv-p52.3
 126. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.iv-p9.2
 127. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#i.iv-p42.1
 128. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i.ii-p4.4
 129. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#i.iv-p42.2
 130. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=19#i.iv-p34.4
 131. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#i.iv-p12.4
 132. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=9#i.iv-p3.11
 133. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=1#i.iv-p29.4
 134. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#i.ii-p13.1
 135. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=8#i.iv-p29.2
 136. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.iv-p9.1
 137. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.iv-p11.1
 138. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#i.iv-p34.3
 139. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#i.iv-p62.3
 140. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#i.iv-p62.4
 141. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=14#i.iv-p32.1
 142. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#i.ii-p22.4
 143. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#i.iv-p3.5
 144. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#i.iii-p7.2
 145. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i.iv-p3.1
 146. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.iv-p34.1
 147. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#i.iv-p12.2
 148. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#i.ii-p22.3
 149. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=29#i.iv-p3.12
 150. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#i.iii-p11.1
 151. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#i.iv-p3.8
 152. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#i.iv-p9.4
 153. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i.ii-p6.1
 154. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.ii-p13.4
 155. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=5#i.ii-p13.3
 156. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#i.ii-p10.1
 157. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#i.ii-p14.1
 158. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#i.iii-p4.2
 159. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=24#i.ii-p4.2
 160. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#i.iv-p19.2
 161. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#i.iv-p23.8
 162. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#i.ii-p5.1
 163. file:///ccel/e/edwards/treatiseongrace/cache/treatiseongrace.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#i.iv-p34.5
