     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Truth and Innocence Vindicated
      Creator(s): Owen, John (1616-1683)
     Print Basis: The Banner of Truth Trust, Edinburgh, 1967.
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology; Classic;
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Truth and innocence vindicated;

   in

   a survey of a discourse concerning ecclesiastical polity, and the
   authority of the civil magistrate over the consciences of subjects in
   matters of religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Non partûm studiis agimur; sed sumsimus arma,
   Consiliis inimica tuis, discordia vecors.

   Ouden ater graphes. -- Clemens Alexand.
     __________________________________________________________________

   London: 1669.
     __________________________________________________________________

Prefatory note.

   Samuel Parker, author of the "Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity, and
   of the Power of the Magistrate in Matters of Religion," to which Owen
   supplied the following answer, was a noted character in his day. When a
   student in Wadham College, Oxford, he was a Puritan of the strictest
   fashion; but as worldly advancement was his ruling motive, he changed
   his views, and recommended himself to the Court by his abject
   subserviency to its arbitrary measures. He was made Bishop of Oxford in
   1686, and when the Fellows of Magdalen College distinguished themselves
   by their magnanimous resistance to the encroachment on their privileges
   attempted by the Crown, and Hough, who had obtained their almost
   unanimous suffrages to the vacant office of President, had been
   forcibly ejected, Parker was thrust, upon them, as a fit tool for
   promoting the despotic and popish views of James II. It was natural
   that such a man should harbour the deepest malice against
   Nonconformists, -- a malice in which the usual rancour of apostasy
   mingled as an ingredient of especial bitterness.

   We refer to the Life of Owen, vol. i., p. 88, for an account of the
   controversy to which Parker's book gave rise, and for a just
   appreciation of the merits of Owen's work in reply to it. Besides
   Owen's work, several anonymous answers to Parker appeared, under such
   titles as the following:-- "Insolence and Impudence Triumphant; Envy
   and Fury Enthroned; The Mirror of Malice and Madness," etc., 1670;
   "Toleration Discussed in Two Dialogues," 1670; "Animadversions on a New
   Book entitled Ecclesiastical Polity," 1670; and, "A Free Inquiry into
   the Causes of that very great Esteem the Nonconformists are in with
   their Followers," 1673.

   Parker in 1671 replied to Owen, in "A Defense and Continuation of the
   Ecclesiastical Polity," and in a preface to Bishop Bramhall's
   "Vindication of the Episcopal Clergy," written in a characteristic
   strain of mingled ribaldry and bombast. In 1672, Marvell published his
   famous "Rehearsal Transprosed." Marvell was immediately assailed in a
   host of pamphlets:-- "The Transproser Rehearsed;" "Rosemary and Bayes;"
   "Gregory Father Greybeard with his Vizor off;" "A Common-place Book out
   of the Rehearsal Transprosed;" "S'too him Bayes," etc. Parker's own
   pamphlet in reply to him bore the title, "A Reproof to the Rehearsal
   Transprosed, in a Discourse to its Author."

   The genius of Marvell, however, carried all before him in the second
   part of his work, published in 1673. The title of it, with the
   exception of an oath prefixed to the threat quoted in it, is subjoined,
   as an illustration of the intensity of feeling excited by the dispute,
   and of the dread which the friends of Parker entertained for the keen
   weapons of the puritan wit:-- "The Rehearsal Transprosed, the second
   part: occasioned by two letters; the first printed by a nameless
   author, entitled A Reproof,' etc.; the second left for me at a friend's
   house, dated November 3, 1673, subscribed J. G.,' and concluding with
   these words, If thou darest to print any lie or libel against Dr
   Parker, ... I will cut thy throat.'" Marvell, undeterred by these
   profane threats and ravings, dealt such a blow to his main opponent as
   made him the laughing-stock of every circle, and compelled him for a
   time to hide his shame in rural obscurity.

   Owen in the following work confines himself to a refutation of the
   slavish and extravagant notions respecting magistratical authority and
   the royal prerogative which the minion of the Court had not shrunk from
   propounding. The work is a complete magazine of sound argumentation on
   such questions as the power of the magistrate, the rights of
   conscience, and the iniquity of persecution. If Marvell had the credit
   of silencing Parker in a torrent of caustic ridicule, which, though not
   untainted with the coarseness of the age, has rendered his "Rehearsal"
   a source of interest and amusement to many who, taking no interest in
   ecclesiastical disputes, have been drawn to the perusal of it simply by
   its literary merit, still we may claim for Owen the praise of
   establishing, on a basis of able argument, the rights and privileges of
   which such abettors of arbitrary power as Parker sought to deprive
   their countrymen. Owen writes in that spirit of calm self-possession
   and dignity which never under any provocations deserted him, and,
   compared with the "Rehearsal Transprosed," his treatise will be
   accounted dull. Frequently, however, he brightens and relieves the
   tenor of his reasonings by strokes of effective sarcasm, which it may
   be questioned if even the genius of Marvell has surpassed. Parker's
   views are ludicrously reduced to an absurdity by the supposition of an
   edict for the settlement of religion, drawn up according to his own
   principles, and almost in his own words. See page 382. And again, after
   showing that Parker virtually claimed for the civil magistrate an
   authority which God only possesses over the conscience, Owen alludes to
   the preposterous argument that the magistrate should now inflict
   penalties for errors in religion, in room of what the excommunicated
   suffered in the days of the apostles at the hands of the devil, p. 406.
   This work,"' he remarks, in a sally of exquisite humour, "the devil now
   ceasing to attend unto, he would have the magistrate to take upon him
   to supply his place and office, by punishments of his own appointment
   and infliction: and so at last, to be sure of giving him full measure,
   he hath ascribed two extremes unto him about religion, -- namely to act
   the part of God and the devil!" For an estimate of the more solid
   qualities and general merits of the following work, the reader is again
   commended to the critique on it, in the "Life of Owen." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   A survey

   of

   a discourse concerning ecclesiastical polity.
     __________________________________________________________________

Review of the Preface.

   Among the many disadvantages which those who plead in any sense for
   liberty of conscience are exposed unto, it is not the least that in
   their arguings and pleas they are enforced to admit a supposition that
   those whom they plead for are indeed really mistaken in their
   apprehensions about the matters concerning which they yet desire to be
   indulged in their practice: for unless they will give place to such a
   supposition, or if they will rigidly contend that what they plead in
   the behalf of is absolutely the truth, and that obedience thereunto is
   the direct will and command of God, there remains no proper field for
   the debate about indulgence to be managed in; for things acknowledged
   to be such are not capable of an indulgence, properly so called,
   because the utmost liberty that is necessary unto them is their right
   and due in strict justice and law. Men, therefore, in such discourses,
   speak not to the nature of the things themselves, but to the
   apprehensions of them with whom they have to do. But yet against this
   disadvantage every party which plead for themselves are relieved by
   that secret reserve that they have in the persuasion of the truth and
   goodness of what they profess, and desire to be indulged in the
   practice of; and this, also, as occasion doth offer itself, and in
   defence of themselves from the charge of their adversaries, they openly
   contend and avow. Neither was it judged formerly that there was any way
   to deprive them of this reserve and relief but by a direct and
   particular debate of the matters specially in difference, carried on
   unto their conviction by evidence of truth, managed from the common
   principles of it. But after trial made, this way to convince men of
   their errors and mistakes, who stand in need of indulgence with respect
   unto the outward administration of the powers that they are under, is
   found, as it should seem, tedious, unreasonable, and ineffectual. A new
   way, therefore, to this purpose is fixed on, and it is earnestly
   pleaded that there needs no other argument or medium to prove men to be
   mistaken in their apprehensions, and to miscarry in their practice of
   religious duties, than that at any time or in any place they stand in
   need of indulgence. To dissent, at all adventures, is a crime, and he
   whom others persecute, tacitly at least, confesseth himself guilty; for
   it is said that the law of the magistrate being the sole rule of
   obedience in religious worship, their non-compliance with any law by
   him established, evidencing itself in their desire of exemption, is a
   sufficient conviction, yea, a self-acknowledgment, not only of their
   errors and mistakes in what they apprehend of their duty in these
   things, and of their miscarriages in what they practice, but also that
   themselves are persons turbulent and seditious, in withdrawing
   obedience from the laws which are justly imposed on them. With what
   restrictions and limitations, or whether with any or no, these
   assertions are maintained, we shall afterward inquire.

   The management of this plea (if I greatly mistake him not) is one of
   the principal designs of the author of that discourse, a brief survey
   whereof is here proposed. The principle which he proceeds herein upon
   himself, it seems, knew to be novel and uncouth, and therefore thought
   it incumbent on him that both the manner of its handling, and the other
   principles that he judged meet to associate with it or annex unto it,
   should be of the same kind and complexion. This design hath at length
   produced us this discourse; which, of what use it may prove to the
   church of God, what tendency it may have to retrieve or promote love
   and peace among Christians, I know not. This I know, that it hath
   filled many persons of all sorts, with manifold surprisals, and some
   with amazement. I have, therefore, on sundry considerations, prevailed
   with myself, much against my inclinations, for the sake of truth and
   peace, to spend a few hours in the examination of the principal parts
   and seeming pillars of the whole fabric. And this I was in my own mind
   the more easily induced unto, because there is no concernment either of
   the church or state in the things here under debate, unless it be that
   they should be vindicated from having any concern in the things and
   opinions here pleaded and argued. For as to the present church, if the
   principles and reasonings here maintained and managed are agreeable
   unto her sentiments, and allowed by her, yet there can be no offence
   given in their examination, because she hath nowhere yet declared them
   so to be. And the truth is, if they are once owned and espoused by her,
   to the ends for which they are asserted, as the Christians of old
   triumphed in the thoughts of him who first engaged in ways of violence
   against them among the nations in the world, so the Nonconformists will
   have no small relief to their minds in their sufferings, when they
   understand these to be the avowed principles and grounds on which they
   are to be persecuted and destroyed. And for the power of ecclesiastical
   jurisdiction belonging to the kings of this nation, as it hath been
   claimed and exercised by them in all ages since the establishment of
   Christian religion among us, as it is declared in the laws, statutes,
   and customs of the kingdom, and prescribed unto an acknowledgment in
   the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, it hath not the least concern in
   the matter here in question; yea, it is allowed, acknowledged, and
   pleaded for, by those whom this author designs to oppose. Whatever,
   then, shall be spoken of this subject, it is but a bare ventilation of
   private opinions, and those such as which, if one doctor's judgment may
   advance into the reputation of probability, so that some may venture to
   act upon them, yet are they not so far thereby secured as to have
   sanctuary given them even from private men's examinations. Herein,
   then, I suppose, a liberty may be exercised without just offence to
   any; and our disquisition after the truth of the principles and
   theorems that will come under consideration may be harmlessly
   accompanied with a moderate plea in the behalf of their innocency who
   are invidiously traduced, contemptuously reproached, unduly charged and
   calumniated, beyond, I am sure, any ordinary examples or precedents,
   among men of any sort, rank, degree, difference, or profession in the
   world. Yea, this seems to be called for by the light and law of nature,
   and to be useful, yea, needful to public tranquillity, beyond what in
   this present hasty review shall be attempted.

   For the author of this discourse, he is to me utterly unknown; neither
   do I intend either to make any inquiry after him, or hastily to fix a
   credit unto any reports concerning either who he is or of what
   consideration in the world. I am not concerned to know what, it seems,
   he was concerned to conceal. Nor do I use to consider reasons,
   arguments, or writings under a relation to any persons; which
   contributes nothing to their worth or signification. Besides, I know
   how deceitful reports are in such matters, and no way doubt but that
   they will betray persons of an over-easy credulity into those mistakes
   about the writer of this survey which he is resolved to avoid with
   reference to the author of the discourse itself. Only, the character
   that in the entrance of it he gives of himself, and such other
   intimations of his principles as he is pleased to communicate, I
   suppose he will be willing we should take notice of, and that we may do
   so without offence.

   Thus, in the entrance of his preface, he tells us that he is "a person
   of such a tame and softly humour, and so cold a complexion, that he
   thinks himself scarce capable of hot and passionate impressions,"
   though I suppose he avow himself, p. 4, to be chafed into some heat and
   briskness with that evenness and steadiness of expression which we
   shall be farther accustomed unto. But in what here he avers of himself,
   he seems to have the advantage of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, upon less
   provocations than he hath undertaken the consideration of (for the
   Pharisees with whom he had to deal were gentlemen, he tells us, unto
   those with whom himself hath to do), as he saith, "fell into a hot fit
   of zeal, yea, into a height of impatience, which made him act with a
   seeming fury and transport of passion," p. 7. And if that be indeed his
   temper which he commends in himself, he seems to me to be obliged for
   it unto his constitution and complexion, as he speaks, and not to his
   age, seeing his juvenile expressions and confidence will not allow us
   to think that he suffers under any defervescency of spirit by his
   years. The philosopher tells us that old men, in matters dubious and
   weighty, are not over-forward to be positive, but ready to cry, isos
   kai tacha, perhaps, and it may be so; and this di' empeirian, because
   they have experience of the uncertainty of things in this world; as,
   indeed, those who know what entanglements all human affairs are
   attended withal, what appearing causes and probable reasons are to be
   considered and examined about them, and how all rational determinations
   are guided and influenced by unforeseen emergencies and occasions, will
   not be over-forward to pronounce absolutely and peremptorily about the
   disposal of important affairs. But, as the same author informs us, Hoi
   neoi eidenai panta oiontai kai diischurizontai, "Young men suppose that
   they know all things, and are vehement in their asseverations:" from
   which frame proceeded all those dogmatical assertions of what is
   politic and impolitic in princes, of what will establish or ruin
   governments, with the contempt of the conceptions of others about
   things conducing to public peace and tranquillity, which so frequently
   occur in our author. This makes him smile at as serious consultations
   for the furtherance of the welfare and prosperity of this nation as, it
   may be, in any age or juncture of time have been upon the wheel,
   preface, p. 48. These considerations made it seem to me that, in an
   ordinary course, he hath time enough before him to improve the notions
   he hath here blessed the world with a discovery of, if, upon second
   thoughts, he be equally enamoured of them unto what now he seems to be.

   I could, indeed, have desired that he had given us a more clear account
   of that religion which in his judgment he doth most approve. His
   commendation of the church of England sufficiently manifesteth his
   interest to lie therein, and that, in pursuit of his own principles, he
   doth outwardly observe the institutions and prescriptions of it; but
   the scheme he hath given us of religion, or religious duties, --
   wherein there is mention neither of sin nor a Redeemer, without which
   no man can entertain any one true notion of Christian religion, --
   would rather bespeak him a philosopher than a Christian. It is not
   unlikely but that he will pretend he was treating of religion as
   religion in general, without an application of it to this or that in
   particular; but to speak of religion as it is among men in this world,
   or ever was since the fall of Adam, without a supposition of sin, and
   the way of a relief from the event of it mentioned, is to talk of
   chimeras, -- things that neither are, ever were, or will be. On the
   other hand, the profit and advantage of his design falls clearly on the
   papal interest; for whereas it is framed and contrived for the
   advantage, security, and unquestionableness of absolute compliers with
   the present possessors of power, it is evident that, in the state of
   Europe, the advantage lies incomparably on that hand. But these things
   are not our concernment. The designs which he manageth in his
   discourse, the subject-matter of it, the manner how he treats those
   with whom he hath to do, and deports himself therein, are by himself
   exposed to the judgment of all, and are here to be taken into some
   examination. Now, because we have in his preface a perfect
   representation of the things last mentioned throughout the whole, I
   shall, in the first place, take a general view and prospect of it.

   And here I must have regard to the judgment of others. I confess, for
   my own part, I do not find myself at all concerned in those invectives,
   tart and upbraiding expressions, those sharp and twinging satires
   against his adversaries, which he avoweth or rather boasteth himself to
   have used. If this unparalleled heap of revilings, scoffings,
   despiteful reproaches, sarcasms, scornful, contemptuous expressions,
   false criminations, with frequent intimations of sanguinary affections
   towards them, do please his fancy and express his morality to his own
   satisfaction, I shall never complain that he hath used his liberty, and
   do presume that he judgeth it not meet that it should be restrained. It
   is far from my purpose to return him any answer in the like manner to
   these things; to do it


   "? opus est mangone perito

   Qui Smithfieldensi polleat eloquio."

   Yet some instances of prodigious excesses in this kind will, in our
   process, be reflected on; and it may be the repetition of them may make
   an appearance, unto some less considerate readers, of a little
   harshness in some passages of this return. But as nothing of that
   nature in the least is intended, -- nothing that might provoke the
   author in his own spirit, were he capable of any "hot impressions,"
   nothing to disadvantage him in his reputation or esteem, -- so what is
   spoken, being duly weighed, will be found to have nothing sharp or
   unpleasant in it, but what is unavoidably infused into it from the
   discourse itself, in its approach unto it to make a representation of
   it.

   It is of more concernment to consider with what frame and temper of
   spirit he manageth his whole cause and debate; and this is such as that
   a man who knows nothing of him but what he learns from this discourse
   would suppose that he hath been some great commander


   "In campis Gurgustidoniis,

   Ubi Bombamachides Cluninstarydisarchides

   Erat imperator summus; Neptuni nepos,"

   [Plaut. Mil. I. i. 13,]

   associate unto him who with his breath blew away and scattered all the
   legions of his enemies, as the wind doth leaves in autumn.

   Such confidence in himself and his own strength; such contempt of all
   his adversaries, as persons "silly, ignorant, illiterate;" such
   boastings of his achievements, with such a face and appearance of
   scorning all that shall rise up against him; such expressions "animi
   gladiatorii," doth he march withal as no man, sure, will be willing to
   stand in his way, unless he think himself to have lived, at least
   quietly, long enough. Only, some things there are which I cannot but
   admire in his undertaking and management of it; as, first, that such a
   man of arms and art as he is should harness himself with so much
   preparation, and enter the lists with so much pomp and glow, to combat
   such pitiful, poor, baffled ignoramuses as he hath chosen to contend
   withal, especially considering that he knew he had them bound hand and
   foot, and cast under his stroke at his pleasure. Methinks it had more
   become him to have sought out some giant in reason and learning, that
   might have given him at least "par animo periculum," as Alexander said
   in his conflict with Porus, a danger big enough to exercise his
   courage, though through mistake it should, in the issue, have proved
   but a windmill. Again; I know not whence it is, nor by what rules of
   errantry it may be warranted, that, being to conflict with such pitiful
   triflers, he should, before he come near to touch them, thunder out
   such terrible words, and load them with so many reproaches and
   contemptuous revilings; as if he designed to scare them out of the
   lists, that there might be no trial of his strength nor exercise of his
   skill.

   But leaving him to his own choice and liberty in these matters, I am
   yet persuaded that if he knew how little his adversaries esteem
   themselves concerned in or worsted by his revilings, how small
   advantage he hath brought unto the cause managed by him, with what
   severity of censures, that I say not indignation, his proceedings
   herein are reflected on by persons sober and learned, who have any
   respect to modesty or sobriety, or any reverence for the things of God
   as debated among men, he would abate somewhat of that self-delight and
   satisfaction which he seems to take in his achievement.

   Neither is it in the matter of dissent alone from the established forms
   of worship that this author and some others endeavour, by their
   revilings and scoffings, to expose Nonconformists to scorn and
   violence, but a semblance at least is made of the like reflections on
   their whole profession of the gospel and their worship of God; yea,
   these are the special subjects of those swelling words of contempt,
   those sarcastical, invidious representations of what they oppose, which
   they seem to place their confidence of success in. But what do they
   think to effect by this course of procedure? Do they suppose that by
   crying out, "canting phrases, silly nonsense, metaphors," they shall
   shame the Nonconformists out of the profession of the gospel, or make
   them forego the course of their ministry, or alienate one soul from the
   truth taught and professed amongst them? They know how their
   predecessors in the faith thereof have been formerly entertained in the
   world. St Paul himself, falling among the gentlemen philosophers of
   those days, was termed by them spermologos, a "babbler," or one that
   canted, his doctrine despised as silly and foolish, and his phrases
   pretended to be unintelligible. These things move not the
   Nonconformists, unless it be to a compassion for them whom they see to
   press their wits and parts to so wretched an employment. If they have
   any thing to charge on them with respect to gospel truths, -- as, that
   they own, teach, preach, or publish, any doctrines or opinions that are
   not agreeable thereunto and to the doctrine of the ancient and late
   (reformed) churches, let them come forth, if they are men of learning,
   reading, and ingenuity, and, in ways used and approved from the
   beginning of Christianity for such ends and purposes, endeavour their
   confutation and conviction; -- let them, I say, with the skill and
   confidence of men, and according to all the rules of method and art,
   state the matters in difference between themselves and their
   adversaries, confirm their own judgments with such reasons and
   arguments as they think pleadable in their behalf, and oppose the
   opinions they condemn with testimonies and reasons suited to their
   eversion. The course at present steered and engaged in, to carp at
   phrases, expressions, manners of the declaration of men's conceptions,
   collected from, or falsely fathered upon, particular persons, thence
   intimated to be common to the whole party of Nonconformists (the
   greatest guilt of some whereof, it may be, is only their too near
   approach to the expressions used in the Scripture to the same purpose,
   and the evidence of their being educed from thence), is unmanly,
   unbecoming persons of any philosophic generosity, much more Christians
   and ministers; nay, some of the things or sayings reflected on and
   carped at by a late author are such as those who have used or asserted
   them dare modestly challenge him, in their defence, to make good his
   charge in a personal conference, -- provided it may be scholastical or
   logical, not dramatic or romantic. And surely were it not for their
   confidence in that tame and patient humour which this author so
   tramples upon, p. 15, they could not but fear that some or other, by
   these disingenuous proceedings, might be provoked to a recrimination,
   and to give in a charge against the cursed oaths, debaucheries,
   profaneness, various immoralities, and sottish ignorance, that are
   openly and notoriously known to have taken up their residence among
   some of those persons, whom the railleries of this and some other
   authors are designed to countenance and secure.

   Because we may not concern ourselves again in things of this nature,
   let us take an instance or two of the manner of the dealing of our
   author with the Nonconformists, and those as to their preaching and
   praying, which of all things they are principally maligned about. For
   their preaching, he thus sets it out, p. 75: "Whoever among them can
   invent any new language presently sets up for a man of new discoveries;
   and he that lights upon the prettiest nonsense is thought by the
   ignorant rabble to unfold new gospel mysteries; and thus is the nation
   shattered into infinite factions with senseless and fantastic phrases:
   and the most fatal miscarriage of them all lies in abusing Scripture
   expressions, not only without but in contradiction to their sense; so
   that had we but an act of parliament to abridge preachers the use of
   fulsome and luscious metaphors, it might perhaps be an effectual cure
   of all our present distempers. Let not the reader smile at the oddness
   of the proposal; for were men obliged to speak sense as well as truth,
   all the swelling mysteries of fanaticism would then sink into flat and
   empty nonsense, and they would be ashamed of such jejune and ridiculous
   stuff as their admired and most profound notions would appear to be."
   Certainly there are few who read these expressions that can retain
   themselves from smiling at the pitiful, fantastic souls that are here
   characterized, or from loathing their way of preaching here
   represented. But yet if any should, by a surprisal, indulge themselves
   herein, and one should seriously inquire what it is that stirred those
   humours in them, it may be they could scarce return a rational account
   of their commotions; for when they have done their utmost to
   countenance themselves in their scorn and derision, they have nothing
   but the bare assertions of this author for the proof of what is here
   charged on those whom they deride. And how if these things are most of
   them, if not all of them, absolutely false? how if he be not able to
   prove any of them by any considerable avowed instance? how if all the
   things intended, whether they be so or no as here represented, depend
   merely on the judgment and fancy of this author, and it should prove in
   the issue that they are no such rules, measures, or standards of men's
   rational expressions of their conceptions, but that they may be justly
   appealed from? And how if sundry things so odiously here expressed be
   proved to have been sober truths, declared in words of wisdom and
   sobriety? what if the things condemned as "fulsome metaphors" prove to
   be scriptural expressions of gospel mysteries? what if the principal
   doctrines of the gospel, about the grace of God, the mediation of
   Christ, of faith, justification, gospel obedience, communion with God,
   and union with Christ, are esteemed and stigmatized by some as
   "swelling mysteries of fanaticism," and the whole work of our
   redemption by the blood of Christ, as expressed in the Scripture, be
   deemed metaphorical? In brief, what if all this discourse concerning
   the preachings of Nonconformists be, as unto the sense of the words he
   used, false, and the crimes in them injuriously charged upon them? what
   if the metaphors they are charged with are no other but their
   expression of gospel mysteries, "not in the words which man's wisdom
   teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things
   with spiritual? As these things may and will be made evident when
   particulars shall be instanced in, so when, I say, these things are
   discovered and laid open, there will be a composure, possibly, of those
   affections and disdainful thoughts which those swelling words may have
   moved in weak and inexperienced minds. It may be, also, it will appear
   that, upon a due consideration, there will be little subject-matter
   remaining to be enacted in that law or act of parliament which he moves
   for; unless it be from that uncouth motion, that men may be "obliged to
   speak sense as well as truth," seeing hitherto it hath been supposed
   that every proposition that is either true or false hath a proper and
   determined sense; and if sense it have not, it can be neither. I shall
   only crave leave to say, that as to the doctrines which they preach,
   and the manner of their preaching, or the way of expressing those
   doctrines or truths which they believe and teach, the Nonconformists
   appeal from the rash, false, and invidious charge of this author, to
   the judgment of all learned, judicious, and pious men in the world; and
   are ready to defend them against himself, and whosoever he shall take
   to be his patrons or his associates, before any equal, competent, and
   impartial tribunal under heaven. It is far from me to undertake the
   absolute defence of any party of men, or of any man because he is of
   any party whatever, much less shall I do so of all the individual
   persons of any party, and least of all as to all their expressions,
   private opinions, and peculiar ways of declaring them, which too much
   abound among persons of all sorts. I know there is no party but have
   weak men belonging to it, nor any men amongst them but have their
   weaknesses, failings, and mistakes; and if there are none such in the
   church of England, -- I mean those that universally comply with all the
   observances at present used therein, -- I am sure enough that there are
   so amongst all other parties that dissent from it. But such as these
   are not principally intended in these aspersions, nor would their
   adversaries much rejoice to have them known to be and esteemed of all
   what they are. But it is others whom they aim to expose unto contempt;
   and in the behalf of them, not the mistakes, misapprehensions, or undue
   expressions of any private persons, these things are pleaded.

   But let us see if their prayers meet with any better entertainment. An
   account of his thoughts about them he gives us, p. 19: "It is the most
   solemn strain of their devotion, to vilify themselves with large
   confessions of the heinousest and most aggravated sins. They will
   freely acknowledge their offences against all the commands, and that
   with the foulest and most enhancing circumstances; they can rake
   together and confess their injustice, uncleanness, and extortion, and
   all the publican and harlot sins in the world: in brief, in all their
   confessions they stick not to charge themselves with such large
   catalogues of sin, and to amass together such a heap of impieties, as
   would make up the completest character of lewdness and villany; and if
   their consciences do really arraign them of all those crimes whereof
   they so familiarly indict themselves, there are no such guilty and
   unpardonable wretches as they. So, then, their confessions are either
   true or false. If false, then they fool and trifle with the Almighty;
   if true, then I could easily tell them the fittest place to say their
   prayers in."

   I confess this passage, at its first perusal, surprised me with some
   amazement. It was unexpected to me that he who designed all along to
   charge his adversaries with Pharisaism, and to render them like unto
   them, should instance in their confession of sin in their prayers, when
   it is even a characteristical note of the Pharisees that in their
   prayers they made no confession of sin at all; but it was far more
   strange to me that any man durst undertake the reproaching of poor
   sinners with the deepest acknowledgment of their sins before the holy
   God that they are capable to conceive or utter. Is this, thought I, the
   spirit of the men with whom the Nonconformists do contend, and upon
   whose instance alone they suffer? Are these their apprehensions
   concerning God, sin, themselves, and others? Is this the spirit
   wherewith the children of the church are acted? Are these things suited
   to the principles, doctrines, practices, of the church of England? Such
   reproaches and reflections, indeed, might have been justly expected
   from those poor deluded souls who dream themselves perfect and free
   from sin; but to meet with such a treaty from them who say or sing, "O
   God, the father of heaven, have mercy upon us, miserable sinners," at
   least three times a-week, was some surprisal. However, I am sure the
   Nonconformists need return no other answer, to them who reproach them
   for vilifying themselves in their confessions to God, but that of David
   to Michal, "It is before the Lord; and we will yet be more vile than
   thus, and will be base in our own sight." Our author makes no small
   stir with the pretended censures of some whom he opposes, -- namely,
   that they should "esteem themselves and their party to be the elect of
   God, all others to be reprobates, -- themselves and theirs to be godly,
   and all others ungodly;" wherein I am satisfied that he unduly chargeth
   those whom he intends to reflect upon. However, I am none of them. I do
   not judge any party to be all the elect of God, or all the elect of God
   to be confined unto any party. I judge no man living to be a reprobate,
   though I doubt not but that there are living men in that condition. I
   confine not holiness or godliness to any party, -- not to the church of
   England, nor to any of those who dissent from it; but am persuaded that
   in all societies of Christians that are under heaven that hold the
   Head, there are some really fearing God, working righteousness, and
   accepted with him. But yet neither my own judgment nor the reflections
   of this author can restrain me from professing that I fear that he who
   can thus trample upon men, scoff at and deride them for the deepest
   confessions of their sins before God which they are capable of making,
   is scarce either well acquainted with the holiness of God, the evil of
   sin, or the deceitfulness of his own heart, or did not in his so doing
   take them into sufficient consideration. The church of England itself
   requires its children to "acknowledge their manifold sins and
   wickednesses, which from time to time they have grievously committed by
   thought, word, and deed, against the divine Majesty;" and what in
   general others can confess more, I know not. If men that are, through
   the light of God's Spirit and grace, brought to an acquaintance with
   the deceitful workings of sin in their own hearts and the hearts of
   others, considering aright the terror of the Lord, and the manifold
   aggravations wherewith all their sins are attended, do more
   particularly express these things before and to the Lord, when indeed
   nor they nor any other can declare the thousandth part of the vileness
   and unworthiness of sin and sinners on the account thereof, shall they
   be now despised for it, and judged to be men meet to be hanged? If this
   author had but seriously perused the confessions of Austin, and
   considered how he traces his sin from his nature in the womb, through
   the cradle, into the whole course of his life, with his marvellous and
   truly ingenuous acknowledgments and aggravations of it, perhaps the
   reverence of so great a name might have caused him to suspend this
   rash, and I fear impious discourse.

   For the particular instances wherewith he would countenance his
   sentiments and censures in this matter, there is no difficulty in their
   removal. Our Lord Jesus Christ hath taught us to call the most secret
   workings of sin in the heart, though resisted, though controlled and
   never suffered to bring forth, by the names of those sins which they
   lie in a tendency unto; and men in their confessions respect more the
   pravity of their natures and the inward working and actings of sin than
   the outward perpetrations of it, wherein perhaps they may have little
   concernment in the world: as Job, who pleaded his uprightness,
   integrity, and righteousness against the charge of all his friends, yet
   when he came to deal with God, he could take that prospect of his
   nature and heart as to vilify himself before him, yea, to "abhor
   himself in dust and ashes."

   Again; ministers, who are the mouths of the congregation to God, may
   and ought to acknowledge, not only the sins whereof themselves are
   personally guilty, but those also which they judge may be upon any of
   the congregation. This assuming of the persons of them to whom they
   speak, or in whose name they speak, is usual even to the sacred writers
   themselves. So speaks the apostle Peter, 1 Epist. iv. 3, "For the time
   past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
   Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
   revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries." He puts himself
   amongst them, although the time past of his life, in particular, was
   remote enough from being spent in the manner there described; and so it
   may be with ministers when they confess the sins of the whole
   congregation. And the dilemma of this author about the truth or
   falsehood of these confessions will fall as heavy on St Paul as on any
   Nonconformist in the world; for besides the acknowledgment that he
   makes of the former sins of his life, when he was "injurious, a
   blasphemer, and persecutor" (which sins I pray God deliver others
   from), and the secret working of indwelling sin, which he cries out in
   his present condition to be freed from, he also, when an apostle,
   professeth himself the "chiefest of sinners." Now, this was either true
   or it was not: if it was not true, God was mocked; if it were, our
   author could have directed him to the fittest place to have made his
   acknowledgments in. What thinks he of the confessions of Ezra, of
   Daniel, and others, in the name of the whole people of God; of David
   concerning himself, whose self-abasements before the Lord,
   acknowledgments of the guilt of sin in all its aggravations and
   effects, far exceed any thing that Nonconformists are able to express?

   As to his instances of the confession of "injustice, uncleanness, and
   extortion," it may be, as to the first and last, he would be put to it
   to make it good by express particulars; and I wish it be not found that
   some have need to confess them who cry at present they are not of these
   publicans. Uncleanness seems to bear the worst sound, and to lead the
   mind to the worst apprehensions of all the rest; but it is God with
   whom men have to do in their confessions, and before him, "What is man,
   that he should be clean? and he that is born of a woman, that he should
   be righteous? Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the
   heavens are not clean in his sight. How much more abominable and filthy
   is man, who drinketh iniquity like water," Job xv. 14-16. And the whole
   church of God in their confession cry out, "We are all as an unclean
   thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags," Isa. lxiv. 6.
   There is a pollution of flesh and spirit which we are still to be
   cleansing ourselves from whilst we are in this world.

   But to what purpose is it to contend about these things? I look upon
   this discourse of our author as a signal instance of the power of
   prejudice and passions over the minds of men: for, setting aside the
   consideration of a present influence from them, I cannot believe that
   any one that professeth the religion taught by Jesus Christ and
   contained in the Scripture can be so ignorant of the terror of the
   Lord; so unaccustomed to thoughts of his infinite purity, severity, and
   holiness; such a stranger to the accuracy, spirituality, and
   universality of the law; so unacquainted with the sin of nature, and
   the hidden deceitful workings of it in the hearts, minds, and
   affections of men; so senseless of the great guilt of the least sin,
   and the manifold inexpressible aggravations wherewith it is attended;
   so unexercised to that self-abasement and abhorrency which becomes poor
   sinners in their approaches to the holy God, when they consider what
   they are in themselves; so disrespective of the price of redemption
   that was paid for our sins, and the mysterious way of cleansing our
   souls from them by the blood of the Son of God, -- as to revile,
   despise, and scoff at men for the deepest humblings of their souls
   before God, in the most searching and expressive acknowledgments of
   their sins, that they do or can make at any time.

   The like account may be given of all the charges that this author
   manageth against the men of his indignation; but I shall return at
   present to the preface under consideration.

   In the entrance of his discourse, being, as it seems, conscious to
   himself of a strange and wild intemperance of speech in reviling his
   adversaries, which he had either used or intended so to do, he pleads
   sundry things in his excuse or for his justification. Hereof the first
   is his zeal for the reformation of the church of England, and the
   settlement thereof with its forms and institutions. These, he saith,
   are "countenanced by the best and purest times of Christianity, and
   established by the fundamental laws of this land" (which yet, as to the
   things in contest between him and Nonconformists, I greatly doubt of,
   as not believing any fundamental law of this land to be of so late a
   date). To see this "opposed by a wild and fanatic rabble, rifled by
   folly and ignorance, on slender and frivolous pretences, so often and
   so shamefully baffled, yet again revived by the pride and ignorance of
   a few peevish, ignorant, and malapert preachers, brain-sick people"
   (all which gentle and peaceable expressions are crowded together in the
   compass of a few lines), is that which hath "chafed him into this heat
   and briskness." If this be not to deal with gainsayers in a "spirit of
   meekness;" if herein there be not an observation of the rules of
   speaking evil of no man, despising no man, of not saying "Raca" to our
   brother, or calling of him "fool;" if here be not a discovery how
   remote he is from self-conceit, elation of mind, and the like
   immoralities, -- we must make inquiry after such things elsewhere: for,
   in this whole ensuing treatise, we shall scarce meet with any thing
   more tending to our satisfaction. For the plea itself made use of,
   those whom he so tramples on do highly honour the reformation of the
   church of England, and bless God for it continually, as that which hath
   had a signal tendency unto his glory, and usefulness to the souls of
   men. That as to the outward rites of worship and discipline contested
   about, it was in all things conformed unto the great rule of them, our
   author doth not pretend; nor can he procure it in those things,
   whatever he says, any "countenance from the best and purest times of
   Christianity." That it was every way perfect in its first edition, I
   suppose will not be affirmed; nor, considering the posture of affairs
   at the time of its framing, both in other nations and in our own, was
   it like it should so be. We may rather admire that so much was then
   done according to the will of God, than that there was no more.
   Whatever is wanting in it, the fault is not to be cast on the first
   reformers, who went as far as well in those days could be expected from
   them. Whether others who have succeeded in their place and room have
   since discharged their duty in perfecting what was so happily begun is
   "sub judice," and there will abide after this author and I have done
   writing. That as to the things mentioned, it never had an absolute
   quiet possession or admittance in this nation, -- that a constant and
   no inconsiderable suffrage hath, from first to last, been given in
   against it, -- cannot be denied; and for any "savage worrying" or
   "rifling of it" at present, no man is so barbarous as to give the least
   countenance to any such thing. That which is intended in these
   exclamations [explanations?] is only a desire that those who cannot
   comply with it as now established, in the matters of discipline and
   worship before mentioned, may not merely for that cause be worried and
   destroyed, as many have already been.

   Again, the chief glory of the English Reformation consisted in the
   purity of its doctrine, then first restored to the nation. This, as it
   is expressed in the articles of religion, and in the
   publicly-authorized writings of the bishops and chief divines of the
   church of England, is, as was said, the glory of the English
   Reformation. And it is somewhat strange to me, that whilst one writes
   against original sin, another preaches up justification by works, and
   scoffs at the imputation of the righteousness of Christ to them that
   believe; yea, whilst some can openly dispute against the doctrine of
   the Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; whilst instances
   may be collected of some men's impeaching all the articles almost
   throughout, -- there should be no reflection in the least on these
   things. Only those who dissent from some outward methods of worship
   must be made the object of all this wrath and indignation.


   "Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?"

   [Juv., ii. 24.]

   Some men's guilt in this nature might rather mind them of pulling the
   beam out of their own eyes than to act with such fury to pull out the
   eyes of others for the motes which they think they espy in them. But
   hence is occasion given to pour out such a storm of fury, conveyed by
   words of as great reproach and scorn as the invention of any man, I
   think, could suggest, as is not lightly to be met withal. Might our
   author be prevailed with to mind the old rule, "Mitte male loqui, dic
   rem ipsam," these things might certainly be debated with less scandal,
   less mutual offences and provocations.

   Another account of the reasons of his intemperance in these reproaches,
   supplying him with an opportunity to increase them in number and
   weight, he gives us, pp. 6, 7 of his preface; which, because it may
   well be esteemed a summary representation of his way and manner of
   arguing in his whole discourse, I shall transcribe:--

   "I know," says he, "but one single instance in which zeal, or a high
   indignation, is just and warrantable, and that is when it vents itself
   against the arrogance of haughty, peevish, and sullen religionists,
   that, under higher pretences of godliness, supplant all principles of
   civility and good-nature; that strip religion of its outside, to make
   it a covering for spite and malice; that adorn their peevishness with a
   mark of piety, and shroud their ill-nature under the demure pretences
   of godly zeal, and stroke and applaud themselves as the only darlings
   and favourites of Heaven; and, with a scornful pride, disdain all the
   residue of mankind as a rout of worthless and unregenerate reprobates.
   Thus, the only hot fit of zeal we find our Saviour in was kindled by an
   indignation against the pride and insolence of the Jews, when he
   whipped the buyers and sellers out of the outward court of the temple;
   for though they bore a blind and superstitious reverence towards that
   part of it that was peculiar to their own worship, yet as for the
   outward court, the place where the Gentiles and proselytes worshipped,
   that was so unclean and unhallowed that they thought it could not be
   profaned by being turned into an exchange of usury. Now, this insolent
   contempt of the Gentiles, and impudent conceit of their own holiness,
   provoked the mild spirit of our blessed Saviour to such an height of
   impatience and indignation as made him, with a seeming fury and
   transport of passion, whip the tradesmen thence, and overthrow their
   tables."

   What truth, candour, or conscience, hath been attended unto in the
   insolent reproaches here heaped up against his adversaries is left to
   the judgment of God and all impartial men; yea, let judgment be made
   and sentence be passed according to the ways, course of life,
   conversation, usefulness amongst men, readiness to serve the common
   concerns of mankind, in exercising loving-kindness in the earth, of
   those who are thus injuriously traduced, compared with any in the
   approbation and commendation of [those by] whom they are covered with
   these reproaches, and there lives not that person who may not be
   admitted to pronounce concerning the equity and righteousness, or
   iniquity, of these intemperances. However, it is nothing with them with
   whom he hath to do to be judged in man's day; they stand at the
   judgment-seat of Christ, and have not so learned him as to relieve
   themselves by false or fierce recriminations. The measure of the
   covering provided for all these excesses of unbridled passion is that
   alone which is now to be taken. The case expressed, it seems, is the
   only single instance in which zeal is "just and warrantable." How our
   author came to be assured thereof, I know not; sure I am that it doth
   neither comprise in it, nor hath any aspect on, the ground, occasion,
   or nature of the zeal of Phinehas, or of Nehemiah, or of David, or of
   Joshua, and, least of all, of our Saviour, as we shall see. He must
   needs be thought to be over-intent upon his present occasion, when he
   forgot not one or two, but indeed all instances of just and warrantable
   zeal that are given us in the only sacred repository of them.

   For what concerns the example of our blessed Saviour, particularly
   insisted on, I wish he had offended one way only in the report he makes
   of it; for let any sober man judge, in the first place, whether those
   expressions he useth, of the "hot fit of zeal" that he was in, of the
   "height of impatience" that he was provoked unto, the "seeming fury and
   transport of passion" that he acted withal, do become that reverence
   and adoration of the Son of God which ought to possess the hearts and
   guide the tongues and writings of men that profess his name. But
   whatever other men's apprehensions may be, as it is not improbable but
   that some will exercise severity in their reflections on these
   expressions, for my part, I shall entertain no other thoughts but that
   our author, being engaged in the composition of an invective
   declamation, and aiming at a grandeur of words, yea, to fill it up with
   tragical expressions, could not restrain his pen from some extravagant
   excess when the Lord Christ himself came in his way to be spoken of.

   However, it will be said the instance is pertinently alleged, and the
   occasion of the exercise of the zeal of our blessed Saviour is duly
   represented. It may be some will think so; but the truth is, there are
   scarce more lines than mistakes in the whole discourse to this purpose.
   What court it was of the temple wherein the action remembered was
   performed is not here particularly determined; only it is said to be
   the "outward court, wherein the Gentiles and proselytes worshipped, in
   opposition to that which was peculiar to the worship of the Jews." Now,
   of old, from the first erection of the temple, there were two courts
   belonging unto it, and no more: the inward court, wherein were the
   brazen altar, with all those utensils of worship which the priests made
   use of in their sacred offices; and the outward court, whither the
   people assembled, as for other devotions, so to behold the priests
   exercising their function, and to be in a readiness to bring in their
   own especial sacrifices, upon which account they were admitted to the
   altar itself. Into this outward court, which was a dedicated part of
   the temple, all Gentiles who were proselytes of righteousness, -- that
   is, who, being circumcised, had taken upon them the observation of the
   law of Moses, and thereby joined themselves to the people of God, --
   were admitted, as all the Jewish writers agree. And these were all the
   courts that were at first sanctified, and were in use when the words
   were spoken by the prophet which are applied to the action of our
   Saviour, -- namely, "My house shall be called a house of prayer, but ye
   have made it a den of thieves." Afterward, in the days of the
   Herodians, another court was added, by the immuring of the remainder of
   the hill, whereinto a promiscuous entrance was granted unto all people.
   It was, therefore, the ancient outward court whereinto the Jews thought
   that Paul had brought Trophimus the Ephesian, whom they knew to be
   uncircumcised. I confess some expositors think that it was this latter
   area from whence the Lord Christ cast out the buyers and sellers, but
   their conjecture seems to be altogether groundless; for neither was
   that court ever absolutely called "the temple," nor was it esteemed
   sacred, but common or profane, nor was it in being when the prophet
   used the words mentioned concerning the temple. It was, therefore, the
   other ancient outward court, common to the Jews and proselytes of the
   Gentiles, that is intended; for as there the salt and wood were stored
   that were daily used in their sacrifices, so the covetous priests,
   knowing that many who came up to offer were wont to buy the beasts they
   sacrificed at Jerusalem, to prevent the charge and labour of bringing
   them from far, to further, as they pretended, their accommodation,
   appropriated a market to themselves in this court, and added a trade in
   money, relating it may be thereunto, and other things, for their
   advantage. Hence the Lord Christ twice drove them, once at the
   beginning, and once at the end of his ministry in the flesh; not with
   "a seeming transport of fury," but with that evidence of the presence
   of God with him, and majesty of God upon him, that it is usually
   reckoned amongst one of the miracles that he wrought, considering the
   state of all things at that time amongst the Jews. And the reason why
   he did this, and the occasion of the exercise of his zeal, is so
   express in the Scripture, as I cannot but admire at the invention of
   our author, who could find out another reason and occasion of it; for
   it is said directly that he did it because of their wicked profanation
   of the house of God, contrary to his express institution and command.
   Of a regard to the Jews' "contempt of the Gentiles" there is not one
   word, not the least intimation; nor was there in this matter the least
   occasion of any such thing.

   These things are not pleaded in the least to give countenance to any in
   their proud, supercilious censures and contempt of others; wherein if
   any person living have outdone our author, or shall endeavour so to do,
   he will not fail, I think, to carry away the prize in this unworthy
   contest. Nor is it to apologize for them whom he charges with
   extravagancies and excesses in this kind. I have no more to say in
   their behalf but that, as far as I know, they are falsely accused and
   calumniated, though I will not be accountable for the expressions of
   every weak and impertinent person. Where men, indeed, sin openly in all
   manner of transgressions against the law and gospel; where a spirit of
   enmity to holiness and obedience unto God discovers and acts itself
   constantly on all occasions; in a word, where men wear sin's livery, --
   some are not afraid to think them sin's servants. But as to that
   elation of mind in self-conceit wherewith they are charged, their
   contempt of other men upon the account of party, which he imputes unto
   them, I must expect other proofs than the bare assertion of this author
   before I join with him in the management of his accusations. And no
   other answer shall I return to the ensuing leaves, fraught with bitter
   reproaches, invectives, sarcasms, far enough distant from truth and all
   sobriety; nor shall I, though in their just and necessary vindication,
   make mention of any of those things which might represent them persons
   of another complexion. If this author will give those whom he probably
   most aims to load with these aspersions leave to confess themselves
   poor and miserable sinners in the sight of God, willing to bear his
   indignation against whom they have sinned, and to undergo quietly the
   severest rebukes and revilings of men, in that they know not but that
   they have a providential permissive commission from God so to deal with
   them; and add thereunto that they yet hope to be saved by Jesus Christ,
   and in that hope endeavour to give up themselves in obedience to all
   his commands, -- it contains that description of them which they shall
   always, and in all conditions, endeavour to answer. But I have only
   given these remarks upon the preceding discourse to discover upon what
   feeble grounds our author builds for his own justification in his
   present engagement.

   Page 13 of his preface, he declares his original design in writing this
   discourse, -- which was to "represent to the world the lamentable folly
   and silliness of those men's religion with whom he had to do;" which he
   farther expresses and pursues with such a lurry [1] of virulent
   reproaches as I think is not to be paralleled in any leaves but some
   others of the same hand; and in the close thereof he supposeth he hath
   evinced that, in comparison of them, "the most insolent of the
   Pharisees were gentlemen, and the most savage of the Americans
   philosophers." I must confess myself an utter stranger unto that
   generous disposition and philosophic nobleness of mind which vent
   themselves in such revengeful, scornful wrath, expressed in such rude
   and barbarous railings, against any sort of men whatever, as that here
   manifested in, and those here used by this author. If this be a just
   delineation and character of the spirit of a gentleman, a due
   portraiture of the mind and affections of a philosopher, I know not who
   will be ambitious to be esteemed either the one or the other. But what
   measures men now make of gentility I know not. Truly noble generosity
   of spirit was heretofore esteemed to consist in nothing more than
   remoteness from such pedantic severities against, and contemptuous
   reproaches of, persons under all manner of disadvantages, yea,
   impossibilities to manage their own just vindication; as are here
   exercised and expressed in this discourse; and the principal pretended
   attainment of the old philosophy was a sedateness of mind, and a
   freedom from turbulent passions and affections under the greatest
   provocations: which if they are here manifested by our author, they
   will give the greater countenance unto the character which he gives of
   others, the judgment and determination whereof is left unto all
   impartial readers.

   But in this main design he professeth himself prevented by "the late
   learned and ingenious discourse, The Friendly Debate;" [2] which, to
   manifest, it may be, that his rhetorical faculty is not confined to
   invectives, he spendeth some pages in the splendid encomiums of. There
   is no doubt, I suppose, but that the author of that discourse will, on
   the next occasion, requite his panegyric, and return him his
   commendations for his own achievements with advantage. They are like
   enough to agree, like those of the poet:--


   "Discedo Alcæus puncto illius, ille meo quis?

   Quis nisi Callimachus?"

   [Hor. Ep., ii. 2, 99.]

   For the present, his account of the excellencies and successes of that
   discourse minds me of the dialogue between Pyrgopolynices and
   Artotrogus:--


   Pyrg. Ecquid meministi? Art. Memini; centum in Ciliciâ,

   Et quinquaginta centum Sycolatron dæ,

   Triginta Sardi, sexaginta Macedones,

   Sunt homines tu quos occidisti uno die.


   Pyrg. Quanta isthæc hominum summa est?


   Art. Septem millia.


   Pyrg. Tantum esse oportet; rectè rationem tenes.


   Art. At nullos habeo scriptos, sic memini tamen."

   [Plaut. MiI. Glor., i. 1, 42.]

   Although the particular instances he gives of the man's successes are
   prodigiously ridiculous, yet the casting up of the sum-total to the
   completing of his victory sinks them all out of consideration. And such
   is the account we have here of the Friendly Debate. This and that it
   hath effected; which though unduly asserted as to the particular
   instances, yet altogether comes short of that absolute victory and
   triumph which are ascribed unto it. But I suppose that, upon due
   consideration, men's glorying in those discourses will be but as the
   crackling of thorns in the fire, -- noise and smoke, without any real
   and solid use or satisfaction. The great design of the author, as is
   apparent unto all, was to render the sentiments and the expressions of
   his adversaries ridiculous, and thereby to expose their persons to
   contempt and scorn.


   "Egregiam verò laudem et spolia ampla!

   [Æn., iv. 93.]

   And to this end his way of writing by dialogues is exceedingly suited
   and accommodated; for although ingenious and learned men, such as Plato
   and Cicero, have handled matters of the greatest importance in that way
   of writing, candidly proposing the opinions and arguments of adverse
   parties in the persons of the dialogists, and sometimes used that
   method to make their design of instruction more easy and perspicuous,
   yet it cannot be denied that advantages may be taken from this way of
   writing to represent both persons, opinions, and practices, invidiously
   and contemptuously, above any other way; and therefore it hath been
   principally used by men who have had that design. And I know nothing in
   the skillful contrivance of dialogues, which is boasted of here with
   respect unto the Friendly Debate, as also by the author of it in his
   preface to one of his worthy volumes, that should free the way of
   writing itself from being supposed to be peculiarly accommodated to the
   ends mentioned. Nor will these authors charge them with want of skill
   and art in composing of their dialogues, who have designed nothing in
   them but to render things uncouth and persons ridiculous, with whom
   themselves were, in worth and honesty: no way to be compared.

   An instance hereof we have in the case of Socrates. Sundry in the city
   being weary of him, for his uprightness, integrity, and continual
   pressing of them to courses of the like nature; some, also, being in an
   especial manner incensed at him and provoked by him; amongst them they
   contrived his ruin. That they might effect this design, they procured
   Aristophanes to write a dialogue, his comedy, which he entitled
   Nephelai, "The Clouds;" wherein Socrates is introduced and personated,
   talking at as contemptible and ridiculous a rate as any one can
   represent the Nonconformists to do, and yet withal to commend himself
   as the only man considerable amongst them. Without some such
   preparation of the people's minds, his enemies thought it impossible to
   obtain his persecution and destruction. And they failed not in their
   projection. Aristophanes, being poor, witty, and, as is supposed, hired
   to this work, lays out the utmost of his endeavours so to frame and
   order his dialogues, with such elegancy of words and composure of his
   verses, with such a semblance of relating the words and expressing the
   manner of Socrates, as might leave an impression on the minds of the
   people. And the success of it was no way inferior to that of the
   Friendly Debate; for though at first the people were somewhat surprised
   with seeing such a person so traduced, yet they were after a while so
   pleased and tickled with the ridiculous representation of him and his
   philosophy, wherein there was much of appearance and nothing of truths,
   that they could make no end of applauding the author of the Dialogues.
   And though this was the known design of that poet, yet that his
   dialogues were absurd and inartificial I suppose will not be affirmed,
   seeing few were ever more skilfully contrived. Having got this
   advantage of exposing him to public contempts his provoked malicious
   adversaries began openly to manage their accusation against him. The
   principal crime laid to his charge was nonconformity, or that he did
   not comply with the religion which the supreme magistrate had enacted;
   or, as they then phrased it, "he esteemed not them to be gods whom the
   city so esteemed." By these means, and through these advantages, they
   ceased not until they had destroyed the best and wisest person that
   ever that city bred in its heathen condition, and whereof they quickly
   repented themselves. The reader may see the whole story exactly related
   in Ælian., lib. ii.; Var. Histor., cap. 13. Much of it also may be
   collected from the Apologies of Xenophon and Plato in behalf of
   Socrates, as also Plutarch's Discourse concerning his Genius. To this
   purpose have dialogues very artificially written been used, and are
   absolutely the most accommodate of all sorts of writing unto such a
   design. Hence Lucian, who aimed particularly to render the things which
   he disliked ridiculous and contemptible, used no other kind of writing;
   and I think his Dialogues will be allowed to be artificial, though
   sundry of them have no other design but to cast contempt on persons and
   opinions better than himself and his own. And this way of dealing with
   adversaries in points of faith, opinion, and judgment, hath hitherto
   been esteemed fitter for the stage than a serious disquisition after
   truth, or confutation of error. Did those who admire their own
   achievements in this way of process but consider how easy a thing it is
   for any one, deposing that respect to truth, modesty, sobriety, and
   Christianity, which ought to accompany us in all that we do, to expose
   the persons and opinions of men, by false, partial, undue
   representations, to scorn and contempt, they would perhaps cease to
   glory in their fancied success. It is a facile thing to take the wisest
   man living, and after he is lime-twigged with ink and paper, and gagged
   with a quill, so that he can neither move nor speak, to clap a fool's
   coat on his back, and turn him out to be laughed at in the streets. The
   Stoics were not the most contemptible sort of philosophers of old, nor
   will be thought so by those who profess their religion to consist in
   morality only, and yet the Roman orator, in his pleading for Muræna,
   finding it his present interest to cast some disreputation upon Cato,
   his adversary in that cause, who was addicted to that sect, so
   represented their dogmas that he put the whole assembly into a fit of
   laughter; whereunto Cato only replied, that he made others laugh, but
   was himself ridiculous. And, it may be, some will find it to fall out
   not much otherwise with themselves by that time the whole account of
   their undertaking is well cast up.

   Besides, do these men not know that if others would employ themselves
   in a work of the like kind, by way of retortion and recrimination, that
   they would find real matter, amongst some whom they would have esteemed
   sacred, for an ordinary ingenuity to exercise itself upon unto their
   disadvantage? But what would be the issue of such proceedings? who
   would be gainers by it? Every thing that is professed among them that
   own religion, all ways and means of their profession, being by their
   mutual reflections of this kind rendered ridiculous, what remains but
   that men fly to the sanctuary of atheism to preserve themselves from
   being scoffed at and despised as fools? On this account alone I would
   advise the author of our late Debates to surcease proceeding in the
   same kind, lest a provocation unto a retaliation should befall any of
   those who are so foully aspersed.

   But, as I said, what will be the end of these things, namely, of mutual
   virulent reflections upon one another? Shall this "sword devour for
   ever? and will it not be bitterness in the latter end?" for, as he said
   of old of persons contending with revilings, --


   Esti gar amphoteroisin oneidea muthesasthai

   Polla mal'· oud' an neus hekatozugos achthos aroito.

   Strepte de gloss' esti broton, polees d' eni muthoi,

   Pantoioi· epeon de polus nomos entha kai entha.

   Hoppoion k' eipestha epos, toion k' epakousais.

   [Il., xx. 246-250]

   Great store there are of such words and expressions on every hand, and
   every provoked person, if he will not bind his passion to a rule of
   sobriety and temperance, may at his pleasure take out and use what he
   supposeth for his turn. And let not men please themselves with
   imagining that it is not as easy, though perhaps not so safe, for
   others to use towards themselves haughty and contemptuous expressions,
   as it is for them to use them towards others. But shall this wrath
   never be allayed? Is this the way to restore peace, quietness, and
   satisfaction to the minds of men? Is it meet to use her language in
   this nation concerning the present differences about religion:--


   "Nullus amor populis, nec foedera sunto.

   Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas

   Imprecor, arma armis: pugnent ipsique nepotes!"

   [Æn., iv. 624-628.]

   Is agreement in all other things, all love and forbearance, unless
   there be a centring in the same opinions absolutely, become criminal,
   yea detestable? Will this way of proceeding compose and satisfy the
   minds of men? If there be no other way for a coalescence in love and
   unity, in the bond of peace, but either that the Nonconformists do
   depose and change in a moment, as it were, their thoughts,
   apprehensions, and judgments, about the things in difference amongst
   us, which they cannot, which is not in their power to do; or that in
   the presence, and with a peculiar respect unto the eye and regard of
   God, they will act contrary unto them, which they ought not, which they
   dare not, no not upon the present instruction, -- the state of these
   things is somewhat deplorable.

   That alone which, in the discourses mentioned, seemeth to me of any
   consideration, if it have any thing of truth to give it countenance,
   is, that the Nonconformists, under pretence of preaching mysteries and
   grace, do neglect the pressing of moral duties, which are of near and
   indispensable concernment unto men in all their relations and actions,
   and without which religion is but a pretence and covering for vice and
   sin. A crime this is, unquestionably, of the highest nature, if true,
   and such as might justly render the whole profession of those who are
   guilty of it suspected. And this is again renewed by our author, who,
   to charge home upon the Nonconformists, reports the saying of Flacius
   Illyricus, a Lutheran, who died a hundred years ago, namely, that "bona
   opera sunt perniciosa ad salutem;" though I do not remember that any
   such thing was maintained by Illyricus, though it was so by Amsdorfius
   against Georgius Major. But is it not strange how any man can assume to
   himself and swallow so much confidence as is needful to the management
   of this charge? The books and treatises published by men of the
   persuasion traduced, their daily preaching, witnessed unto by
   multitudes, of all sorts of people, the open avowing of their duty in
   this matter, their principles concerning sin, duty, holiness, virtue,
   righteousness, and honesty, do all of them proclaim the blackness of
   this calumny, and sink it, with those who have taken, or are able to
   take, any sober cognizance of these things, utterly beneath all
   consideration. Moral duties they do esteem, commend, count as necessary
   in religion as any men that live under heaven. It is true, they say
   that on a supposition of that performance whereof they are capable
   without the assistance of the grace and Spirit of God, though they may
   be good in their own nature and useful to mankind, yet they are not
   available unto the salvation of the souls of men; and herein they can
   prove that they have the concurrent suffrage of all known churches in
   the world, both those of old and these at present. They say, moreover,
   that for men to rest upon their performances of these moral duties for
   their justification before God, is but to set up their own
   righteousness through an ignorance of the righteousness of God, for we
   are freely justified by his grace; neither yet are they sensible of any
   opposition to this assertion.

   For their own discharge of the work of the ministry, they endeavour to
   take their rule, pattern, and instruction, from the precepts,
   directions, and examples of them who were first commissionated unto
   that work, even the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, recorded in the
   Scripture, that they might be used and improved unto that end. By them
   are they taught to endeavour the declaring unto men all the counsel of
   God concerning his grace, their obedience, and salvation; and having
   the word of reconciliation committed unto them, they do pray their
   bearers "in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God." To this end do
   they declare the "unsearchable riches of Christ," and comparatively
   determine to know nothing in this world but "Christ and him crucified,"
   -- whereby their preaching becometh principally the word or doctrine of
   the cross, which by experience they find to be a "stumbling-block" unto
   some, and "foolishness" unto others; by all means endeavouring to make
   known "what is the riches of the glory of the mystery of God in Christ,
   reconciling the world unto himself;" praying withal for their hearers,
   that "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give
   unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him,"
   that "the eyes of their understanding being enlightened," they may
   learn to know "what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of
   the glory of his inheritance in the saints." And in these things are
   they "not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, which is the power of God
   unto salvation."

   By this dispensation of the gospel do they endeavour to ingenerate in
   the hearts and souls of men "repentance toward God, and faith toward
   our Lord Jesus Christ." To prepare them also hereunto they cease not,
   by the preaching of the law, to make known to men "the terror of the
   Lord," to convince them of the nature of sin, of their own lost and
   ruined condition by reason of it, through its guilt, as both original
   in their natures and actual in their lives; that they may be stirred up
   to "flee from the wrath to come," and to" lay hold on eternal life."
   And thus, as God is pleased to succeed them, do they endeavour to lay
   the great foundation, Jesus Christ, in the hearts of their hearers, and
   to bring them to an interest in him by believing. In the farther
   pursuit of the work committed unto them, they endeavour more and more
   to declare unto, and instruct their hearers in, all the mysteries and
   saving truths of the gospel; to the end that, by the knowledge of them,
   they may be wrought unto obedience, and brought to conformity to
   Christ, -- which is the end of their declaration. And in the pursuit of
   their duty there is nothing more that they insist upon, as far as ever
   I could observe, than an endeavour to convince men that that faith or
   profession that doth not manifest itself, which is not justified by
   works, which doth not purify the heart within, that is not fruitful in
   universal obedience to all the commands of God, is vain and
   unprofitable; letting them know that though we are saved by grace, yet
   we are the "workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good
   works, which he hath before ordained that we should walk in them," -- a
   neglect whereof doth uncontrollably evict men of hypocrisy and
   falseness in their profession: that, therefore, these things, in those
   that are adult, are indispensably necessary to salvation. Hence do they
   esteem it their duty continually to press upon their hearers the
   constant observance and doing of "whatsoever things are honest,
   whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
   things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report;" letting them
   know that those who are called to a participation of the grace of the
   gospel have more, higher, stronger obligations upon them to
   righteousness, integrity, honesty, usefulness amongst men, in all moral
   duties, throughout all relations, conditions, and capacities, than any
   others whatever.

   For any man to pretend, to write, [to] plead that this they do not, but
   indeed do discountenance morality and the duties of it, is to take a
   liberty of saying what he pleases for his own purpose, when thousands
   are ready from the highest experience to contradict him. And if this
   false supposition should prove the soul that animates any discourses,
   let men never so passionately admire them and expatiate in the
   commendation of them, I know some that will not be their rivals in
   their ecstasies. For the other things which those books are mostly
   filled withal, setting aside frivolous, trifling exceptions about modes
   of carriage and common phrases of speech, altogether unworthy the
   review or perusal of a serious person, they consist of such exceptions
   against expressions, sayings, occasional reflections on texts of
   Scripture, invectives, and impertinent calling over of things past and
   bygone, as the merit of the cause under contest is no way concerned in.
   And if any one would engage in so unhandsome an employment as to
   collect such fond speeches, futilous expressions, ridiculous
   expositions of Scripture, smutty passages, weak and impertinent
   discourses, yea, profane scurrilities, which some others, whom for
   their honour's sake and other reasons I shall not name, have in their
   sermons and discourses about sacred things been guilty of, he might
   provide matter enough for a score of such dialogues as the Friendly
   Debates are composed of.

   But to return: that the advantages mentioned are somewhat peculiar unto
   dialogues, we have a sufficient evidence in this, that our author
   having another special design, he chose another way of writing suited
   thereunto. He professeth that he hath neither hope nor expectation to
   convince his adversaries of their crimes or mistakes, nor doth
   endeavour any such thing. Nor did he merely project to render them
   contemptible and ridiculous (which to have effected, the writing of
   dialogues in his management would have been most accommodate); but his
   purpose was to expose them to persecution, or to the severity of penal
   laws from the magistrates, and if possible, it may be, to popular rage
   and fury. The voice of his whole discourse is the same with that of the
   Jews concerning St Paul, "Away with such fellows from the earth, for it
   is not fit that they should live." Such an account of his thoughts he
   gives us, p. 253. Saith he, "The only cause of all our troubles and
   disturbances" (which what they are he knows not nor can declare), "is
   the inflexible perverseness of about a hundred proud, ignorant, and
   seditious preachers; against whom if the severity of the laws were
   particularly levelled, how easy would it be," etc.


   "Macte novâ virtute puer: sic itur ad astra."

   [Æn., ix. 641.]

   But I hope it will appear, before the close of this discourse, that our
   author is far from deserving the reputation of infallible in his
   polities, whatever he may be thought to do in his divinity. It is
   sufficiently known how he is mistaken in his calculation of the numbers
   of those whom he designs to brand with the blackest marks of infamy,
   and whom he exposeth in his desires to the severities of law for their
   ruin. I am sure it is probable that there are more than a hundred of
   those whom he intends, who may say unto him as Gregory of Nazianzum
   introduceth his father speaking to himself,


   "Nondum tot sunt anni tui, quot jam in sacris nobis sunt peracti
   victimis,"

   who have been longer in the ministry than he in the world. But suppose
   there were but a hundred of them, he knows, or may know, when there was
   such a disparity in the numbers of them that contested about religion,
   that it was said of them, "All the world against Athanasius, and
   Athanasius against the world," who yet was in the right against them
   all, as they must acknowledge who frequently say or sing his "Quicunque
   vult."

   But how came he so well acquainted with them all and every one as to
   pronounce of them that they are "proud, ignorant, and seditious?" Allow
   him the liberty, -- which I see he will take whether we allow it him or
   no, -- to call whom he pleaseth "seditious," upon the account of real
   or supposed principles not compliant with his thoughts and
   apprehensions, yet that men are "proud and ignorant," how he can prove
   but by particular instances from his own acquaintance with them, I know
   not. And if he should be allowed to be a competent judge of knowledge
   and ignorance in the whole compass of wisdom and science, -- which, it
   may be, some will except against, -- yet unless he had personally
   conversed with them all, or were able to give sufficient instances of
   their ignorance from actings, writings, or expressions of their own, he
   would scarce be able to give a tolerable account of the honesty of this
   his peremptory censure. And surely this must needs be looked on as a
   lovely, gentle, and philosophic humour, to judge all men proud and
   ignorant who are not of our minds in all things, and on that ground
   alone.

   But yet, let them be as ignorant as can be fancied, this will not
   determine the difference between them and their adversaries. One
   unlearned Paphnutius [3] in the Council of Nice stopped all the learned
   fathers, when they were precipitately casting the church into a snare;
   and others, as unlearned as he, may honestly attempt the same at any
   time. And for our author's projection for the obtaining of quiet by
   severe dealings with these men in an especial manner, one of the same
   nature failed in the instance mentioned; for when Athanasius stood
   almost by himself in the eastern empire for a profession in religion
   which the supreme magistrate and the generality of the clergy
   condemned, it was thought the levelling of severity in particular
   against him would bring all to a composure. To this purpose, after they
   had again and again charged him to be proud and seditious, they
   vigorously engaged in his prosecution, according to the projection here
   proposed, and sought him near all the world over, but to no purpose at
   all, as the event discovered; for the truth which he professed having
   left its root in the hearts of multitudes of the people, on the first
   opportunity they returned again to the open avowing of it.

   But to return from this digression: this being the design of our
   author, not so much to expose his adversaries to common contempt and
   laughter as to ruin and destruction, he diverted from the beaten path
   of dialogues, and betook himself unto that of rhetorical invective
   declamations; which is peculiarly suited to carry on and promote such a
   design. I shall, therefore, here leave him for the present, following
   the triumphal chariot of his friend, singing, "Io triumphe!" and
   casting reflections upon the captives that he drags after him at his
   chariot wheels; which will doubtless supply his imagination with a
   pleasing entertainment, until he shall awake out of his dream, and find
   all the pageantry that his fancy hath erected round about him to vanish
   and disappear.

   His next attempt is upon atheists, wherein I have no concern, nor his
   principal adversaries, the Nonconformists. For my part, I have had this
   advantage by my own obscurity and small consideration in the world, as
   never to converse with any persons that did or durst question the being
   or providence of God, either really or in pretence. By common reports
   and published discourses, I find that there are not a few in these days
   who, either out of pride and ostentation or in a real compliance with
   their own darkness and ignorance, do boldly venture to dispute the
   things which we adore; and, if I am not greatly misinformed, a charge
   of this prodigious licentiousness and impiety may, from pregnant
   instances, be brought near the doors of some who on other occasions
   declaim against it. For practical atheism, the matter seems to be
   unquestionable; many live as though they believed neither God nor devil
   in the world but themselves. With neither sort am I concerned to treat
   at present, nor shall I examine the invectives of our author against
   them, though I greatly doubt whether ever such a kind of defence of the
   being of God was written by any man before him. If a man would make a
   judgment upon the genius and the way of his discourse, he might
   possibly be tempted to fear that it is persons rather than things that
   are the object of his indignation; and it may be the fate of some to
   suffer under the infamy of atheism, as it is thought Diagoras did of
   old, not for denying the Deity, nor for any absurd conceptions of mind
   concerning it, but for deriding and contemning them who, without any
   interest in or sense of religion, did foolishly, in idolatrous
   instances, make a pretence of it in the world. But whatever wickedness
   or miscarriages of this nature our author hath observed, his zeal
   against them were greatly to be commended, but that it is not in that
   only instance wherein he allows of the exercise of that virtue. Let it,
   then, be his anger or indignation, or what he pleases, that he may not
   miss of his due praises and commendation. Only I must say, that I
   question whether to charge persons inclined to atheism with profaning
   Jonson and Fletcher, as well as the holy Scriptures, be a way of
   proceeding probably suited to their conviction or reduction.

   It seems, also, that those who are here chastised do vent their atheism
   in scoffing, drollery, and jesting, and such like contemptible efforts
   of wit, that may take for a while amongst little and unlearned people,
   and immediately evaporate. I am more afraid of those who, under
   pretences of sober reason, do vent and maintain opinions and principles
   that have a direct tendency to give an open admission unto atheism in
   the minds of men, than of such fooleries. When others' fury and raving
   cruelties succeeded not, he alone prevailed "qui solus accessit sobrius
   ad perdendam rempublicam." One principle contended for as rational and
   true, which, if admitted, will insensibly seduce the mind unto and
   justify a practice ending in atheism, is more to be feared than ten
   thousand jests and scoffs against religion, which, me-thinks, amongst
   men of any tolerable sobriety, should easily be buried under contempt
   and scorn. And our author may do well to consider whether he hath not,
   unwittingly I presume, in some instances, so expressed and demeaned
   himself as to give no small advantage to those corrupt inclinations
   unto atheism which abound in the hearts of men. Are not men taught here
   to keep the liberty of their minds and judgments to themselves, whilst
   they practice that which they approve not nor can do so? which is
   directly to act against the light and conviction of conscience. And yet
   an associate of his in his present design, in a modest and free
   conference, tells us that "there is not a wider step to atheism than to
   do any thing against conscience;" and informs his friend that "dissent
   out of grounds that appear to any founded on the will of God is
   conscience." But against such a conscience, the light, judgment, and
   conviction of it, are men here taught to practise; and thereby, in the
   judgment of that author, are instructed unto atheism! And, indeed, if
   once men find themselves at liberty to practice contrary to what is
   prescribed unto them in the name and authority of God, as all things
   are which conscience requires, it is not long that they will retain any
   regard of him or reverence unto him. It hath hitherto been the judgment
   of all who have inquired into these things, that the great concern of
   the glory of God in the world, the interest of kings and rulers, of all
   governments whatever, the good and welfare of private persons, lies in
   nothing more than in preserving conscience from being debauched in the
   conducting principles of it, and in keeping up its due respect to the
   immediate sovereignty of God over it in all things. Neither ever was
   there a more horrid attempt upon the truth of the gospel, all common
   morality, and the good of mankind, than that which some of late years
   or ages have been engaged in, by suggesting, in their casuistical
   writings, such principles for the guidance of the consciences of men as
   in sundry particular instances might set them free, as to practice,
   from the direct and immediately influencing authority of God in his
   word. And yet I doubt not but it may be made evident that all their
   principles in conjunction are scarce of so pernicious a tendency as
   this one general theorem, that men may lawfully act in the worship of
   God, or otherwise, against the light, dictates, or convictions of their
   own consciences. Exempt conscience from an absolute, immediate, entire,
   universal dependence on the authority, will, and judgment of God,
   according to what conceptions it hath of them, and you disturb the
   whole harmony of divine providence in the government of the world, and
   break the first link of that great chain whereon all religion and
   government in the world do depend. Teach men to be like Naaman the
   Syrian, to believe only in the God of Israel, and to worship him
   according to his appointment, by his own choice and from a sense of
   duty, yet also to bow in the house of Rimmon, contrary to his light and
   conviction, out of compliance with his master; or, with the men of
   Samaria, to fear the Lord but to worship their idols, -- and they will
   not fail, at one time or other, rather to seek after rest in restless
   atheism than to live in a perpetual conflict with themselves, or to
   cherish an everlasting sedition in their own bosoms.

   I shall not much reflect upon those expressions which our author is
   pleased to vent his indignation by, such as "religious rage and fury,
   religions villany, religious lunacies, serious and conscientious
   villanies, wildness of godly madness, men led by the Spirit of God to
   disturb the public peace, the world filled with a buzz and noise of the
   Divine Spirit, sanctified fury, sanctified barbarism, pious villanies,
   godly disobedience, sullen and cross-grained godliness," with
   innumerable others of the like kind; which, although perhaps he may
   countenance himself in the use of, from the tacit respect that he hath
   to the persons whom he intends to vilify and reproach, yet in
   themselves, and to others who have not the same apprehensions of their
   occasion, they tend to nothing but to beget a scorn and derision of all
   religion and the profession of it, -- a humour which will not find
   where to rest or fix itself, until it come to be swallowed up in the
   abyss of atheism.

   We are at length arrived at the last act of this tragical preface; and
   as in our progress we have rather heard a great noise and bluster than
   really encountered either true difficulty or danger, so now I confess
   that weariness of conversing with so many various sounds of the same
   signification, the sum of all being "knaves, villains, fools," will
   carry me through the remainder, of it with some more than ordinary
   precipitation, as grudging an addition in this kind of employment to
   those few minutes wherein the preceding remarks were written or
   dictated.

   There are two or three heads which the remainder of this prefatory
   discourse may be reduced unto: First, a magnificent proclamation of his
   own achievements, -- what he hath proved, what he hath done, especially
   in representing the "inconsistence of liberty of conscience with the
   first and fundamental laws of government.'' And I am content that he
   please himself with his own apprehensions, like him who admired at the
   marvellous feats performed in an empty theatre; for it may be that,
   upon examination, it will be found that there is scarce in his whole
   discourse any one argument offered that hath the least seeming cogency
   towards such an end. Whether you take "liberty of conscience" for
   liberty of judgment, which himself confesseth uncontrollable, or
   liberty of practice upon indulgence, which he seems to oppose, an
   impartial reader will, I doubt, be so far from finding the conclusion
   mentioned to be evinced, as he will scarcely be able to satisfy himself
   that there are any premises that have a tendency thereunto. But I
   suppose he must extremely want an employment who will design himself a
   business in endeavouring to dispossess him of his self-pleasing
   imagination. Yea, he seems not to have pleaded his own cause absurdly
   at Athens, who, giving the city the news of a victory when they had
   received a fatal defeat, affirmed that public thanks were due to him
   for affording them two days of mirth and jollity before the tidings
   came of their ill success, which was more than they were ever likely to
   see again in their lives! And there being as much satisfaction in a
   fancied as a real success, though useless and failing, we shall leave
   our author in the highest contentment that thoughts of this nature can
   afford him. However, it may not be amiss to mind him of that good old
   counsel, "Let not him that girdeth on his armour boast himself as he
   that putteth it off."

   Another part of his oration is, to decry the folly of that brutish
   apprehension, that men can possibly live peaceably and quietly if they
   enjoy the liberty of their consciences; where he fears not to affirm
   that it is more eligible to tolerate the highest debaucheries than
   liberty for men to worship God according to what they apprehend he
   requires! whence some severe persons would be too apt, it may be, to
   make a conjecture of his own inclinations, for it is evident that he is
   not absolutely insensible of self-interest in what he doth or writes.
   But the contrary to what he asserts being a truth at this day written
   with the beams of the sun in many nations of Europe, let envy, malice,
   fear, and revenge suggest what they please otherwise, and the nature of
   the thing itself denied being built upon the best, greatest, and surest
   foundations and warranty that mankind hath to build on or trust unto
   for their peace and security, I know not why its denial was here
   ventured at, unless it were to embrace an opportunity once more to give
   vent to the remainders of his indignation by revilings and reproaches,
   which I had hoped had been now exhausted.

   But these things are but collateral to his principal design in this
   close of his declamation, and this is, the removal of an objection,
   that "liberty of conscience would conduce much to the improvement of
   trade in the nation." It is known that many persons of great wisdom and
   experience, and who, as it is probable, have had more time to consider
   the state and proper interest of this nation, and have spent more pains
   in the weighing of all things conducing thereunto, than our author hath
   done, are of this mind and judgment. But he at once strikes them and
   their reasons dumb by drawing out his Gorgon's head, that he hath
   proved it inconsistent with government, and so it must needs be a
   foolish and silly thing to talk of its usefulness to trade. "Verum, ad
   populum phaleras." If great blustering words, dogmatical assertions,
   uncouth, unproved principles, accompanied with a pretence of contempt
   and scorn of all exceptions and oppositions to what is said, with the
   persons of them that make them, may be esteemed proofs, our author can
   prove what he pleaseth, and he is to be thought to have proved whatever
   he affirms himself so to have done. If sober reason, experience,
   arguments derived from commonly-acknowledged principles of truth, if a
   confirmation of deductions from such principles by confessed and
   commonly approved instances, are necessary to make up convincing proofs
   in matters of this nature and importance, we are yet to seek for them,
   notwithstanding any thing that hath been offered by this author, or, as
   far as I can conjecture, is likely so to be. In the meantime, I
   acknowledge many parts of his discourse to be singularly remarkable.
   His insinuation "that the affairs of the kingdom are not in a fixed and
   established condition, that we are distracted amongst ourselves with a
   strange variety of jealousies and animosities," and such like
   expressions, as, if divulged in a book printed without licence, would,
   and that justly, be looked on as seditious, are the foundations that he
   proceedeth upon. Now, as I am confident that there is very little
   ground, or none at all, for these insinuations, so the public disposing
   of the minds of men to fears, suspicions, and apprehensions of unseen
   dangers by such means, becomes them only who care not what disadvantage
   they cast others, nay, their rulers under, so they may compass and
   secure their own private ends and concerns.

   But yet, not content to have expressed his own real or pretended
   apprehensions, he proceeds to manifest his scorn of those, or his
   smiling at them, who "with mighty projects labour for the improvement
   of trade;" which the council appointed, as I take it, by his majesty,
   thence denominated, is more concerned in than the Nonconformists, and
   may do well upon this information, finding themselves liable to scorn,
   to desist from such a useless and contemptible employment. They may now
   know that to erect and encourage trading combinations is only to build
   so many nests of faction and sedition; for he says, "There is not any
   sort of people so inclinable to seditious practices as the trading part
   of a nation," and that "their pride and arrogance naturally increase
   with the improvement of their stock." Besides, "the fanatic party," as
   he says, "live in these greater societies, and it is a very odd and
   preposterous folly to design the enriching of that sort of people; for
   wealth doth but only pamper and encourage their presumption, and he is
   a very silly man, and understands nothing of the follies, passions, and
   inclinations of human nature, who sees not that there is no creature so
   ungovernable as a wealthy fanatic."

   It cannot be denied but that this modern policy runs contrary to the
   principles and experience of former ages. To preserve industrious men
   in a peaceable way of improving their own interests, whereby they might
   partake, in their own and family concerns, of the good and advantages
   of government, hath been by the weak and silly men of former
   generations esteemed the most rational way of inducing their minds unto
   peaceable thoughts and resolutions; for as the wealth of men
   increaseth, so do their desires and endeavours after all things and
   ways whereby it may be secured, that so they may not have spent their
   labour and the vigour of their spirits, with reference unto their own
   good and that of their posterity, in vain. Yea, most men are found to
   be of Issachar's temper, who, when he saw that "rest was good, and the
   land pleasant," wherein his own advantages lay, "bowed his shoulder to
   bear, and became a servant unto tribute." "Fortes" and "miseri" have
   heretofore been only feared, and not such as found satisfaction to
   their desires in the increases and successes of their endeavours. And
   as Cæsar said he feared not those fat and corpulent persons, Antony and
   Dolabella, but those pale and lean discontented ones, Brutus and
   Cassius, so men have been thought to be far less dangerous or to be
   suspected in government who are well clothed with their own wealth and
   concerns, than such as have nothing but themselves to lose, and, by
   reason of their straits and distresses, do scarce judge them worth the
   keeping.

   And hath this gentleman really considered what the meaning of that word
   "trade" is, and what is the concernment of this nation in it? or is he
   so fond of his own notions and apprehensions as to judge it meet that
   the vital spirits and blood of the kingdom should be offered in
   sacrifice unto them? Solomon tells us that the "profit of the earth is
   for all, and the king himself is served by the field;" and we may truly
   in England say the same of trade. All men know what respect unto it
   there is in the revenues of the crown, and how much they are concerned
   in its growth and promotion. The rents of all, from the highest to the
   lowest that have an interest in the soil, are regulated by it, and rise
   and fall with it; nor is there any possibility to keep them up to their
   present proportion and standard, much less to advance them, without the
   continuance of trade in its present condition at least, nay, without a
   steady endeavour for its increase, furtherance, and promotion. Noblemen
   and gentlemen must be contented to eat their own beef and mutton at
   home if trade decay; to keep up their ancient and present splendour,
   they will find no way or means. Corporations are known to be the most
   considerable and significant bodies of the common people, and herein
   lies their being and bread. To diminish or discountenance their trade
   is to starve them, and discourage all honest industry in the world. It
   was a sad desolation that not long since befell the great city by fire;
   yet, through the good providence of God, under the peaceable government
   of his majesty, it is rising out of its ashes with a new signal beauty
   and lustre. But that consumption and devastation of it which the
   pursuit of this counsel will inevitably produce would prove fatal and
   irreparable. And as the interests of all the several parts of the
   commonwealth do depend on the trade of the people amongst ourselves, so
   the honour, power, and security of the whole, in reference unto foreign
   nations, are resolved also into the same principles: for as our soil is
   but small in comparison of some of our neighbours', and the numbers of
   our people no way to be compared with theirs, so if we should forego
   the advantages of trade, for which we have opportunities, and unto
   which the people of this nation have inclinations above any country or
   nation in the world, we should quickly find how unequal the competition
   between them and us would be; for even our naval force, which is the
   honour of the king, the security of his kingdoms, the terror of his
   enemies, oweth its rise and continuance unto that preparation of
   persons employed therein which is made by the trade of the nation. And
   if the counsel of this author should be followed, to suspend all
   thoughts of the supportment, encouragement, and furtherance of trade,
   until all men, by the severities of penalties, should be induced to a
   uniformity in religion, I doubt not but our envious neighbours would as
   readily discern the concernment of their malice and ill-will therein as
   Hannibal did his in the action of the Roman general, who, at the battle
   of Cannæ, according to their usual discipline (but fatally at that time
   misapplied), caused, in the great distress of the army, his horsemen to
   alight and fight on foot, not considering the advantage of his great
   and politic enemy as things then stood; who immediately said, "I had
   rather he had delivered them all bound unto me," though he knew there
   was enough done to secure his victory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] A word occurring more than once in Owen's writings, though not
   noticed in such dictionaries as those of Webster and Richardson. It
   seems to mean "a disturbance, or tumult." See Halliwell's "Dictionary
   of Archaic and Provincial Words," where he quotes Cotton using the word
   in this sense. -- Ed.

   [2] The work to which Owen refers is entitled, "A Friendly Debate
   between a Conformist and a Nonconformist, in two parts," London, 1669.
   It is understood to have been written by Dr Simon Patrick, who was
   afterwards successively Bishop of Chichester and of Ely. He died in
   1691, and his memory is still respected for his Paraphrase and Critical
   Commentaries on the books of the Old Testament, and other works of a
   theological and devotional character. The "Debate" was resented by the
   Nonconformists as harsh and unjust in its strictures; and even on the
   other side, the eminent Judge Hale wrote to Baxter in strong
   disapproval of it. -- Ed.

   [3] See Cave's Lives of the Fathers; Life of Athanasius sec. Iii. 2. --
   Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         A Survey of the First Chapter

   [Inconsistent expressions of Parker in regard to the power of the
   magistrate and the rights of conscience -- The design of his discourse
   to prove the magistrate's authority to govern the consciences of his
   subjects in affairs of religion -- This doctrine inconsistent with
   British law -- Ascribes more power to the magistrate than to Christ --
   Contrary to the history of the royal prerogative -- Alleged necessity
   of the principle to public peace and order -- Evils alleged to spring
   from liberty of conscience -- The principle of Parker no real
   preventive to these evils -- Various pleas refuted. [4] ]

   The author of this discourse seems, in this first chapter, to design
   the stating of the controversy which he intendeth to pursue and handle
   (as he expresseth himself, p. 11); as also, to lay down the main
   foundations of his ensuing superstructure. Nothing could be more
   regularly projected, nor more suited to the satisfaction of ingenious
   inquirers into the matters under debate; for those who have any design
   in reading beyond a present divertisement of their minds or
   entertainment of their fancies, desire nothing more than to have the
   subject-matter which they exercise their thoughts about clearly and
   distinctly proposed, that a true judgment may be made concerning what
   men say and whereof they do affirm. But I fear our author hath fallen
   under the misadventure of a failure in these projections, at least as
   unto that certainty, clearness, and perspicuity in the declaration of
   his conceptions and expression of his assertions and principles,
   without which all other ornaments of speech, in matters of moment, are
   of no use or consideration. His language is good and proper; his
   periods of speech laboured, full, and even; his expressions poignant
   towards his adversaries, and, singly taken, appearing to be very
   significative and expressive of his mind. But I know not how it is come
   to pass that, what either [whether?] through his own defect as to a due
   comprehension of the notions whose management he hath undertaken, or
   out of a design to cloud and obscure his sentiments, and to take the
   advantage of loose, declamatory expressions, it is very hard, if
   possible, to gather from what he hath written either what is the true
   state of the controversy proposed to discussion, or what is the
   precise, determinate sense of those words wherein he proposeth the
   principles that he proceeds upon.

   Thus, in the title of the book he asserts "the power of the magistrate
   over the consciences of men;" elsewhere [he] confines "the whole work
   and duty of conscience to the inward thoughts and persuasions of the
   mind, over which the magistrate hath no power at all." "Conscience
   itself," he sometimes says, "is every man's opinion;" sometimes he
   calls it an "imperious faculty;" -- which surely are not the same.
   Sometimes he pleads for "the uncontrollable power of magistrates over
   religion and the consciences of men;" sometimes asserts their
   "ecclesiastical jurisdiction" as the same thing, and seemingly all that
   he intends; -- whereas, I suppose, no man ever yet defined
   "ecclesiastical jurisdiction" to be "an uncontrollable power over
   religion and the consciences of men." The magistrate's "power over
   religion" he asserts frequently, and denieth outward worship to be any
   part of religion, and at last pleads upon the matter only for his power
   over outward worship. Every particular virtue he affirms to be such,
   because it is "a resemblance and imitation of some of the divine
   attributes;" yet [he] also teacheth that there may be more virtues, or
   new ones that were not so, and that to be virtue in one place which is
   not so in another. Sometimes he pleads that the magistrate hath power
   to impose "any religion on the consciences of his subjects that doth
   not countenance vice or disgrace the Deity," and then anon pleads for
   it in indifferent things and circumstances of outward worship only.
   Also, that the magistrate may" oblige his subjects' consciences" to the
   performance of moral duties, and other duties in religious worship,
   under penalties, and yet "punisheth none for their crime and guilt, but
   for the example of others. And many other instances of the like nature
   may be given.

   Now, whatever dress of words these things may be set off withal, they
   savour rankly of crude and undigested notions, not reduced unto such a
   consistency in his mind as to suffer him to speak evenly, steadily, and
   constantly to them. Upon the whole matter, it may not be unmeetly said
   of his discourses, what Tully said of Rullus's oration about the
   agrarian law: "Concionem ... advocari jubet: summâ cum expectatione
   concurritur. Explicat orationem sanè longam, et verbis valdè bonis.
   Unum erat quod mihi vitiosum videbatur, quod tantâ ex frequentitâ
   inveniri nemo potuit, qui intelligere posset, quid diceret. Hoc ille
   utrum insidiarum causâ fecerit, an hoc genere eloquentiæ delectetur,
   nescio. Tamen, siqui acutiores in concione steterunt, de lege agraria
   nescio quid voluisse eum dicere, suspicabantur." [De Lege Agr., ii. 5]
   Many good words it is composed of, many sharp reflections are made on
   others, a great appearance there is of reason; but besides that it is
   plain that he treats of the Nonconformists and the magistrate's power,
   and would have this latter exercised about the punishment or
   destruction of the former (which almost every page expresseth), it is
   very hard to gather what is the case he speaks unto, or what are the
   principles he proceeds upon.

   The entrance of his discourse is designed to give an account of the
   great difficulty which he intends to assail, of the controversy that he
   will handle and debate, and of the difference which he will compose.
   Here, if anywhere, accuracy, perspicuity, and a clear, distinct
   direction of the minds of the reader unto a certain just apprehension
   of the matter in question and difference, ought to be expected; for if
   the foundation of discourses of this nature be laid in terms general,
   ambiguous, loose, rhetorical, and flourishing, giving no particular,
   determinate sense of the controversy (for so this is called by our
   author), all that ensues in the pursuit of what is so laid down must
   needs be of the same complexion. And such appears to be the declamatory
   entrance of this chapter; for instead of laying a solid foundation to
   erect his superstructure upon, the author seems in it only to have
   built a castle in the air, that makes a goodly appearance and show, but
   is of no validity or use. Can he suppose that any man is the wiser or
   the more intelligent, in the difference about liberty of conscience,
   the power and duty of magistrates in granting or denying an indulgence
   unto the exercise of it, by reading an elegant parabolical discourse of
   "two supreme powers, the magistrate and conscience, contesting for
   sovereignty, in and about" no man knows what? What conscience is, what
   liberty of conscience, what it is pleaded for to extend unto, who are
   concerned in it, whether its plea be resolved absolutely into its own
   nature and constitution, or into that respect which it hath to another
   common rule of the minds and conceptions of men in and about the
   worship of God, is not declared; nor is it easily discernible what he
   allows and approves of in his own discourse, and what he introduceth to
   reflect upon, and so reject. Page 5, he tells us that "conscience is
   subject and accountable to God alone, that it owns no superior but the
   Lord of consciences;" and, p. 7, "that those who make it accountable to
   none but God alone do in effect usurp their prince's crown, defy his
   authority, and acknowledge no governor but themselves"! If it be
   pleaded that, in the first place, not what is, but what is unduly
   pretended, is declared, his words may be as well so expounded in all
   his ascriptions unto magistrates also, -- namely, that it is not with
   them as he asserts, but only it is unduly pretended so to be, -- as to
   any thing that appears in the discourse. The distinct consideration of
   the principles of conscience and the outward exercise of it can alone
   here give any show of relief. But as no distinction of that nature doth
   as yet appear, and, if rested on, ought to have been produced by any
   one who understood himself, and intended not to deceive or entangle
   others, so when it is brought on the stage, its inconsistency to serve
   the end designed shall be evinced. But that a plea for the consciences
   of private men (submitting themselves freely and willingly to the
   supreme power and government of magistrates in all things belonging to
   public peace and tranquillity) to have liberty to express their
   obedience unto God in the exercise of his outward worship, should
   receive such a tragical description, of a "rival supreme power set up
   against the magistrate, to the usurpation of his crown and dignity," is
   a new way of stating controversies, whether in divinity or policy,
   which this author judgeth conducing to his design and purpose; and I
   shall say no more but that those who delight in such a way of writing,
   and do receive light and satisfaction thereby, do seem to be exercised
   in a logic that I was never acquainted withal, and which I shall not
   now inquire after.

   What seems to be of real difficulty in this matter, which is so
   rhetorically exaggerated, our blessed Saviour hath stated and
   determined in one word. "Give," saith he, "unto Cæsar the things that
   are Cæsar's, and to God the things that are God's;" and this he did
   when he gave his disciples command not only to think, judge, and
   believe according to what he should propose and reveal unto them, but
   also to observe and do in outward practices whatever he should command
   them. As he requires all subjection unto the magistrate in things of
   his proper cognizance, -- that is, all things necessary to public peace
   and tranquillity in this world, the great end of his authority; so he
   asserts also that there are things of God which are to be observed and
   practised, even all and every one of his own commands, in a neglect
   whereof, on any pretence or account, we give not unto God that which is
   his. And he doubted not but that these things, these distinct respects
   to God and man, were exceedingly well consistent, and together
   directive to the same end of public good. Wherefore, passing through
   the flourishes of this frontispiece with the highest unconcernment, we
   may enter the fabric itself, where, possibly, we may find him declaring
   directly what it is that he asserts in this matter and contendeth for;
   and this he doth, p. 10: "And, therefore, it is the design of this
   discourse, by a fair and impartial debate, to compose all these
   differences, and adjust all these quarrels and contentions, and settle
   things upon their true and proper foundations; first, by proving it to
   be absolutely necessary to the peace and government of the world, that
   the supreme magistrate of every commonwealth should be vested with a
   power to govern and conduct the consciences of subjects in affairs of
   religion."

   I am sure our author will not be surprised, if, after he hath reported
   the whole party whom he opposeth as a company of "silly, foolish,
   illiterate persons," one of them should so far acknowledge his own
   stupidity as to profess that, after the consideration of this
   declaration of his intention and mind, he is yet to seek for the direct
   and determinate sense of his words, and for the principle that he
   designs the confirmation of. I doubt not but that the magistrate hath
   all that power which is absolutely necessary for the preservation of
   public peace and tranquillity in the world; but if men may be allowed
   to fancy what they please to be necessary unto that end, and thence to
   make their own measures of that power which is to be ascribed unto him,
   no man knows what bounds will be fixed unto that ocean wherein the
   leviathans they have framed in their imaginations may sport themselves.
   Some will, perhaps, think it necessary to this purpose that the
   magistrate should have power to declare and determine whether there be
   a God or no; Whether, if there be, it be necessary he should be
   worshipped or no; whether any religion be needful in, or useful to, the
   world; and if there be, then to determine what all subjects shall
   believe and practice from first to last in the whole of it. And our
   author hopes that some are of this mind. Others may confine it to
   lesser things, according as their own interest doth call upon them so
   to do, though they are not able to assign a clear distinction between
   what is subjected unto him and what may plead an exemption from his
   authority. He, indeed, who is the fountain and original of all power
   hath both assigned its proper end, and fully suited it to the
   attainment thereof; and if the noise of men's lusts, passions, and
   interests, were but a little silenced, we should quickly hear the
   harmonious consenting voice of human nature itself declaring the just
   proportion that is between the grant of power and its end, and
   undeniably expressing it in all the instances of it: for as the
   principle of rule and subjection is natural to us, concreated with us,
   and indispensably necessary to human society, in all the distinctions
   it is capable of, and the relations whence those distinctions arise; so
   nature itself, duly attended unto, will not fail, by the reason of
   things, to direct us unto all that is essential unto it and necessary
   unto its end. Arbitrary fictions of ends of government, and what is
   necessary thereunto, influenced by present interest, and arising from
   circumstances confined to one place, time, or nation, are not to be
   imposed on the nature of government itself, which hath nothing
   belonging unto it but what inseparably accompanieth mankind as
   sociable.

   But to let this pass; the authority here particularly asserted is a
   "power in the supreme magistrate to govern and guide the consciences of
   his subjects in affairs of religion." Let any man duly consider these
   expressions, and if he be satisfied by them as to the sense of the
   controversy under debate, I shall acknowledge that he is wiser than I,
   -- which is very easy for any one to be. What are the "affairs of
   religion" here intended, all or some; whether in religion or about it;
   what are the "consciences of men," and how exercised about these
   things; what it is to "govern and conduct" them; with what "power," by
   what means, this may be done, -- I am at a loss, for aught that yet is
   here declared. There is a guidance, conduct, yea, government of the
   consciences of men, by instructions and directions, in a due proposal
   of rational and spiritual motives, for those ends, such as is that
   which is vested in and exercised by the guides of the church, and that
   in subjection to and dependence on Christ alone, as hath been hitherto
   apprehended, though some now seem to have a mind to change their
   master, and to take up "præsente Numine," who may be of more advantage
   to them. That the magistrate hath also power so to govern and conduct
   the consciences of his subjects in his way of administration, -- that
   is, by ordering them to be taught, instructed, and guided in their
   duty, -- I know none that doth deny: so did Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. xvii.
   7-9. But it seems to be a government and guidance of another nature
   that is here intended. To deliver ourselves, therefore, from the deceit
   and entanglement of these general expressions, and that we may know
   what to speak unto, we must seek for a declaration of their sense and
   importance from what is elsewhere, in their pursuit, affirmed and
   explained by their author.

   His general assertion is, as was observed, "That the magistrate hath
   power over the consciences of his subjects in religion," as appears in
   the title of his book; here, p. 10, that power is said to be "to govern
   and conduct their consciences in religious affairs;" p. 13, that
   "religion is subject to his dominion, as well as all other affairs of
   state;" p. 27, that "it is a sovereignty over men's consciences in
   matters of religion, and this universal, absolute, and uncontrollable."
   Matters of religion are as uncontrollably subject to the supreme power
   as all other civil concerns: "He may, if he please, reserve the
   exercise of the priesthood to himself," p. 32; -- that is, what now in
   religion corresponds unto the ancient priesthood, as the ordering
   bishops and priests, administering sacraments, and the like; as the
   Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time did commonly report, in their usual
   manner, that it was done by a woman amongst us, by a fiction of such
   principles as begin, it seems, now to be owned. That if this "power of
   the government of religion be not universal and unlimited, it is
   useless," p. 35; that this "power is not derived from Christ, nor any
   grant of his, but is antecedent to his coming, or any power given unto
   him or granted by him," p. 40. "Magistrates have a power to make that a
   particular of the divine law which God had not made so," p. 80, and "to
   introduce new duties in the most important parts of religion: so that
   there is a public conscience, which men are in things of a public
   concern (relating to the worship of God) to attend unto, and not to
   their own; and if there be any sin in the command, he that imposed it
   shall answer for it, and not I, whose whole duty it is to obey," p.
   308. Hence, the command of "authority will warrant obedience, and
   obedience will hallow my actions and excuse me from sin," ibid. Hence
   it follows, that whatever the magistrate commands in religion, his
   authority doth so immediately affect the consciences of men that they
   are bound to observe it, on the pain of the greatest sin and
   punishment; and he may appoint and command whatever he pleaseth in
   religion, "that doth not either countenance vice or disgrace the
   Deity," p. 85. And many other expressions are there of the general
   assertion before laid down.

   This, therefore, seems to me, and to the most impartial considerations
   of this discourse that I could bring unto it, to be the doctrine or
   opinion proposed and advanced for the quieting and composing of the
   great tumults described in its entrance, -- namely, that the supreme
   magistrate in every nation hath power to order and appoint what
   religion his subjects shall profess and observe, or what he pleaseth in
   religion, as to the worship of God required in it, provided that he"
   enjoineth nothing that doth countenance vice or disgrace the Deity;"
   and thereby binds their consciences to profess and observe that which
   is by him so appointed (and nothing else are they to observe), making
   it their duty in conscience so to do, and the highest crime or sin to
   do any thing to the contrary, and that whatever the precise truth in
   these matters be, or whatever be the apprehensions of their own
   consciences concerning them. Now, if our author can produce any law,
   usage, or custom of this kingdom, any statute or act of parliament, any
   authentic record, any acts or declarations of our kings, any
   publicly-authorized writing, before or since the Reformation,
   declaring, asserting, or otherwise approving, the power and authority
   described to belong unto, to be claimed or exercised by, the kings of
   this nation, I will faithfully promise him never to write one word
   against it, although I am sure I shall never be of that mind. And, if I
   mistake not, in a transient reflection on these principles, compared
   with those which the church of England hath formerly pleaded against
   them who opposed her constitutions, they are utterly by them cast out
   of all consideration; and this one notion is advanced in the room of
   all the foundations which, for so many years, her defenders (as wise
   and as learned as this author) have been building upon. But this is not
   my concernment to examine; I shall leave it unto them whose it is, and
   whose it will be made appear to be, if we are again necessitated to
   engage in this dispute.

   For the present be it granted that it is the duty and in the power of
   every supreme magistrate to order and determine what religion, what
   way, what modes in religion, shall be allowed, publicly owned, and
   countenanced, and by public revenue maintained in his dominions; --
   that is, this is allowed with respect to all pretensions of other
   sovereigns, or of his own subjects. With respect unto God, it is his
   truth alone, the religion by him revealed, and the worship by him
   appointed, that he can so allow or establish. The rule that holds in
   private persons with respect to the public magistrate holds in him with
   respect unto God. "Illud possumus quod jure possumus." It is also
   agreed that no men, no individual person, no order or society of men,
   are, either in their persons or any of their outward concerns,
   exempted, or may be so, on the account of religion, from his power and
   jurisdiction; nor any causes that are liable unto a legal, political
   disposal and determination. It is also freely acknowledged that
   whatever such a magistrate cloth determine about the observances of
   religion, and under what penalties soever, his subjects are bound to
   observe what he doth so command and appoint, unless by general or
   especial rules their consciences are obliged to a dissent or contrary
   observation, by the authority of God and his word. In this case they
   are to keep their souls entire in their spiritual subjection unto God,
   and quietly and peaceably to bear the troubles and inconveniences which
   on the account thereof may befall them, without the least withdrawing
   of their obedience from the magistrate. And in this state of things, as
   there is no necessity or appearance of it that any man should be
   brought into such a condition as wherein sin on the one hand or the
   other cannot be avoided, so that state of things will probably occur in
   the world, as it hath done in all ages hitherto, that men may be
   necessitated to sin or suffer.

   To wind up the state of this controversy, we say, that antecedent to
   the consideration of the power of the magistrate, and all the influence
   that it hath upon men or their consciences, there is a superior
   determination of what is true, what false in religion, what right and
   what wrong in the worship of God, wherein the guidance of the
   consciences of men doth principally depend, and whereinto it is
   ultimately resolved. This gives an obligation or liberty unto them
   antecedent unto the imposition of the magistrate of whose commands, and
   our actual obedience unto them in these things, it is the rule and
   measure. And I think there is no principle, no common presumption of
   nature, nor dictate of reason, more evident, known, or confessed than
   this, that whatever God commands us, in his worship or otherwise, that
   we are to do; and whatever he forbids us, that we are not to do, be the
   things themselves in our eye great or small.

   Neither is there any difference, in these things, with respect unto the
   way or manner of the declaration of the will of God. Whether it be by
   innate common light or by revelation, all is one; the authority and
   will of God in all is to be observed. Yea, in command of God, made
   known by revelation (the way which is most contended about), may
   suspend, as to any particular instance, the greatest command that we
   are obliged unto by the law of nature in reference unto one another; as
   it did in the precept given to Abraham for the sacrificing of his son.
   And we shall find our author himself setting up the supremacy of
   conscience in opposition unto and competition with that of the
   magistrate (though with no great self-consistency), ascribing the
   pre-eminence and prevalency in obligation unto that of conscience, and
   that in the principal and most important duties of religion and human
   life. Such are all those moral virtues which have in their nature a
   resemblance of the divine perfections, wherein he placeth the substance
   of religion. With respect unto these, he so setteth up the throne of
   conscience as to affirm that if any thing be commanded by the
   magistrate against them, "to disobey him is no sin, but a duty." And we
   shall find the case to be the same in matters of mere revelation; for
   what God commands, that he commands, by what way soever that command be
   made known to us; and there is no consideration that can add any thing
   to the obligatory power and efficacy of infinite authority. So that
   where the will of God is the formal reason of our obedience, it is all
   one how or by what means it is discovered unto us. Whatever we are
   instructed in by innate reason or by revelation, the reason why we are
   bound by it is neither the one nor the other, but the authority of God
   in both.

   But we must return unto the consideration of the sentiments of our
   author in this matter, as before laid down. The authority ascribed to
   the civil magistrate being as hath been expressed, it will be very hard
   for any one to distinguish between it and the sovereignty that the Lord
   Christ himself hath in and over his church; yea, if there be any
   advantage on either side, or a comparative pre-eminence, it will be
   found to be cast upon that of the magistrate. Is the Lord Christ the
   lord of the souls and consciences of men? hath he dominion over them,
   to rule them in the things of the worship of God? -- it is so with the
   magistrate also; he hath a universal power over the consciences of his
   subjects." Doth the Lord Christ require his disciples to do and observe
   in the worship of God whatever he commanded them? -- so also may the
   magistrate, "the rule and conduct of conscience in these matters
   belonging unto him," provided that he command nothing that may
   "countenance vice or disgrace the Deity;" which, with reverence be it
   spoken, our Lord Jesus Christ himself, not only on the account of the
   perfection and rectitude of his own nature, but also of his commission
   from the Father, could not do. Is the authority of Christ the formal
   reason making obedience necessary to his commands and precepts? -- so
   is the authority of the magistrate in reference unto what he requires.
   Do men, therefore, sin if they neglect the observance of the commands
   of Christ in the worship of God, because of his immediate authority so
   to command them binding their consciences? -- so do men sin if they
   omit or neglect to do what the magistrate requires in the worship of
   God, because of his authority, without any farther respect. Hath the
   Lord Christ instituted two sacraments in the worship of God, that is,
   "outward visible signs," or symbols, of inward invisible or spiritual
   grace?" -- the magistrate, if he please, may institute and appoint
   twenty under the name of "significant ceremonies," that is, "outward
   visible signs of inward spiritual grace," which alone is the
   significancy contended about. Hath the magistrate this his authority in
   and over religion and the consciences of men from Jesus Christ? No more
   than Christ hath his authority from the magistrate, for he holds it by
   the law of nature, antecedent to the promise and coming of Christ.
   Might Christ in his own person administer the holy things of the church
   of God? Not in the church of the Jews, for he "sprang of the tribe of
   Judah, concerning which nothing was spoken as to the priesthood;" only
   he might in that of the gospel, but hath judged meet to commit the
   actual administration of them to others. So it is with the magistrate
   also.

   Thus far, then, Christ and the magistrate seem to stand on even or
   equal terms. But there are two things remaining that absolutely turn
   the scale, and cast the advantage on the magistrate's side; for, first,
   Men may do and practice many things in the worship of God which the
   Lord Christ hath nowhere nor by any means required. Yea, to think that
   his word, or the revelation of his mind and will therein, is "the sole
   and adequate rule of religious worship," is reported as an "opinion
   foolish, absurd, and impious, and destructive of all government." If
   this be not supposed, not only the whole design of our author in this
   book is defeated, but our whole controversy also is composed and at an
   end. But, on the other hand, no man must do or practice any thing in
   that way but what is prescribed, appointed, and commanded by the
   magistrate, upon pain of sin, schism, rebellion, and all that follow
   thereon. To leave this unasserted is all that the Nonconformists would
   desire in order unto peace. Comprehension and indulgence would ensue
   thereon. Here, I think, the magistrate hath the advantage. But that
   which follows will make it yet more evident; for, secondly, Suppose the
   magistrate require any thing to be done and observed in the worship of
   God, and the Lord Christ require the quite contrary in a man's own
   apprehension, so that he is as well satisfied in his apprehension of
   his mind as he can be of any thing that is proposed to his faith and
   conscience in the word of God; in this case he is to obey the
   magistrate, and not Christ, as far as I can learn, unless all confusion
   and disorder be admitted an entrance into the world. Yea, but this
   seems directly contrary to that rule of the apostles, which hath such
   an evidence and power of rational conviction attending it, that they
   refer it to the judgment of their adversaries, and those persons of as
   perverse, corrupt minds and prejudicate engagements against them and
   their cause as ever lived in the world, -- namely, "Whether it be right
   to obey God or man, judge ye." But we are told that "this holds only in
   greater matters," the logic (by the way) of which distinction is as
   strange as its divinity; for if the formal reason of the difference
   intimated arise from the comparison between the authority of God and
   man, it holds equally as to all things, small or great, that they may
   be oppositely concerned in. Besides, who shall judge what is small or
   what is great in things of this nature? "Cave ne titubes." Grant but
   the least judgment to private men themselves in this matter, and the
   whole fabric tumbles. If the magistrate be judge of what is great and
   of what is little, we are still where we were, without hope of
   delivery. And this, to me, is a notable instance of the pre-eminence of
   the magistrate above Christ in this matter. Some of the old Irish have
   a proverbial speech amongst them, "That if Christ had not been Christ
   when he was Christ, Patrick had been Christ," but it seems now, that
   taking it for granted that he was Christ, yet we have another that is
   so also, that is lord over the souls and consciences of men; and what
   can be said more of him "who sits in the temple of God, and shows
   himself to be God?"

   As we formerly said, Nonconformists, who are unacquainted with the
   mysteries of things of this nature, must needs desire to know whether
   these be the avowed principles of the church of England, or whether
   they are only inventions to serve a present turn of the pursuit of some
   men's designs. Are all the old pleas of the "jus divinum" of
   episcopacy, of example and direction apostolical, of a parity of reason
   between the condition of the church whilst under extraordinary officers
   and whilst under ordinary, of the power of the church to appoint
   ceremonies for decency and order, of the consistency of Christian
   liberty with the necessary practice of indifferent things, of the
   pattern of the churches of old, which (whether duly or otherwise we do
   not now determine) have been insisted on in this cause, swallowed all
   up in this abyss of magistratical omnipotency, which plainly renders
   them useless and unprofitable? How unhappy hath it been that the
   Christian world was not sooner blessed with this great discovery of the
   only way and means of putting a final end unto all religious contests!
   that he should not until now appear,


   "Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes

   Præstinxit, stellas exortus ut ætherius sol!"

   [Lucret. of Epicurus, iii. 1056.]

   But every age produceth not a Columbus. Many indeed have been the
   disputes of learned men about the power of magistrates in and
   concerning religion. With us it is stated in the recorded actings of
   our sovereign princes, in the oath of supremacy, and the acts of
   parliament concerning it, with other authentic writings explanatory
   thereof. Some have denied him any concern herein; our author is none of
   them, but rather is like the frenetic gentleman, who, when he was
   accused, in former days, for denying the corporeal presence of Christ
   in the sacrament, replied, in his own defence, that he "believed him to
   be present, booted and spurred as he rode to Capernaum." He hath
   brought him booted and spurred, yea, armed cap-a-pie, into the church
   of God, and given all power into his hands, to dispose of the worship
   of God according to his own will and pleasure; and that not with
   respect unto outward order only, but with direct obligation upon the
   consciences of men.

   But, doubtless, it is the wisdom of sovereign princes to beware of this
   sort of enemies, -- persons who, to promote their own interest, make
   ascriptions of such things unto them as they cannot accept of without
   the utmost hazard of the displeasure of God. Is it meet that, to
   satisfy the desires of any, they should invade the prerogative of God,
   or set themselves down at his right hand, in the throne of his
   only-begotten Son? I confess they are no way concerned in what others,
   for their advantage' sake, as they suppose, will ascribe unto them,
   which they may sufficiently disown by scorn and silence; nor can their
   sin involve them in any guilt. It was not the vain acclamation of the
   multitude unto Herod, "The voice of a god, and not of a man," but his
   own arrogant satisfaction in that blasphemous assignation of divine
   glory to him, that exposed him to the judgment and vengeance of God.
   When the princes of Israel found, by the answer of the Reubenites, that
   they had not transgressed against the law of God's worship in adding
   unto it or altering of it, which they knew would have been a
   provocation not to have been passed over without a recompense of
   revenge, they replied unto them, "Now ye have delivered the children of
   Israel out of the hand of the Lord;" and it is to be desired that all
   the princes of the Israel of God in the world, all Christian
   potentates, would diligently watch against giving admission unto any
   such insinuations as would deliver them into the hand of the Lord.

   For my own part, such is my ignorance that I know not that any
   magistrate from the foundation of the world, unless it were
   Nebuchadnezzar, Caius Caligula, Domitian, and persons like to them,
   ever claimed, or pretended to exercise, the power here assigned unto
   them. The instances of the laws and edicts of Constantine in the
   matters of religion and the worship of God, of Theodosius and Gratian,
   Arcadius, Marcian, and other emperors of the east, remaining in the
   Code and Novels; the Capitular of the western emperors, and laws of
   Gothish kings; the right of ecclesiastical jurisdiction inherent in the
   imperial crown of this nation, and occasionally exercised in all ages,
   -- are of no concernment in this matter: for no man denies but that it
   is the duty of the supreme magistrate to protect and further the true
   religion and right worship of God, by all ways and means suited and
   appointed of God thereunto. To encourage the professors thereof, to
   protect them from wrong and violence, to secure them in the performance
   of their duties, is doubtless incumbent on them. Whatever, under
   pretence of religion, brings actual disturbance unto the peace of
   mankind, they may coerce and restrain. When religion, as established in
   any nation by law, doth or may interest the professors of it, or guides
   in it, in any privileges, advantages, or secular emoluments, which are
   subject and liable, as all human concerns, to doubts, controversies,
   and litigious contests, in their security and disposal, all these
   things depend merely and solely on the power of the magistrate, by
   whose authority they are originally granted, and by whose jurisdictive
   power both the persons vested with them and themselves are disposable.
   But for an absolute power over the consciences of men, to bind or
   oblige them formally thereby to do whatever they shall require in the
   worship of God, so as to make it their sin, deserving eternal
   damnation, not so to do, without any consideration whether the things
   are true or false, according to the mind of God or otherwise, yea,
   though they are apprehended by them who are so obliged to practice them
   to be contrary to the will of God, -- that this hath hitherto been
   claimed by any magistrate, unless such as those before mentioned, I am
   yet to seek. And the case is the same with respect unto them who are
   not satisfied that what is so prescribed unto them will be accepted
   with God; for whereas, in all that men do in the worship of God, they
   ought to be fully persuaded of its acceptableness to God in their own
   minds, seeing "whatsoever is not of faith is sin," he that "doubteth"
   is in a very little better capacity to serve God on such injunctions
   than he who apprehendeth them to be directly contrary to his mind.

   If an edict were drawn up for the settlement of religion and religious
   worship in any Christian nation, according to the principles and
   directions before laid down, it may be there would be no great strife
   in the world by whom it should be first owned and espoused; for it must
   be of this importance:--

   "Whereas we have a universal and absolute power over the consciences of
   all our subjects in things appertaining to the worship of God, so that,
   if we please, we can introduce new duties, never yet heard of, in the
   most important parts of religion (p. 80), and may impose on them, in
   the practice of religion and divine worship, what we please, so that,
   in our judgment, it do not countenance vice nor disgrace the Deity (p.
   85): and whereas this power is naturally inherent in us; not given or
   granted unto us by Jesus Christ, but belonged to us or our predecessors
   before ever he was born; nor is expressed in the Scripture, but rather
   supposed; and this being such as that we ourselves, if we would,
   whether we be man or woman" (here France must be excepted by virtue of
   the Salique law, though the whole project be principally calculated for
   that meridian), "might exercise the special offices and duties of
   religion in our own person, especially that of the priesthood, though
   we are pleased to transfer the exercise of it unto others: and whereas
   all our prescriptions, impositions, and injunctions, in these things,
   do immediately affect and bind the consciences of our subjects, because
   they are ours, whether they be right or wrong, true or false, so long
   as in our judgment they neither, as was said, countenance vice nor
   disgrace the Deity, we do enact and ordain as followeth:"

   (Here, if you please, you may intersert the scheme of religion given us
   by our author in his second chapter, and add unto it, "That because
   sacrifices were a way found out by honest men of old to express their
   gratitude unto God thereby, so great and necessary a part of our
   religious duty, it be enjoined that the use of them be again revived,
   seeing there is nothing in them that offends against the bounds
   prescribed to the power to be expressed, and that men in all places do
   offer up bulls and goats, sheep and fowls, to God," with as many other
   institutions of the like nature as shall be thought meet.) Hereunto
   add, --

   "Now, our express will and pleasure is, that every man may and do think
   and judge what he pleaseth concerning the things enjoined and enacted
   by us; for what have we to do with their thoughts and judgments? They
   are under the empire and dominion of conscience, which we cannot invade
   if we would. They may, if they please, judge them inconvenient,
   foolish, absurd, yea, contrary to the mind, will, and law of God. Our
   only intention, will, and pleasure is, to bind them to the constant
   observation and practice of them, and that under the penalties of
   hanging and damnation." I know not any expression in such an impious
   and futilous edict that may not be warranted out of the principles of
   this discourse, the main parts of it being composed out of the words
   and phrases of it, and those used, to the best of my understanding, in
   the sense fixed to them by our author.

   Now, as was said before, I suppose Christian princes will not be
   earnest in their contests who shall first own the authority intimated,
   and express it in a suitable exercise; and if any one of them should
   put forth his hand unto it, he will find that


   ? "Furiarum maxima juxta

   Accubat, et manibus prohibet contingere mensas." ?

   [Æn., vi. 605.]

   There is one who lays an antecedent claim to a sole interest in this
   power, and that bottomed on other manner of pretensions than any which
   as yet have been pleaded in their behalf; for the power and authority
   here ascribed unto princes is none other but that which is claimed by
   the pope of Rome, with some few enlargements, and appropriated unto him
   by his canonists and courtiers. Only here "the old gentleman" (as he is
   called by our author) hath the advantage, in that, beside the
   precedency of his claim, it being entered on record at least six or
   seven hundred years before any proctor or advocate appeared in the
   behalf of princes, he hath forestalled them all in the pretence of
   infallibility: which, doubtless, is a matter of singular use in the
   exercise of the power contended about; for some men are so peevish as
   to think that thus to deal with religion and the consciences of men
   belongs to none but him who is absolutely, yea, essentially so, -- that
   is, infallible. For, as we have now often said (as, contrary to their
   design, men in haste oftentimes speak the same things over and over),
   as to all ecclesiastical jurisdiction over persons and causes
   ecclesiastical, and the sovereign disposal of all the civil and
   political concernments of religion, which is vested in the imperial
   crown of this nation, and by sundry acts of parliament is declared so
   to be, I shall be always ready to plead the right of our kings, and all
   Christian kings whatever, against the absurd pleas and pretences of the
   pope; so, as to this controversy between him and such princes as shall
   think meet to contend with him about it, concerning the power over the
   consciences of men before described, I shall not interpose myself in
   the scuffle, as being fully satisfied they are contending about that
   which belongs to neither of them.

   But what reason is there why this power should not be extended unto the
   inward thoughts and apprehensions of men about the worship of God, as
   well as the expression of them in pure, spiritual acts of that worship?
   The power asserted, I presume, will be acknowledged to be from God,
   though I can scarce, meet with the communication and derivation of it
   from him in this discourse. But whereas it is granted on all hands that
   "the powers that be are of God," and that none can have authority over
   another unless it be originally "given him from above," I desire to be
   informed why the other part of the power mentioned, -- namely, over the
   thoughts, judgments, and apprehensions of men, in the things of the
   worship of God, -- should not be invested in the magistrate also; that
   so, he having declared what is to be believed, thought, and judged in
   such things, all men should be obliged so to believe, think, and judge:
   for this power God can give, and hath given it unto Jesus Christ. I
   presume it will be said that this was no way needful for the
   preservation of peace in human society, which is the end for which all
   this power is vested in the magistrate; for let men believe, think, and
   judge what they please, so long as their outward actings are or may be,
   overruled, there is no danger of any public disturbance. But this seems
   to be a mighty uneasy condition for mankind, -- namely, to live
   continually in a contradiction between their judgments and their
   practices; which in this case is allowed to be incident unto them.
   Constantly to judge one way best and most according to the mind of God
   in his worship, and constantly to practice another, will, it is to be
   feared, prove like the conflicting of vehement vapours with their
   contrary qualities, that at one time or other will produce an
   earthquake. How, then, if men, weary of this perplexing, distorting
   condition of things in their minds, should be provoked to run to
   excesses and inordinate courses for their freedom and rest, such as our
   author excellently displays in all their hideous colours and
   appearances, and which are really pernicious to human policy and
   society? were it not much better that all these inconveniences had been
   prevented in the first instance, by taking care that the faith,
   thoughts, persuasions, and judgments of all subjects about the things
   of God, should be absolutely bound up unto the declared conceptions of
   their rulers in these matters? Let it not be pretended that this is
   impossible, and contrary to the natural liberty of the minds of men as
   rational creatures, guiding and determining themselves according to
   their own reason of things and understandings; for do but fix the
   declared will of the ruler in the room and place of divine revelation
   (which is no hard matter to do, which some actually do universally, and
   our author as to a great share and proportion), and the obligation
   sought after to prevent all inconveniences in government falls as full
   and directly upon the minds, thoughts, and judgments of men, as upon
   any of their outward actions. And this, for the substance of it, is now
   pleaded for, seeing it is pretended that in all things dubious, where
   men cannot satisfy themselves that it is the will of God that they
   should do a thing or no, the declaration of the magistrate determines
   not only their practice but their judgment also, and gives them that
   full persuasion of their minds which is indispensably required unto
   their acting in such things, and that faith which frees them from sin;
   for "he that doubteth is damned if he eat."

   But it will be said that there will be no need hereof; for let men
   think and judge what they please, whilst they are convinced and
   satisfied that it is their duty not to practice any thing outwardly in
   religion but what is prescribed by their rulers, it is not possible
   that any public evil should ensue upon their mental conceptions only.
   We observed before that the condition described is exceedingly uneasy;
   which, I suppose, will not be denied by men who have seriously
   considered what it is either to judge or practice any thing that lies
   before them with reference unto the judgment of God. And that which
   should tie men up to rest perpetually in such a restless state is, as
   it seems, a mere conviction of their duty. They ought to be, and are
   supposed to be, convinced that it is their duty to maintain the liberty
   of their minds and judgments, but to submit in their outward practice
   universally to the laws of men that are over them; and this sense and
   conviction of duty is a sufficient security unto public tranquillity in
   all that contrariety and opposition of sentiments unto established
   religion and forms of worship that may be imagined. But if this be so,
   why will not the same conviction and sense of duty restrain them who do
   peaceably exercise the worship of God, according to the light and
   dictates of their consciences, from any actings whatever that may tend
   to the disturbance of the public peace? Duty, nakedly considered, is
   even, as such, the greatest obligation on the minds of men; and the
   great security of others in their actings ariseth from thence. But the
   more it is influenced and advantaged by outward considerations, the
   less it is assaulted and opposed by things grievous and perplexing in
   the way of the discharge of it, the more efficacious will be its
   operations on the minds of men, and the firmer will be the security
   unto others that thence ariseth. Now, these advantages lie absolutely
   on the part of them who practice, or are allowed so to do, according to
   their own light and persuasion in the worship of God, wherein they are
   at rest and full satisfaction of mind; and not on theirs who all their
   days are bound up to a perverse, distorted posture of mind and soul, in
   judging one thing to be best and most pleasing unto God, and practising
   of the contrary. Such a one is the man that, of all others, rulers have
   need, I think, to be most jealous of; for what security can be had of
   him who hath inured himself unto a continual contradiction between his
   faith and his practice? For my part, I should either expect no other
   measure from him in any other thing, nor ever judge that his profession
   and ways of acting are any sufficient indications of his mind (which
   takes away all security from mankind), or fear that his convictions of
   light and knowledge, as he apprehends, would, at one time or other,
   precipitate him into attempts of irregularity and violence, for his own
   relief.


   ? "Hic niger est, hunc tu Romane caveto."

   It will be said, perhaps, that we need not look farther for the
   disturbance of public peace from them who practice outwardly any thing
   in the worship of God but what is prescribed, established, and
   enjoined, seeing that every such practice is such a disturbance itself.
   I say, this pretence is miserably ridiculous and contemptible, and
   contrary to the common experience of mankind. If this were so, the
   whole world for three hundred years lived in one continual disturbance
   and tumult upon the account of Christian religion, whose professors
   constantly practised and performed that in the worship of God which was
   so far from being established or approved by public authority, that it
   was proscribed and condemned under penalties of all sorts, pecuniary,
   corporeal, and sanguinary or capital; But we see no such matter ensued,
   nor the least disquietment unto the world, but what was given unto it
   by the rage of bloody persecutors, that introduced the first
   convulsions into the Roman empire, which were never well quieted, but
   ended in its dissolution. The experience, also, of the present and next
   preceding ages casts this frivolous exception out of consideration. And
   as such a practice, even against legal prohibitions, though it be by
   the transgression of a penal law, is yet in itself and [by] just
   consequence remote enough from any disturbance of government (unless we
   should suppose that every non-observance of a penal statute invalidates
   the government of a nation, which were to fix it upon such a foundation
   as will not afford it the steadiness of a weather-cock); so being
   allowed by way of exemption, it contains no invasion upon or intrusion
   into the rights of others, but, being accompanied with the abridgment
   of the privileges of none, or the neglect of any duty required to the
   good of the commonwealth, it is as consistent with, and may be as
   conducing to, public good and tranquillity, as any order of religious
   things in the world, as shall be elsewhere demonstrated.

   It remains, therefore, that the only answer to this consideration is,
   that men who plead for indulgence and liberty of conscience in the
   worship of God, according to his word and the light which he hath given
   them therein, have indeed no conscience at all, and so are not to be
   believed as to what they profess against sinister and evil practices.
   This flail I know no fence against but this only, that they have as
   good and better grounds to suspect him to have no conscience at all
   who, upon unjust surmises, shall so injuriously charge them, as finding
   him in a direct transgression of the principal rules that conscience is
   to be guided and directed by, than he hath to pronounce such a judgment
   concerning them and their sincerity in what they profess. And whether
   such mutual censures tend not to the utter overthrow of all peace,
   love, and security amongst mankind, it is easy to determine. Certainly,
   it is the worst game in the world for the public, to have men bandying
   suspicions one against another, and thereon managing mutual charges of
   all that they do surmise, or what else they please to give the
   countenance of surmise unto.

   I acknowledge the notion insisted on, -- namely, "That whilst men
   reserve to themselves the freedom and liberty of judging what they
   please, or what seems good unto them, in matters of religion and the
   worship of God, they ought to esteem it their duty to practice in all
   things according to the prescription of their rulers, though every way
   contrary unto and inconsistent with their own judgments and
   persuasions, unless it be in things that countenance vice or disgrace
   the Deity" (whereof yet, it may be, it will not be thought meet that
   they themselves should judge for themselves and their own practice,
   seeing they may extend their conceptions about what doth so unto such
   minute instances as would frustrate the whole design), -- is
   exceedingly accommodated to the corrupt lusts and affections of men,
   and suited to make provision for their security in this world by an
   exemption from the indispensable command of professing the truth
   communicated and known unto them; a sense of the obligation whereof
   hath hitherto exposed innumerable persons in all ages to great
   difficulties, dangers, and sufferings, yea, to death, the height and
   sum of all: for whereas men have been persuaded that "with the heart
   man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
   unto salvation," the latter clause is in many cases hereby sufficiently
   superseded, and the troublesome duty seeming to be required in it is
   removed out of the way. It will not, it may be, be so easy to prove
   that in the religion of the Mohammedans there is any thing enjoined in
   practice that will directly fall under the limitations assigned unto
   the compliance with the commands of superiors contended for; and,
   therefore, let a man but retain his own apprehensions concerning Jesus
   Christ and the gospel, it may be lawful for him, yea, be his duty, to
   observe the worship enjoined by the law of Mohammed, if his lot fall to
   live under the power of the Grand Seignior or any sovereign prince of
   the same persuasion! But the case is clear in the religion of the
   Papists, which is under the protection of the greatest number of
   supreme magistrates in Europe. It will not be pretended, I suppose, by
   our author, that there is any thing in the confession of the church of
   Rome, or imposed by it on the practices of men, that directly gives
   countenance unto any immorality, especially as the sense of that term
   is by him stated; and it is no easy matter for ordinary men to prove
   and satisfy themselves that there is aught in their modes of worship of
   such a tendency as to cast disgrace upon the Deity, especially
   considering with how much learning and diligence the charge of any such
   miscarriage is endeavoured to be answered and removed, -- all which
   pleas ought to be satisfied before a man can make sedately a
   determinate judgment of the contrary. Let, then, men's judgments be
   what they will in the matters of difference between Protestants and
   Papists, it is, on this hypothesis, the duty of all that live under the
   dominion of sovereign popish princes outwardly to comply with and
   practice that religious worship that is commanded by them and enjoined!
   The case is the same, also, as to the religion of the Jews!

   Now, as this casts a reflection of incredible folly and inexpiable
   guilt upon all protestant martyrs, in casting away their own lives and
   disobeying the commands of their lawful sovereigns, so it exposeth all
   the Protestants in the world who are still in the same condition of
   subjection to the severe censures of impiety and rebellion, and must
   needs exasperate their rulers to pursue them to destruction, under
   pretence of unwarrantable obstinacy in them: for if we wholly take off
   the protection of conscience in this matter, and its subjection to the
   authority of God alone, there is no plea left to excuse dissenting
   Protestants from the guilt of such crimes as may make men justly cry
   out against them, as the Jews did against St Paul, "Away with such
   fellows from the earth; for it is not fit that they should live!" or,
   "Protestantes ad leones!" according to the old cry of the Pagans
   against the primitive Christians. But if this should prove to be a way
   of teaching and justifying the grossest hypocrisy and dissimulation
   that the nature of man is capable of, a means to cast off all regard
   unto the authority of God over the ways and lives of men, all the
   rhetoric in the world shall never persuade me that God hath so moulded
   and framed the order and state of human affairs that it should be any
   way needful to the preservation of public peace and tranquillity.
   Openness, plainness of heart, sincerity in our actions and professions,
   generous honesty, and a universal respect in all things to the supreme
   Rector of all, the great Possessor of heaven and earth, with an
   endeavour to comply with his present revealed mind and future judgment,
   are far better foundations for and ligaments of public peace and
   quietness. To make this the foundation of our political superstructure,
   that "divisum imperium cum Jove Cæsar habet," God hath immediate and
   sole power over the minds and inward thoughts of men, but the
   magistrate over the exercise of those thoughts, in things especially
   belonging to the worship of God, and in the same instances, seems not
   to prognosticate a stable or durable building. The prophet was not of
   that mind of old, who, in the name of God, blamed the people for
   willingly walking after the commandment of their ruler in concerns of
   worship not warranted by divine appointment; nor was Daniel so, who,
   notwithstanding the severe prohibition made against his praying in his
   house, continued to do so three times a day.

   But besides all this, I do not see how this hypothesis is necessarily
   subservient to the principal design of the author, but it may be as
   well improved to quite distant, yea, contrary ends and purposes. His
   design, plainly, is to have one fabric of religion erected, one form of
   external worship enacted and prescribed, which all men should be
   compelled by penalties to the outward profession and observance of.
   These penalties he would have to be such as should not fail of their
   end, -- namely, of taking away all professed dissent from his religious
   establishment; which, if it cannot be effected without the destruction
   and death of multitudes, they also are not to be forborne. Now, how
   this ensues from the forementioned principle I know not; for a supreme
   magistrate, finding that the minds of very many of his subjects are, in
   their judgments and persuasions, engaged in a dissent unto the religion
   established by him, or somewhat in it, or some part of it, especially
   in things of practical worship, though he should be persuaded that he
   hath so far a power over their consciences as to command them to
   practice contrary to their judgment, yet, knowing their minds and
   persuasions to be out of his reach and exempted from his jurisdiction,
   why may he not think it meet and conducing to public tranquillity and
   all the ends of his government, even the good of the whole community
   committed to his charge, rather to indulge them in the quiet and
   peaceable exercise of the worship of God according to their own light,
   than always to bind them up unto that unavoidable disquietment which
   will ensue upon the conflict in their minds between their judgments and
   their practices, if he should oblige them as is desired? Certainly, as
   in truth and reality, so according to this principle, he hath power so
   to do; for to fancy him [to have] such a power over the religion and
   consciences of his subjects as that he should be inevitably bound, on
   all occurrences, and in all conditions of affairs, to impose upon them
   the necessary observation of one form of worship, is that which would
   quickly expose him to inextricable troubles. And instances of all sorts
   might be multiplied to show the ridiculous folly of such a conception.
   Nay, it implies a perfect contradiction to what is disputed, before;
   for if he be obliged to settle and impose such a form on all, it must
   be because there was a necessity of somewhat antecedent to his
   imposition, whence his obligation to impose it did arise. And, on such
   a supposition, it is in vain to inquire after his liberty or his power
   in these things, seeing by his duty he is absolutely determined; and
   whatever that be which doth so determine him and put an obligation upon
   him, it doth indispensably do the same on his subjects also, which, as
   it is known, utterly excludes the authority pleaded for.

   This principle, therefore, indeed asserts his liberty to do what he
   judgeth meet in these matters, but contains nothing in it to oblige him
   to judge that it may not be meet and most conducing unto all the ends
   of his government to indulge unto the consciences of men peaceable
   (especially if complying with him in all the fundamentals of the
   religion which himself professeth) the liberty of worshipping God
   according to what they apprehend of his own mind and will. And let an
   application of this principle be made to the present state of this
   nation, wherein there are so great multitudes of persons peaceable, and
   not unuseful unto public good, who dissent from the present
   establishment of outward worship, and have it not in their power either
   to change their judgments or to practice contrary unto them; and as it
   is in the power of the supreme magistrate to indulge them in their own
   way, so it will prove to be his interest, as he is the spring and
   centre of public peace and prosperity.

   Neither doth it appear that, in this discourse, our author hath had any
   regard either to the real principles of the power of the magistrate as
   stated in this nation, or to his own, which are fictitious, but yet
   such as ought to be obligatory to himself. His principal assertion is,
   "That the supreme magistrate hath power to bind the consciences of men
   in matters of religion;" that is, by laws and edicts to that purpose.
   Now, the highest and most obligatory way of the supreme magistrate's
   speaking in England is by acts of parliament; it is therefore supposed
   that what is so declared in or about matters of religion should be
   obligatory to the conscience of this author; but yet quite otherwise,
   page 59, he sets himself to oppose and condemn a public law of the
   land, on no other ground than because it stood in his way, and seemed
   incompliant with his principles: for whereas the law of 2 and 3 Edward
   VI., which appointed two weekly days for abstinence from flesh, had
   been, amongst other reasons, prefaced with this, "That the king's
   subjects having now a more clear light of the gospel, through the
   infinite mercy of God" (such "canting" language was then therein used),
   "and thereby the king's majesty perceiving that one meat of itself was
   not more holy than another," etc., "yet considering that due abstinence
   was a means to virtue, and to subdue men's bodies to their souls and
   spirits," etc.; and it being after found (it should seem by a farther
   degree of light) that those expressions, meeting with the inveterate
   opinions of some newly brought out of Popery, had given countenance to
   them to teach or declare that something of religion was placed therein,
   thereon, by the law made 5 Eliz., adding another weekly day to be kept
   with the former for the same purpose, the former clause was omitted,
   and mention only made therein of the civil and politic reasons inducing
   the legislators thereunto, and withal a penalty of inflicting
   punishment on those who should affirm and maintain that there was any
   concernment of conscience and religion in that matter. This provision
   hath so distasted our author, that forgetting, it seems, his own
   design, he reproaches it with the title of "jejunium Cecilianum," [5]
   and thinks it so far from obliging his conscience to acquiesce in the
   determination therein made, that he will not allow it to give law to
   his tongue or pen! But ("vexet censura columbas") it seems they are the
   fanatics only that are thus to be restrained.

   Moreover, on occasion hereof, we might manifest how some other laws of
   this land do seem carefully to avoid that imposition on conscience
   which, against law and reason, he pleadeth for. For instance, in that
   of 21 Jac., touching usury, and the restraint of it unto the sum
   therein established, it was provided, "That no words in this act
   contained shall be construed or expounded to allow the practice of
   usury in point of religion and conscience." And why did not the supreme
   magistrate in that law determine and bind the consciences of men by a
   declaration of their duty in a point of religion, seeing whither way
   soever the determination had been made, neither would immorality have
   been countenanced nor the Deity disgraced? But, plainly, it is rather
   declared that he hath not Cognizance of such things with reference to
   the consciences of men, to oblige them or set them at liberty, but only
   power to determine what may be practised in order to public profit and
   peace. And, therefore, the law would neither bind nor set at liberty
   the consciences of men in such cases; which is a work for the supreme
   Lawgiver only.

   Neither, as it hath been before observed, do the principles here
   asserted and contended for either express or represent the supremacy of
   the kings of this nation in matters ecclesiastical, as it is stated and
   determined by themselves in parliament, but rather so as to give great
   offence and scandal to the religion here professed, and advantage to
   the adversaries thereof; for after there appeared some ambiguity in
   those words of the oath, enacted 1 Eliz., of "testifying the queen to
   be supreme governor, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things
   or causes as in temporal," and many doubts and scruples had ensued
   thereon, as though there were assigned to her a power over the
   consciences of her subjects in spiritual things, or that she had a
   power herself to order and administer spiritual things, in Elizabeth it
   is enacted, by way of explanation, that the oaths aforesaid shall be
   expounded in such form as is set forth in the admonition annexed to the
   queen's injunctions, published in the first year of her reign; where,
   disclaiming the power of the ministry of divine offices in the church,
   or the power of the priesthood here by our author affixed to the
   supreme magistrate, her power and authority is declared to be a
   sovereignty over all manner of persons born within this realm, whether
   they be ecclesiastical or temporal, so that no foreign power hath, or
   ought to have, any superiority over them. And so is this supremacy
   stated in the articles, anno 1562, -- namely, an authority to rule all
   estates and degrees committed to the charge of the supreme magistrate
   by God, whether they be ecclesiastical or temporal, and to restrain the
   stubborn or evil-doers. Of the things contended for by our author, --
   the authority of the priesthood, and power over the consciences of men
   in matters of religion, -- there is not one word in our laws, but
   rather they are both of them rejected and condemned.

   I have yet laid the least part of that load upon this principle, which,
   if it be farther pressed, it must expect to be burdened withal, and
   that from the common suffrage of Christians in all ages. But yet, that
   I may not transgress against the design of this short and hasty
   discourse, I shall proceed no farther in the pursuit of it, but take a
   little survey of what is here pleaded in its defence. Now, this is
   undertaken and pursued in the first chapter, with the two next ensuing,
   where an end is put to this plea: for if I understand any thing of his
   words and expressions, our author in the beginning of his fourth
   chapter cuts down all those gourds and wild vines that he had been
   planting in the three preceding; for he not only grants but disputes
   also for an obligation on the consciences of men antecedent and
   superior unto all human laws and their obligation! His words are as
   followeth, p. 115: "It is not because subjects are in any thing free
   from the authority of the supreme power on earth, but because they are
   subject to a superior in heaven, and they are only then excused from
   the duty of obedience to their sovereign when they cannot give it
   without rebellion against God: so that it is not originally any right
   of their own that exempts them from a subjection to the sovereign power
   in all things; but it is purely God's right of governing his own
   creatures that magistrates then invade when they make edicts to violate
   or control his laws. And those who will take off from the consciences
   of men all obligations antecedent to those of human laws, instead of
   making the power of princes supreme, absolute, and uncontrollable, they
   utterly enervate all their authority, and set their subjects at perfect
   liberty from all their commands."

   I know no men that pretend to exemption from the obligation of human
   laws but only on this plea, that God by his law requires them to do
   otherwise; and if this be so, the authority of such laws as to the
   consciences of men is superseded, by the confession of this author.
   Allow, therefore, but the principles here expressed, -- namely, that
   men have a superior Power over them in heaven, whose laws and the
   revelation of whose will concerning them is the supreme rule of their
   duty, whence an obligation is laid upon their consciences of doing
   whatever is commanded, or not doing what is forbidden by him, which is
   superior unto, and actually supersedes, all human commands and laws
   that interfere therewith, -- and I see neither use of nor place for
   that power of magistrates over the consciences of men which is so
   earnestly contended for. And our author, also, in his ensuing discourse
   in that chapter, placeth all the security of government in the respect
   that the consciences of men have to the will and command of God, and
   which they profess to have; which in all these chapters he pleads to be
   a principle of all confusion! But it is the first chapter which alone
   we are now taking a view of.

   The only argument therein insisted on to make good the ascription unto
   the magistrate of the power over religion and the consciences of men
   before described, is "the absolute and indispensable necessity of it
   unto public tranquillity; which is the principal and most important end
   of government." In the pursuit of this argument, sometimes, yea often,
   such expressions are used concerning the magistrate's power as, in a
   tolerable construction, declare it to be what no man denies nor will
   contend about: but it is necessary that they be interpreted according
   to the genius and tenor of the opinion contended for; and, accordingly,
   we will consider them. This alone, I say, is that which is here
   pleaded, or is given in as the subject of the ensuing discourse. But,
   after all, I think that he who shall set himself seriously to find out
   how any thing here spoken hath a direct and rational cogency towards
   the establishment of the conclusion before laid down will find himself
   engaged in no easy undertaking. We were told, I confess, at the
   entrance (so as that we may not complain of a surprisal) that we must
   expect to have invectives twisted with arguments, and some such thing
   seems here to be aimed at; but if a logical chemist come and make a
   separation of the elements of this composition, he will find, if I
   mistake not, a heap of the drossy invective, and scarce the least
   appearance of any argument ore. Instead of sober, rational arguing,


   ? "crimina rasis

   Librat in antithetis;" ?

   Pers. i. 85,

   great aggravations of men's miscarriages in the pursuit of the dictates
   of their consciences, either real or feigned, edged against and
   fiercely rejected upon those whom he makes his adversaries, and these
   the same for substance, repeated over and over in a great variety of
   well-placed words, take up the greatest part of his plea in this
   chapter, especially the beginning of it, wherein alone the controversy,
   as by himself stated, is concerned.

   But if the power and authority over religion and the consciences of men
   here ascribed unto supreme magistrates be so indispensably necessary to
   the preservation of public tranquillity as is pretended, a man cannot
   but wonder how the world hath been in any age past kept in any
   tolerable peace and quietness, and how it is anywhere blessed with
   those ends of government at this day; for it will not be an easy task
   for our author, or any one else, to demonstrate that the power
   mentioned hath ever been either claimed or exercised by any supreme
   magistrate in Christendom, or that it is so at this day. The experience
   of past and present ages is, therefore, abundantly sufficient to defeat
   this pretence, which is sufficiently asserted, without the least
   appearance of proof or argument to give it countenance or confirmation,
   or they must be very charitable to hire, or ignorant in themselves, who
   will mistake invectives for arguments. The remembrance, indeed, of
   these severities I would willingly lay aside, especially because the
   very mention of them seems to express a higher sense of and regret
   concerning them than I am in the least subject unto, or something that
   looks like a design of retaliation; but as these things are far from my
   mind, so the continual returns that almost in every page I meet with of
   high and contemptuous reproaches will not allow that they be always
   passed by without any notice or remark.

   It is, indeed, indispensably necessary that public peace and
   tranquillity be preserved; but that there is any thing in point of
   government necessary hereunto, but that God have all spiritual power
   over the consciences of men, and rulers political power over their
   actings, wherein public peace and tranquillity are concerned, the world
   hath not hitherto esteemed, nor do I expect to find it proved by this
   author. If these things will not preserve the public peace, it will not
   be kept if one should rise from the dead to persuade men unto their
   duty. The power of God over the consciences of men I suppose is
   acknowledged by all who own any such thing as conscience, or believe
   there is a God over all. That, also, in the exercise of this authority,
   he requires of men all that obedience unto rulers that is any way
   needful or expedient unto the preservation of the ends of their rule,
   is a truth standing firm on the same foundation of universal consent,
   derived from the law of creation; and his positive commands to that
   purpose have an evidence of his will in this matter not liable to
   exception or control. This conscience unto God our author confesseth
   (as we have observed in his fourth chapter) to be the great
   preservation and security of government and governors, with respect
   unto the ends mentioned; and if so, what becomes of all the pretences
   of disorder and confusion that will ensue unless this power over men's
   consciences be given to the magistrate, and taken as it were out of the
   hands of God? Nor is it to be supposed that men will be more true to
   their consciences, supposing the reiglement of them in the hand of men,
   than when they are granted to be in the hand and power of God; for both
   at present are supposed to require the same things. Certainly, where
   conscience respects authority, as it always doth, the more absolute and
   sovereign it apprehends the authority by which it is obliged, the
   greater and more firm will be the impression of the obligation upon it;
   and in that capacity of pre-eminence it must look upon the authority of
   God, compared with the authority of man. Here, then, lies the security
   of public peace and tranquillity, as it is backed by the authority of
   the magistrate, to see that all outward actions are suitable unto what
   conscience toward God doth in this matter openly and unquestionably
   require.

   The pretence, indeed, is, that the placing of this authority over the
   consciences of men in the supreme ruler doth obviate and take away all
   grounds and occasions of any such actings on the account of religion as
   may tend unto public disturbance; for suppose conscience, in things
   concerning religion and the worship of God, subject to God alone, and
   the magistrate require such things to be observed in the one or the
   other as God hath not required, at least in the judgments and
   consciences of them of whom the things prescribed are required, and to
   forbid the things that God requires to be observed and done, in this
   case, it is said, they cannot or will not comply in active obedience
   with the commands of the magistrate. But, what if it so fall out? Doth
   it thence follow that such persons must needs rebel and be seditious,
   and disturb the public peace of the society whereof they are members?
   Wherefore is it that they do not do or observe what is required of them
   by the magistrate in religion or the worship of God, or that they do
   what he forbids? Is it not because of the authority of God over their
   minds and consciences in these things? and why should it be supposed
   that men will answer the obligations laid by God on their consciences
   in one thing and not in another, in the things of his worship and not
   of obedience unto civil power, concerning which his commands are as
   express and evident as they can be pretended to be in the things which
   they avow their obligation unto?

   Experience is pretended to the contrary. It is said again and again
   that "men, under pretence of their consciences unto God in religion,
   have raised wars and tumults, and brought all things into confusion, in
   this kingdom and nation especially; and what will words avail against
   the evidence of so open an experience to the contrary?" But what if
   this also should prove a false and futilous pretence? Fierce and long
   wars have been in this nation of old, upon the various titles of
   persons pleading their right unto supreme government in the kingdom
   against one another; so also have there been about the civil rights and
   privileges of the subjects in the confusions commonly called "The
   barons' wars." The late troubles, disorders, and wars amongst us must
   bear the weight of this whole charge. But if any one will take the
   pains to review the public writings, declarations, treatises, whereby
   those tumults and wars were begun and carried on, he will easily
   discern that liberty of conscience in practice, or the exemption of it
   from the power of the magistrate, as to the rule and conduct of it, now
   ascribed unto him in the latitude, by sober persons defended or pleaded
   for, had neither place in nor influence into the beginnings of those
   troubles. And when such confusions are begun, no man can give assurance
   or conjecture where they shall end.

   Authority, laws, privileges, and I know not what things, wherein
   private men, of whom alone we treat, have no pretence of interest, were
   pleaded in those affairs. He that would judge aright of these things
   must set aside all other considerations, and give his instance of the
   tumults and seditions that have ensued on the account of men's keeping
   their consciences entire for God alone, without any just plea or false
   pretence of authority, and the interest of men in the civil concerns of
   nations.

   However, it cannot be pretended that liberty of conscience gave the
   least occasion unto any disorders in those days, for indeed there was
   none but only that of opinion and judgment, which our author placeth
   out of the magistrate's cognizance and dispose, and supposeth it is a
   thing wherein the public peace neither is nor can be concerned. It is
   well if it prove so; but this liberty of judgment, constantly pressed
   with a practice contrary to its own determinations, will, I fear, prove
   the most dangerous posture of the minds of men, in reference to public
   tranquillity, that they can be well disposed into. However, we may take
   a little nearer view of the certain remedy provided for all these evils
   by our author, and satisfy ourselves in some inquiries about it. Shall,
   then, according to this expedient, the supreme magistrate govern, rule,
   and oblige unto obedience the consciences of his subjects universally
   in all things in religion and the worship of God, so that, appoint what
   he please, forbid what he please, subjects are bound in conscience to
   observe them and yield obedience accordingly? His answer, as far as I
   can gather his meaning, is, that he may and must do so in all things,
   taking care that what he commands shall neither countenance vice nor
   disgrace the Deity; and then the subjects are obliged according to the
   inquiry. But there seems another limitation to be given to this power,
   p. 37, where he affirms that the "Lord Christ hath given severe
   injunctions to secure the obedience of men to all lawful superiors,
   except where they run directly cross to the interest of the gospel;"
   and elsewhere he seems to give the same privilege of exemption where a
   religion is introduced that is idolatrous or superstitious. I would,
   then, a little farther inquire, who shall judge whether the things
   commanded in religion and the worship of God be idolatrous and
   superstitious? whether they cross directly the interest of the gospel?
   whether they countenance vice and disgrace the Deity or no? To say that
   the magistrate is to judge and determine hereof is the highest foppery
   imaginable; for no magistrate, unless he be distracted, will enjoin
   such a religion to observance as he judgeth himself to fall under the
   [dis]qualifications mentioned, and when he hath done so declare that so
   they do, and yet require obedience unto them. Besides, if this judgment
   be solely committed unto him indeed, in the issue there neither is nor
   can be any question for a judgment to be passed upon in this matter,
   for his injunction doth quite render useless all disquisitions to that
   purpose. The judgment and determination hereof, therefore, is
   necessarily to be left unto the subjects from whom obedience is
   required. So it lies in the letter of the proposal; they must obey in
   all things but such; and, therefore, surely must judge what is such and
   what is not. Now, who shall fix bounds to what they will judge to fall
   under one or other of these limitations? If they determine, according
   to the best light they have, that the religious observances enjoined by
   the magistrate do directly cross the interest of the gospel, they are
   absolved by our author from any obligation in conscience to their
   observation; and so we are just as before, and this great engine for
   public tranquillity vanisheth into air and smoke.

   Thus this author himself, in way of objection, supposeth a case of a
   magistrate enjoining, as was said, a religion superstitious and
   idolatrous. This he acknowledgeth to be an inconvenience, yet such as
   is far beneath the mischiefs that ensue upon the exemption of the
   consciences of men in religion from the power of the magistrate! which
   I confess I cannot but admire at, and can give reasons why I do so
   admire it, which also may be given in due season. But what, then, is to
   be done in this case? He answers, "It is to be borne." True, but how?
   Is it to be so borne as to practice and observe the things so enjoined,
   though superstitious and idolatrous? Though his words are dubious, yet
   I suppose he will not plainly say so, nor can he, unless he will teach
   men to cast off all respect unto the authority of God, and open such a
   door to atheism as his rhetorical, prefatory invective will not be able
   to shut. The bearing, then, intended, must be by patient suffering in a
   refusal to practice what is so commanded, and observing the contrary
   commands of God. But why in this case ought they to suffer quietly for
   refusing a compliance with what is commanded, and for their observance
   of the contrary precepts of the gospel? Why, they must do so because of
   the command of God, obliging their consciences unto obedience to the
   magistrate in all things wherein the public peace is concerned; and so
   that is absolutely secured. Is it not evident to him that hath but half
   an eye that we are come about again where we were before? Let this be
   applied to all the concernments of religion and religious worship, and
   there will arise, with respect unto them, the same security which in
   this case is deemed sufficient, and all that human affairs are capable
   of; for if in greater matters men may refuse to act according to the
   magistrate's command, out of a sense of the authority of God obliging
   them to the contrary, and yet their civil peaceableness and obedience
   be absolutely secured from the respect of their consciences to the
   command of God requiring it, why should it not be admitted that they
   may and will have the same respect to that command when they dissent
   from the magistrate's constitution in lesser things, on the same
   account of the authority of God requiring the contrary of them? Shall
   we suppose that they will cast off the authority of God requiring their
   obedience, on the account of their dissatisfaction in lesser things of
   the magistrate's appointment when they will not do so for all the
   violence that may be offered unto them in things of greater and higher
   importance? The principle, therefore, asserted is as useless as it is
   false, and partakes sufficiently of both these properties to render it
   inconsiderable and contemptible; and he that can reconcile these things
   among themselves or make them useful to the author's design will
   achieve what I dare not aspire unto.

   I know not any thing that remains in the first chapter deserving our
   farther consideration; what seems to be of real importance, or to have
   any aspect towards the cause in hand, may undergo some brief remarks,
   and so leave us at liberty to a farther progress. In general, a
   supposition is laid down, and it is so vehemently asserted as is
   evident that it is accompanied with a desire that it should be taken
   for granted, -- namely, that if the consciences of men be not
   regulated, in the choice and practice of religion, by the authority of
   the magistrate over them, they will undoubtedly run into principles and
   practices inconsistent with the safety of human society, and such as
   will lead them to seditions and tumults; and hence (if I understand
   him, a matter I am continually jealous about, from the looseness of his
   expressions, though I am satisfied I constantly take his words in the
   sense which is received of them by the most intelligent persons) he
   educeth all his reasonings, and not from a mere dissent from the
   magistrate's injunctions, without the entertainment of such principles
   or an engagement into such practices. I cannot, I say, find the
   arguments that arise from a mere supposition that men, in some things
   relating to the worship of God, will or do practice otherwise than the
   magistrate commands, which are used to prove the inconsistency of such
   a posture of things with public tranquillity; which yet alone was the
   province our author ought to have managed. But there is another
   supposition added, -- that where conscience is in any thing left unto
   its own liberty to choose or refuse in the worship of God, there it
   will embrace, sure enough, such wicked, debauched, and seditious
   principles as shall dispose men unto commotions, rebellions, and all
   such evils as will actually evert all rule, order, and policy amongst
   men. But now this supposition will not be granted him, in reference
   unto them who profess to take up all their profession of religion from
   the command of God or the revelation of his will in the Scripture,
   wherein all such principles and practices as those mentioned are
   utterly condemned; and the whole profession of Christianity being left
   for three hundred years without the rule, guidance, and conduct of
   conscience now contended for, did not once give the least disturbance
   unto the civil governments of the world. Disturbances, indeed, there
   were, and dreadful revolutions of governments, in those days and places
   when and where the professors of it lived; but no concerns of religion
   being then involved in or with the civil rights and interests of men,
   as the professors of it had no engagements in them, so from those
   alterations and troubles no reflection could be made on their
   profession. And the like peace, the like innocency of religion, the
   like freedom from all possibility of such imputations as are now cast
   upon it, occasioned merely by its intertexture with the affairs,
   rights, and laws of the nations, and the interests of its professors as
   such therein, will ensue when it shall be separated from that relation
   wherein it stands to this world, and left at the pure, naked tendency
   of the souls of men to another, and not before.

   But what says our author? "If for the present the minds of men happen
   to be tainted with such furious and boisterous conceptions of religion
   as incline them to stubbornness and sedition, and make them
   unmanageable to the laws of government, shall not a prince be allowed
   to give check to such unruly and dangerous persuasions?" I answer, That
   such principles which, being professed and avowed, are in their own
   nature and just consequence destructive to public peace and human
   society, are all of them directly opposite to the light of human
   nature, that common reason and consent of mankind wherein and whereon
   all government is founded, with the prime fundamental laws and dictates
   of the Scripture, and so may and ought to be restrained in the
   practices of the persons that profess them; and with reference unto
   them the magistrate "beareth not the sword in vain:" for human society
   being inseparably consequent unto, and an effect of, the law of our
   nature, or concreated principles of it, which hath subdued the whole
   race of mankind, in all times and places, unto its observance;
   opinions, persuasions, principles opposite unto it, or destructive of
   it, manifesting themselves by any sufficient evidence or in overt acts,
   ought to be no more allowed than such as profess an enmity to the being
   and providence of God himself. For men's inclinations, indeed, as in
   themselves considered, there is no competent judge of them amongst the
   sons of men; but as to all outward actions that are of the tendency
   described, they are under public inspection, to be dealt withal
   according to their demerit.

   I shall only add, that the mormo here made use of is not now first
   composed or erected; it hath, for the substance of it, been flourished
   by the Papists ever since the beginning of the Reformation. Neither did
   they use to please themselves more in or to dance more merrily about
   any thing than this calf: "Let private men have their consciences
   exempted from a necessary obedience to the prescriptions of the church,
   and they will quickly run into all pernicious fancies and persuasions."
   It is known how this scare-crow hath been cast to the ground, and this
   calf stamped to powder, by divines of the church of England. It is no
   pleasant thing, I confess, to see this plea revived now with respect to
   the magistrate's authority, and not the pope's; for I fear that when it
   shall be manifested, and that by the consent of all parties, that there
   is no pleadable argument to bottom this pretension for the power of the
   magistrate upon, some, rather than forego it, will not be unwilling to
   recur to the fountain from whence it first sprang, and admit the pope's
   plea as meet to be revived in this case. And, indeed, if we must come
   at length, for the security of public peace, to deprive all private
   persons of the liberty of judging what is right and wrong in religion
   in reference to their own practice, or what is their duty towards God
   about his worship, and what is not, there are innumerable advantages
   attending the design of devolving the absolute determination of these
   things upon the pope, above that of committing it to each supreme
   magistrate in his own dominions; for besides the plea of at least
   better security in his determinations than in that of any magistrate,
   if not his infallibility, which he hath so long talked of, and so
   sturdily defended, as to get it a great reputation in the world, the
   delivering up of the faith and consciences of all men unto him will
   produce a seeming agreement, at least of incomparably a larger extent
   than the remitting of all things of this nature to the pleasure of
   every supreme magistrate, which may probably establish as many
   different religions in the world as there are different nations,
   kingdoms, or commonwealths.

   That which alone remains seeming to give countenance to the assertions
   before laid down, is our author's assignation of the priesthood by
   natural right unto the supreme magistrate, which in no alteration of
   religion he can be divested of, but by virtue of some positive law of
   God, as it was for a season in the Mosaical institution and government.
   But these things seem to be of no force; for it never belonged to the
   priesthood to govern or to rule the consciences of men with an
   absolute, uncontrollable power, but only in their name, and for them,
   to administer the holy things which by common consent were admitted and
   received amongst them. Besides, our author, by his discourse, seems not
   to be much acquainted with the rise of the office of the priesthood
   amongst men; as shall be demonstrated if farther occasion be given
   thereunto. However, by the way, we may observe what is his judgment in
   this matter. The magistrate, we are told, hath not his ecclesiastical
   authority from Christ, and yet this is such as that the power of the
   priesthood is included therein, the exercise whereof, "as he is pleased
   to transfer to others, so he may, if he please, reserve it to himself,"
   p. 32; whence it follows, not only that it cannot be given by Christ
   unto any other, for it is part of the magistrate's power, which he hath
   not limited or confined by any subsequent law, nor can there be a
   coordinate subject of the same power of several kinds; so that all the
   interest or right any man or men have in or unto the exercise of it is
   but transferred to them by the magistrate; and therefore they act
   therein in his name and by his authority only; and hence the bishops,
   as such, are said to be "ministers of state," p. 49. Neither can it be
   pretended that this was indeed in the power of the magistrate before
   the coming of Christ, but not since; for he hath, as we are told, all
   that he ever had, unless there be a restraint put upon him by some
   express prohibition of our Saviour, p. 41, -- which will hardly be
   found in this matter. I cannot, therefore, see how, in the exercise of
   the Christian priesthood, there is (on these principles) any the least
   respect unto Jesus Christ or his authority: for men have only the
   exercise of it transferred to them by the magistrate, by virtue of a
   power inherent in him antecedent unto any concessions of Christ; and,
   therefore, in his name and authority they must act in all the sacred
   offices of their functions. It is well if men be so far awake as to
   consider the tendency of these things.

   At length Scripture proofs for the confirmation of these opinions are
   produced, pp. 35, 36; and the first pleaded is that promise, that
   "kings shall be nursing fathers unto the church." It is true this is
   promised, and God accomplish it more and more! but yet we do not desire
   such nurses as beget the children they nurse. The proposing,
   prescribing, commanding, binding religion on the consciences of men, is
   rather the begetting of it than its nursing. To take care of the church
   and religion, that it receive no detriment, by all the ways and means
   appointed by God and useful thereunto, is the duty of the magistrates:
   but it is so also, antecedently to their actings unto this purpose, to
   discern aright which is the church whereunto this promise is made;
   without which they cannot duly discharge their trust nor fulfil the
   promise itself. The very words, by the rules of the metaphor, do imply
   that the church and its religion, and the worship of God observed
   therein, are constituted, fixed, and regulated by God himself,
   antecedently unto the magistrate's duty and power about it. They are to
   nurse that which is committed to them, and not what themselves have
   framed or begotten. And we contend for no more but a rule concerning
   religion and the worship of God antecedent unto the magistrate's
   interposing about it, whereby both his actings in his place, and those
   of subjects in theirs, are to be regulated. Mistakes herein have
   engaged many sovereign princes, in pursuit of their trust as nursing
   fathers to the church, to lay out their strength and power for the
   utter ruin of it; as may be evidenced in instances too many of those
   who, in a subserviency to and by the direction of the papal interest,
   have endeavoured to extirpate true religion out of the world. Such a
   nursing mother we had some time in England, who, in pursuit of her
   care, burned so many bishops and other holy men to ashes.

   He asks farther, "What doth the Scripture mean when it styles our
   Saviour the King of kings, and maketh princes his vicegerents here on
   earth?" I confess, according to this gentleman's principles, I know not
   what it means in so doing. Kings, he tells us, have not their authority
   in and over religion and the consciences of men from him, and therefore
   in the exercise of it cannot be his vicegerents; for none is the
   vicegerent of another in the exercise of any power and authority, if he
   have not received that power and authority from him. Otherwise the
   words have a proper sense, but nothing to our author's purpose. It is
   his power over them, and not theirs over the consciences of their
   subjects, that is intended in the words. Of no more use, in this
   controversy is the direction of the apostle, that we "should pray for
   kings, that under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life;" for no
   more is intended therein but that, under their peaceable and righteous
   administration of human affairs, we may live in that godliness and
   honesty which is required of us. Wherefore, then, are these weak
   attempts made to confirm and prove what is not? Those, or the most of
   them, whom our author in this discourse treats with so much severity,
   do plead that it is the duty of all supreme magistrates to find out,
   receive, embrace, and promote, the truths of the gospel, with the
   worship of God appointed therein; confirming, protecting, and defending
   them, and those that embrace them, by their power and authority: and in
   the discharge of this duty they are to use the liberty of their own
   judgments, informed by the ways that God hath appointed, independently
   of the dictates and determinations of any other persons whatever. They
   affirm, also, that to this end they are intrusted with supreme power
   over all persons in their respective dominions; who on no pretence can
   be exempted from the exercise of that power, as occasion, in their
   judgments, shall require it to be exercised: as also, that all causes
   wherein the profession of religion in their dominions is concerned,
   which are determinable in "foro civili," by coercive umpirage or
   authority, are subject unto their cognizance and power. The sovereign
   power over the consciences of men, to institute, appoint, and prescribe
   religion and the worship of God, they affirm to belong unto Him alone
   who is the "author and finisher of our faith, who is the head over all
   things to the church." The administration of things merely spiritual in
   the worship of God is, they judge, derived immediately from him to the
   ministers and administrators of the gospel, possessed of their offices
   by his command and according to his institution. As to the external
   practice of religion, and religious worship as such, it is, they say,
   in the power of the magistrate to regulate all the outward civil
   concernments of it, with reference unto the preservation of public
   peace and tranquillity, and the prosperity of his subjects; and herein
   also they judge that such respect is to be had to the consciences of
   men as the Scripture, the nature of the thing itself, and the right of
   the Lord Christ to introduce his spiritual kingdom into all nations, do
   require.

   That which seems to have imposed on the mind of this author is, that if
   the magistrate may make laws for the regulating of the outward
   profession of religion, so as public peace and tranquillity may be
   kept, added to what is his duty to do in the behalf of the truth, then
   he must have the power over religion and the consciences of men by him
   ascribed unto him; but there is no privity of interest between these
   things. The laws which he makes to this purpose are to be regulated by
   the word of God and the good of the community over which, in the name
   of God, he doth preside; and whence he will take his warranty to forbid
   men the exercise of their consciences in the duties of spiritual
   worship, whilst the principles they profess are suited to the light of
   nature and the fundamental doctrines of the gospel, with the peace of
   mankind, and their practices absolutely consistent with the public
   welfare, I am yet to seek; and so, as far as I can yet perceive, is the
   author of the discourse under consideration. It will not arise, from a
   parity of reason, from the power that he hath to restrain cursed
   swearing and blasphemies by penal coercions; for these things are no
   less against the light of nature, and no less condemned by the common
   suffrage of mankind (and the persons that contract the guilt of them
   may be no less effectually brought to judge and condemn themselves),
   than are the greatest outrages that may be committed in and against
   human society. That the gospel will give no countenance hereunto he
   seems to acknowledge, in his assignation of several reasons why the use
   of the power, and exercise of it in the way of compulsion by penalties,
   pleaded for by him, is not mentioned therein. That "Christ and his
   apostles behaved themselves as subjects; that he neither took nor
   exercised any sovereign power; that he gave his laws to private men as
   such, and not to the magistrate; that the power that then was was in
   bad hands," are pleaded as excuses for the silence of the gospel in
   this matter. But, lest this should prove farther prejudicial to his
   present occasion, he adds, p. 42, "The only reason why the Lord Christ
   bound not the precepts of the gospel upon men's consciences by any
   secular compulsories was, not because compulsion was an improper way to
   put his laws in execution, for then he had never established them with
   more enforcing sanctions, but only because himself was not vested with
   any secular power, and so could not use those methods of government
   which are proper to its jurisdiction." This in plain English is, that
   if Christ had had power, he would have ordered the gospel to have been
   propagated as Mohammed hath done his Alcoran; an assertion untrue and
   impious, contrary to the whole spirit and genius of the gospel and of
   the author of it, and the commands and precepts of it. And it is fondly
   supposed that the Lord Christ suited all the management of the affairs
   of the gospel unto that state and condition in this world wherein he
   emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, making
   himself of no reputation, that he might be obedient unto death, the
   death of the cross. He lays the foundation of the promulgation and
   propagation of it in the world in the grant of all power unto him in
   heaven and earth. "All power," saith he to his apostles, "is given unto
   me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
   baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
   Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
   commanded you," Matt. xxviii. 18-20. He is considered, in the
   dispensation of the gospel, as he who is "head over all things to the
   church," the "Lord of lords, and King of kings," whom our author
   acknowledgeth to be his vicegerents. On this account the gospel, with
   all the worship instituted therein and required thereby, is accompanied
   with a right to enter into any of the kingdoms of the earth, and
   spiritually to make the inhabitants of them subject to Jesus Christ,
   and so to translate them out of the power of darkness into the kingdom
   of the Son of God; and this right is antecedent and paramount to the
   right of all earthly kings and princes whatever, who have no power or
   authority to exclude the gospel out of their dominions, and what they
   exercise of that kind is done at their peril.

   The "penalties that he hath annexed to the final rejection of the
   gospel and disobedience thereunto" are pleaded by our author to justify
   the magistrate's power of binding men to "the observation of his
   commands in religion on temporal penalties, to be by him inflicted on
   them." Unto that is the discourse of this chapter arrived, which was
   designed unto another end. I see neither the order, method, nor
   projection of this procedure, nor know


   "Amphora cum coepit institui, cur urceus exit."

   [Altered from Hor. ad Pison. 21.]

   However, the pretence itself is weak and impertinent. Man was
   originally made under a law and constitution of eternal bliss or woe.
   This state, with regard to his necessary dependence on God and respect
   to his utmost end, was absolutely unavoidable unto him. All possibility
   of attaining eternal happiness by himself he lost by sin, and became
   inevitably obnoxious to eternal misery and the wrath to come. In this
   condition the Lord Jesus Christ, the supreme Lord of the souls and
   consciences of men, interposeth his law of relief, redemption and
   salvation, the great means of man's recovery, together with the
   profession of the way and law hereof. He lets them know that those by
   whom it is refused shall perish under that wrath of God which before
   they were obnoxious unto, with a new aggravation of their sin and
   condemnation, from the contempt of the relief provided for them and
   tendered to them. This he applies to the souls and consciences of men,
   and to all the inward secret actings of them in the first place, --
   such as are exempted not only from the judicature of men, but from the
   cognizance of angels. This he doth by spiritual means, in a spiritual
   manner, -- with regard to the subjection of the souls of men unto God,
   and with reference unto their bringing to him and enjoyment of him, or
   their being eternally rejected by him. Hence to collect and conclude
   that earthly princes, -- who (whatever is pretended) are not the
   sovereign lords of the souls and consciences of men, nor do any of
   them, that I know of, plead themselves so to be; who cannot interpose
   any thing by their absolute authority that should have a necessary
   respect unto men's eternal condition; who have no knowledge of, no
   acquaintance with, nor can judge of, the principal things whereon it
   doth depend; from whose temporal jurisdiction and punishment the things
   of the gospel and the worship of God, as purely such, are by the nature
   of them (being spiritual and not of this world, though exercised in it,
   having their respect only unto eternity), and by their being taken into
   the sole disposal of the sovereign Lord of consciences, who hath
   accompanied his commands concerning them with his own promises and
   threatenings, plainly exempted, -- should have power over the
   consciences of men, so to lay their commands upon them in these
   spiritual things as to back them with temporal, corporeal restraints
   and punishments, is a way of arguing that will not be confined unto any
   of those rules of reasoning which hitherto we have been instructed in.
   When the magistrate hath "an arm like God," and can "thunder with a
   voice like him;" when he "judgeth not after the sight of his eyes, nor
   reproveth after the hearing of his ears;" when he can "smite the earth
   with the rod of his mouth," and "slay the wicked with the breath of his
   lips;" when he is constituted a judge of the faith, repentance, and
   obedience of men, and of their efficacy in their tendency unto the
   pleasing of God here and the enjoyment of him hereafter; when spiritual
   things, in order to their eternal issues and effects, are made subject
   unto him; -- in brief, when he is Christ let him act as Christ, or
   rather most unlike him, and guide the consciences of men by rods, axes,
   and halters (whereunto alone his power can reach), who in the meantime
   have an express command from the Lord Christ himself not to have their
   consciences influenced in the least by the consideration of these
   things.

   Of the like complexion is the ensuing discourse, wherein our author, p.
   43, having spoken contemptuously of the spiritual institutions of the
   gospel, as altogether "insufficient for the accomplishment of the ends
   whereunto they are designed," -- forgetting that they respect only the
   consciences of men, and are His institutions who is the Lord of their
   consciences, and who will give them power and efficacy to attain their
   ends, when administered in his name and according to his mind, and that
   because they are his, -- would prove the necessity of temporal
   coercions and penalties in things spiritual, from the extraordinary
   effects of excommunication in the primitive times, in the "vexation and
   punishment of persons excommunicate, by the devil." This work the devil
   now ceasing to attend unto, he would have the magistrate to take upon
   him to supply his place and office, by punishments of his own
   appointment and infliction, and so at last, to be sure of giving him
   full measure, he hath ascribed two extremes unto him about religion, --
   namely, to act the part of God and the devil! But as this inference is
   built upon a very uncertain conjecture, -- namely, that upon the giving
   up of persons to Satan in excommunication, there did any visible or
   corporeal vexation of them by his power ensue, or any other effects but
   what may yet be justly expected from an influence of his terror on the
   minds of men who are duly and regularly cast out of the visible kingdom
   of Christ by that censure, -- and whereas, if there be any truth in it,
   it was confined unto the days of the apostles, and is to be reckoned
   amongst the miraculous operations granted to them for the first
   confirmation of the gospel, and the continuance of it all the time the
   church wanted the assistance of the civil magistrate is most unduly
   pretended, without any colour of proof or instance beyond such as may
   be evidenced to continue at this day; -- supposing it to be true, the
   inference made from it, as to its consequence, on this concession, is
   exceeding weak and feeble; for the argument here amounteth to no more
   but this: God was pleased, in the days of the apostles, to confirm
   their spiritual censures against stubborn sinners, apostates,
   blasphemers, and such like heinous offenders, with extraordinary
   spiritual punishments (so in their own nature, or in the manner or way
   of their infliction); therefore, the civil magistrate hath power to
   appoint things to be observed in the worship of God, and forbid other
   things which the light and consciences of men, directed by the word of
   God, require the observation of, upon ordinary, standing, corporeal
   penalties, to be inflicted on the outward man, "quod erat
   demonstrandum."

   To wind up this debate, I shall commit the umpirage of it to the
   church, of England, and receive her determination in the words of one
   who may be supposed to know her sense and judgment as well as any one
   who lived in his days or since; and this is Dr Bilson, bishop of
   Winchester, a learned man, skilled in the laws of the land, and a great
   adversary unto all that dissented from church constitutions. This man,
   therefore, treating by way of dialogue, in answer to the Jesuits'
   Apology and Defence, in the third part, p. 293, thus introduceth
   Theophilus, a protestant divine, arguing with Philander, a Jesuit,
   about these matters:-- "Theoph. As for the supreme head of the church,'
   it is certain that title was first transferred from the pope to King
   Henry the Eighth by the bishops of your side, not of ours. And though
   the pastors in King Edward's time might not well dislike, much less
   dissuade, the style of the crown, by reason the king was under years,
   and so remained until he died; yet as soon as it pleased God to place
   her majesty in her father's throne, the nobles and preachers,
   perceiving the words head of the church' (which is Christ's proper and
   peculiar honour) to be offensive unto many that had vehemently repelled
   the same in the pope, besought her highness the meaning of that word
   which her father had used might be expressed in some plainer, apter
   terms, and so was the prince called supreme governor of the realm, --
   that is, ruler and bearer of the sword, with lawful authority to
   command and punish, answerable to the word of God, in all spiritual or
   ecclesiastical things or causes, as well as in temporal, and no foreign
   prince or prelate to have any jurisdiction, superiority, pre-eminence,
   or authority to establish, prohibit, correct and chastise, with public
   laws or temporal pains, any crimes or causes ecclesiastical or
   spiritual within her realm. Philand. Calvin saith this is sacrilege and
   blasphemy. Look you, therefore, with what consciences you take that
   oath which your own master so mightily detesteth. Theoph. Nay, look you
   with what faces you allege Calvin, who maketh that style to be
   sacrilegious and blasphemous as well in the pope as in the prince;
   reason, therefore, you receive or refuse his judgment in both. If it
   derogate from Christ in the prince, so it doth in the pope. Yet we
   grant the sense of the word supreme,' as Calvin perceived it by Stephen
   Gardiner's answer and behaviour, is very blasphemous and injurious to
   Christ and his word, whether it be prince or pope that so shall use
   it." What this sense is he declares in the words of Calvin, which are
   as followeth, in his translation of them: "That juggler, which after
   was chancellor, I mean the bishop of Winchester, when he was at
   Rentzburge, neither would stand to reason the matter nor greatly cared
   for any testimonies of the Scripture, but said it was at the king's
   discretion to abrogate that which was in use and appoint new. He said
   the king might forbid priests' marriage; the king might bar the people
   from the cup in the Lord's supper; the king might determine this or
   that in his kingdom: and why? forsooth, the king had supreme power.
   This sacrilege hath taken hold on us, whilst princes think they cannot
   reign except they abolish all the authority of the church, and be
   themselves supreme judges, as well in doctrine as in all spiritual
   regimen." To which he subjoins: "This was the sense which Calvin
   affirmed to be sacrilegious and blasphemous, for princes to profess
   themselves to be supreme judges of doctrine and discipline; and,
   indeed, it is the blasphemy which all godly hearts reject and abomine
   in the bishop of Rome. Neither did King Henry take any such thing on
   him, for aught that we can learn. But this was Gardiner's stratagem to
   convey the reproach and shame of the Six Articles [6] from himself and
   his fellows, that were the authors of them, and to cast it on the
   king's supreme power. Had Calvin been told that supreme' was first
   received to declare the prince to be superior to the prelates (which
   exempted themselves from the king's authority by their church liberties
   and immunities) as well as to the laymen of this realm, and not to be
   subject to the pope the word would never have offended him." Thus far
   he; and if these controversies be any farther disputed, it is probable
   the next defence of what is here pleaded will be in the express words
   of the principal prelates of this realm since the Reformation, until
   their authority be peremptorily rejected.

   Upon my first design to take a brief survey of this discourse, I had
   not the least intention to undertake the examination of any particular
   assertions or reasonings that might fall under controversy, but merely
   to examine the general principles whereon it doth proceed. But passing
   through these things "currente calamo," I find myself engaged beyond my
   thoughts and resolutions; I shall therefore here put an end to the
   consideration of this chapter, although I see sundry things as yet
   remaining in it that might immediately be discussed with ease and
   advantage, as shall be manifest if we are called again to a review of
   them. I have neither desire nor design "serram reciprocare," or to
   engage in any controversial discourses with this author; and I presume
   himself will not take it amiss that I do at present examine those
   principles whose novelty justifies a disquisition into them, and whose
   tendency, as applied by him, is pernicious and destructive to so many
   quiet and peaceable persons who dissent from him. And yet I will not
   deny but that I have that valuation and esteem for that sparkling of
   wit, eloquence, and sundry other abilities of mind which appear in his
   writing, that if he would lay aside the manner of his treating those
   from whom he dissents, with revilings, contemptuous reproaches,
   personal reflections, sarcasms, and satirical expressions, and would
   candidly and perspicuously state any matter in difference, I should
   think that what he hath to offer may deserve the consideration of them
   who have leisure for such a purpose. If he be otherwise minded, and
   resolved to proceed in the way and after the manner here engaged in, as
   I shall in the close of this discourse absolutely give him my "salve
   æternumque vale," so I hope he will never meet with any one who shall
   be willing to deal with him at his own weapons.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4] No contents to the different sections of this treatise appear in
   the previous editions. We have prefixed a brief table of them to each
   section, as far as possible in the words of our author. -- Ed.

   [5] In allusion, doubtless, to Cecil, Lord Burleigh, the celebrated
   prime minister of Elizabeth. -- Ed.

   [6] These Articles are well known by the name of the "Bloody Statute,"
   31 Henry VIII., cap. 14, entitled, "An Act for the Abolishing Diversity
   of Opinions in certain Articles concerning Christian Religion." They
   affirmed transubstantiation, communion in one kind, clerical celibacy,
   vows of chastity, private masses, and auricular confession -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         A Survey of the Second Chapter

   [Alleged power of the magistrate over the conscience in matters of
   morality refuted -- Distinction between moral virtue and grace --
   Meaning of the terms -- Four propositions of Parker on grace and virtue
   considered -- Agreement between the views of Parker and those of the
   Socinian Seidelius -- Exceptions taken to these views -- Power of the
   magistrate in reference to moral duties -- The true ground of
   obligation to these duties.]

   The "summary" of this chapter must needs give the reader a great
   expectation, and the chapter itself no less of satisfaction, if what is
   in the one briefly proposed be in the other as firmly established: for,
   amongst other things, a scheme of religion is promised, reducing all
   its branches either to "moral virtues" or "instruments of morality;" --
   which being spoken of Christian religion, is, as far as I know, an
   undertaking new and peculiar unto this author, in whose management all
   that read him must needs weigh and consider how dexterously he hath
   acquitted himself; for as all men grant that morality hath a great
   place in religion, so, that all religion is nothing but morality many
   are now to learn. "The villany of those men's religion that are wont to
   distinguish between grace and virtue" (that is, moral virtue) is nextly
   traduced and inveighed against. I had rather, I confess, that he had
   affixed the term of "villany" to the men themselves whom he intended to
   reflect on than to their religion, because, as yet, it seems to me that
   it will fall on Christianity, and no other real or pretended religion
   that is or ever was in the world; for if the professors of it have, in
   all ages, according to its avowed principles, never before
   contradicted, made a distinction between moral virtues (since these
   terms were known in the church) and evangelical graces, if they do so
   at this day, what religion else can be here branded with this infamous
   and horrible reproach I know not. A farther inquiry into the chapter
   itself may possibly give us farther satisfaction; wherein, we shall
   deal as impartially as we are able, with a diligent watchfulness
   against all prejudicate affections, that we may discover what there is
   of sense and truth in the discourse, being ready to receive whatever
   shall be manifested to have an interest in them. The civil magistrate,
   we are also here informed, amongst many other things that he may do,
   "may command any thing in the worship of God that doth not tend to
   debauch men's practices or to disgrace the Deity;" and that "all
   subordinate duties, both of morality and religious worship" (such as
   elsewhere we are told the sacraments are), "are equally subject to the
   determination of human authority." These things, and sundry others
   represented in this summary, being new, yea some of them, as far as I
   know, unheard of amongst Christians until within a few years last past,
   any reader may justify himself in the expectation of full and
   demonstrative arguments to be produced in their proof and confirmation.
   What the issue will be, some discovery may be made by the ensuing
   inquiry, as was said, into the body of the chapter itself.

   The design of this chapter, in general, is to confirm the power of the
   magistrate over religion and the consciences of men, ascribed unto him
   in the former, and to add unto it some enlargements not therein
   insisted on. The argument used to this purpose is taken from "the power
   of the magistrate over the consciences of men in matters of morality,"
   or with respect unto moral virtue; whence it is supposed the conclusion
   is so evident unto his "power over their consciences in matters of
   religious worship," that it strikes our author with wonder and
   amazement that it should not be received and acknowledged. Wherefore,
   to further the conviction of all men in this matter, he proceeds to
   discourse of moral virtue, of grace, and of religious worship, with his
   wonted reflections upon and reproaches of the Nonconformists for their
   ignorance about and villanous misrepresentation of these things; which
   seem more to be aimed at than the argument itself.

   I must here wish again that our author had more perspicuously stated
   the things which he proposeth to debate for the subject of his
   disputation; but I find an excess of art is as troublesome sometimes as
   the greatest defect therein. From thence I presume it is that things
   are so handled in this discourse that an ordinary man can seldom
   discern satisfactorily what it is that directly and determinately he
   doth intend beyond reviling of Nonconformists; for in this proposition,
   -- which is the best and most intelligible that I can reduce the
   present discourse unto, -- "The supreme civil magistrate hath power
   over the consciences of men in morality, or with respect unto moral
   virtue," excepting only the subject of it, there is not one term in it
   that may not have various significations, and those such as have
   countenance given unto them in the ensuing disputation itself. But
   "contenti sumus hoc Catone," and make the best we can of what lies
   before us.

   I do suppose that in the medium made use of in this argument, there is,
   or I am sure there may be, a controversy of much more importance than
   that principally under consideration. It, therefore, shall be stated
   and cleared in the first place; and then the concernment of the
   argument itself, in what is discoursed thereupon, shall be manifested.
   It is about moral virtue and grace, their coincidence or distinction,
   that we are in the first place to inquire; for without a due stating of
   the conception of these things, nothing of this argument nor what
   belongs unto it can be rightly understood. We shall, therefore, be
   necessitated to premise a brief explanation of these terms themselves,
   to remove as far as may be all ambiguity from our discourse.

   First, then, the very name of virtue, in the sense wherein it is
   commonly used and received, comes from the schools of philosophy, and
   not from the Scripture. In the Old Testament we have "uprightness,
   integrity, righteousness, doing good and eschewing evil, fearing,
   trusting, obeying, believing in God, holiness," and the like; but the
   name of "virtue" doth not occur therein. It is true, we have translated
   'st chyl?, "a virtuous woman," and once or twice the same word
   "virtuously," Ruth iii. 11, Prov. xii. 4, xxxi. 10, 29; but that word
   signifies, as so used, "strenuous, industrious, diligent," and hath no
   such signification as that we now express by "virtue." Nor is it
   anywhere rendered arete by the LXX., although it may have some respect
   unto it, as arete may be derived from ares, and peculiarly denote the
   exercise of industrious strength, such as men use in battle; for chyl?
   is "vis, robur, potentia," or "exercitus" also. But in the common
   acceptation of it, and as it is used by philosophers, there is no word
   in the Hebrew or Syriac properly to express it. The rabbins do it by
   mdh?, which signifies properly "a measure;" for, studying the
   philosophy of Aristotle, and translating his Ethics into Hebrew, which
   was done by Rabbi Meir, and finding his "virtue'' placed in mediocrity,
   they applied mdh? to express it: so they call Aristotle's Ethics sphr
   hmdvt?, "The Book of Measures," -- that is, of virtues; and mdvt tvvvt?
   are "boni mores." Such a stranger is this very word unto the Old
   Testament. In the New Testament arete occurs four times; but it should
   not seem anywhere to be taken in the sense now generally admitted. In
   some of the places it rather denotes the excellency and praises that do
   attend virtue, than virtue itself. So we render aretas "praises," 1
   Pet. ii. 9, as the Syriac doth also tsvvchth?, "praises;" and the same
   translation, Phil. iv. 8, renders ei tis arete, "if there be any
   virtue," by vd' dsvvch'?, "works glorious" or "praiseworthy," 1 Pet.
   ii. 19. It is a peculiar gracious disposition and operation of mind,
   distinguished from "faith, temperance, patience, brotherly-kindness,
   godliness, charity," etc., and so cannot have the common sense of the
   word there put upon it.

   The word "moral" is yet far more exotic to the church and Scripture. We
   are beholden for it, if there be any advantage in its use, merely to
   the schools of the philosophers, especially of Aristotle. His doctrine
   peri ethon, commonly called his Ethika or "Moralia," his Morals, hath
   begotten this name for our use. The whole is expressed, in Isocrates to
   Demonicus, by he ton tropon arete, "the virtue of manners." If, then,
   the signification of the words be respected as usually taken, it is
   virtue in men's manners that is intended. The schoolmen brought this
   expression with all its concerns, as they did the rest of Aristotle's
   philosophy, into the church and divinity; and I cannot but think it had
   been well if they had never done it, as all will grant they might have
   omitted some other things without the least disadvantage to learning or
   religion. However, this expression of "moral virtue" having absolutely
   possessed itself of the fancies and discourses of all, and, it may be,
   of the understanding of some, though with very little satisfaction when
   all things are considered, I shall not endeavour to dispossess it or
   eliminate it from the confines of Christian theology. Only, I am sure
   had we been left unto the Scripture expressions of "repentance toward
   God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, of the fear of God, of
   holiness, righteousness, living unto God, walking with God, and before
   him," we might have been free from many vain, wordy perplexities, and
   the whole wrangle of this chapter in particular had been utterly
   prevented; for let but the Scripture express what it is to be
   religious, and there will be no contesting about the difference or no
   difference between grace and moral virtue. It is said that "some judge
   those who have moral virtue to want grace, not to be gracious;" but say
   that men are "born of God, and do not commit sin," that they "walk
   before God and are upright," that they " cleave unto God with full
   purpose of heart," that they are "sanctified in Christ Jesus," and the
   like, and no man will say that they have not grace, or are not
   gracious, if they receive your testimony. But having, as was said, made
   its entrance amongst us, we must deal with it as well as we can, and
   satisfy ourselves about its common acceptation and use.

   Generally, moral virtues are esteemed to be the duties of the second
   table: for although those who handle these matters more accurately do
   not so straiten or confine them, yet it is certain that in vulgar and
   common acceptation (which strikes no small stroke in the regulating of
   the conceptions of the wisest men about the signification of words)
   nothing else is intended by "moral virtues," or "duties of morality,"
   but the observation of the precepts of the second table; nor is any
   thing else designed by those divines who, in their writings, so
   frequently declare that it is not morality alone that will render men
   acceptable to God. Others do extend these things farther, and fix the
   denomination of moral firstly upon the law or rule of all those habits
   of the mind and its operations which afterward thence they call moral.
   Now, this moral law is nothing but the law of nature, or the law of our
   creation, which the apostle affirms to lie equally obligatory on all
   men, even all the Gentiles themselves, Rom. ii. 14, 15, and whereof the
   decalogue is summarily expressive. This moral law is, therefore, the
   law written in the hearts of all men by nature; which is resolved
   partly into the nature of God himself, which cannot but require most of
   the things of it from rational creatures, partly into that state and
   condition of the nature of thing and their mutual relations wherein God
   was pleased to create and set them. These things might be easily
   instanced and exemplified, but that we must not too much divert from
   our present occasion. And herein lies the largest sense and acceptation
   of the law moral, and consequently of moral virtues, which have their
   form and being from their relation and conformity thereunto. Let it be,
   then, that moral virtues consist in the universal observance of the
   requisites and precepts of the law of our creation, and dependence on
   God thereby. And this description, as we shall see, for the substance
   of it, is allowed by our author.

   Now, these virtues, or this conformity of our minds and actions unto
   the law of our creation, may be, in the light and reason of Christian
   religion, considered two ways:-- First, as with respect unto the
   substance or essence of the duties themselves, they may be performed by
   men in their own strength, under the conduct of their own reason,
   without any special assistance from the Spirit or sanctifying grace of
   Christ. In this sense they still bear the name of "virtues," and, for
   the substance of them, deserve so to do. Good they are in themselves,
   useful to mankind, and seldom, in the providence of God, go without
   their reward in this world. I grant, I say, that they may be obtained
   and acted without special assistance of grace evangelical, though the
   wiser heathens acknowledged something divine in the communication of
   them to men. Papinius speaks to that purpose:--


   "Diva Jovis solio juxta comes; unde per orbem

   Rara dari, terrisque solet contingere virtus.

   Seu Pater Omnipotens tribuit, sive ipsa capaces

   Elegit penetrare viros." ?

   But old Homer put it absolutely in the will of his god:--


   Zeus d' areten andressin ophellei te minuthei te

   Hoppos ken ethelesi ?

   [Il. U., 242.]

   Thus we grant moral virtue to have been in the heathen of old, for this
   is that alone whereby they were distinguished amongst themselves: and
   he that would exclude them all from any interest in moral virtue takes
   away all difference between Cato and Nero, Aristides and Tiberius,
   Titus and Domitian, and overthrows all natural difference between good
   and evil; which, besides other abominations that it would plentifully
   spawn in the world, would inevitably destroy all human society. But
   now, these moral virtues, thus performed, whatever our author thinks,
   are distinct from grace, may be without it, and in their present
   description, which is not imaginary, but real, are supposed so to be;
   and, if he please, he may exercise himself in the longsome disputes of
   Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, and others to this purpose
   innumerable, -- not to mention reformed divines, lest they should be
   scornfully rejected as systematical. And this is enough, I am sure, to
   free their religion from villany who make a distinction between moral
   virtue and grace; and if our author is otherwise minded, and doth
   believe that there is grace evangelical wherever there is moral virtue,
   or that moral virtues may be so obtained and exercised without the
   special assistance of grace as to become a part of our religion and
   accepted with God, and will maintain his opinion in writing, I will
   promise him, if I live, to return him an answer, on one only condition,
   which is, that he will first answer what Augustine hath written against
   the Pelagians on this subject.

   Again; these moral virtues, this observance of the precepts of the law
   of our creation, in a consonancy whereunto originally the image of God
   in us did consist, may now under the gospel be considered, as men are
   principled, assisted, and enabled to and in their performance by the
   grace of God, and as they are directed unto the especial end of living
   unto him in and by Jesus Christ. What is particularly required hereunto
   shall be afterward declared. Now, in this sense no man living ever
   distinguished between grace and virtue any otherwise than the cause and
   the effect are to be, or may be, distinguished; much less was any
   person ever so brutish as to fancy an inconsistency between them: for,
   take grace in one sense, and it is the efficient cause of this virtue,
   or of these virtues, which are the effects of it; and in another, they
   are all graces themselves, for that which is wrought in us by grace is
   grace, as that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. To this purpose
   something may be spoken concerning grace also, the other term, whose
   ambiguity renders the discourse under consideration somewhat intricate
   and perplexed. Now, as the former term of "moral virtue" owes its
   original to the schools of philosophy, and its use was borrowed from
   them, so this of "grace" is purely scriptural and evangelical. The
   world knows nothing of it but what is declared in the word of God,
   especially in the gospel; for "the law was given by Moses, but grace
   and truth came by Jesus Christ." All the books of the ancient
   philosophers will not give us the least light into that notion of grace
   which the Scripture declares unto us. As, then, we allowed the sense of
   the former term, given unto it by its first coiners and users, so we
   cannot but think it equal that men be precisely tied up in their
   conceptions about grace unto what is delivered in the Scripture
   concerning it, as having no other rule either to frame them or judge of
   them; and this we shall attend unto. Not that I here design to treat of
   the nature of gospel grace in general; but whereas all the divines that
   ever I have read on these things, whether ancient or modern (and I have
   not troubled myself to consider whether they were systematical ones
   only, or otherwise qualified), allow some distinctions of this term to
   be necessary for the right understanding of those passages of Scripture
   wherein it is made use of, I shall mention that or those only which are
   so unto the right apprehension of what at present under debate.

   First, therefore, Grace in the Scripture is taken for the free grace or
   favour of God towards sinners by Jesus Christ. By this he freely
   pardoneth them their sins, justifieth and accepteth them, or makes them
   "accepted in the Beloved." This, certainly, is distinct from moral
   virtue. Secondly, It is taken for the effectual working of the Spirit
   of God in and upon the minds and souls of believers, thereby quickening
   them when they were "dead in trespasses and sins," regenerating of
   them, creating a new heart in them, implanting his image upon them.
   Neither, I presume, will this be called moral virtue. Thirdly, For the
   actual supplies of assistance and ability given to believers, so to
   enable them unto every duty in particular which in the gospel is
   required of them; for he "worketh in them both to will and to do of his
   own good pleasure." As yet the former distinction will appear
   necessary. Fourthly, For the effects wrought and produced by this
   operation of God and his grace in the hearts and minds of them that
   believe; which are either habitual, in the spiritual disposition of
   their minds, or actual, in their operation: all which are called
   "grace." It may be our author will be apt to think that I "cant," "use
   phrases," or "fulsome metaphors." But besides that I can confirm these
   distinctions, and the necessity of them, and the words wherein they are
   expressed, from the Scriptures and ancient fathers, I can give them
   him, for the substance of them, out of very learned divines, -- whether
   systematical or no I know not; but this I know, they were not long
   since bishops of the church of England.

   We are now, in the next place, to inquire into the mind of our author
   in these things; for, from his apprehensions about them, he frames a
   mighty difference between himself, and those whom he opposeth, and from
   thence takes occasion and advantage afresh to revile and reproach them.

   First, therefore, He declares his judgment, that the moral virtues
   which he treats of do "consist of men's observance of the law of
   nature, of the dictates of reason, and precepts thereof." Secondly,
   That "the substance, yea, the whole of religion, consists in these
   virtues or duties, so that by the observation of them men may attain
   everlasting happiness" Thirdly, That "there is no actual concurrence of
   present grace enabling men to perform these duties, or to exercise
   these virtues, but they are called grace on another account." Fourthly,
   That "his adversaries are so far from making virtue and grace to be the
   same, that they make them inconsistent."

   And these things shall we take into a brief examination, according as
   indeed they do deserve.

   The first of them he plainly and more than once affirms, nor shall I
   contend with him about it. So he speaks, p. 68: "The practice of virtue
   consists in living suitably to the dictates of reason and nature; and
   this is the substance and main design of all the laws of religion, to
   oblige mankind to behave themselves in all their actions as becomes
   creatures endowed with reason and understanding, and, in ways suitable
   to rational beings, to prepare and qualify themselves for the state of
   glory and immortality." This is a plain description both of the rule of
   moral virtues and of the nature of them. The law of reason and nature
   is the rule; and their own nature, as acting or acted, consists in a
   suitableness unto rational beings acting to prepare themselves for the
   state of immortality and glory, -- the first end of all virtue, no
   doubt. We need not, therefore, make any farther inquiry into this
   matter, wherein we are agreed.

   Secondly, That the substance, yea, the whole of religion, consists in
   these moral virtues he fully also declares, p. 69: "Moral virtue having
   the strongest and most necessary influence upon the end of all
   religion, namely, man's happiness, it is not only its most material and
   useful part, but the ultimate end of all its other duties" (though I
   know not how the practice of virtue in this life can be the ultimate
   end of other duties); "and all true religion can consist in nothing
   else but either the practice of virtue itself or the use of those means
   and instruments that contribute unto it." So also, p. 70: "All duties
   of devotion, excepting only our returns of gratitude, are not essential
   parts of religion, but are only in order to it, as they tend to the
   practice of virtue and moral goodness, and their goodness is derived
   upon them from the moral virtues to which they contribute; and in the
   same proportion they are conducive to the ends of virtue, they are to
   be valued among the ministers of religion." So, then, the whole duty of
   man consists in being virtuous, and all that is enjoined beside is in
   order thereunto. Hence we are told elsewhere that "outward worship is
   no part of religion." Again, p. 76: "All religion must of necessity be
   resolved into enthusiasm or morality; the former is mere imposture, and
   therefore all that is true must be reduced to the latter." But we need
   not insist on particulars, seeing he promoteth this to confirmation by
   the best of demonstrations, -- that is, an induction of all
   particulars, which he calls "a scheme of religion;" wherein, yet, if
   any thing necessary be left out or omitted, this best of demonstrations
   is quickly turned into one of the worst of sophisms. Therefore we have
   here, no doubt, a just and full representation of all that belongs to
   Christian religion; and it is as follows, p. 69: "The whole duty of man
   refers either to his Creator, or his neighbour, or himself. All that
   concerns the two last is confessedly of a moral nature, and all that
   concerns the first consists either in praising of God or praying to
   him. The former is a branch of the virtue of gratitude, and is nothing
   but a thankful and humble temper of mind, arising from a sense of God's
   greatness in himself and his goodness to us: so that this part of
   devotion issues from the same virtuous quality, -- that is, the
   principle of all other resentments and expressions of gratitude; only,
   those acts of it that are terminated on God as their object are styled
   "religious;" -- and therefore gratitude and devotion are not diverse
   things, but only differing names of the same thing, devotion being
   nothing else but the virtue of gratitude towards God. The latter,
   namely, prayer, is either put up in our own or other men's behalf. If
   for others, it is an act of that virtue we call kindness or charity; if
   for ourselves, the things we pray for, unless they be the comforts and
   enjoyments of this life, are some or other virtuous qualities; -- and
   therefore the proper and direct use of prayer is, to be instrumental to
   the virtues of morality." It is of Christian religion that this author
   treats, as is manifest from his ensuing discourse, and the reason he
   gives why moral virtues are styled "graces." Now, I must needs say,
   that I look on this of our author as the rudest, most imperfect, and
   weakest scheme of Christian religion that ever yet I saw; so far from
   comprising an induction of all particulars belonging to it, that there
   is nothing in it that is constitutive of Christian religion, as such,
   at all. I wish he had given us a summary of the "credenda" of it, as he
   hath done of its "agenda," that we might have had a prospect of the
   body of his divinity. The ten commandments would, in my mind, have done
   twice as well on this present occasion, with the addition of the
   explication of them given us in the church catechism; but I am afraid
   that very catechism may, ere long, be esteemed fanatical also. One, I
   confess, I have read of before who was of this opinion, that all
   religion consisted in morality alone; but withal he was so ingenuous as
   to follow the conduct of his judgment in this matter unto a full
   renunciation of the gospel, which is certainly inconsistent with it.
   This was one Martin Seidelius, a Silesian, who gave the ensuing account
   of his faith unto Faustus Socinus and his society at Cracovia:--

   "Cæterum ut sciatis cujus sim religionis, quamvis id scripto meo quod
   habetis, ostenderim, tamen hic breviter repetam. Et primum quidem
   doctrina de Messia, seu Rege illo promisso, ad meam religionem nihil
   pertinet; nam Rex ille tantum Judæis promissus erat, sicut et bona illa
   Canaan. Sic etiam circumcisio, sacrificia, et reliquæ ceremoniæ Mosis
   ad me non pertinent, sed tantum populo Judaico promissa, data, et
   mandata sunt. Neque ista fuerunt cultus Dei apud Judæos, sed
   inserviebant cultui divino, et ad cultum deducebant Judæos. Verus autem
   cultus Dei quem meam religionem appello est decalogus, qui est æterna
   Dei voluntas; qui decalogus ideo ad me pertinet, quia etiam mihi a Deo
   datus est, non quidem per vocem sonantem de coelo sicut populo Judaico,
   at per creationem insita est menti meæ. Quia autem insitus decalogus,
   per corruptionem naturæ humanæ et pravis consuetudinibus, aliquâ ex
   parte obscuratus est, ideo ad illustrandum eum adhibeo vocalem
   decalogum, qui vocalis decalogus ideo etiam ad me, ad omnes populos
   pertinet, quia cum insito nobis decalogo consentit, imo idem ille
   decalogus est. Hæc est mea sententia de Messiâ seu Rege illo promisso,
   et hæc est mea religio, quam coram vobis ingenuè profiteor. Martin
   Seidelius Olavensis Silesius."

   That is, "But that you may know of what religion I am, although it is
   expressed in that writing which you have already, yet I will here
   briefly repeat it. And, first of all, the doctrine of the Messiah or
   King that was promised doth not belong to my religion; for that King
   was promised to the Jews only, as was the good land of Canaan. So in
   like manner circumcision, sacrifices, and the rest of the ceremonies of
   Moses, belong not to me, but were promised, given, and granted unto the
   people of the Jews alone. Neither were they the worship of God among
   the Jews, but were only subservient unto divine worship, and led the
   Jews unto it" (the same opinion is maintained by our author concerning
   all exterior worship). "But the true worship, which I call my religion,
   is the decalogue; which is the eternal and immutable will of God" (and
   here also he hath the consent and concurrence of our author): "which
   decalogue doth therefore belong unto me, because it is given by God to
   me also; not, indeed, by a voice sounding from heaven, as he gave it to
   the people of the Jews, but it is implanted in my mind by nature. But
   because this implanted decalogue, by reason of the corruption of human
   nature and through depraved customs, is in some measure obscured, for
   the illustration of it I make use of the vocal decalogue; which
   therefore also belongs unto me and all people, because it consenteth
   with the decalogue written in our hearts, yea, is the same law with it.
   This is my opinion concerning the Messiah or the promised King, and
   this is my religion, which I freely acknowledge before you." So he.
   This is plain dealing. He saw clearly that if all religion and the
   worship of God consisted in morality only, there was neither need nor
   use of Christ nor the gospel; and accordingly, having no outward
   advantage by them, he discarded them. But setting aside his bold
   renunciation of Christ as promised, I see not any material difference
   between the religion of this man and that now contended for. The poor
   deluded souls among ourselves, who, leaving the Scripture, pretend that
   they are guided by the light within them, are, upon the matter, of the
   same religion: for that light being nothing but the dictates of reason
   and a natural conscience, it extends not itself beyond morality; which
   some of them understanding, we know what thoughts and apprehensions
   they have had of Christ and his gospel, and the worship of God
   instituted therein; for hence it is (and not as our author pretends,
   with a strange incogitancy concerning them and the Gnostics, that they
   assert the Scripture to be the only rule of religious worship) that
   they are fallen into these fond imaginations. And these are the effects
   which this principle doth naturally lead unto. I confess, then, that I
   do not agree with our author in and about this scheme of Christian
   religion; which I shall, therefore, first briefly put in my exceptions
   unto, and then offer him another in lieu of it.

   First, then, This scheme seems to represent religion unto us as suited
   to the state of innocency, and that very imperfectly also; for it is
   composed to answer the former assertion of confining religion to moral
   virtues, which are granted to consist in our conformity unto and
   expression of the dictates of reason and the law of nature. Again, the
   "whole duty of man" is said to refer "either to his Creator, or his
   neighbour, or himself." Had it been said to God absolutely, another
   interpretation might have been put upon the words; but being restrained
   unto him as our Creator, all duties referring to our Redeemer are
   excluded, or not included, which certainly have some place in Christian
   religion. Our obedience therein is the "obedience of faith," and must
   answer the special objects of it, And we are taught in the church
   catechism to believe in God the Father, who made us and all the world;
   and in God the Son, who redeemed us and all mankind; and in God the
   Holy Ghost, who sanctifies us and all the elect people of God. Now,
   these distinct acts of faith have distinct acts of obedience attending
   them; whereas none here are admitted, or at least required, but those
   which fall under the first head. It is also very imperfect as a
   description of natural religion, or the duties of the law of nature:
   for the principal duties of it, such as fear, love, trust, affiance of
   and in God, are wholly omitted, nor will they be reduced unto either of
   the heads which all religion is here distributed into; for gratitude
   unto God hath respect formally and directly to the benefits we
   ourselves are made partakers of; but these duties are eternally
   necessary on the consideration of the nature of God himself, antecedent
   unto the consideration, of his communicating of himself unto us by his
   benefits. Prayer proceeds from them, and it is an odd method, to reduce
   the cause under the head of its effect; and prayer itself is made at
   length not to be so much a moral virtue as somewhat instrumental to the
   virtues of morality.

   Secondly, I cannot think we have here a complete representation of
   Christian religion, nor an induction of all its particulars, because we
   have neither supposition nor assertion of sin, or a Redeemer, or any
   duty with respect unto them. Gratitude and prayer, I confess, are two
   heads whereunto sundry duties of natural religion, without respect unto
   these things, may be reduced; but since the fall of Adam, there was
   never any religion in the world accepted with God that was not built
   and founded on the supposition of them, and whose principal duties
   towards God did not respect them. To prescribe now unto us a religion,
   as it respects God, without those duties which arise from the
   consideration of sin and a Redeemer, is to persuade us to throw away
   our Bibles. Sin, and the condition of all men on the account thereof;
   what God requires of them with reference thereunto; the way that God
   hath found out, proposed, and requires of us to make use of, that we
   may be delivered from that condition; with the duties necessary to that
   end, -- do even constitute and make up that religion which the
   Scripture teacheth us, and which, as it summarily expresseth itself,
   consists in "repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus
   Christ, neither of which, nor scarce any thing that belongs unto them,
   appears in this scheme: so that, --

   Thirdly, The most important duties of Christian religion are here not
   only omitted but excluded. Where shall we find any place here to
   introduce repentance, and, as belonging thereunto, conviction of sin,
   humiliation, godly sorrow, conversion itself to God? For my part, I
   will never be of that religion where these duties towards God have no
   place. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, with all that is necessary to
   it, preparatory for it, included in it, and consequential on it, are in
   like manner cast out of the verge of religious duties here schematized.
   An endeavour to flee from the wrath to come, to receive Jesus Christ,
   to accept of the atonement, to seek after the forgiveness of sins by
   him (that we may cant a little), and to give up our souls in universal
   obedience to all his commands, belong also to the duties of that
   religion towards God which the Scripture prescribeth unto us; but here
   they appear not in the least intimation of them. No more do the duties
   which, though generally included in the law of loving God above all,
   yet are prescribed and determined in the gospel alone; such are self-
   denial, readiness to take up the cross, and the like. Besides, all the
   duties wherein our Christian conflict against our spiritual adversaries
   doth consist, and, in especial, the whole of our duty towards God in
   the mortification of sin, can be of no consideration, there where no
   supposition of sin is made or allowed.

   But there would be no end, if all exceptions of this nature, that
   readily offer themselves, might here have admittance. If this be the
   religion of our adversaries in these things, if this be a perfect
   scheme of its duties towards God and induction of all its particulars,
   let our author insult over and reproach them whilst he pleaseth who
   blame it as insufficient without grace and godliness, I would not be in
   the condition of them who trust their eternal concernment to mere
   observance of it, as knowing that there is no name under heaven given
   unto men whereby they may be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ.
   It will be in vain pretended that it is not a description of Christian
   religion, but of religion as religion in general, that is here
   attempted; for besides that it is Christian religion, and that as used
   and practised by Christians, which is alone under consideration, and an
   introduction of religion here under any other notion would be
   grievously inconsistent and incoherent with the whole discourse, it is
   acknowledged by our author in the progress of his disputation, as was
   before observed, when he gives a reason why moral virtue is styled
   "grace," which is peculiar and appropriate to Christian religion alone.
   Besides, to talk now of a religion in the world, which either hath been
   or may be since the fall of Adam, without respect unto sin, is to build
   castles in the air. All the religion that God now requires, prescribes,
   accepts, that is or can be, is the religion of sinners, or of those who
   are such, and of them as such, though also under other qualifications.
   On, many accounts, therefore, this scheme of religion, or religious
   duties towards God, is exceedingly insufficient and imperfect. To lay
   it, therefore, as a foundation whereon to stand and revile them who
   plead for a super-addition unto it of grace and godliness, is an
   undertaking from whence no great success is to be expected.

   I can easily supply another scheme of religion in the room of this,
   which though it have not any such contexture of method, nor is set out
   with such gaudy words as those which our author hath at his disposal,
   yet I am confident, in the confession of all Christians, shall give a
   better account than what is here offered unto us both of the religion
   we profess and of the duties that God requires therein, -- and this
   taken out of one epistle of St Paul, namely, that to the Romans; and I
   shall do it as things come to mind in the haste wherein I am writing.
   He, then, gives us his scheme to this purpose: as, first, That all men
   sinned in Adam, came short of the glory of God, and rendered themselves
   liable to death and the whole curse of the law; then, that they do all,
   as left to themselves, accumulate their original sin and transgression
   with a world of actual sins and provocations of God; that against men
   in this condition God testifies his wrath and displeasure, both in his
   works and by his word. Hence it necessarily follows that the first duty
   of man towards God is to be sensible of this condition, of the guilt of
   sin, with a fear of the wrath and judgment due to them. Then he informs
   us that neither the Jews by the law, nor the Gentiles by the light of
   nature, could disentangle themselves from this state, or do that which
   is pleasing unto God, so as they might obtain forgiveness of sin and
   acceptation with him. This bespeaks unto all the great duty towards God
   of their acknowledgment unto him of their miserable and helpless
   condition, with all those affections and subordinate duties wherewith
   it is attended. In this state he declares that God himself, in his
   infinite wisdom, goodness, and grace, provided a remedy, a way of
   relief, on which he hath put such an impression of his glorious
   excellencies as may stir up the hearts of his creatures to endeavour a
   return unto him from their apostasy; and that this remedy consists in
   his setting forth Jesus Christ to be a propitiation through faith in
   his blood, to declare his righteousness for the forgiveness of sin;
   which he proposeth unto men for their receiving and acceptance. This
   renders it the greatest duty of mankind towards God to believe in the
   Son of God so set forth, to seek after an interest in him, or being
   made partakers of him; for this is the great work that God requires,
   namely, that we believe on him whom he hath sent. Again; he declares
   that God justifieth them who so believe, pardoning their sins, and
   imputing righteousness unto them; whereon innumerable duties do depend,
   even all the obedience that Christ requires of us, seeing in our
   believing in him we accept him to be our king, to rule, govern, and
   conduct our souls to God. And all these are religious duties towards
   God. He declares, moreover, that whereas men are by nature dead in
   trespasses and sins, and stand in need of a new spiritual life, to be
   born again, that they may live unto God, that God in Jesus Christ doth,
   by his Spirit, quicken them and regenerate them, and work in them a new
   principle of spiritual life; whence it is their great duty towards God
   (in this religion of St Paul) to comply with, and to yield obedience
   unto, all the ways and methods that God is pleased to use in the
   accomplishment of this, work upon them, the especial duties whereof are
   too many to be instanced in. But he farther manifests, that
   notwithstanding the regeneration of men by the Spirit and their
   conversion to God, there yet continues in them a remainder of the
   principle of corrupted nature, which he calls "the flesh," and
   "indwelling sin," that is of itself wholly "enmity against God," and,
   as far [as] it abides in any, inclines the heart and mind unto sin;
   which is to be watched against and opposed. And on this head he
   introduceth the great religious duty towards God of our spiritual
   conflict against sin, and of the mortification of it; wherein those
   that believe are to be exercised all the days of their lives, and
   wherein their principal duty towards God doth consist, and without
   which they can perform no other in a due manner. Moreover, he farther
   adds the great gospel privilege of the communication of the Spirit of
   Christ unto believers, for their sanctification, consolation, and
   edification, with the duties of thankfulness towards God, joy and
   rejoicing in him, cheerfulness under trials, afflictions, and
   persecutions, and sundry others that on that account are required of
   us; -- all religious duties towards God, in the religion by him
   proposed unto us. Having laid these foundations, and manifested how
   they all proceed from the eternal counsel and free grace of God, in
   which it is our duty to admire, adore, and praise him, he declareth how
   hereby, and on the account of these things, we are bound unto all
   holiness, righteousness, godliness, honesty, and usefulness in this
   world, in all relations and conditions whatsoever; -- declaring our
   duties in churches, according to our especial interest in them, towards
   believers, and towards all men in the world in our several relations;
   in obedience to magistrates and all superiors; in a word, in universal
   observance of the whole will and all the commands of God. Now, whether
   any one will call this a "scheme" or no, or allow it to have any thing
   of method in it or no, I neither know nor care, but am persuaded that
   it makes a better, more plain and intelligible, representation of the
   religious duties towards God which Christian religion requires of us,
   unto all that suppose this whole religion to depend on divine
   revelation, than that of our author. But I find myself in a digression.
   The end of this discourse was only to manifest the sentiments of our
   author on the second head before laid down; which, I think, are
   sufficiently evinced.

   The third is, That there is no actual work of present grace, either to
   fit the persons of whom these duties of moral virtues are required unto
   the performance of them or to work and effect them in them; for
   although they are called "graces," and the "graces of the Spirit," in
   the Scripture, yet that is upon another account, as he declares
   himself, p. 72: "All that the Scripture intends by the graces of the
   Spirit' are only virtuous qualities of the soul; that are therefore
   styled graces,' because they are derived purely from God's free grace
   and goodness, in that, in the first ages of Christianity, he was
   pleased, out of his infinite concern for its propagation, in a
   miraculous manner to inspire its converts with all sorts of virtue."

   "Virtuous qualities of the soul" is a very ambiguous expression. Take
   these virtuous qualities for a new principle of spiritual life,
   consisting in the habitual disposition, inclination, and ability of
   mind unto the things required of us in the will of God, or unto the
   acts of religious obedience, and it may express the graces of the
   Spirit; which are yet far enough from being so called upon the account
   here mentioned. But these virtuous qualities are to be interpreted
   according to the tenor of the preceding discourses that have already
   passed under examination. Let now our author produce any one writer of
   the church of God, from first to last, of any repute or acceptation,
   from the day that the name of Christian was known in the world unto
   this wherein we live, giving us this account why the fruits of the
   Spirit, the virtuous or gracious qualities of the minds of believers,
   are called "graces" that here he gives, and I will give him my thanks
   publicly for his discovery; for if this be the only reason why any
   thing in believers is called "grace," why virtues are graces, --
   namely, because God was pleased in the first ages of Christianity
   miraculously to inspire its converts with all sorts of virtue, -- then
   there is no communication of grace unto any, no work of grace in and
   upon any, in an ordinary way, through the ministry of the gospel in
   these latter ages! The whole being and efficacy of grace, according to
   this notion, is to be confined unto the miraculous operations of God in
   gospel concernments in the first ages, whence a denomination in the
   Scripture is cast upon our virtues, when obtained and exercised by and
   in our own strength! Now, this plainly overthrows the whole gospel, and
   contains a Pelagianism that Pelagius himself never did nor durst avow.

   Are these things, then, so indeed, that God did, from his free grace
   and goodness, miraculously inspire the first converts of Christianity
   with all sorts of virtues, but that he doth not still continue to put
   forth in any actually the efficacy of his grace, or make them gracious,
   holy, believing, obedient to himself, and to work in them all suitable
   actings towards himself and others? Then farewell Scripture, the
   covenant of grace, the intercession of Christ, yea, all the ancient
   fathers, councils, schoolmen, and most of the Jesuits themselves! Many
   have been the disputes amongst Christians about the nature of grace,
   the rule of its dispensation, the manner and way of its operation, its
   efficacy, concurrence, and cooperation in the wills of men; but that
   there is no dispensation of it, no operation but what was miraculous in
   the first converts of the gospel, was, I think, until now undiscovered.
   Nor can it be here pretended that the virtuous qualities of our minds
   and their exercise, -- by which is intended all the obedience that God
   requireth of us, in principle and practice, that we may please him and
   come to the enjoyment of him, -- are not said to be called graces only
   on the account mentioned; for as in respect of us they are not so
   termed at all, so if the term "only" be not understood, the whole
   discourse is impertinent and ridiculous: for those other reasons and
   accounts that may be taken in will render that given utterly useless
   unto our author's intention, and, indeed, are altogether inconsistent
   with it, and he hath given us no reason to suppose that he talks after
   such a weak and preposterous rate. This, then, is that which is here
   asserted: The qualities of our minds and their exercise, wherein the
   virtues pleaded about and affirmed to contain the whole substance of
   religion do consist, are not wrought in us by the grace or Spirit of
   God through the preaching of the gospel, but are only called
   "graces,"as before. Now, though here be a plain contradiction to what
   is delivered but two pages before, namely, "that we pray for some or
   other virtuous qualities," -- that is, doubtless, to be wrought in us
   by the grace of God, -- yet this present discourse is capable of no
   other interpretation but that given unto it. And, indeed, it seems to
   be the design of some men to confine all real gifts and graces of the
   Spirit of God to the first ages of the gospel, and the miraculous
   operations in it; which is to overthrow the whole gospel, the church,
   and the ministry of it, as to their use and efficacy, leaving men only
   the book of the Bible to philosophize upon, as shall be elsewhere
   demonstrated. Our author, indeed, tells us, that on the occasion of
   some men's writings in theology, "there hath been a buzz and a noise of
   the Spirit of God in the world." His expressions are exceedingly suited
   to pour contempt on what he doth not approve, not so to express what he
   doth himself intend. But I desire that he and others would speak plain
   and openly in this matter, that neither others may be deceived nor
   themselves have occasion to complain that they are misrepresented; a
   pretence whereof would probably give them a dispensation to deal very
   roughly, if not despitefully, with them with whom they shall have to
   do. Doth he, therefore, think or believe that there are not now any
   real gracious operations of the Spirit of God upon the hearts and minds
   of men in the world? that the dispensation of the Spirit is ceased, as
   well unto ordinary ministerial gifts, with its sanctifying, renewing,
   assisting grace, as unto gifts miraculous and extraordinary? that there
   is no work at all of God upon the hearts of sinners but that which is
   purely moral and persuasive by the word? that what is asserted by some
   concerning the efficacy of the grace of the Spirit, and concerning his
   gifts, is no more but "a buzz and a noise?" I wish he would explain
   himself directly and positively in these things, for they are of great
   importance; and the loose expressions which we meet with do give great
   offence unto some, who are apt to think that as pernicious a heresy as
   ever infested the church of God may be covered and cloaked by them.

   But to return: in the sense that mortal virtue is here taken, I dare
   boldly pronounce that there is no villany in the religion of those men
   who distinguish between virtue and grace, -- that is, there is not in
   their so doing, -- this being the known and avowed religion of
   Christianity. It is granted that wherever grace is, there is virtue;
   for grace will produce and effect all virtues in the soul whatever. But
   virtue, on the other side, may be where there is no grace; which is
   sufficient to confirm a distinction between them. It was so in sundry
   of the heathen of old; though now it be pretended that grace is nothing
   but an occasional denomination of virtue, not that it is the cause or
   principle of it. But the proofs produced by our author are exceedingly
   incompetent unto the end whereunto they are applied. For that place of
   the apostle, Gal. v. 22, 23, "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
   peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
   temperance," though our author should be allowed to turn "joy" into
   "cheerfulness," "peace" into "peaceableness," "faith" into
   "faithfulness," as he hath done, corruptly enough, to accommodate it to
   his purpose, yet it will no way reach his end, nor satisfy his
   intention; for doth it follow, that because the Spirit effects all
   these moral virtues in a new and gracious manner, and with a direction
   to a new and special end in believers, either that these things are
   nothing but mere moral, virtues, not wrought in us by the grace of God
   (the contrary whereof is plainly asserted in calling them "fruits of
   the Spirit"), or that wherever there is moral virtue, though not so
   wrought by the Spirit, that there is grace also, because virtue and
   grace are the same? If these are the expositions of Scripture which we
   may expect from them who make such outcries against other men's
   perverting and corrupting of it, the matter is not like to be much
   mended with us, for aught I can see, upon their taking of that work
   into their own hands.

   And indeed his quotation of this place is pretty odd. He doth not in
   the print express the words as he useth, and as he doth those of
   another scripture immediately, in a different character, as the direct
   words of the apostle, that no man may charge him with a false
   allegation of the text; yet he repeats all the words of it which he
   intends to use to his purpose, somewhat altering the expressions. But
   he hath had, I fear, some unhappiness in his explanations. By "joy" he
   would have "cheerfulness" intended; but what is meant by cheerfulness
   is much more uncertain than what is intended by joy. Mirth, it may be,
   in conversation is aimed at, or somewhat of that nature; but how remote
   this is from that spiritual joy which is recommended unto us in the
   Scripture, and is affirmed to be "unspeakable and full of glory," he
   that knows not is scarce meet to paraphrase upon St Paul's epistles.
   Neither is that "peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ," which
   is wrought in the hearts of believers by the Holy Ghost, who "creates
   the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, unto them," a matter of any more
   affinity with a moral peaceableness of mind and affections. Our faith
   also in God, and our faithfulness in our duties, trusts, offices, and
   employments, are sufficiently distinct. So palpably must the Scripture
   be corrupted and wrested to be made serviceable to this presumption! He
   yet adds another proof to the same purpose, -- if any man know
   distinctly what that purpose is, -- namely, Tit. ii. 11; where he tells
   us that the same apostle makes the "grace of God" to consist in
   gratitude towards God, temperance towards ourselves, and justice
   towards our neighbours. But these things are not so; for the apostle
   doth not say that the grace of God doth consist in these things, but
   that the "grace of God teacheth" us these things. Neither is the grace
   here intended any subjective or inherent grace, nor, to speak with our
   author, any "virtuous quality, or virtue;" but the love and grace of
   God himself in sending Jesus Christ, as declared in the gospel, as is
   manifest in the words and context beyond contradiction. And I cannot
   but wonder how our author, desirous to prove that the whole of our
   religion consists in moral virtues, and these only called "graces"
   because of the miraculous operations of God from his own grace in the
   first, gospel converts, should endeavour to do it by these two
   testimonies; the first whereof expressly assigns the duties of
   morality, as in believers, to the operations of the Spirit; and the
   latter, in his judgment, makes them to proceed from grace.

   Our last inquiry is into what he ascribes unto his adversaries in this
   matter, and how he deals with them thereupon. This, therefore, he
   informs us, p. 71: "It is not enough,' say they, to be completely
   virtuous, unless ye have grace too.'" I can scarce believe that ever he
   heard any one of them say so, or ever read it in any of their writings:
   for there is nothing that they are more positive in than that men
   cannot, in any sense, be completely virtuous unless they have grace;
   and so they cannot suppose them to be so who have it not. They say,
   indeed, that moral virtues, as before described, so far as they are
   attainable by, or may be exercised in the strength of, men's own wills
   and natural faculties, are not enough to please God and to make men
   accepted with him; so that virtue as it may be without grace, and some
   virtues may be so for the substance of them, is not available unto
   salvation. And I had almost said, that he is no Christian that is of
   another mind. In a word, virtue is or may be without grace, in all or
   any of the acceptations of it before laid down. Where it is without the
   favour of God and the pardon of sin, where it is without the renewing
   of our natures and the endowment of our persons with a principle of
   spiritual life, where it is not wrought in us by present efficacious
   grace, it is not enough, nor will serve any man's turn with respect
   unto the everlasting concernments of his soul.

   But he gives in his exceptions, p. 71: "But when," saith he, "we have
   set aside all manner of virtue, let them tell me what remains to be
   called grace, and give me any notion of it distinct from all morality,
   that consists in the right order and government of our actions in all
   our relations, and so comprehends all our duty; and therefore if grace
   be not included in it, it is but a phantasm and an imaginary thing." I
   say, first, Where grace is, we cannot set aside virtue, because it will
   and doth produce and effect it in the minds of men; but virtue may be
   where grace is not, in the sense so often declared. Secondly, Take
   moral virtue in the notion of it here received and explained by our
   author, and I have given sundry instances before of gracious duties
   that come not within the verge or compass of the scheme given us of it.
   Thirdly, The whole aimed at lies in this: That virtue that governs our
   actions in all our duties may be considered either as the duty we owe
   to the law of nature for the ends of it, to be performed in the
   strength of nature, and by the direction of it; or it may be considered
   as it is an especial effect of the grace of God in us, which gives it a
   new principle and a new end, and a new respect unto the covenant of
   grace wherein we walk with God; -- the consideration whereof frustrates
   the intention of our author in this discourse.

   But he renews his charge, p. 73: "So destructive of all true and real
   goodness is the very religion of those men that are wont to set grace
   at odds with virtue, and are so far from making them the same that they
   make them inconsistent; and though a man be exact in all the duties of
   moral goodness, yet if he be a graceless person (that is, void of I
   know not what imaginary godliness) he is but in a cleaner way to hell,
   and his conversion is more hopeless than the vilest and most notorious
   sinner's; and the morally righteous man is at a greater distance from
   grace than the profane; and better be lewd and debauched than live an
   honest and virtuous life, if you are not of the godly party," -- with
   much more to this purpose. For the "men that are wont to set grace at
   odds with virtue, and are so far from making them the same that they
   make them inconsistent," I wish our author would discover them, that he
   might take us along with him in his detestation of them. It is not
   unlikely, if all be true that is told of them, but that the Gnostics
   might have some principles not unlike this; but beside them, I never
   heard of any that were of this mind in the world. And, in truth, the
   liberty that is taken in these discourses is a great instance of the
   morality under consideration. But the following words will direct us
   where these things are charged; for some say that if "a man be exact in
   all the duties of moral goodness, yet if he be a graceless person, void
   of I know not what imaginary godliness, he is but in a cleaner way to
   hell." I think I know both what and who are intended, and that both are
   dealt withal with that candour we have been now accustomed unto. But,
   first, you will scarce find those you intend over-forward in granting
   that men may be "exact in all the duties of moral goodness," and yet be
   "graceless persons:" for taking moral virtues to comprehend, as you do,
   their duties towards God, they will tell you such persons cannot
   perform one of them aright, much less all of them exactly; for they can
   neither believe in God, nor trust him, nor fear him, nor glorify him,
   in a due manner. [Secondly,] Take the duties of moral goodness for the
   duties of the law between man and man, and the observation of the
   outward duties of God's worship, and they say, indeed, that they may be
   so performed as that in respect of them men may be blameless, and yet
   be graceless; for that account, if they mistake not, the apostle Paul
   gives of himself, Phil. iii. 6-9. They do say, therefore, that many of
   these duties, so as to be useful in the world and blameless before men,
   they may perform who are yet graceless. Thirdly, This gracelessness is
   said to consist in being "void of I know not what imaginary godliness."
   No, no; -- it is to be void of the Spirit of God, of the grace of
   Christ; not to be born again, not to have a new spiritual life in
   Christ; not to be united to him or ingrafted in him; not to be accepted
   and made an heir of God, and enabled to a due, spiritual, evangelical
   performance of all duties of obedience, according to the tenor of the
   covenant. These are the things intended. And as many with their "moral
   duties" may come short of them and be "graceless," so those to whom
   they are "imaginary" must reject the whole gospel of Christ as an
   imagination. And I must say (to give matter of a new charge), that, to
   the best observation that I have been able to make in the world, none
   have been, nor are, more negligent in the principal duties of morality
   than those who are aptest to exalt them above the gospel and the whole
   mystery of it; unless morality do consist in such a course of life and
   conversation as I will not at present characterize.

   It is farther added, that the "conversion of such a one is more
   hopeless than the vilest and most notorious sinner's; and the morally
   righteous man, etc. Setting aside the invidious expression of what is
   here reflected upon, there is nothing more openly taught in the gospel.
   The Pharisees were a people morally righteous, whereon they "trusted in
   themselves that they were righteous;" and, yet our Lord Jesus Christ
   told them that "publicans and harlots," the vilest and most notorious
   of sinners, entered before them into the kingdom of God. And where men
   trust to their own righteousness, their own duties, be they moral or
   what they will, there are no men farther from the way of the gospel
   than they; nay, our Saviour lets us know that, as such, the gospel is
   not concerned in them, nor they in it. "I came not," he says, "to call
   the righteous, but sinners to repentance," -- not men justifying or
   lifting up themselves in a conceit of their moral duties, but those who
   are burdened and laden with a sense of their sins; and so, in like
   manner, that "the whole have no need of a physician, but the sick." And
   St Paul declares what enemies they were to the righteousness of God who
   went about to set up their own righteousness, Rom. x. 3. Now, because
   moral duties are incumbent on all persons at all times, they are
   continually pressed upon all, from a sense of the authority and command
   of God, indispensably requiting all men's attendance unto them. Yet
   such is the deceitfulness of the heart of man and the power of
   unbelief, that oftentimes persons who, through their education or
   following convictions, have been brought to some observance of them,
   being not enlightened in their minds to discern their insufficiency
   unto the great end of salvation in and of themselves, are apt to take
   up with them and to rest in them, without ever coming to sincere
   repentance towards God, or faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; whereas
   others, the guilt of whose sins doth unavoidably press upon them, as it
   did on the publicans and sinners of old, are ofttimes more ready to
   look out after relief. And those who question these things do nothing
   but manifest their ignorance in the Scripture, and want of experience
   in the work of the ministry. But yet, upon the account of the charge
   mentioned, so unduly framed and impotently managed, our author makes an
   excursion into such an extravagancy of reproaches as is scarce exceeded
   in his whole book; part of it I have considered before in our view of
   his preface, and I am now so used to the noise and bluster wherewith he
   pours out the storm of his indignation, that I am altogether
   unconcerned in it, and cannot prevail with myself to give it any
   farther consideration.

   These things, though not direct to the argument in hand, and which on
   that account might have been neglected, yet supposing that the author
   placed as much of his design in them as in any part of his discourse, I
   could not wholly omit the consideration of; not so much out of a desire
   for their vindication who are unduly traduced in them, as to plead for
   the gospel itself, and to lay a foundation of a farther defence of the
   truths of it, if occasion shall so require. And we have also here an
   insight into the judgment of our author, or his mistake in this matter.
   He tells us that it is better to tolerate debaucheries and immoralities
   than liberty of conscience for men to worship God according to their
   light and persuasion! Now, all religion, according to him, consisting
   in morality, to tolerate immoralities and debaucheries in conversation
   is plainly to tolerate atheism; which, it seems, is more eligible than
   to grant liberty of conscience unto them who differ from the present
   establishment only as to some things belonging to the outward worship
   of God!

   These things being premised, the argument itself pleaded in this
   chapter is capable of a speedy despatch. It is to this purpose: "The
   magistrate hath power over the consciences of men in reference to
   morals or moral virtues, which are the principal things in religion;
   and therefore much more hath so in reference to the worship of God,
   which is of less importance." We have complained before of the
   ambiguity of these general terms, but it is to no purpose to do so any
   more, seeing that we are not like to be relieved in this discourse. Let
   us, then, take things as we find them, and satisfy ourselves on the
   intention of the author by that declaration which he makes of it up and
   down the chapter. But yet here we are at a loss also. When he speaks,
   or seems to speak, to this purpose, whether in the confirmation of the
   proposition, or the inferences whereof his arguments consist, what he
   says is cast into such an intertexture with invectives and reproaches,
   and expressed in such a loose, declamatory manner, as it is hard to
   discover or find out what it is that he intends. Suppose, therefore, in
   the first place, that a man should call his consequent into question,
   -- namely, that because the magistrate hath power over the consciences
   of his subjects in morals, that therefore he hath so also in matters of
   instituted worship, -- how would he confirm and vindicate it? Two
   things are all I can observe that are offered in the confirmation of
   it:-- First, That "these things of morality, moral virtues, are of more
   importance in religion than the outward worship of God," which the
   amplitude of power before asserted is now reducing to a respect unto.
   Secondly, That "there is much more danger of his erring and mistaking
   in things of morality than in things of outward worship, because of
   their great weight and importance." These things are pleaded, p. 28,
   and elsewhere up and down. That any thing else is offered in the
   confirmation of this consequent I find not. And it may be some will
   think these proofs to be very weak and feeble, unable to sustain the
   weight that is laid upon them; for it is certain that the first rule,
   -- that he that hath power over the greater hath so over the lesser, --
   doth not hold unless it be in things of the same nature and kind. And
   it is no less certain and evident that there is an especial and formal
   difference between these things, -- namely, moral virtues and
   instituted worship; the one depending, as to their being and discovery,
   on the light of nature, and the dictates of that reason which is common
   to all, and speaks the same language in the consciences of all mankind;
   the other, on pure revelation, which may be and is variously
   apprehended. Hence it is, that whereas there is no difference in the
   world about what is virtue and what is not, there is no agreement about
   what belongs to divine worship and what doth not.

   Again; lesser things may be exempted from that power and authority, by
   especial privilege or law, which hath the disposal of greater committed
   unto it, and intrusted with it; as the magistrate amongst us may take
   away the life of a man, which is the greatest of his concernments, the
   name of his all, for felony, but cannot take his estate or inheritance
   of land, which is a far less concernment unto him, if it be
   antecedently settled by law to other uses than his own. And if it
   cannot be proved that the disposal of the worship of God, as to what
   doth really and truly belong unto it, and all the parts of it, is
   exempted from all human power by special law and privilege, let it be
   disposed of as whoso will shall judge meet.

   Nor is the latter consideration suggested to enforce this consequent of
   any more validity, -- namely, "that there is more danger of the
   magistrate's erring or mistaking about moral virtue than about rites of
   worship," because that is of most concernment in religion; for it is
   true, that suppose a man to walk on the top of a high house or tower,
   on a plain floor, with battlements or walls round about him, there will
   be more danger of breaking his neck if he should fall from thence than
   if he should fall from the top of a narrow wall that had not the fourth
   part of the height of the house. But there would not be so much danger
   of falling: for from the top of the house, as circumstantiated, he
   cannot fall, unless he will willfully and violently cast himself down
   headlong; and on the top of the wall, it may be, he cannot stand, with
   the utmost of his heed and endeavours. The magistrate cannot mistake
   about moral virtues, unless he will do it willfully. They have their
   station fixed in the world on the same ground and evidence with the
   magistracy itself. The same evidence, the same common consent and
   suffrage of mankind, is given unto moral virtues, as is to any
   government in the world; and to suppose a supreme magistrate, a
   lawgiver, to mistake in these things, in judging whether justice, and
   temperance, or fortitude, be virtues or no, and that in his legislative
   capacity, is ridiculous. Neither Nero nor Caligula was ever in danger
   of any such misadventure. All the magistrates in the world at this day
   are agreed about these things. But as to what concerns the worship of
   God, they are all at variance. There is no such evidence in these
   things, no such common suffrage about them, as to free any absolutely
   from failings and mistakes; so that in respect of them, and not of the
   other, lies the principal danger of miscarrying as to their
   determination and administration. Supposing, therefore, the premises
   our author lays down to be true, his inference from them is feeble and
   obnoxious to various impeachments, whereof I have given some few
   instances only, which shall be increased if occasion require.

   But the assertion itself which is the foundation of these consequences
   is utterly remote from accuracy and truth. It is said that "the
   magistrate hath power over the consciences of men in reference unto
   moral duties, which are the principal parts of religion." Our first and
   most difficult inquiry is after the meaning of this proposition; the
   latter, after its truth. I ask, then, first, Whether he hath power over
   the consciences of men with respect unto moral virtue, and over moral
   virtue itself as virtue and as a part of religion, or on some other
   account? If his power respect virtue as a part of religion, then it
   equally extends itself to all that is so, by virtue of a rule which
   will not be easily everted. But it doth not appear that it so extends
   itself as to plead an obliging authority in reference unto all duties;
   for let but the scheme of moral duties, especially those whose object
   is God, given us by our author, be considered, and it will quickly be
   discerned how many of them are exempted from all human cognizance and
   authority, and that from and by their nature, as well as their use in
   the world. And it is in vain to ascribe an authority to magistrates
   which they have no power to exert, or take cognizance whether it be
   obeyed or no. And what can they do therein with respect unto "gratitude
   to God," which holds the first place in the scheme of moral virtues
   here given in unto us? We are told, also, p. 83, "That in matters both
   of moral virtue and divine worship, there are some rules of good and
   evil that are of an eternal and changeable obligation, and these can
   never be prejudiced or altered by any human power, because the reason
   of their obligation arises from a necessity and constitution of nature,
   and therefore must be as perpetual as that; but then there are other
   rules of duty that are alterable according to the various accidents,
   changes, and conditions of human life, and depend chiefly upon
   contracts and positive laws of kingdoms." It would not be unworthy our
   inquiry to consider what rules of moral duty they are which are
   alterable and depend "on accidents and contracts;" but we might easily
   find work enough should we call all such fond assertions to a just
   examination. Neither doth the distinction here given us between various
   rules of moral virtue very well answer what we are told, p. 69, --
   namely, "that every particular virtue is therefore such, because it is
   a resemblance and imitation of some of the divine attributes;" which I
   suppose they are not whose rules and forms are alterable upon accidents
   and occasions. And we are taught also, p. 68, that the "practice of
   virtue consists in living suitably to the dictates of reason and
   nature;" which are rules not variable and changeable. There must be
   some new distinction to reconcile these things, which I cannot at
   present think of. That which I would enquire from hence is, Whether the
   magistrate have power over the consciences of men in reference unto
   those things in morality whose rules of good and evil are of an eternal
   obligation? That he hath not is evidently implied in this place. And I
   shall not enter into the confusion of the ensuing discourse, where the
   latter sort of rules for virtue, the other member of the distinction,
   are turned into various methods of executing laws about outward acts of
   virtue or vice, and the virtues themselves into outward expressions and
   significations of duty; for I have at present no contest with this
   author about his manner of writing, nor do intend to have. It is enough
   that here at once all the principal and most important virtues are
   vindicated to their own unalterable rules as such, and the consciences
   of men in reference unto them put under another jurisdiction. And what,
   then, becomes of this argument, "That the magistrate must have power
   over the consciences of men in matters of divine worship, because he
   hath so in things moral, which are of greater importance," when what is
   so of importance is exempted from his power?

   Hence it sufficiently appears that the authority of the magistrate over
   men, with reference unto moral virtue and duty, doth not respect virtue
   as virtue, but hath some other consideration. Now what this is, is
   evident unto all. How moral virtues do belong unto religion, and are
   parts of it, hath been before declared. But God, who hath ordered all
   things in weight and measure, hath fore-designed them also to another
   end and purpose. For preparing mankind for political society in the
   world among themselves for a time, as well as for religious obedience
   unto himself, he inlaid his nature and composition with principles
   suited to both those ends, and appointed them to be acted with
   different respects unto them. Hence moral virtues, notwithstanding
   their peculiar tendency unto him, are appointed to be the instrument
   and ligament of human society also; -- as the law of Moses had in it a
   typical end, use, and signification, with respect to Christ and the
   gospel; and a political use, as the instrument of the government of the
   nation of the Jews. Now, the power of the magistrate in respect to
   moral virtues is in their latter use, -- namely, as they relate to
   human policy, which is concerned in the outward actings of them. This,
   therefore, is granted; and we shall inquire farther, whether any more
   be proved, namely, that the magistrate hath power over the outward
   actings of virtue and vice, so far as human society or public
   tranquillity is concerned in them, and on that account?

   Secondly, It may be inquired, What is the power and authority over
   moral virtues which is here ascribed unto the civil magistrate, and
   over the consciences of men with respect unto them? Is it such as to
   make that to be virtue which was not virtue before, or which was vice,
   and oblige men in conscience to practice it as virtue? This would go a
   great way indeed, and answer somewhat of what is, or, as it is said,
   may be, done in the worship of God, when that is made a part of it
   which was not so before. But what name shall these new virtues be
   called by? A new virtue, both as to its acts and objects, will as much
   fly the imaginations of men as a sixth sense doth. It may be our author
   will satisfy us as to this inquiry; for he tells us, p. 80, that "he
   hath power to make that a particular of the divine law that God hath
   not made so." I wish he had declared himself how and wherein; for I am
   afraid this expression, as here it lies, is offensive. The divine law
   is divine, and so is every particular of it; and how a man can make a
   thing divine that is not so of itself, nor by divine institution, is
   hard to find out. It may be that only the subject-matter of the law,
   and not the law itself formally, is intended; and to make a thing a
   particular of the divine law is no more but to make the divine law
   require that in particular of a man which it did not require of him
   before. But this particular refers to the nature, essence, and being of
   the thing, or to the acting and occasion of it in particular. And if it
   be taken in the latter sense, there is no more ascribed unto the
   magistrate than is common with him to every man in the world: for every
   one that puts himself into new circumstances or new relations, doth so
   make that unto him to be a particular of the divine law which was not
   so before; for he is bound and obliged unto the actual performance of
   many duties which, as so circumstantiated, he was not bound unto
   before.

   But somewhat else seems to be intended from the ensuing discourse:
   "They are fully empowered to declare new instances of virtue and vice,
   and to introduce new duties in the most important parts of religion."
   And yet I am still at the same loss; for by his "declaring new
   instances of virtue and vice," I suppose he intends an authoritative
   declaration, such as that they have no other foundation, nor need none
   to make them what they are. They are new instances of virtue and vice,
   because so declared. And this suits unto the "introducing of new duties
   in the most important parts of religion," -- made duties by that
   introduction. I wish I could yet learn what these "new instances of
   virtue and vice" are or mean; whether they are new as virtues and
   vices, or as instances. For the first, would I could see a new practice
   of old virtues! but, to tell you the truth, I care not for any of the
   new virtues that I have lately observed in the world, nor do I hope
   ever to see any better new ones.

   If it be the instances that are new, I wish again I knew what were more
   in them than the actual and occasional exercise of old duties. Pages
   79, 80, conduce most to extricate us out of these ambiguities. There we
   are informed that "the laws of every nation do distinguish and settle
   men's rights and properties, and that distinctly; with respect
   whereunto justice, that prime natural virtue, is in particular
   instances to be exercised. And, p. 84, it is farther declared, that "in
   the administration of justice there may be great difference in the
   constitution of penalties and execution of them." This, it seems, is
   that which is aimed at: The magistrate, by his laws, determines whether
   Titius have set his hedge upon Caius' ground, and whether Sempronius
   have rightly conveyed his land or house to his son or neighbour;
   whereby what is just and lawful in itself is accommodated to the use of
   political society. He determines, also, how persons guilty of death
   shall be executed, and by whom, and in what manner. Whence it must
   needs follow, that he hath power to assign new particulars of the
   divine law, to declare new bounds or hedges of right and wrong, which
   the law of God neither doth nor can limit, or hath power over the
   consciences of men with respect to moral virtues; which was to be
   demonstrated. Let us lay aside these swelling expressions, and we shall
   find that all that can be ascribed unto the civil magistrate in this
   matter is no more than to preserve property and peace by that rule and
   power over the outward actions of men which is necessary thereunto.

   Having made some inquiry into the terms of "moral virtue" and the
   "magistrate's power," it remains only that we consider what respect
   this case hath unto the consciences of men, with reference unto them;
   and I desire to know whether all mankind be not obliged in conscience
   to the observation of all moral virtues antecedently to the command or
   authority of the magistrate, who doth only inspect their observation of
   them as to the concerns of public peace and tranquillity? Certainly, if
   all moral virtues consist in "living suitably to the dictates of
   reason," as we are told, -- and in a sense rightly, if the rule of them
   all and every one, which gives them their formal nature, be the law of
   our creation, which all mankind enter the world under an indispensable
   obligation unto, -- it cannot be denied but that there is such an
   antecedent obligation on the consciences of men as that inquired after.
   But the things mentioned are granted by our author; nor can by any be
   denied without offering the highest outrage to Scripture, reason, and
   the common consent of mankind. Now, if this obligation be thus on all
   men, unto all virtue as virtue, and this absolutely, from the authority
   of God over them and their consciences, how comes an inferior authority
   to interpose itself between that of God and their consciences, so as
   immediately to oblige them? It is granted that when the magistrate
   commandeth and requireth the exercise of any moral duty, in a way
   suited unto public good and tranquillity, he is to be obeyed for
   conscience' sake, because he who is the Lord of conscience doth require
   men to be obedient unto him, whereon they are obliged in conscience so
   to be: but if the things required of them be in themselves moral
   duties, as they are such, their consciences are obliged to observe and
   exercise them from the command of God; and other obligation unto them,
   as such, they neither have nor can have. But the direction and command
   for the exercise of them in these and those circumstances, for the ends
   of public good whereunto they are directed, belongs unto the
   magistrate, who is to be obeyed: for as in things merely civil, and
   which have nothing originally of morality in them, but secondarily
   only, as they tend to the preservation and welfare of human society,
   which is a thing morally good, the magistrate is to be obeyed for
   conscience' sake, and the things themselves, as far as they partake of
   morality, come directly under the command of God, which affects the
   conscience; -- so in things that have an inherent and inseparable
   morality, and so respect God in the first place, when they come to have
   a civil sanction in reference to their exercise unto public political
   good, that sanction is to be obeyed out of conscience; but the
   antecedent obligation that was upon the conscience unto a due exercise
   of those duties, when made necessary by circumstances, is not
   superseded, nor any new one added thereunto.

   I know what is said, but I find not as yet what is proved, from these
   things, concerning the uncontrollable and absolute power of the supreme
   magistrate over religion and the consciences of men. Some things are
   added indeed here, up and down, about circumstances of divine worship,
   and the power of ordering them by the magistrate; which though there
   may be some different conceptions about, yet they no way reach the
   cause under debate. But as they are expressed by our author, I know not
   of any one writer in and of the church of England that hitherto has so
   stated them as they are by him; for he tells us, p. 85, that "all
   rituals, ceremonies, postures, and manners of performing the outward
   expressions of devotion, that are not chargeable with countenancing
   vice or disgracing the Deity, are capable of being adopted into the
   ministries of divine service, and are not exempted from being subject
   to the determinations of human power." Whether they are so or no, the
   magistrate, I presume, is to judge, or all this flourish of words and
   concessions of power vanish into smoke. His command of them binds the
   consciences of men to observe them, according to the principle under
   consideration. Hence it must be absolutely in the power of every
   supreme magistrate to impose on the Christian subjects a greater number
   of ceremonious observances in the worship of God, and those of greater
   weight, than ever were laid upon the Jews; for who knows not that under
   the names of "rituals, ceremonies, postures, manners of performing all
   divine service," what a burdensome heap of things are imposed in the
   Roman church? whereunto, as far as I know, a thousand more may be
   added, not chargeable in themselves with either of the crimes which
   alone are allowed to be put in in bar or plea against them. And whether
   this be the liberty whereunto Jesus Christ hath vindicated his
   disciples and church, is left unto the judgment of sober men. Outward
   religious worship, we know, is to be performed by natural actions.
   These have their circumstances; and those ofttimes, because of the
   public concernment of the exercise of religion, of great importance.
   These may be ordered by the power and according to the wisdom of those
   in authority; but that they should make so many things as this
   assertion allows them to make to belong unto and to be parts of the
   worship of God, whereof not one is enjoined or required by him, and the
   consciences of men be thereby obliged unto their observance, I do not
   believe, nor is it here at all proved.

   To close this discourse about the power of obliging the consciences of
   men; I think our author grants that conscience is immediately obliged
   to the observation of all things that are good in themselves, from the
   law of our creation. Such things as either the nature of God or our own
   requires from us, our consciences surely are obliged immediately by the
   authority of God to observe: nor can we have any dispensation for the
   non-performance of our duty from the interposition of the commands and
   authority of any of the sons of men; for this would be openly and
   directly to set up men against God, and to advance them or their
   authority above him or his. Things evidently deduced and necessarily
   following the first principles and dictates of nature are of the same
   kind with themselves, and have the authority of God no less enstamped
   on them than the other; and in respect unto them, conscience cannot by
   virtue of inferior commands plead an exemption. Things of mere
   revelation do remain; and concerning them I desire to know, whether we
   are not bound to observe and do whatever God in his revealed will
   commands us to observe and do, and to abstain from whatever he forbids,
   and this indispensably? If this be denied, I will prove it with the
   same arguments whereby I can prove that there is a God and that we are
   his creatures, made to serve him; for the reason of these things is
   inseparable from the very being of God. Let this be granted, and
   ascribe what ye will, or please, or can, to the supreme magistrate, and
   you shall not from me have the least contradiction.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         A Survey of the Third Chapter

   [Liberty of conscience -- The obligation to comply with its dictates
   not superseded by the authority of the magistrate -- External worship
   an essential part of religion -- External worship not left to be
   regulated by man -- The rite of sacrifice shown to be of divine
   original -- Alleged right of the magistrate to appoint ceremonies --
   Distinction between words and ceremonies as signs.]

   The third chapter entertains us with a magnificent grant of liberty of
   conscience. The very first paragraph asserts a "liberty of conscience
   in mankind over all their actions, whether moral or strictly
   religious." But lest this should prove a bedlam concession, that might
   mischief the whole design in hand, it is delivered to the power of a
   keeper; who yet, upon examination, is no less wild and extravagant than
   itself is esteemed absolutely to be. This is, "That they have it as far
   as concerns their judgments, but not their practice;" -- that is, they
   have liberty of conscience over their actions but not their practices,
   or over their practices but not over their practices! for, upon trial,
   their actions and practices will prove to be the same. And I do not as
   yet well understand what is this liberty of conscience over men's
   actions. Is it to do or not to do, as their consciences dictate to
   them? This is absolutely denied and opposed in the chapter itself. Is
   it to judge of their actions, as done, whether they be good or evil?
   This, conscience is at no liberty in; for it is determined to a
   judgment in that kind naturally and necessarily, and must be so whilst
   it hath the light of nature and word of God to regard, so far as a rule
   is capable of giving a measure and determination to things to be
   regulated by it, -- that is, its moral actings are morally determined.
   What, then, this liberty of conscience over men's actions should be,
   when they can neither act freely according to their consciences what
   they are to do, nor abstain from what they are not to do, nor are at
   liberty to judge what they have done to be good or bad, I cannot
   divine.

   Let us search after an explication of these things in the paragraph
   itself, whose contents are represented in the words mentioned. Here we
   are told that this liberty consists in "men's thinking of things
   according to their own persuasion, and therein asserting the freedom of
   their judgments." I would be loath to think that this liberty of men's
   consciences over all their moral actions should, at first dash, dwindle
   into a liberty in speculations, -- that men may think what they will,
   opine as they please, in or about things that are not to be brought
   into practice; but yet, as far as I can perceive, I must think so, or
   matters will come to a worse issue.

   But these things must be a little farther examined, and that very
   briefly. Here is mention of "liberty of conscience;" but what
   conscience is, or what that liberty is, is not declared. For
   conscience, it is called sometimes "the mind," sometimes "the
   understanding," sometimes "opinion," sometimes described by the
   "liberty of thinking,"sometimes termed an "imperious faculty;" which
   things, without much discourse and more words than I can now afford to
   use, are not reconcilable among themselves. Besides, liberty is no
   proper affection of the mind or understanding. Though I acknowledge the
   mind and its actings to be naturally free from outward compulsion or
   coaction, yet it is capable of such a determination from the things
   proposed unto it, and the manner of their proposal, as to make
   necessary the elicitation of its acts. It cannot but judge that two and
   three make five. It is the will that is the proper seat of liberty; and
   what some suppose to be the ultimate determination of the practical
   understanding is indeed an act of the will. It is so if you speak of
   liberty naturally and morally, and not of state and condition, which
   are here confounded. But suppose what you will to be conscience, it is
   moral actions or duties that are here supposed to be the objects of its
   actings. Now, what are or can be the thoughts or actings of the mind of
   man about moral actions, but about their virtue or their vice, their
   moral good or evil? Nor is a conclusion of what is a man's own duty in
   reference to the practice of them possibly to be separated from them.
   That, then, which is here asserted is, That a man may think, judge, or
   conceive such or such a thing to be his duty, and yet have thereby no
   obligation put upon him to perform it; for conscience, we are informed,
   hath nothing to do beyond the inward thoughts of men's minds!

   To state this matter a little more clearly, let us take conscience in
   the most usual acceptation of it, and that which answers the experience
   of every man that ever looks into the affairs and concerns within; and
   so it is the practical judgment that men make of themselves and of
   their actions, or what they are to do and what they are not to do, what
   they have done or what they have omitted, with reference unto the
   judgment of God, at present declared in their own hearts and in his
   word, and to be fully executed at the last day: for we speak of
   conscience as it is amongst Christians, who acknowledge the word of
   God, and that for a double end; first, as the rule of conscience
   itself; secondly, as the declaration of the will of God, as to his
   approbation or rejecting of what we do or omit. Suppose, then, that a
   man make a judgment in his conscience, regulated by the word of God,
   and with respect unto the judgment of God concerning him, that such and
   such a thing is a duty, and whose performance is required of him, I
   desire to know whether any obligation be upon him from thence to act
   according? It is answered, that "the territory of conscience is
   confined unto men's thoughts, judgments, and persuasions, and these are
   free" (Yea, no doubt); "but for outward actions there is no remedy, but
   they must be subject to the cognizance of human laws," p. 9. Who ever
   doubted of it? He that would have men so have liberty from outward
   actions as not to have those actions cognoscible by the civil power as
   to the end of public tranquillity, but to have their whole station
   firmed absolutely in the world upon the plea of conscience, would, no
   doubt, lay a foundation for confusion in all government. But what is
   this to the present inquiry, Whether conscience lay an obligation on
   men, as regulated by the word of God, and respecting him, to practice
   according to its dictates? It is true enough, that if any of its
   practices do not please or satisfy the magistrate, their authors must,
   for aught I know, stand to what will follow or ensue on them to their
   prejudice; but this frees them not from the obligation that is upon
   them in conscience unto what is their duty. This is that which must be
   here proved, if any thing be intended unto the purpose of this author,
   -- namely, that notwithstanding the judgment of conscience concerning
   any duty, by the interposition of the authority of the magistrate to
   the contrary, there is no obligation ensues for the performance of that
   duty. This is the answer that ought plainly to be returned, and not a
   suggestion that outward actions must fall under the cognizance of the
   magistrate, which none ever doubted of, and which is nothing to the
   present purpose, unless he would have them so to fall under the
   magistrates cognizance as that his will should be the supreme rule of
   them; which, I think, he cannot prove. But what sense the magistrate
   will have of the outward actions, wherein the discharge of man's duty
   doth consist, is of another consideration.

   This, therefore, is the state of the present case applied unto
   religious worship: Suppose the magistrate command such things in
   religion as a man in his conscience, guided by the word and respecting
   God, doth look upon as unlawful and such as are evil, and sin unto him
   if he should perform them, and forbid such things in the worship of God
   as he esteems himself obliged in conscience to observe as commands of
   Christ; if he practice the things so commanded, and omit the things so
   forbidden, I fear he will find himself within doors continually at
   confession, saying, with trouble enough, "I have done those things
   which I ought not to have done, and I have left undone those things
   which I ought to have done, and there is no health in me;" unless this
   author can prove that the commands of God respect only the minds of
   men, but not their outward actions, which are left unto the authority
   of the magistrate alone. If no more be here intended, but that whatever
   conscience may require of any, it will not secure them but that, when
   they come to act outwardly according to it, the civil magistrate may
   and will consider their actions, and allow them or forbid them,
   according to his own judgment, it were surely a madness to deny it, as
   great as to say the sun shineth not at noonday. If conscience to God be
   confined to thoughts, and opinions, and speculations about the general
   notions and notices of things, about true and false, and unto a liberty
   of judging and determining upon them what they are, whether they are so
   or no, the whole nature and being of conscience, and that to the
   reason, sense, and experience of every man, is utterly overthrown. If
   conscience be allowed to make its judgment of what is good or evil,
   what is duty or sin, and no obligation be allowed to ensue from thence
   unto a suitable practice, a wide door is opened unto atheism, and
   thereby the subversion of all religion and government in the world.

   This, therefore, is the sum of what is asserted in this matter:
   Conscience, according to that apprehension which it hath of the will of
   God about his worship (whereunto we confine our discourse), obligeth
   men to act or forbear accordingly. If their apprehensions are right and
   true, just and equal, what the Scripture, the great rule of conscience,
   doth declare and require, I hope none, upon second thoughts, will deny
   but that such things are attended with a right unto a liberty to be
   practised, while the Lord Jesus Christ is esteemed the Lord of lords
   and King of kings, and is thought to have power to command the
   observance of his own institutions. Suppose their apprehensions to be
   such as may in those things, be they more or less, be judged not to
   correspond exactly with the great rule of conscience, yet supposing
   them also to contain nothing inconsistent with, or of a disturbing
   nature to, civil society and public tranquillity, nothing that gives
   countenance to any vice or evil, or is opposite to the principal truths
   and main duties of religion, wherein the minds of men in a nation do
   coalesce, nor to carry any politic entanglements along with them; and
   add thereunto the peaceableness of the persons possessed with those
   apprehensions, and the impossibility they are under to divest
   themselves of them; -- and I say natural right, justice, equity,
   religion, conscience, God himself in all, and his voice in the hearts
   of all unprejudiced persons, do require that neither the persons
   themselves, on the account of their consciences, have violence offered
   unto them, nor their practices in pursuit of their apprehensions be
   restrained by severe prohibitions and penalties But whereas the
   magistrate is allowed to judge and dispose of all outward actions in
   reference to public tranquillity, if any shall assert principles, as of
   conscience, tending or obliging unto the practice of vice, immorality,
   or sin, or to the disturbance of public society, such principles being
   all notoriously judged by Scripture, nature, the common consent of
   mankind, and inconsistent with the fundamental principles of human
   polity, may be, in all instances of their discovery and practice,
   coerced and restrained. But, plainly, as to the commands of conscience,
   they are of the same extent with the commands of God; -- if these
   respect only the inward man, or the mind, conscience doth no more; if
   they respect outward actions, conscience doth so also.

   From the liberty of conscience a proceed is made to Christian liberty,
   which is said to be "a duty or privilege founded upon the" (chimerical)
   "liberty of conscience" before granted. But these things stand not in
   the relation imagined. Liberty of conscience is of natural right,
   Christian liberty is a gospel privilege, though both may be pleaded in
   unwarrantable impositions on conscience. But these things are so
   described by our author as to be confounded: for the Christian liberty
   described in this paragraph is either restrained to matters of pure
   speculation, wherein the mind of man is left entirely free to judge of
   the truth and falsehood of things; or as it regards things that fall
   under laws and impositions, wherein men are left entirely free to judge
   of them, as they are objects of mere opinion. Now, how this differs
   from the liberty of conscience granted before I know not. And that
   there is some mistake in this description of Christian liberty needs no
   other consideration to evince but this, namely, that Christian liberty,
   as our author tells us, is a privilege; but this is not so, being that
   which is equally common unto all mankind. This liberty is necessary
   unto human nature, nor can it be divested of it; and so it is not a
   privilege that includes a speciality in it. Every man cannot but think
   what he thinks, and judge what he judgeth, and that when he doth so,
   whether he will or no; for every thing when it is, and as it is, is
   necessary. In the use of what means they please, to guide, direct, and
   determine their thoughts, their liberty doth consist. This is equal in
   all, and natural unto all. Now, this inward freedom of our judgment is,
   it seems, our Christian liberty, consistent with any impositions upon
   men in the exercise of the worship of God, with an obligation on
   conscience unto their use and practice! a liberty, indeed, of no value,
   but a mere aggravation of bondage. And these things are farther
   discoursed, sect. iii., p. 95; wherein we are told, that "this
   prerogative of our Christian liberty is not so much any new favour
   granted in the gospel, as the restoration of the mind of man to its
   natural privilege, by exempting us from the yoke of the ceremonial law,
   whereby things in themselves indifferent were tied upon the conscience
   with as indispensable an obligation as the rule of essential goodness,
   and equity, during the whole period of the Mosaic dispensation; which
   being corrected by the gospel, those indifferent things, that have been
   made necessary by a divine, positive command, returned to their own
   nature, to be used or omitted only as occasion shall direct."

   It is true that a good part of our Christian liberty consists in our
   deliverance from the yoke of Mosaical institutions; but that this "is
   not so much a new favour granted in the gospel as the restoration of
   the mind of man to its natural privilege," is an assertion that runs
   parallel with many others in this discourse. This privilege, as all
   others of the gospel are, is spiritual, and its outward concerns and
   exercise are of no value where the mind is not spiritually made free by
   Christ. And it is uncertain what is meant by the "restoration of the
   mind to its natural privilege." If the privilege of the mind in its
   natural purity is intended, as it was before the entrance of sin, it is
   false; if any privilege [which] the mind of man, in its corrupt,
   depraved condition, is capable of, be designed, it is no less untrue.
   In things of this nature the mind in that condition is in bondage, and
   not capable of any liberty; for it is a thing ridiculous to confound
   the mere natural liberty of our wills, which is an affection
   inseparable from that faculty, with a moral or spiritual liberty of
   mind relating unto God and his worship. But this whole paragraph runs
   upon no small mistake, -- namely, that the yoke of Mosaical
   institutions consisted in their impositions on the minds and judgments
   of men, with an opinion of the antecedent necessity of them; for
   although the words recited, "Things in themselves indifferent were tied
   upon the conscience with as indispensable an obligation as the rules of
   essential goodness and equity," may be restrained to their use,
   exercise, and observation, yet the conclusion of it, that "whatever our
   superiors impose upon us, whether in matters of religious worship or
   any other duties of morality, there neither is nor can be any
   intrenchment upon our Christian liberty, provided it be not imposed
   with an opinion of the antecedent necessity of the thing itself," with:
   the whole scope of the argument insisted on, makes it evident to be the
   sense intended. But this is wide enough from the mark. The Jews were
   never obliged to judge the whole system of their legal institutions to
   be any way necessary antecedent unto their institution and appointment;
   nor were they obliged to judge their intrinsic nature changed by their
   institution: only, they knew they were obliged to their constant and
   indispensable practice, as parts of the worship of God, instituted and
   commanded by him who hath the supreme authority over their souls and
   consciences. There was, indeed, a bondage frame of spirit upon them in
   all things, especially in their whole worship of God, as the apostle
   Paul several times declares. But this is a thing of another nature,
   though our delivery from it be also a part of Christian liberty. This
   was no part of their inward no more than their outward bondage, that
   they should think, believe, judge, or esteem the things themselves
   enjoined them to be absolutely of any other nature than they were. Had
   they been obliged unto any such judgment of things, they had been
   obliged to deceive themselves, or to be deceived. But, by the absolute
   authority of God, they were indispensably bound in conscience to the
   actual observance and continual use of such a number of ceremonies,
   carnal ordinances, and outward observances, as, being things in
   themselves low and mean, called by the apostle "beggarly elements," and
   enjoined with so great strictness, and under so severe penalties, --
   many of them, of excision, or extermination from among the people, --
   so became an intolerable and insupportable yoke unto them. Neither doth
   the apostle Peter dispute about a judgment of their nature, but the
   necessity of their observation, when he calls them "a yoke which
   neither they nor their fathers were able to bear," Acts xv. 10. And
   when St Paul gives a charge to believers to "stand fast in the liberty
   wherewith Christ hath made them free," it is with respect to the
   outward observation of Mosaical rites, as by him instituted, and not as
   to any inward judgment of their minds concerning their nature
   antecedent unto that institution. His whole disputation on that subject
   respects only men's practice with regard unto an authoritative
   obligation thereunto, which he pleaded to be now expired and removed.
   And if this Christian liberty, which he built and proceeded upon, be of
   force to free, not our minds from the judgments that they had before of
   things in themselves, but our persons from the necessary practice and
   observance of things instituted of God, however antecedently
   indifferent in themselves, I think it is, at least, of equal efficacy
   to exempt us from the necessary practice of things imposed on us in the
   worship of God by men. For, setting aside the inequality of the
   imposing authority, which casts the advantage on the other side (for
   these legal impositions were imposed on the church by God himself;
   those now intended are such masters as our superiors of themselves
   impose on us in religious worship), the case is absolutely the same:
   for as God did not give the "law of commandments contained in
   ordinances" unto the Jews from the goodness of the things required
   therein antecedent to his command, which should make them necessary to
   be practised by them for their good, but did it of his own sovereign,
   arbitrary will and pleasure; so he obliged not the people themselves
   unto any other judgment of them, but that they were necessarily to be
   observed. And, setting aside the consideration of his command, they
   were things in their own nature altogether indifferent. So is it in the
   present case. It is pleaded that there is no imposition on the minds,
   consciences, or judgments of men, to think or judge otherwise of what
   is imposed on them than as their nature is and doth require; only they
   are obliged unto their usage, observance, and practice: which is to put
   us into a thousand times worse condition than the Jews, if instances of
   them should be multiplied, as they may lawfully be every year, seeing
   it much more quiets the mind, to be able to resolve its thoughts
   immediately into the authority of God under its yoke than into that of
   man. If, therefore, we are freed from the one by our Christian liberty,
   we are so much more from the other; so as that, "being made free by
   Christ," we should not be the "servants of men" in things belonging to
   his service and worship.

   From this discovery here made of the nature of Christian liberty, our
   author makes some deductions, pp. 98, 99, concerning the nature of
   religious worship; wherein he tells us that "the whole substance of
   religious worship is transacted within the mind of man, and dwells in
   the heart and thoughts, the soul being its proper seat and temple,
   where men may worship their God as they please without offending their
   prince; and that external worship is no part of religion itself." I
   wish he had more clearly and distinctly expressed his mind in this
   matter, for his assertions, in the sense the words seem to bear, are
   prodigiously false, and such as will open a door to atheism, with all
   the villany and confusion in the world; for who would not think this to
   be his intention: Let men keep their minds and inward thoughts and
   apprehensions right for God, and then they may practice outwardly in
   religion what they please; one thing one day, another another; be
   Papists and Protestants, Arians and Homo-ousians, yea, Mohammedans and
   Christians, any thing, every thing, after the manner of the country and
   laws of the prince where they are and live; -- the rule that Ecebolius
   [7] walked by of old? I think there is no man that owns the Scripture
   but will confess that this is, at least, if not a direct, yet an
   interpretative rejection of the whole authority of God. And may not
   this rule be quickly extended unto oaths themselves, the bonds and
   ligaments of human society? for whereas, in their own formal nature,
   they belong to the worship of God, why may not men pretend to keep up
   their reverence unto God in the internal part of them, or their esteem
   of him in their invocation of his name, but as to the outward part
   accommodate it unto what by their interest is required of them; so
   swearing with their tongues, but keeping their mind at liberty? If the
   principles laid down be capable of any other more tolerable sense, and
   such as may be exclusive of these inferences, I shall gladly admit it;
   at present, what is here deduced from them seems to be evidently
   included in them.

   It is true, indeed, that natural, moral, or internal worship,
   consisting in faith, love, fear, thankfulness, submission, dependence,
   and the like, hath its constant seat and residence in the souls and
   minds of men; but that the ways whereby these principles of it are to
   be outwardly exercised and expressed, by God's command and appointment,
   are not also indispensably necessary unto us, and parts of his worship,
   is utterly false. That which principally in the Scripture comes under
   the notion of the worship of God, is the due observance of his outward
   institutions; which divines have, upon unquestionable grounds,
   contended to be commanded and appointed in general in the second
   commandment of the decalogue, whence all particular institutions in the
   several seasons of the church are educed, and resolved into the
   authority of God therein expressed. And that account which we have here
   given us of outward worship, -- namely, that it is "no part of religion
   itself, but only an instrument to express the inward generation of the
   mind by some outward action or posture of the body," -- as it is very
   difficultly to be accommodated unto the sacrifices of old or the
   present sacraments of the church, which were and are parts of outward
   worship, and, as I take it, of religion; so the being an instrument,
   unto the purpose mentioned, doth not exclude any thing from being also
   a part of religion and worship itself, if it be commanded by God to be
   performed in his service unto his glory. It is pretended that all
   outward worship is only "an exterior signification of honour;" but yet
   all the parts of it in their performance are acts of obedience unto
   God, and are the proper actings of faith, love, and submission of soul
   unto God; which if they are not his worship, and parts of religion, I
   know not what may be so esteemed. Let, then, outward worship stand in
   what relation it will to inward spiritual honour, where God requires it
   and commands it, it is no less necessary and indispensably to be
   performed than any part of inward worship itself, and is a no less
   important duty of religion; for any thing comes to be a part of
   religious worship outwardly to be performed, not from its own nature,
   but from its respect unto the commands of God, and the end whereunto it
   is by him designed. So the apostle tells us, that "with the heart man
   believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
   unto salvation," Rom. x. 10. Confession is but the "exterior
   signification" of the faith that is in our hearts; but yet it is no
   less necessary to salvation than faith itself is to righteousness. And
   those who regulate their obedience and religious worship by the
   commands of God, knowing that which way soever they are signified, by
   inbred light or superadded revelation, it is they which give their
   obedience its formal nature, making it religious, will not allow that
   place and use of the outward worship required by God himself which
   should exclude it from being religious, or a part of their religion.

   But upon the whole matter our author affirms, "That in all ages of the
   world, God hath left the management of his outward worship unto the
   discretion of men, unless when to determine some particulars hath been
   useful to some other purpose, p. 100. "The management of outward
   worship" may signify no more but the due performance of it; and so I
   acknowledge that though it be not left unto men's discretion to observe
   or not observe it, yet it is, too, their duty and obedience, which are
   their discretion and their wisdom. But the management here understood
   is opposed to God's own determination of particular forms, -- that is,
   his especial institutions; and hereof I shall make bold to say, that it
   was never in any age so left to the discretion of men. To prove this
   assertion, sacrifices are singled out as an instance. It is known and
   granted that these were the most solemn part of the outward worship of
   God for many ages, and that there was a general consent of mankind unto
   the use of them, so that however the greatest part of the world
   apostatized from the true, only, and proper object of all religious
   worship, yet they retained this mode and medium of it. These
   sacrifices, we are told, p. 101, "did not owe their original unto any
   divine institution, but were made choice of by good men as a fit way of
   imitating the grateful resentments of their minds." The argument alone,
   as far as I can find, fixed on to firm this assertion is, that those
   who teach the contrary, and say that this mode of worship was
   commanded, do say so without proof or evidence. Our author, for the
   most part, sets off his assertions at no less rate than as such without
   whose admittance all order and government, and almost every thing that
   is good amongst mankind, would be ruined and destroyed. But he hath the
   unhappiness to found them, ordinarily, not only on principles and
   opinions dubious and uncertain, but on such paradoxes as have been by
   sober and learned men generally decried. Such is this of the original
   of sacrifices, here insisted on. The divines of the church of Rome do
   generally contend that religion and sacrifices are so related that the
   one cannot be without the other. Hence, they teach [that] God would
   have required sacrifices in the state of innocency had mankind
   continued therein. And though the instance be ill laid and not proved,
   yet the general rule applied unto the religion of sinners is not easily
   to be evicted; for as in Christian religion we have a Sacrifice that is
   prosphatos kai zosa, as to its efficacy, always "newly offered and
   living," so before the personal offering of it in the body of Christ,
   there was no season or age without a due representation of it in
   sacrifices typical and of mystical signification. And although there be
   no express mention in the Scripture of their institution (for these are
   ancient things), yet there is as good warrant for it as for offering
   and burning incense only with sacred fire taken from the altar, which
   was of a heavenly traduction, for a neglect whereof the priests were
   consumed with fire from before the Lord; that is, though an express
   command be not recorded for their institution and observation, yet
   enough may be collected from the Scripture that they were of a divine
   extract and original. And if they were arbitrary inventions of some
   men, I desire to have a rational account given me of their catholicism
   in the world, and one instance more of any thing not natural or divine
   that ever prevailed to such an absolute universal acceptance amongst
   mankind. It is not so safe, I suppose, to assign an arbitrary original
   unto any thing that hath obtained a universal consent and suffrage,
   lest men be thought to set their own houses on fire, on purpose to
   consume their neighbours'.

   Besides, no tolerable colour can be given to the assertion that they
   were the "invention of good men." The first notice we have of them is
   in those of Cain and Abel, whereof one was a bad man and of the evil
   one, and yet must be looked on as the principal inventor of sacrifices,
   if this fiction be allowed. Some of the ancients, indeed, thought that
   Adam sacrificed the beasts to God whose skins his first garments were
   made of; and if so, he was very pregnant and sudden in his invention,
   if he had no direction from God. But more than all this, bloody
   sacrifices were types of Christ, from the foundation of the world; and
   Socinus himself, who and his followers are the principal assessors of
   this paradox, grants that Christ is called the "Lamb of God," with
   respect unto the sacrifices of old, even before the law, as he is
   termed "a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," not only with
   respect unto the efficacy of his sacrifice, but to the typical
   representation of it. And he that shall deny that the patriarchs in
   their sacrifices had respect unto the promised Seed will endeavour the
   shaking of a pillar of the church's creed. Now, I desire to know how
   men, by their own invention or authority, could assign such an end unto
   their sacrifices, if they were not of divine prescription, if not
   designed of God thereunto.

   Again, the apostle tells us, Abel offered his sacrifice by faith, Heb.
   xi. 4; and faith hath respect unto the testimony of God, revealing,
   commanding, and promising to accept our duty. Wherever any thing is
   done in faith, there an assent is included to this, "that God is true,"
   John iii. 33; and what it doth is thereby distinguished from
   will-worship, that is resolved into the commandments and doctrines of
   men, which whoso rest on make void the commandment of God, Matt. xv. 3,
   6. And the faith of Abel, as to its general nature, was "the substance
   of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen," Heb. xi. 1;
   which in this matter it could not be if it had neither divine command
   nor promise to rest upon. It is evident, therefore, that sacrifices
   were of a divine original; and the instance in them to prove that the
   "outward worship of God hath, in all ages, been left unto the prudence
   and management of men," is feeble, and such as will give no countenance
   unto what it is produced in the justification of. And herewith the
   whole discourse of our author on this subject falls to the ground;
   where I shall at present let it lie, though it might, in sundry
   particulars, be easily crumbled into useless asseverations and some
   express contradictions.

   In the close of this chapter an application is made of what hath been
   before argued, or rather dictated, upon a particular controversy about
   "significant ceremonies." I am not willing to engage in any contests of
   that nature, seeing to the due handling of them a greater length of
   discourse would be necessary than I think meet at present to draw forth
   this survey unto. Only, seeing a very few words may serve to manifest
   the looseness of what is here discoursed, to that purpose I shall
   venture on the patience of the reader with an addition of them. We
   have, therefore, in the first place, a reflection on "the prodigious
   impertinency of the clamour against the institution of significant
   ceremonies, when it is the only use of ceremonies, as of all other
   outward expressions of religion, to be significant," I do somewhat
   admire at the temper of this author, who cannot express his dissent
   from others in controversial points of the meanest and lowest
   concernment, but with crying out, "prodigies," "clamours,"
   "impertinencies," and the like expressions of astonishment in himself
   and contempt of others. He might reserve some of these great words for
   more important occasions. But yet I join with him thus far in what he
   pleads, that ceremonies instituted in the worship of God that are not
   significant are very insignificant, and such as deserve not the least
   contention about them. He truly, also, in the next words, tells us that
   all "outward worship is a sign of inward honour." It is so, both in
   civil things and sacred. All our question is, How these instituted
   ceremonies come to be significant, and what it is they signify, and
   whether it be lawful to assign a significancy to them in the worship of
   God, when indeed they have none of the kind intended? To free us from
   any danger herein he informs us, p. 108, "That all the magistrate's
   power of instituting significant ceremonies amounts to no more than a
   power of determining what shall or what shall not be visible signs of
   honour; and this can be no usurpation upon the consciences of men."
   This is new language, and such as we have not formerly been used unto
   in the church of England, -- namely, that of the "magistrate's
   instituting significant ceremonies." It was of old, the "church's
   appointing ceremonies for decency and order." But all the terms of that
   assertion are metamorphosed; the "church" into the "magistrates;"
   "appointing," which respects exercise, into "institution," which
   respects the nature of the thing, and hath a singular use and sense in
   this matter (or let them pass for the same); and "order and decency"
   into "ceremonies significant." These things were indeed implied before,
   but not so fully and plainly expressed or avowed. But the "honour" here
   intended in this matter is the honour, which is given to God in his
   worship. This is the honour of faith, love, fear, obedience, spiritual
   and holy, in Jesus Christ. To say that the magistrate hath power to
   institute visible signs of this honour, to be observed in the outward
   worship of God, is upon the matter to say that he hath power to
   institute new sacraments, for so such things would be, and to say what
   neither is nor can be proved, nor is here either logically or any way
   regularly attempted so to be.

   The comparing of the ceremonies and their, signification, with words
   and their signification, will not relieve our author in this matter.
   Some things are naturally significant of one another: so effects are of
   causes; so is smoke of fire; and such were the signs of the weather
   mentioned by our Saviour, Matt. xvi. 2, 3. Thus, I suppose, ceremonies
   are not significant, They do not naturally signify the things whereunto
   they are applied; for if they did there would be no need of their
   institution, and they are here said to be instituted by the magistrate.
   Again, there are customary signs, -- some, it may be, catholic, many
   topical, -- that have prevailed by custom and usage to signify such
   things as they have no absolute natural coherence with or relation
   unto; such is putting off the hat in sign of reverence, with others
   innumerable. And both these sorts of signs may have some use about the
   service and worship of God, as might be manifested in instances. But
   the signs we inquire after are voluntary, arbitrary, and instituted, as
   our author confesseth; for we do not treat of appointing some
   ceremonies for order and decency, which our canons take notice of, but
   of instituting ceremonies for signification, such as neither naturally
   nor merely by custom and usage come to be significant, but only by
   virtue of their institution. Now, concerning these, one rule may be
   observed, -- namely, that they cannot be of one kind and signify things
   of another, by virtue of any command and consent of men, unless they
   have an absolute authority both over the sign and thing signified, and
   can change their natures, or create a new relation between them. To
   take, therefore, things natural, that are outward and visible, and
   appoint them to be signs, not natural, nor civil, nor customary, but
   mystical, of things spiritual, supernatural, inward, and invisible, and
   as such to have them observed in the church or worship of God, is a
   thing which is not as yet proved to be lawful. Signify thus naturally
   they never can, seeing there is no natural relation between them;
   civilly, or by consent, they do not so, for they are things sacred
   which they am supposed to signify, and are so far from signifying by
   consent, that those who plead for their signification do not agree
   wherein it doth consist. They must, therefore, signify so mystically
   and spiritually, and "signa cum ad res divinas pertinent sunt
   sacramenta," says Austin; -- these things are sacraments. And when men
   can give mystical and spiritual efficacy to any of their own
   institutions; when they can make a relation between such signs and the
   things signified by them; when they can make that teaching and
   instructing in spiritual things and the worship of God which he hath
   not made so or appointed, blessed or consecrated to that end; when they
   can bind God's promises of assistance and acceptance to their own
   inventions; when they can advance what they will into the same rank and
   series of things in the worship of God with the sacrifices of old, or
   other parts of instituted worship in the church, by God's command, and
   attended with his promise of gracious acceptance; -- then, and not
   before, may they institute the "significant ceremonies" here contended
   for. Words, it is true, are signs of things, and those of a mixed
   nature, partly natural, partly by consent: but they are not of one kind
   and signify things of another; for, say the schoolmen, "Where Words are
   signs of sacred things, they are signs of them as things, but not as
   sacred."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [7] Ecebolius was a sophist of Constantinople, a zealous Christian
   under Constantine the Great, and equally zealous as a Pagan under
   Julian. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         A Survey of the Fourth Chapter

   [Conscience exempted from human authority, where there is an antecedent
   obligation from divine authority.]

   In the fourth chapter we have no concern. The hypothesis whose
   confutation he hath undertaken, as it is in itself false, so it is
   rather suited to promote what he aims at than what he opposeth; and the
   principles which himself proceedeth on do seem to some to border on, if
   not to be borrowed from his, and those which are here confuted. And
   thence it is that the foundations which he lays down in the entrance of
   this discourse are as destructive of his own pretensions as of those
   against which they are by himself improved: for it is granted and
   asserted by him that there are actions and duties in and about which
   the consciences of men are not to be obliged by human authority, but
   have an antecedent obligation on them from the authority of God
   himself; "so that disobedience unto the contrary commands of human
   authority is no sin, but an indispensable duty." And although he seems
   at first to restrain things of this nature unto things natural, and of
   an essential rectitude, -- that is, to the prime dictates of the law of
   nature, -- yet he expressly extends it in instances unto the belief of
   the truth of the gospel, which is a matter of mere and pure revelation.
   And hereon he adds the formal and adequate reason of this exemption of
   conscience from human authority, and its obligation unto duty, before
   its consideration without it and against it; "which is, not because
   subjects are in any thing free from the authority of the supreme power
   on earth, but because they are subject to a superior in heaven; and
   they are then only excused from the duty of obedience to their
   sovereign, when they cannot give it without rebellion against God: so
   that it is not originally any right of their own that exempts them from
   a subjection to the sovereign power in all things, but it is purely
   God's right of governing his own creatures that magistrates then invade
   when they make edicts to violate or control his laws."

   It is about religion and the worship of God that we are discoursing.
   Now, in these things no man ever thought that it was originally a right
   of subjects, as subjects, abstracting from the consideration of the
   authority of God, that should exempt them from a subjection to the
   sovereign power; for though some of the ancients discourse at large
   that it is of natural right and equity that every one should worship
   God as he would himself, yet they founded this equity in the nature of
   God and the authority of his commands. This exemption, then, ariseth
   merely, as our author observes, because they are subject to a superior
   power in heaven, which excuseth them from the duty of obedience to
   their superiors on earth, when they cannot give it without rebellion
   against God: whence it undeniably follows, that that supreme power in
   heaven exempted these things from all inferior powers on earth. Extend
   this, now, unto all things wherein men have, and ought to have, a
   regard unto that superior power in heaven, as it must be extended, or
   the whole is ridiculous (for that heavenly supremacy is made the formal
   reason of the exemption here granted), and all that our author hath
   been so earnestly contending for in the preceding chapters falls to the
   ground: for no man pleads exemption from subjection unto, yea, from
   giving active obedience unto, the authority and commands of the
   magistrate, even in things religious, but merely on the account of his
   subjection to the authority of God in heaven; and, where this is so, he
   is set at liberty by our author from all contrary commands of men. This
   is Bellarmine's "Tutissimum est," which, as King James observed,
   overthrows all that he had contended for in his five books De
   Justificatione. [8]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [8] See vol. xiv., p. 204 of Owen's works. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         A Survey of the Fifth Chapter

   [Alleged evils from the free exercise of conscience -- Charges of
   Parker against Nonconformists -- Mischief of different sects in a
   commonwealth -- Duties of a prince in regard to divided interests in
   religion -- Principle of toleration asserted.]

   The fifth chapter is at such variance with itself and what is elsewhere
   dictated in the treatise, that it would require no small labour to make
   any tolerable composition of things between them. This I shall not
   engage in, as not being of my present concernment. What seems to tend
   unto the carrying on of the design of the whole may be called unto some
   account. In the beginning of it he tells us that "a belief of the
   indifferency, or rather imposture, of all religions is made the most
   effectual, not to say the most fashionable, argument for liberty of
   conscience," For my part, I never read, I never heard of this pretence
   or argument, to be used to that purpose. It wants no such defence. Nay,
   the principle itself seems to me to be suited directly to oppose and
   overthrow it: for if there be no such thing in reality as religion in
   the world, it is certainly a very foolish thing to have differences
   perpetuated amongst men upon the account of conscience; which, without
   a supposition of religion, is nothing but a vain and empty name. But
   hence our author takes occasion to discourse of the use of religion and
   conscience in the government of affairs in the world; and proves in
   many words that "conscience unto God, with a regard to future eternal
   rewards or punishments, is the great ligament of human society, the
   security of government, the strongest bond of laws, and only support of
   rule; without which every man would first and last be guided by mere
   self-interest, which would reduce all power and authority to mere force
   and violence." To this purpose doth he discourse at large in one
   section of this chapter; and in another, with no less earnestness and
   elegancy of words, and repetition of various expressions of the same
   signification, that "the use and exercise of conscience will certainly
   overthrow all government, and fill the world with confusion"! In like
   manner, whereas we have been hitherto throughly instructed, as I
   thought, that men may think what they will in the matters of religion,
   and be of what persuasion they please, [and] no man can or ought to
   control them therein, here we are told that "no power nor policy can
   keep men peaceable until some persuasions are rooted out of their minds
   by severity of laws and penalties"! p. 145. And whereas heretofore we
   were informed that "men might believe what they would," princes were
   concerned only in their outward practice, now are we assured that
   "above all things it concerns princes to look to the doctrines and
   articles of men's belief"! p. 147. But these things, as was before
   intimated, are not of our concern.

   Nor can I find much of that importance in the third and fourth
   paragraphs of this declamatory invective. It is evident whom he regards
   and reflects upon, and with what false, unmanly, unchristian revilings
   he endeavours to traduce them. He would have the world believe that
   there is a generation of men whose principles of religion teach them to
   be proud, peevish, malicious, spiteful, envious, turbulent, boisterous,
   seditious, and whatever is evil in the world; when others are all for
   candour, moderation, and ingenuity, -- amongst whom, no doubt, he
   reckons himself for one, and gives in this discourse in evidence
   thereof. But what are those doctrines and articles of men's belief,
   which dispose them inevitably to all the villanies that our author
   could find names for? A catalogue of them he gives us, pp. 147, 148.
   Saith he, "What if they believe that princes are but the executioners
   of the decrees of the presbytery; and that in case of disobedience to
   their spiritual governors they may be excommunicated, and by
   consequence deposed? What if they believe that dominion is founded in
   grace, and therefore all wicked kings forfeit their crowns, and that it
   is in the power of the people of God to bestow them where they please?
   And what if others believe that to pursue their successes in villany
   and rebellion is to follow providence?" All the world knows what it is
   that hath given him the advantage of providing a covering for these
   monstrous fictions, and an account thereof hath been given elsewhere.
   And what, now, if those intended do not believe these things, nor any
   one of them? What if they do openly disavow every one of them, as, for
   aught I ever heard or know, they do, and as I do myself? What if some
   of them are ridiculously framed into articles of faith, from the
   supposed practices of some individual persons? And what if men be of
   never so vile opinions about the pursuit of their successes, so they
   have none to countenance them in any unlawful enterprises; which, I
   think, must go before successes? What if only the Papists be concerned
   in these articles of faith, and they only in one of them, about the
   excommunication and deposition of princes, and that only some of them;
   and not one of those has any concern in them whom he intends to
   reproach? I say, if these things are so, we need look no farther for
   the principles of that religion which hath furnished him with all this
   candour, moderation, and ingenuity, and hath wrought him to such a
   quiet and peaceable temper, by teaching him that humility, charity, and
   meekness, which here bewray themselves.

   Let it be granted, as it must and ought to be, that all principles of
   the minds of men, pretended to be from apprehensions of religion, that
   are in themselves inconsistent with any lawful government, in any place
   whatever, ought to be coerced and restrained; for our Lord Jesus
   Christ, sending his gospel to be preached and published in all nations
   and kingdoms of the world, then and at all times under various sorts of
   governments, all for the same end of public tranquillity and
   prosperity, did propose nothing in it but what a submission and
   obedience unto might be consistent with the government itself, of what
   sort soever it were. He came, as they used to sing of old, "to give men
   a heavenly kingdom, and not to deprive them or take from them their
   earthly temporal dominions." There is, therefore, nothing more certain
   than that there is no principle of the religion taught by Jesus Christ
   which either in itself, or in the practice of it, is inconsistent with
   any righteous government on the earth. And if any opinions can truly
   and really be manifested so to be, I will be no advocate for them nor
   their abettors. But such as these our author shall never be able justly
   to affix on them whom he opposeth, nor the least umbrage of them, if he
   do but allow the gospel and the power of Christ to institute those
   spiritual ordinances, and require their administration, which do not,
   which cannot, extend unto any thing wherein a magistrate, as such, hath
   the least concernment in point of prejudice; for if, on a false or
   undue practice of them, any thing should be done that is not purely
   spiritual, or that, being done, should be esteemed to operate upon may
   of the outward concerns, relations, interests, or occasions of men,
   they may be restrained by the power of him who presides over public
   good.

   But besides these pretences, our author, I know not how, chargeth also
   the humours, inclinations, and passions of some men as inconsistent
   with government, and always disposing men to fanaticism and sedition;
   and on occasion thereof falls out into an excess of intemperance in
   reproaching them whom he opposeth, such as we have not above once or
   twice before met with the like; and in particular, he raves about that
   "zeal," as he calls it, for the glory of God, which hath "turned whole
   nations into shambles, filled the world with butcheries and massacres,
   and fleshed itself with slaughters of myriads of mankind." Now,
   omitting all other controversies, I shall undertake to maintain this
   against any man in the world, that the effects here so tragically
   expressed have been produced by the zeal our author pleads for, in
   compelling all unto the same sentiments and practices in religion,
   incomparably above what hath ensued upon any other pretence in or about
   religion whatever. This, if need require, I shall evince with such
   instances, from the entering of Christianity into the world to this
   very day, as will admit of no competition with all those together
   which, on any account or pretence, have produced the like effects. This
   it was and is that hath soaked the earth with blood, depopulated
   nations, ruined families, countries, kingdoms, and at length made
   innumerable Christians rejoice in the yoke of Turkish tyranny, to free
   themselves from their perpetual persecutions on the account of their
   dissent from the worship publicly established in the places of their
   nativity. And as for the humours, inclinations, and passions of men,
   when our author will give such rules and directions as whereby the
   magistrate may know how to make a true and legal judgment of who are
   fit on their account to live in his territories, and who are not, I
   suppose there will not be any contest about them. Until then, we may
   leave them, as here displayed and set up by our author, for every one
   to cast a cudgel at them that hath a mind thereunto.

   For to what purpose is it to consider the frequent occasions he takes
   to discourse about the ill tempers and humours of men, or of inveighing
   against them for being "morose and ungentle, unsociable, peevish,
   censorious," with many other terms of reproach that do not at present
   occur to my memory, nor are, doubtless, worth the searching after?
   Suppose he hath the advantage of a better natural temper, have more
   sedate affections, a more compliant humour, be more remote from giving
   or receiving provocations, and have learned the ways of courtly
   deportment, only was pleased to veil them all and every one in the
   writing of this discourse, is it meet that they should be persecuted
   and destroyed, be esteemed seditious, and I know not what, because they
   are of a natural temper not so disposed to affability and sweetness of
   conversation as some others are? For my part, I dislike the humour and
   temper of mind characterized by our author, it may be as much as he, --
   I am sure, I think, as much as I ought; but to make it a matter of such
   huge importance as solemnly to introduce it into a discourse about
   religion and public tranquillity will not, it may be, on second
   thoughts, be esteemed over-considerately done. And it is not unlikely
   but that our author seems of as untoward a composition and peevish a
   humour to them whom he reflects upon as they do to him, and that they
   satisfy themselves as much in their disposition and deportment as he
   doth himself in his.


   "Nimirum idem onmes fallimur; neque est quisqam,

   Quem non in aliqua re, videre Suffenum Possis."

   [Catull., xxii. 18]

   Sect. v. pp. 155, 156, he inveighs against the events that attend the
   permission of different sects of religion in a commonwealth; and it is
   not denied but that some inconveniences may ensue thereon. But, as
   himself hath well observed in another place, we do not in these things
   inquire what is absolutely best, and what hath no inconvenience
   attending it; but what is the best which, in our present condition, we
   can attain unto, and what in that state answers the duty that God
   requireth of us. Questionless, it were best that we should be all of
   one mind in these things of God, and it is no doubt also our duty on
   all hands to endeavour so to be; but seeing, "de facto," this is not
   so, nor is it in the power of men, when and how they will, to depose
   those persuasions of their minds and dictates of their consciences from
   whence it is not so, on the one part or the other (although in some
   parts of our differences some may do so and will not, namely, in things
   acknowledged to be of no necessity antecedent to their imposition, and
   some would do so and cannot), it is now inquired, What is the best way
   to be steered in for the accomplishment of the desired end of peace and
   tranquillity for the future, and maintaining love, quietness, and
   mutual usefulness at present amongst men? Two ways are proposed to this
   purpose. The one is, to exercise mutual forbearance to each other
   whilst we are inevitably under the power of different persuasions in
   these things, producing no practices that are either injurious unto
   private men in their rights, or hurtful unto the state as to public
   peace; endeavouring, in the meantime, by the evidence of truth, and a
   conversation suited unto it, to win upon each other to a consent and
   agreement in the things wherein we differ. The other is, by severe
   laws, penalties, outward force, as imprisonments, mulcts, fines,
   banishments, or capital punishments, to compel all men out of hand to a
   uniformity of practice, whatever their judgments be to the contrary.
   Now, as the state of things is amongst us, which of these ways is most
   suitable to the law of our being and creation, the best principles of
   the nature of man, and those which have the most evident resemblance of
   divine perfections, the gospel, the spirit and letter of it, with the
   mind of its author, our Lord Jesus Christ, -- which is most conducing
   to attain the end aimed at, in ways of a natural and genuine compliance
   with the things themselves of religion, conscience, and divine worship,
   -- is left unto the judgment of God and all good men.

   In the meantime, if men will make declamations upon their own surmises,
   jealousies, and suspicions of things which are either so indeed, that
   is, really surmised, or pretended to be so, for some private interests
   or advantages of their own, which no man can answer or remove; if they
   may fancy at their pleasure ghosts, goblins, fiends, walking sprights,
   seditions, drums, trumpets, armies, bears and tigers; every difference
   in religion, be it never so small, be the agreement amongst them that
   differ never so great; be it the visible, known, open interest of them
   that dissent from what is established to live quietly and peaceably,
   and to promote the good of the commonwealth wherein they live; do they
   profess that it is their duty, their principle, their faith and
   doctrine, to obey constantly their rulers and governors in all things
   not contrary to the mind of God, and pretend no such commands of his as
   should interfere in the least with their power in order to public
   tranquillity; do they offer all the security of their adherence to such
   declared principles as mankind is necessitated to be contented and
   satisfied with in things of their highest concernment; do they avow an
   especial sense of the obligation that is put upon them by their rulers
   when they are protected in peace; have they no concernment in any such
   political societies, combinations, interests as might alone give
   countenance unto any such disturbance; -- all is one, every different
   opinion is press-money, and every sect is an army, although they be all
   and every one of them Protestants, of whom alone we do discourse, Other
   answer, therefore, I shall not return unto this part of our author's
   arguing than what he gave of old, --


   "Ne admittam culpam, ego meo sum promus pectori,

   Suspicio est in pectore alieno sita.

   Nam nunc ego te si surripuisse suspicer,

   Jovi coronam de capite e Capitolio,

   Quod in culmine astat summo, si non id feceris,

   Atque id tamen mihi lubeat suspicarier;

   Quî tu id prohibere me potes, ne suspicer." ?

   [Plaut., Trin. i. 2, 44.]

   Only, I may add, that sundry of the instances our author makes use of
   are false and unduly alleged; for what is here charged on differences
   in and about religion, in reference unto public tranquillity, might
   have been, yea, and was, charged on Christian religion for three
   hundred years, and is so by many still on Protestancy, as such; and
   that it were a very easy and facile task to set out the pernicious
   evils of a compelled agreement in the practice of religion, and those
   not fancied only or feigned, but such as do follow it, have followed
   it, and will follow it in the world.

   An inquiry in this invective, tending to evince its reasonableness, is
   offered in p. 158, -- namely, "Where there are divided interests in
   religion in the same kingdom, it is asked, how shall the prince behave
   himself towards them?" The answer thereunto is not, I confess, easy,
   because it is not easy to be understood what is intended by "divided
   interests in religion." We will, therefore, lay that aside, and
   consider what really is amongst us, or may be, according to what we
   understand by these expressions. Suppose, then, that in the same
   profession of protestant religion, some different ways and observances
   in the outward worship of God should be allowed, and the persons
   concerned herein have no other, cannot be proved to have any other
   interest, with respect unto religion, but to "fear God and honour the
   king," it is a very easy thing to return an answer to this inquiry:
   for, not entering into the profound political speculation of our author
   about "balancing of parties, or siding with this or that party," where
   the differences themselves constitute no distinct parties, in reference
   to civil government and public tranquillity, let the prince openly
   avow, by the declaration of his judgment, his constant practice, his
   establishing of legal rights, disposing of public favours in places and
   preferments, that way of religion which himself owns and approves; and
   let him indulge and protect others of the same religion, for the
   substance of it, with what himself professeth, in the quiet and
   peaceable exercise of their consciences in the worship of God, keeping
   all dissenters within the bounds allotted to them, that none transgress
   them to the invasion of the rights of others; -- and he may have both
   the reality and glory of religion, righteousness, justice, and all
   other royal virtues; which will render him like to Him whose vicegerent
   he is; and he will undoubtedly reap the blessed fruits of them in the
   industry, peaceableness, and loyalty of all his subjects whatever.

   There are sundry things, in the close of this chapter, objected against
   such a course of procedure, but those such as are all of them resolved
   into a supposition that they who in any place or part of the world
   desire liberty of conscience for the worship of God have indeed no
   conscience at all; for it is thereon supposed, without farther
   evidence, that they will thence fall into all wicked and
   unconscientious practices. I shall make, as I said, no reply to such
   surmises. Christianity suffered under them for many ages; Protestancy
   hath done so in sundry places for many years; and those who now may do
   so must, as they did, bear the effects of them as well as they are
   able. Only I shall say, first, Whatever is of real inconvenience in
   this pretension, on the supposition of liberty of conscience, is no way
   removed by taking away all different practices, unless ye could also
   obliterate all different persuasions out of the minds of men; which,
   although in one place he tells us ought to be done by severe penalties,
   yet in another he acknowledgeth that the magistrate hath no cognizance
   of any such things, who yet alone is the inflicter of all penalties.
   Nay, where different apprehensions are, the absolute prohibition of
   different answerable practices doth a thousand times more dispose the
   minds of men to unquietness than where they are allowed both together,
   as hath been before declared. And he that can obliterate out of and
   take away all different apprehensions and persuasions about the worship
   of God from the minds and consciences of men, bringing them to centre
   in the same thoughts and judgments absolutely, in all particulars about
   them,


   "Dicendum est, Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclute Memmi!

   Qui princeps vitæ rationem invenit eam;" ?

   [Lucret., v. 8,]

   he is God, and not man.

   Secondly, It is granted that the magistrate may and ought to restrain
   all principles and outward practices that have any natural tendency
   unto the disturbance of the peace; which being granted, and all
   obligations upon dissenting parties being alone put upon them by the
   supreme legislative and executive power of the kingdoms and nations of
   the world, public tranquillity is, and will be, as well secured on that
   respect as such things are capable of security in this world. All the
   longsome discourse, therefore, which here ensues, -- wherein all the
   evils that have been in this nation are charged on liberty of
   conscience, from whence not one of them did proceed, seeing there was
   no such thing granted until, upon other civil and political accounts,
   the flood-gates were set open unto the following calamities and
   confusions, -- is of no use, nor unto any purpose at all: for until it
   can be demonstratively proved that those who do actually suffer, and
   are freely willing so to do (as far as the foregoing otherwise lawful
   advantages, open unto them as well as others, may be so called), and
   resolved to undergo what may farther, to their detriment, yea, to their
   ruin, be inflicted on them, to preserve their consciences entire unto
   some commands of God, have no respect unto others of as great evidence
   and light to be his (as are those which concern their obedience unto
   magistrates, compared with those which they avow about the worship of
   God); and that private men, uninterested in, and incapable of, any
   pretence unto public authority of any sort, do always think themselves
   warranted to do such things as others have done, pleading right and
   authority for their warranty; and until it be made manifest, also, that
   they have any other or greater interest than to enjoy their particular
   conditions and estates in peace, and to exercise themselves in the
   worship of God according as they apprehend his mind to be, -- these
   declamations are altogether vain, and, as to any solid worth, lighter
   than a feather.

   And I could desire if these controversies must be farther debated, that
   our author would omit the pursuit of those things which are really exo
   tou pragmatos, and, according to the ancient custom, attend aneu
   prooimion kai pathon, without rhetorical prefaces or unreasonable
   passions, unto the merit of the cause. To this purpose I suppose it
   might not be amiss for him to consider a few sheets of paper lately
   published under the title of "A Case Stated," etc, wherein he will find
   the main controversy reduced to its proper heads, and a modest
   provocation unto an answer to what is proposed about it.


   ? "Illum aspice contra

   Qui vocat."
     __________________________________________________________________

                         A Survey of the Sixth Chapter

   [The word of God the sole rule of worship -- The light of reason --
   Vocal revelation -- Magistrate's power in regard to things without the
   church but about it -- Testimonies from the ancient fathers as to the
   supreme authority of Scripture -- Alleged instances from the Old
   Testament of the magistrate appointing religious rites -- Parker's
   answers to certain objections considered -- Doctrine of passive
   obedience refuted -- Alleged right of the magistrate to punish his
   subjects if they will not comply with idolatry or superstition
   established by law -- The true dignity and functions of the magistrate
   declared -- Exhortation to toleration and charity.]

   The sixth chapter in this discourse, -- which is the last that at the
   present I shall call to any account, as being now utterly wearied with
   the frequent occurrence of the same things in various dresses, -- is
   designed to the confutation of a principle which is termed the
   "foundation of all Puritanism," and that wherein "the mystery of it"
   consisteth. Now this is, "That nothing ought to be established in the
   worship of God but what is authorized by some precept or example in the
   word of God, which is the complete and adequate rule of worship." Be it
   so that this principle is by some allowed, yea, contended for, it will
   not be easy to affix a guilt upon them on the account of its being so;
   for lay aside prejudices, corrupt interests, and passions, and I am
   persuaded that at the first view, it will not seem to be foreign unto
   what is in a hundred places declared and taught in the Scripture. And
   certainly a man must be master of extraordinary projections who can
   foresee all the evil, confusion, and desolation in the world, which our
   author hath found out as inevitable consequences of its admittance. It
   hath, I confess, been formerly disputed with colourable arguments,
   pretences, and instances, on the one side and the other, and variously
   stated amongst learned men, by and on various distinctions, and with
   divers limitations. But the manner of our author is, that whatever is
   contrary to his apprehensions must presently overthrow all government
   and bring in all confusion into the world. Such huge weight hath he
   wonted himself to lay on the smallest different conceptions of the
   minds of men, where his own are not enthroned! Particularly, it is
   contended that there can be no peace in any churches or states whilst
   this principle is admitted; when it is easily demonstrable that without
   the admittance of it, as to its substance and principal end, all peace
   and agreement among churches are utterly impossible. The like also may
   be said of states; which, indeed, are not at all concerned in it, any
   farther than as it is a principal means of their peace and security
   where it is embraced, and that which would reduce rulers to a stability
   of mind in these things, after they have been tossed up and down with
   the various suggestions of men, striving every one to exalt their own
   imaginations. But seeing it is pretended and granted to be of so much
   importance, I shall, without much regard to the exclamations of this
   author, and the reproachful, contemptuous expressions, which, without
   stint or measure, he pours out upon the assertors of it, consider both
   what is the concern of his present adversaries in it and what is to be
   thought of the principle itself; so submitting the whole to the
   judgment of the candid reader. Only, I must add one thing to the
   position, without which it is not maintained by any of those with whom
   he hath to do, which may deliver him from combating the air in his next
   assault of it; and this is, That nothing ought to be established in the
   worship of God, as a part of that worship, or made constantly necessary
   in its observance, without the warranty before mentioned: for this is
   expressly contended for by them who maintain it, and who reject nothing
   upon the authority of it but what they can prove to be a pretended part
   of religious worship as such. And, as thus laid down, I shall give some
   farther account both of the principle itself and of the interest of the
   Nonconformists in it, because both it and they are together here
   reproached.

   What then, I say, is the true sense and importance of that which our
   author designs to oppose, according to the mind of them who assert it?
   How impotent his attempts against it are for its removal shall briefly
   be declared. In the meantime, I cannot but in the first place tell him,
   that if by any means this principle, truly stated, as to the
   expressions wherein it is before laid down, and the formal terms
   whereof it consisteth, should be shaken or rendered dubious, yet that
   the way will not be much the plainer or clearer for the introduction of
   his pretensions. There are yet other general maxims which
   Nonconformists adhere unto, and suppose not justly questionable, which
   they can firmly stand and build upon in the management of their plea,
   as to all differences between him and them; and because, it may be, he
   is unacquainted with them, I shall reckon over some of them, for his
   information. And they are these that follow:--

   1. That whatever the Scripture hath indeed prescribed and appointed to
   be done and observed in the worship of God and the government of the
   church, that is indeed to be done and observed. This, they suppose,
   will not be opposed; at least, they do not yet know, notwithstanding
   any thing spoken or disputed in this discourse, any pretences on which
   it may honestly so be. It is also, as I think, secured, Matt. xxviii.
   20.

   2. That nothing in conjunction with, nothing as an addition or
   supplement unto, what is so appointed ought to be admitted, if it be
   contrary either to the general rules or particular preceptive
   instructions of the Scripture. And this also, I suppose, will be
   granted; and if it be not freely, some are ready by arguments to extort
   the confession of it from them that shall deny it.

   3. That nothing ought to be joined with or added unto what in the
   Scripture is prescribed and appointed in these things without some
   cogent reason, making such conjunction or addition necessary. Of what
   necessity may accrue unto the observation of such things by their
   prescription, we do not now dispute, but at present only desire to see
   the necessity of their prescription; and this can be nothing but some
   defect, in substance or circumstance, matter or manner, kind or form,
   in the institutions mentioned in the Scripture, as to their proper
   ends. Now, when this is discovered, I will not, for my part, much
   dispute by whom the supplement is to be made. In the meantime, I do
   judge it reasonable that there be some previous reasons assigned unto
   any additional prescriptions in the worship of God unto what is
   revealed in the Scripture, rendering the matter of those prescriptions
   antecedently necessary and reasonable.

   4. That if any thing or things in this kind shall be found necessary to
   be added and prescribed, then that and those alone be so which are most
   consonant unto the general rules of the Scripture given us for our
   guidance in the worship of God, and the nature of those institutions
   themselves wherewith they are conjoined or whereunto they are added.
   And this also I suppose to be a reasonable request, and such as will be
   granted by all men who dare not advance their own wills and wisdom
   above or against the Will and wisdom of God.

   Now, if, as was said, the general principle before mentioned should by
   any means be duly removed, or could be so, or if entangled or rendered
   dubious, yet, as far as I can learn, the Nonconformists will be very
   far from supposing the matters in contest between them and their
   adversaries to be concluded. But as they look upon their concernments
   to be absolutely secured in the principles now mentioned, all which
   they know to be true and hope to be unquestionable, so the truth is,
   there is by this author very small occasion administered unto any
   thoughts of quitting the former more general thesis as rightly stated;
   but rather, if his ability be a competent measure of the merit of his
   cause, there is a strong confirmation given unto it in the minds of
   considering men, from the impotency and successlessness of the attempt
   made upon it. And that this may appear to the indifferent reader's
   satisfaction, I shall so far divert in this place from the pursuit of
   my first design as to state the principle aright, and briefly to call
   the present opposition of it unto a new account.

   The sum, in general, of what this author opposeth with so much clamour
   is, That divine revelation is the sole rule of divine religious
   worship; an assertion that, in its latitude of expression, hath been
   acknowledged in and by all nations and people. The very heathen
   admitted it of old, as shall be manifested, if need require, by
   instances sufficient; for though they framed many gods, in their
   foolish, darkened imaginations, yet they thought that every one of them
   would be worshipped according to his own mind, direction, and
   prescription. So did, and I think do, Christians generally believe.
   Only, some have a mind to pare this generally-avowed principle, to curb
   it, and order it so, by distinctions and restrictions, that it may
   serve their turn and consist with their interest; for an opposition
   unto it nakedly, directly, and expressly, few have had the confidence
   yet to make. And the Nonconformists need not go one step farther in the
   expression of their judgments and principles in this matter; for who
   shall compel them to take their adversaries' distinctions (which have
   been invented and used by the most learned of them) of "substantial and
   accidental, proper and reductive, primitive and accessary, direct and
   consequential, intrinsic and circumstantial worship," and the like, for
   the most part, unintelligible terms, in their application unto the
   state of the question? If men have a mind, let them oppose this thesis
   as laid down; if not, let them let it alone: and they who shall
   undertake the confirmation of it will no doubt carry it through the
   briers of those unscriptural distinctions. And that this author may be
   the better instructed in his future work, I shall give him a farther
   account of the terms of the assertion laid down.

   Revelation is either endiathetos or prophorikos, and containeth every
   discovery or declaration that God hath made of himself or of his mind
   and will unto men. Thus it is comprehensive of that concreated light
   which is in all men concerning him and his will; for although we say
   that this is natural, and is commonly contradistinguished from
   revelation properly so called, which, for perspicuity's sake, we call
   revelation supernatural, yet whereas it doth not so necessarily
   accompany human nature but that it may be separated from it, nor is it
   educed out of our natural faculties by their own native or primogenial
   virtue, but is or was distinctly implanted in them by God himself, I
   place it under the general head of revelation.

   Hence, whatever is certainly from God, by the light of nature and
   instinct thereof declared so to be, is no less a certain rule of
   worship and obedience, so far forth as it is from him and concerneth
   those things, than any thing that comes from him by express vocal
   revelation. And this casts out of consideration a vain exception
   wherewith some men please themselves, as though the men of this opinion
   denied the admittance of what is from God, and by the light of nature
   discovered to be his mind and will. Let them once prove any thing in
   contest between them and their adversaries to be required, prescribed,
   exacted, or made necessary, by the light of nature, as the will of God
   revealed therein, and I will assure them that, as to my concern, there
   shall be an end to all difference about it. But yet, that I may add a
   little farther light into the sense of the Nonconformists in this
   matter, I say, --

   1. That this inbred light of reason guides unto nothing at all in or
   about the worship of God, but what is more fully, clearly, and directly
   taught and declared in the Scripture. And this may easily be evinced,
   as from the untoward mixture of darkness and corruption that is
   befallen our primogenial, inbred principles of light and wisdom by the
   entrance of sin, so also from the end of the Scripture itself, which
   was to restore that knowledge of God and his mind which was lost by
   sin, and which might be as useful to man in his lapsed condition as the
   other was in his pure and uncorrupted estate. At present, therefore, I
   shall leave this assertion, in expectation of some instance, in matters
   great or small, to the contrary, before I suppose it be obnoxious to
   question or dispute.

   2. As there can be no opposition nor contradiction between the light of
   nature and inspired vocal or scriptural revelation, because they are
   both from God, so if in any instance there should appear any such thing
   unto us, neither faith nor reason can rest in that which is pretended
   to be natural light, but must betake themselves for their resolution
   unto express revelation. And the reason hereof is evident, -- because
   nothing is natural light but what is common to all men, and where it is
   denied, it is frustrated as to its ruling efficacy. Again; it is mixed,
   as we said before, and it is not every man's work to separate the chaff
   from the wheat, or what God hath implanted in the mind of man when he
   made him upright, and what is since soaked into the principles of his
   nature from his own inventions. But this case may possibly very rarely
   fall out, and so shall not much be insisted on.

   3. Our inquiry in our present contest is solely about instituted
   worship, which we believe to depend on supernatural revelation. The
   light of nature can no way relieve or guide us in it or about it,
   because it refers universally to things above and beyond that light;
   but only with reference unto those moral, natural circumstances, which
   appertain unto those actings or actions of men whereby it is performed,
   which we willingly submit unto its guidance and direction.

   Again, vocal revelation hath come under two considerations:-- First, As
   it was occasional. Secondly, As it became stated.

   First, As it was occasional. For a long time God was pleased to guide
   his church in many concerns of his worship by fresh occasional
   revelations, even from the giving of the first promise unto Adam unto
   the solemn giving of the law by Moses; for although men had, in process
   of time, many stated revelations, that were preserved by tradition
   among them, as the first promise, the institution of sacrifices, and
   the like, yet as to sundry emergencies of his worship, and parts of it,
   God guided them by new occasional revelations. Now, those revelations
   being not recorded in the Scripture, as being only for present or
   emergent use, we have no way to know them but by what those to whom God
   was pleased so to reveal himself did practice, and which, on good
   testimony, found acceptance with him. Whatever they so did, they had
   especial warranty from God for; which is the case of the great
   institution of sacrifices itself, It is a sufficient argument that they
   were divinely instituted, because they were graciously accepted.

   Secondly, Vocal revelation, as the rule of worship, became stated and
   invariable in and by the giving and writing of the law. From thence,
   with the allowances before mentioned, we confine it to the Scripture,
   and so unto all succeeding generations. I confess, many of our company,
   who have kept to us hitherto in granting divine revelation to be the
   sole principle and rule of religious worship, now leave us, and betake
   themselves to paths of their own. The postmisnical [9] Jews, after many
   attempts made that way by their predecessors, both before and after the
   conversation of our Lord Christ in the flesh, at length took up a
   resolution that all obligatory divine revelation was not contained in
   the Scripture, but was partly preserved by oral tradition; for although
   they added a multitude of observances unto what were prescribed unto
   their fathers by Moses, yet they would never plainly forego that
   principle, nor do to this day, that divine revelation is the rule of
   divine worship. Wherefore, to secure their principle and practice, and
   to reconcile them together (which are indeed at an unspeakable
   variance), they have fancied their oral law, which they assert to be of
   no less certain and divine original than the law that is written. On
   this pretence they plead that they keep themselves unto the
   forementioned principle, under the superstition of a multitude of
   self-invented observances. The Papists also here leave us, but still
   with a semblance of adhering to that principle, which carries so great
   and uncontrollable an evidence with it as that there are a very few, as
   was said, who have hitherto risen up in a direct and open opposition
   unto it; for whereas they have advanced a double principle for the rule
   of religious worship besides the Scripture, -- namely, tradition, and
   the present determinations of their church, from thence educed, -- they
   assert the first to be divine or apostolical, which is all one, and the
   latter to be accompanied with infallibility, which is the formal reason
   of our adherence and submission unto divine revelation: so that they
   still adhere in general unto the forementioned principle, however they
   have debauched it by their advancement of those other guides. But
   herein also we must do them right, that they do not absolutely turn
   loose those two rude creatures of their own, traditions and present
   church determinations, upon the whole face of religion, to act therein
   at their pleasure, but they secure them from whatever is determined in
   the written word, affirming them to take place only in those things
   that are not contrary to the word or not condemned in it; for in such,
   they confess, they ought not nor can take place, -- which I doubt
   whether our author will allow of or no in reference to the power by him
   asserted.

   By "religious worship," in the thesis above, we understand, as was said
   before, instituted worship only, and not that which is purely moral and
   natural; which, in many instances of it, hath a great coincidence with
   the light of nature, as was before discoursed.

   We understand also the solemn or stated worship of the church of God.
   That worship, I say, which is solemn and stated for the church, the
   whole church, at all times and seasons, according to the rules of his
   appointment, is that which we inquire after. Hence, in this matter we
   have no concernment in the fact of this or that particular person which
   might be occasionally influenced by necessity, as David's eating of the
   shew-bread was, and which how far it may excuse or justify the persons
   that act thereon, or regulate their actions directly, I know not, nor
   am any way engaged to inquire.

   This is the state of our question in hand, the mind of the assertion,
   which is here so hideously disguised and represented in its pretended
   consequences. Neither do I think there is any thing needful farther to
   be added unto it; but yet, for the clearing of it from mistakes,
   something may be discoursed which relates unto it. We say, then, --

   First, That there are sundry things to be used in, about, and with
   those actions whereby the worship of God is performed, which yet are
   not sacred, nor do belong unto the worship of God as such, though that
   worship cannot be performed without them. The very breath that men
   breathe and the light whereby they see are necessary to them in the
   worship of God, and yet are not made sacred or religious thereby.
   Constantine said of old that he was "a bishop, but without the church;"
   not a sacred officer, but one that took care and had a supervisorship
   of things necessarily belonging to the performance of God's worship,
   yet no parts or adjuncts of it as such, for it was all still without.
   Now, all those things in or about the worship of God that belonged unto
   Constantine's episcopacy, -- that is, the ordering and disposal of
   things without the church but about it, without worship but about it,
   -- we acknowledge to be left unto common prudence, guided by the
   general rules of Scripture, by which the church is to walk and compose
   its actings. And this wholly supersedes the discourse of our author
   concerning the great variety of circumstances wherewith all human
   actions are attended; for, in one word, all such circumstances as
   necessarily attend human actions, as such, neither are sacred nor can
   be made so without an express institution of God, and are disposable by
   human authority: so that the long contest of our author on that head is
   altogether vain. So, then, --

   Secondly, By "all the concernments of religious worship," which any
   affirm that they must be directed in by divine revelation or regulated
   by the Scripture, they intend all that is religious, or whatever
   belongs to the worship of God, as it is divine worship; and not what
   belongs unto the actions wherein and whereby it is performed, as they
   are actions.

   Thirdly, That when any part of worship is instituted in special, and
   general rules are given for the practice of it, "hic et nunc," there
   the warranty is sufficient for its practice at its due seasons; and for
   those seasons, the nature of the thing itself, with what it hath
   respect unto, and the light of the general Scripture rules, will give
   them an acceptable determination.

   And these few observations will abundantly manifest the impertinency of
   those who think it incumbent on any, by virtue of the principle before
   laid down, to produce express warranty in words of Scripture for every
   circumstance that doth attend and belong unto the actions whereby the
   worship of God is performed, which as they require not, so no such
   thing is included in the principle as duly stated. For particular
   circumstances that have respect to good order, decency, and external
   regulation of divine worship, they are all of them either circumstances
   of the actions themselves whereby divine worship is performed and
   exercised, and so in general they are natural and necessary, which in
   particular, or "actu exercito," depend on moral prudence; or religious
   rites themselves, added in and to the whole, or any parts of divine
   service, -- which alone, in this question, come under inquiry.

   I know there are usually sundry exceptions put in to this thesis, as
   before stated and asserted, and instances to the contrary are
   pretended, some whereof are touched upon by our author, p. 181, which
   are not now particularly and at large to be considered. But yet,
   because I am, beyond expectation, engaged in the explication of this
   principle, I shall set it so far forth right and straight unto farther
   examination as to give in such general observations as, being
   consistent with it and explanatory of it, will serve to obviate the
   most of the exceptions that are laid against it; as, --

   1. Wherever in the Scripture we meet with any religious duty that had a
   preceding institution, although we find not expressly a consequent
   approbation, we take it for granted that it was approved; and so, on
   the contrary, where an approbation appears, an institution is
   concealed.

   2. The question being only about religious duties, or things pertaining
   to or required in or about the worship of God, no exception against the
   general thesis can take place but such as consists in things directly
   of that nature. Instances in and about things civil and belonging
   merely to human conversation, or things natural, as signs and memorials
   one of another, are in this matter of no consideration.

   3. Things extraordinary in their performance, and which, for aught we
   know, may have been so in their warranty or rule, have no place in our
   debate: for we are inquiring only after such things as may warrant a
   suitable practice in us without any farther authority, which is the end
   for which instances against this principle are produced; this actions
   extraordinary will not do.

   4. Singular and occasional actions, which may be variously influenced
   and regulated by present circumstances, are no rule to guide the
   ordinary stated worship of the church. David's eating of the
   shew-bread, wherein he was justified because of his hunger and
   necessity, was not to be drawn into example of giving the shew-bread
   promiscuously to the people. And sundry instances to the same purpose
   are given by our Saviour himself.

   5. There is nothing of any dangerous or bad consequence in this whole
   controversy, but what lies in the imposition on men's practices of the
   observation of uncommanded rites, making them necessary unto them in
   their observation. The things themselves are said in their own nature,
   antecedent to their injunction for practice, to be indifferent, and
   indifferent as unto practice. What hurt would it be to leave them so?
   They cannot, say some, be omitted, for such and such reasons. Are
   there, then, reasons for their observation besides their injunction,
   and such as on the account whereof they are enjoined? Then are they
   indeed necessary in some degree before their injunction; for all reason
   for them must be taken from themselves. And things wholly indifferent
   have nothing in themselves, one more than another, why one should be
   taken and another left; for if one have the advantage of another in the
   reasons for its practice, it is no more indifferent, at least it is not
   comparatively so. Granting, therefore, things enjoined to be,
   antecedently to their injunction, equally indifferent in their own
   nature with all other things of the same or the like kind, which yet
   are rejected or not enjoined, and then to give reasons taken from
   themselves, -- their decency, their conducingness to edification, their
   tendency to the increase of devotion, their significancy of this or
   that, -- is to speak daggers and contradictions, and to say, "A thing
   is indifferent before the injunction of its practice; but yet if we had
   thought so, we would never have enjoined it, seeing we do so upon
   reasons." And, without doubt, this making necessary the practice of
   things in the worship of God, proclaimed to be indifferent in
   themselves, and no way called for by any antecedent reason, is an act
   of power.

   6. Where things are instituted of God, and he himself makes an
   alteration in or of his own institutions, those institutions may be
   lawfully practised and observed until the mind of God for their
   alteration and abolition be sufficiently revealed, proposed, and
   confirmed unto them that are concerned in them; for as the making of a
   law doth not oblige until and without the promulgation of it, so as
   that any should offend in not yielding obedience unto it, so upon the
   abrogation of a law, obedience may be conscientiously and without sin
   yielded unto that law, until the abrogation, by what act soever it was
   made, be notified and confirmed. An instance hereof we have in the
   observation of Mosaical rites, in the forbearance of God, after the law
   of their institution was enervated and the obligation of it unto
   obedience really dissolved, at least the foundation of it laid, for the
   actual dissolution of it depended on the declaration of the fact
   wherein it was founded.

   7. There may be a coincidence of things performed by sundry persons at
   the same time and in the same place, whereof some may have respect unto
   religious worship directly, and so belong unto it, and others only
   occasionally, and so not at all belong thereunto; as if, when the
   Athenians had been worshipping at their altars, St Paul had come, and
   reading the inscription of one of them, and thence taking occasion and
   advantage to preach "the unknown God" unto them, their act was a part
   of religious veneration, his presence and observation of them, and
   laying hold of that occasion for his purpose, was not so.

   8. Many things which are mere natural circumstances, requisite unto the
   performance of all actions whatever in communities, and so to be
   ordered by prudence according unto general rules of the word of God,
   may seem to be adjuncts of worship, unless they are followed to their
   original, which will discover them to be of another nature.

   9. Civil usages and customs observed in a religious manner, -- as they
   are all to be by them that believe, and directed by them unto moral
   ends, -- may have a show and appearance of religious worship, and so,
   according to the principle before stated, require express institution;
   but although they belong unto our living unto God in general, as do all
   things that we do, seeing "whether we eat or drink, we are to do all to
   the glory of God," and therefore are to be done in faith, yet they are,
   or may be, no part of instituted worship, but such actions of life as
   in our whole course we are to regulate by the rules of the Scripture,
   so far as they afford us guidance therein.

   10. Many observances in and about the worship of God are recorded in
   the Scripture without especially reflecting any blame or crime on them
   by whom they were performed (as many great sins are historically only
   related, and left to be judged by the rule of the word in other places,
   without the least remark of displeasure on the persons guilty of them),
   and that by such whose persons were accepted of God; yea, it may be in
   that very service wherein, less or more, they failed in their
   observation, God being merciful to them, though not in all things
   prepared according to the preparation of the sanctuary; and yet the
   things themselves not to be approved or justified, but condemned of
   God. Such was the fact of Judas Maccabæus in his offering sacrifices
   for the sin of them that were dead; and that of instituting an
   anniversary feast in commemoration of the dedication of the altar.

   This little search have I made into this "great mystery," as it is
   called, "of Puritanism," after which so mighty an outcry is raised by
   this author; and if it might be here farther pursued, it would, as
   stated by us in these general rules and explications, be fully
   manifested to be a principle in general admitted, until of late, by all
   sorts of men, some few only having been forced sometimes to corrupt it
   for the security of some especial interest of their own. And it were an
   easy thing to confirm this assertion by the testimonies of the most
   learned protestant writers that have served the church in the last
   ages. But I know how with many amongst us they are regarded, and that
   the citation of some of the most reverend names among them is not
   unlikely to prejudice and disadvantage the cause wherein their witness
   is produced. I shall not, therefore, expose them to the contempt of
   those, now they are dead, who would have been unwilling to have entered
   the lists with them in any kind of learning when they were alive. There
   is, in my apprehension, the substance of this assertion still retained
   among the Papists, Bellarmine himself lays it down as the foundation of
   all his controversies, and endeavours to prove: "Propheticos et
   apostolicos libros verum esse verbum Dei, et certam et stabilem regulam
   fidei," De Verbo Dei, lib. i. cap. 1; -- "That the prophetical and
   apostolical books are the true word of God, a certain and stable rule
   of faith." [This] will go a great way in this matter; for all our
   obedience in the worship of God is the obedience of faith. And if the
   Scripture be the rule of faith, our faith is not, in any of its
   concerns, to be extended beyond it, no more than the thing regulated is
   to be beyond the rule.

   Neither is this opinion of so late a date as our author and others
   would persuade their credulous followers. The full sense of it was
   spoken out roundly of old. So speaks the great Constantine (that an
   emperor may lead the way) in his oration to the renowned fathers
   assembled at Nice: Euangelikai bibloi kai apostolikai, kai ton palaion
   propheton thespismata saphos hemas ha chre peri tou theiou phronein
   ekpaideuousi· ten polemopoion oun apelasantes erin, ek ton theopneuston
   logon labomen ton zetoumenon ten lusin· -- that is, "The evangelical
   and apostolical books and the oracles of the ancient prophets do
   plainly instruct us what we are to think of divine things. Laying
   aside, therefore, all hostile discord, let us resolve the things
   brought into question by the testimonies of the writings given by
   divine inspiration." We have here the full substance of what is pleaded
   for; and might the advice of this noble emperor be admitted, we should
   have a readier way to expedite all our present differences than as yet
   seems to be provided for us. The great Basil speaks yet more expressly
   than Constantine the Great, Lib. de Confes. Fid.: Phanera ekptosis, kai
   huperephanias kategoria, e athetein ti ton gegrammenon, e epeisagein
   ton me gegrammenon· -- that is, "It hath the manifest guilt of
   infidelity and pride, to reject any thing that is written, or to add or
   introduce any thing that is not written;" which is the sum of all that
   in this matter is contended for. To the same purpose he discourseth,
   Epist. lxxx. ad Eustath.; where, moreover, he rejects all pretences of
   customs and usages of any sorts of men, and will have all differences
   to be brought for their determination to the Scripture. Chrysostom, in
   his Homily on Psalm xcv., speaks the same sense. Saith he, Kai tis ho
   tauta enguomenos; Paulos. Ouden gar dei legein amarturon, oude apo
   logismon monon· ean ti gar agraphon legetai, he dianoia ton akroaton
   skazei, pe men epineuousa, pe de paragraphomene, kai pote men ton logon
   hos heolon apostrephomene, pote de hos pithanon paradechomene. Hotan de
   engraphos he marturia tes theias phones proelthe, kai tou legontos ton
   logon, kai tou akouontos ten dianoian ebebaiose· -- "Who is it that
   promiseth these things? Paul. For we are not to say any thing without
   testimony, nor upon our mere reasoning; for if any thing be spoken
   without Scripture (testimony), the mind of the hearers fluctuates, now
   assenting, anon hesitating, sometimes rejecting what is spoken as
   frivolous, sometimes receiving it as probable. But where the testimony
   of the divine voice comes forth from the Scripture, it confirmeth the
   word of the speaker and the mind of the hearer." It is even so. Whilst
   things relating to religion and the worship of God are debated and
   disputed by the reasonings of men, or on any other principles besides
   the express authority of the Scriptures, no certainty or full
   persuasion of mind can be atoned about them. Men under such actings are
   as Lucian in his Menippus says he was between the disputations of the
   philosophers; sometimes he nodded one way, sometimes another, and
   seemed to give his assent backwards and forwards to express
   contradictions. It is in the testimony of the Scripture alone about the
   things of God that the consciences of those that fear him can acquiesce
   and find satisfaction. The same author, as in many other places, so in
   his 13th Homily on the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, expressly
   sends us to the Scripture to inquire after all things, as that which is
   the exact canon, balance, and rule of religion: Para ton graphon tauta
   panta punthanesthe. Among the Latins, Tertullian is express to the same
   purpose. In his book against Hermogenes, "Adoro," said he,
   "plenitudinem Scripturarum quæ mihi factorem manifestat et facta."
   Again, "Scriptum esse hoc doceat Hermogenis officina, aut timeat iræ
   illud adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum;" -- "I adore the
   fulness of the Scripture;" and, "Let Hermogenes prove what he saith to
   be written, or fear the woe denounced against them who add to or take
   from the word." And again, in his book, De Carne Christi, "Non recipio
   quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers;" -- "I do not receive what you
   bring of your own without Scripture." So also in his book, De
   Præscriptionibus, "Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet; sed
   nec eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos Domini
   habemus authores, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod inducerent
   elegerunt; sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam, fideliter nationibus
   assignaverunt;" -- "It is not lawful for us" (in these things) "to
   indulge unto our own choice, nor to choose what any one brings in of
   his choosing. We have the apostles of our Lord for our example, who
   brought in nothing of their own minds or choice; but having received
   the discipline" (of Christian religion) "from Christ, they faithfully
   communicated it to the nations." Jerome is plain to the same purpose in
   sundry places. So Comment. in xxiii. Matthew, "Quod de Scripturis
   authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur;" --
   "That which hath not authority from the Scripture is as easily despised
   as asserted." Comm. in Hagg., cap. i., "Sed et alia quæ, absque
   authoritate et testimoniis Scripturarum, quasi traditione apostolica
   sponte reperiunt atque confingunt, percutit gladius Dei;" -- "But those
   other things which, without authority or testimony of the Scriptures,
   they find out or feign of their own accord, as of apostolical
   tradition, the sword of God smites through." It were easy to produce
   twenty other testimonies out of the ancient writers of the church,
   giving sufficient countenance to the assertion contended about. What
   account our author gives of this principle is now, very briefly, to be
   considered.

   First, therefore, pp. 174, 175, he reviles it as "a pretence wild and
   humorsome, which men must be absurd if they believe, or impudent if
   they do not, seeing it hath not the least shadow or foundation either
   from Scripture or reason;" though it be expressly asserted, either in
   its own terms, or confirmed by direct deductions, in and from above
   forty places of Scripture. And so much for that part of the assault.

   The next chargeth it with infinite follies and mischiefs in those which
   allow it, and it is said that "there can never be an end of alterations
   and disturbances in the church whilst it is maintained;" the contrary
   whereof is true, confirmed by experience and evidence of the thing
   itself. The admittance of it would put an end to all disturbances; for
   let any man judge whether, if there be matters in difference, as in all
   these things there are and ever were, the bringing them to an issue and
   settled stability be not likelier to be effected by all men's
   consenting unto one common rule, whereby they may be tried and
   examined, than that every party should be left at liberty to indulge to
   their own affections and imaginations about them. And yet we are told,
   p. 178, "that all the pious villanies that ever have disturbed the
   Christian world have sheltered themselves in this grand maxim, that
   Jesus Christ is the only lawmaker to his church." I confess I could
   heartily desire that such expressions might be forborne; for let what
   pretence men please be given to them and colour put upon them, they are
   full of scandal to Christian religion. The maxim itself here traduced
   is as true as any part of the gospel; and it cannot be pretended that
   it is not the maxim itself, but the abuse of it (as all the principles
   of the gospel, through the blindness and lusts of men, have been
   abused), that is reflected on, seeing the design of the whole discourse
   is to evert the maxim itself. Now, whatever apprehensions our author
   may have of his own abilities, I am satisfied that they are no way
   competent to disprove this principle of the gospel, as will be evident
   on the first attempt he shall make to that purpose; let him begin the
   trial as soon as he pleaseth.

   In the third section we have a heap of instances raked together to
   confront the principle in its proper sense before declared and
   vindicated, in no one whereof it is at all concerned; for the reasons
   of things in matters civil and religious are not the same. All
   political government in the world consists in the exercise of
   principles of natural right, and their just application to times, ages,
   people, occasions, and occurrences. Whilst this is done, government is
   acted regularly to its proper end; where this is missed, it fails.
   These things God hath left unto the prudence of men and their consent;
   wherein they cannot for the most part fail, unless they are absolutely
   given up unto unbridled lusts; and the things whereto they may fail are
   always convenient or inconvenient, good and useful or hurtful and
   destructive; not always, yea, very seldom, directly and in themselves
   morally good or evil. In such things men's ease and profit, not their
   consciences, are concerned. In the worship of God things are quite
   otherwise. It is not convenience or inconvenience, advantage or
   disadvantage, as to the things of this life, but merely good or evil,
   in reference to the pleasing of God and to eternity, that is in
   question. Particular applications to the manners, customs, usages of
   places, times, countries, -- which is the proper field of human
   authority, liberty, and prudence in civil things (because their due,
   useful, and regular administration depends upon them), -- have here no
   place: for the things of the worship of God, being spiritual, are
   capable of no variations from temporal, earthly varieties among men;
   have no respect to climates, customs, forms of civil government, or any
   thing of that nature; but, considering men quite under other notions,
   namely, of sinners and believers, with respect utterly unto other ends,
   namely, their living spiritually unto God here, and the eternal
   enjoyment of him hereafter, are not subject to such prudential
   accommodations or applications. The worship of God is, or ought to be,
   the same at all times, in all places, and amongst all people, in all
   nations; and the order of it is fixed and determined in all particulars
   that belong unto it. And let not men pretend the contrary: until they
   can give an instance of any such defect in the institutions of Christ
   as that the worship of God cannot be carried on, nor his church ruled
   and edified, without an addition of something of their own for the
   supply thereof, which therefore should and would be necessary to that
   end antecedent unto its addition; and when they have so done, I will
   subscribe unto whatsoever they shall be pleased to add of that, or
   indeed any other kind. "Customs of churches," and "rules of decency,''
   which our author here casts under the magistrate's power, are ambiguous
   terms, and in no sense express the hypothesis he hath undertaken the
   defence of. In the proper signification of the words, the things
   intended may fall under those natural circumstances wherein religious
   actions in the worship of the church may have their concern, as they
   are actions, and are disposable by human authority; but he will not, I
   presume, so soon desert his fundamental principle, of the magistrate's
   appointing things in and parts of religious worship, nowhere described
   or determined in the word of God, which alone we have undertaken to
   oppose. The instances he also gives us about actions in their own
   nature and use indifferent, as going to law or taking physic, are not
   in the least to his purpose. And yet if I should say that none of these
   actions are indeed indifferent in "actu exercito," as they speak, and
   in their individual performance, but have a moral good or evil, as an
   inseparable adjunct, attending them, arising out of respect to some
   rule, general or particular, of divine revelation, I know he cannot
   disprove it; and much more is not pleaded concerning religious worship.

   But this principle is farther charged with "mischief equal to its
   folly;" which is proved by instances in sundry uninstituted
   observances, both in the Jewish and primitive Christian churches, as
   also in protestant churches abroad. I answer, that if this author will
   consent to umpire these differences by either the Old or New Testament,
   or by any protestant church in the world, we shall be nearer an end of
   them than, as far as I can see, yet otherwise we are. If he will not be
   bound neither to the example of the church of the Jews, nor of the
   churches of the New Testament, nor of the present protestant churches,
   it must be confessed that their names are here made use of only for a
   pretence and an advantage. Under the Old Testament we find that all
   that God required of his church was, that they should "remember the law
   of Moses his servant, which he commanded unto him in Horeb for all
   Israel, with the statutes and judgments," Mal. iv. 4. And when God had
   given out his institutions and the whole order of his worship, it being
   fixed in the church accordingly, it is added eight or ten times in one
   chapter that this was done: "As the Lord commanded Moses, so did he,"
   Exod. xl.. After this God gives them many strict prohibitions from
   adding any thing to what he had so commanded: as Deut. iv. 2, xii. 32;
   Prov. xxx. 6. And as he had in the decalogue rejected any worship not
   of his own appointment, as such, Exod. xx. 4, 5, so he made it
   afterward the rule of his acceptation of that people and what they did,
   or his refusal of them and it, whether it was by him commanded or no.
   So, in particular, he expressly rejects that which was so added as to
   days, and times, and places, though of the nearest affinity and
   cognation to what was appointed by himself, because it was invented by
   man, yea, by a king, 1 Kings xii. 33. And when, in process of time,
   many things of an uncertain original were crept into the observance of
   the church, and had firmed themselves with the notion of "traditions,"
   they were all at once rejected in that word of the blessed Holy One,
   "In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines'' (that is, what is
   in my worship to be observed) "the traditions of men." For the churches
   of the New Testament, the foundation of them is laid in that command of
   our Saviour, Matt. xxviii. 19, 20, "Go ye therefore, and teach all
   nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
   of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
   have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of
   the world." That they should be taught to do or observe any thing but
   what he commanded, -- that his presence should accompany them in the
   teaching or observation of any superadditions of their own, -- we
   nowhere find written, intimated, or exemplified by any practice of
   theirs. Nor, however, in that juncture of time, the like whereunto did
   never occur before, nor ever shall do again, during the expiration and
   taking down of Mosaical institutions, before they became absolutely
   unlawful to be observed, the apostles, according to the liberty given
   them by our Lord Jesus Christ and direction of the Holy Ghost, did
   practice some things compliant with both church-states, did they, in
   any one instance, impose any thing on the practice of the churches in
   the worship of God, to be necessarily and for a continuance observed
   among them, but what they had express warrant, and authority, and
   command of our Lord Christ for. Counsel they gave in particular cases,
   that depended upon present emergencies; directions for the regular and
   due observation of institutions, and the application of general rules
   in particular practice; they also taught a due and sanctified use of
   civil customs, and the proper use of moral or natural symbols: but to
   impose any religious rites on the constant practice of the church in
   the worship of God, making them necessary to be always observed by that
   imposition, they did not once attempt to do, or assume power for it to
   themselves. Yea, when, upon an important difficulty, and to prevent a
   ruining scandal, they were enforced to declare their judgment to the
   churches in some points, wherein they were to abridge the practice of
   their Christian liberty for a season, they would do it only in things
   made "necessary" by the state of things then among the churches (in
   reference to the great end of edification, whereby all practices are to
   be regulated), before the declaration of their judgment for the
   restriction mentioned, Acts xv. 23-29. So remote were they from
   assuming unto themselves a dominion over the religion, consciences, or
   faith of the disciples of Christ, or requiring any thing, in the
   constant worship of the church, but what was according to the will,
   appointment, and command of their Lord and Master. Little countenance,
   therefore, is our author like to obtain unto his sentiments from the
   Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, or the example either of the
   Jews or Christians mentioned in them.

   The instances he gives from the church of the Jews, or that may be
   given, are either civil observances, as the feast of purim; or moral
   conveniencies directed by general rules, as the building of synagogues;
   or customary signs suited to the nature of things, as wearing of
   sackcloth; or such as have no proof of their being approved, as the
   feast of dedication, and some monthly fasts taken up in the captivity;
   -- from none of which any objection can be taken against the position
   before laid down. Those from the church of the New Testament had either
   a perpetual binding institution from the authority of Christ, as the
   Lord's-day Sabbath; or contain only a direction to use civil customs
   and observances in a holy and sanctified manner, as the love feasts and
   kiss of charity; or such as were never heard of in the New Testament at
   all, as the observation of Lent and Easter. He that out of these
   instances can draw a warranty for the power of the civil magistrate
   over religion and the consciences of men, to institute new duties in
   religion when he pleaseth, so these "do not countenance vice nor
   disgrace the Deity," which all his Christian subjects shall be bound in
   conscience to observe, or otherwise make good any of those particular
   conclusions, that therefore Christ is not the only lawgiver to his
   church, or that divine revelation is not the adequate rule of divine
   worship, or that men may add any thing to the worship of God, to be
   observed in it constantly and indispensably by the whole church, will
   manifest himself, to have an excellency in argumentation beyond what I
   have ever yet met withal.

   A removal of the argument taken from the perfection of the Scripture,
   and its sufficiency to instruct us in the whole counsel and will of
   God, concerning his worship and our obedience unto him, is nextly
   attempted; but with no engines but what have been discovered to be
   insufficient to that purpose a hundred times. It is alleged, "That what
   the Scripture commands in the worship of God is to be observed, that
   what it forbids is to be avoided;" which if really acknowledged, and a
   concernment of the consciences of men be granted therein, is
   sufficiently destructive of the principal design of our author. But,
   moreover, I say that it commands and forbids things by general rules,
   as well as by particular precepts and inhibitions; and that if what is
   so commanded be observed, and what is so forbidden be avoided, there is
   a direct rule remaining in it for the whole worship of God.

   But this is said here to be of "substantial duties, but not of external
   circumstances;" and if it be so even of substantial duties, it
   perfectly overthrows all that our author hath been pleading in the
   first three chapters of his discourse. For external circumstances, of
   what nature those are which are disposable by human authority and
   prudence hath been now often declared, and needs not here to be
   repeated.

   The sum of his apprehensions in this matter, about the perfection and
   sufficiency of the Scripture in reference to the worship of God, our
   author gives us, p. 189: "Any thing," saith he, "is lawful" (that is,
   in the worship of God) "that is not made unlawful by some prohibition;
   for things become evil, not upon the score of their being not
   commanded, but upon that of their being forbidden. And what the
   Scripture forbids not, it allows; and what it allows is not unlawful;
   and what is not unlawful may lawfully be done." This tale, I confess,
   we have been told many and many a time, but it hath been as often
   answered that the whole of it, as to any thing of reasoning, is
   captious and sophistical.

   Once more, therefore; what is commanded in the worship of God is
   lawful, yea, is our duty to observe. All particular instances of this
   sort that are to have actual place in the worship of God were easily
   enumerated, and so expressly commanded; and why, among sundry things
   that might equally belong thereunto, one should be commanded, and
   another left at liberty without any institution, no man can divine. Of
   particular things not to be observed there is not the same reason. It
   is morally impossible that all instances of men's inventions, all that
   they can find out to introduce into the worship of God, at any time, in
   any age, and please themselves therein, should be beforehand enumerated
   and prohibited in their particular instances. And if, because they are
   not so forbidden, they may lawfully be introduced into divine worship,
   and imposed upon the practice of men, ten thousand things may be made
   lawful and be so imposed. But the truth is, although a particular
   prohibition be needful to render a thing evil in itself, a general
   prohibition is enough to render any thing unlawful in the worship of
   God. So we grant that what is not forbidden is lawful, but withal say
   that every thing is forbidden that should be esteemed as any part of
   divine worship that is not commanded; and if it were not, yet for want
   of such a command or divine institution, it can have neither use nor
   efficacy with respect to the end of all religious worship.

   Our author speaks with his wonted confidence in this matter; yea, it
   seems to rise to its highest pitch, as also doth his contempt of his
   adversaries or whatever is or may be offered by them in the
   justification of this principle. "Infinite certainty" on his own part,
   p. 193, "baffled and intolerable impertinencies, weak and puny
   arguments, cavils of a few hot-headed and brain-sick people," with
   other opprobrious expressions of the like nature, filling up a great
   part of his leaves, are what he can afford unto those whom he opposeth.
   But yet I am not, for all this bluster, well satisfied, much less
   "infinitely certain," that he doth in any competent measure understand
   aright the controversy about which he treats with all this wrath and
   confidence; for the sum of all that here he pleads is no more but this,
   that "the circumstances of actions in particular are various, and as
   they are not, so they cannot be, determined by the word of God, and
   therefore must be ordered by human prudence and authority:" which if he
   suppose that any man denies, I shall the less wonder at his severe
   reflections upon them, though I shall never judge them necessary or
   excusable in any case whatever. Page 198, he imposeth it on others that
   lie under the power of this persuasion, "that they are obliged in
   conscience to act contrary to whatever their superiors command them in
   the worship of God;" which farther sufficiently evidenceth that either
   he understands not the controversy under debate, or that he believes
   not himself in what he saith; which, because the harsher imputation, I
   shall avoid the owning of in the least surmise.

   Section 6, from the concession that the "magistrate may take care that
   the laws of Christ be executed," -- that is, command and require his
   subjects to observe the commands of Christ in that way and by such
   means as those commands, from the nature of the things themselves, and
   according to the rule of the gospel, may be commanded and required, --
   he infers that he hath himself power of making laws in religion! But
   why so? and how doth this follow? Why, saith he, "It is apparently
   implied, because whoever hath a power to see that laws be executed
   cannot be without a power to command their execution." Very good: but
   the conclusion should have been, "He cannot be without a power to make
   laws in the matter about which he looks to the execution;" which would
   be good doctrine for justices of the peace to follow. But what is here
   laid down is nothing but repeating of the same thing in words a little
   varied; as if it had been said, "He that hath power to see the laws
   executed, or a power to command their execution, he hath power to see
   the laws executed, or a power to command their execution;" which is
   very true. And this we acknowledge the magistrate hath, in the way
   before declared. But that, because he may do this, he may also make
   laws of his own in religion, it doth not at all follow from hence,
   whether it be true or no. But this is farther confirmed from "the
   nature of the laws of Christ, which have only declared the substance
   and morality of religious worship, and therefore must needs have left
   the ordering of its circumstances to the power and wisdom of lawful
   authority." "The laws of Christ" which are intended are those which he
   hath given concerning the worship of God. That these have "determined
   the morality of religious worship," I know not how he can well allow,
   who makes the law of nature to be the measure of morality and all moral
   religious worship. And for "the substance of religious worship," I wish
   it were well declared what is intended by it. For my part, I think that
   whatever is commanded by Christ, the observation of it is of the
   substance of religious worship; else, I am sure the sacraments are not
   so. Now, do but give men leave, as rational creatures, to observe those
   commands of Christ in such a way and manner as the nature of them
   requires them to be observed, as he hath himself in general rules
   prescribed, as the concurrent actions of many in society make
   necessary, and all this controversy will be at an end. When a duty, as
   to the kind of it, is commanded in particular, or instituted by Christ
   in the worship of God, he hath given general rules to guide us in the
   individual performance of it, as to the circumstances that the actions
   whereby it is performed will be attended withal. For the disposal of
   those circumstances according to those rules, prudence is to take place
   and to be used; for men, who are obliged to act as men in all other
   things, are not to be looked on as brutes in what is required of them
   in the worship of God.

   But to institute mystical rites and fixed forms of sacred
   administrations, whereof nothing in the like kind doth necessarily
   attend the acting of instituted worship, is not to determine
   circumstances, but to ordain new parts of divine worship; and such
   injunctions are here confessed by our author, p. 191, to be "new and
   distinct commands by themselves," and to enjoin something that the
   Scripture nowhere commands: which when he produceth a warranty for, he
   will have made a great progress towards the determining of the present
   controversy.

   Page 192, he answers an objection, consisting of two branches, as by
   him proposed, whereof the first is, "That it cannot stand with the love
   and wisdom of God not to take order himself for all things that
   immediately concern his own worship and kingdom." Now, though I doubt
   not at all but that God hath so done, yet I do not remember at present
   that I have read [of] any imposing the necessity hereof upon him in
   answer to his love and wisdom. I confess Valerianus Magnus, a famous
   writer of the church of Rome, tells us that never any one did so
   foolishly institute or order a commonwealth as Jesus Christ must be
   thought to have done, if he have not left one supreme judge to
   determine the faith and consciences of men in matters of religion and
   divine worship; and our author seems not to be remote from that kind of
   reasoning, who, without an assignment of a power to that purpose,
   contendeth that all things among men will run into confusion, -- of so
   little concernment do the Scriptures and the authority of God in them
   to some seem to be. We do indeed thankfully acknowledge that God, out
   of his love and wisdom, hath ordered all things belonging to his
   worship and spiritual kingdom in the world; and we do suppose we need
   no other argument to evince this assertion but to challenge all men who
   are otherwise minded to give an instance of any defect in his
   institutions to that purpose. And this we are the more confirmed in,
   because those things which men think good to add unto them, they dare
   not contend that they are parts of his worship, or that they are added
   to supply any defect therein; neither did ever any man yet say that
   there is a defect in the divine institution of worship, which must be
   supplied by a minister's wearing a surplice. All, then, that is
   intended in this consideration, though not urged, as is here pretended,
   is, that God, in his goodness, love, and care towards his church, hath
   determined all things that are needful in or to his worship; and about
   what is not needful, men, if they please, may contend, but it will be
   to no great purpose.

   The other part of the objection which he proposeth to himself is laid
   down by him in these words: "If Jesus Christ have not determined all
   particular rites and circumstances of religion, he hath discharged his
   office with less wisdom and fidelity than Moses, who ordered every
   thing appertaining to the worship of God, even as far as the pins or
   nails of the tabernacle." And hereunto in particular he returns in
   answer not one word, but only ranks it amongst idle and impertinent
   reasonings. And I dare say he wants not reasons for his silence;
   whether they be pertinent or no I know not: for setting aside the
   advantage that, it is possible, he aimed to make in the manner and
   terms of the proposal of this objection to his sentiments, it will
   appear that he hath not much to offer for its removal. We dispute not
   about the "rites and circumstances of religion, which are terms
   ambiguous, and, as hath been declared, may be variously interpreted, no
   more than we do about the "nails of the tabernacle," wherein there were
   none at all; but it is about the worship of God, and what is necessary
   thereunto. The ordering hereof, -- that is, of the house of God and all
   things belonging thereunto, -- was committed to Jesus Christ, "as a Son
   over his own house," Heb. iii. 1-6. In the discharge of his trust
   therein he was faithful, as was Moses, who received that testimony from
   God, that he was "faithful in all his house," upon his ordering all
   things in the worship of God as he commanded him, without adding any
   thing of his own thereunto, or leaving any thing uninstituted or
   undetermined which was to be of use therein. From the faithfulness of
   Christ, therefore, in and over the house of God, as it is compared with
   the faithfulness of Moses, it may be concluded, I think, that he
   ordered all things for the worship of God in the churches of the New
   Testament, as far as Moses did in and for the church of the Old, and
   more is not contended for; and it will be made appear that his
   commission in this matter was as extensive as that of Moses at the
   least, or he could not, in that trust and the discharge of it, have
   that preeminence above him which in this place is ascribed unto him.

   Section 7, an account is given of the great variety of circumstances
   which do attend all human actions, whence it is impossible that they
   should be all determined by,divine prescription. The same we say also;
   but add withal, that if men would leave these circumstances free, under
   the conduct of common prudence, in the instituted worship of God, as
   they are compelled so to do in the performance of moral duties, and as
   he himself hath left them free, it would be as convenient for the
   reasons and consciences of men as an attempt to the contrary. Thus, we
   have an instance given us by our author in the moral duty of charity,
   which is commanded us of God himself; but the times, seasons, manner,
   objects, measures of it are left free, to be determined by human
   prudence upon emergencies and occasions. It may be now inquired whether
   the magistrate, or any other, can determine those circumstances by a
   law? or whether they are not, as by God, so by all wise men, left free,
   under the conduct of their reason and conscience who are obliged to do
   the duty itself by the command of God? And why may not the same rule
   and order be observed with respect to the circumstances that attend the
   performance of the duties of instituted worship? Besides, there are
   general circumstances that are capable of a determination, -- such are
   time and place as naturally considered, -- without such adjuncts as
   might give them a moral consideration, or render them good or evil;
   these the magistrate may determine: but for particular circumstances
   attending individual actions, they will hardly be regulated by a
   standing law. But none of these things have the least interest in our
   debate. To add things necessarily to be observed in the worship of God,
   no way naturally related unto the actions wherewith prescribed worship
   is to be performed, and then to call them circumstances thereof, erects
   a notion of things which nothing but interest can digest and concoct.

   His eighth section is unanswerable. It contains such a strenuous
   reviling of the Puritans, and contemptuous reproaches of their
   writings, with such encomiums of their adversaries, as there is no
   dealing with it; and so I leave it. And so likewise I do his ninth,
   wherein, as he saith, he "upbraids the men of his contest with their
   shameful overthrows, and dares them to look those enemies in the face
   that have so lamentably cowed them by so many absolute triumphs and
   victories:" which kind of juvenile exultations on feigned suppositions
   will, I suppose, in due time receive an alloy from his own more advised
   thoughts and considerations. The instance wherewith he countenanceth
   himself in his triumphant acclamations unto the victory of his party is
   the book of Mr Hooker, and its being unanswered; concerning which I
   shall only say, that as I wish the same moderation, ingenuity, and
   learning unto all that engage in the same cause with him in these days,
   so if this author will mind us of any one argument in his longsome
   discourse not already frequently answered, and that in print long ago,
   it shall have its due consideration. But this kind of discourse, it may
   be, on second thoughts, will be esteemed not so comely. And I can mind
   him of those who boast as highly of some champions of their own against
   all Protestants, as he can do of any patron of those opinions which he
   contendeth for. But it doth not always fall out that those who have the
   most outward advantages and greatest leisure have the best cause and
   abilities to manage it.

   The next sections treat concerning superstition, will-worship, and
   Popery; which, as he saith, having been charged by some on the church
   unduly, he retorts the crime of them upon the authors of that charge. I
   love not to strive, nor will I contend about words that may have
   various significations fixed on them. It is about things that we
   differ. That which is evil is so, however you call it, and whether you
   can give it any special name or no. That which is good will still be
   so, call it what and how men please. The giving of a bad or odious name
   to any thing doth not make itself to be bad or odious. The managing,
   therefore, of those appellations, either as to their charge or
   recharge, I am no way concerned in. When it is proved that men believe,
   teach, or practice otherwise than in duty to God they ought to do, then
   they do evil; and when they obey his mind and will in all things, then
   they do well, and in the end will have the praise thereof. In
   particular, I confess superstition, as the word is commonly used,
   denotes a vicious habit of mind with respect unto God and his worship,
   and so is not a proper denomination for the worship itself, or of any
   evil or crime in it; but yet, if it were worth contending about, I
   could easily manifest that, according to the use of the word by good
   authors, in all ages men have been charged with that crime from the
   kind and nature of the worship itself observed by them. And when St
   Paul charged the Athenians with an excess in superstition, it was from
   the multiplication of their gods, and thronging them together, right or
   wrong, in the dedication of their altars. But these things belong not
   at all to our present design. Let them who enjoin things unto an
   indispensable necessary observation in the worship of God, which are
   not by him prescribed therein, take care of their own minds that they
   be free from the vice of superstition, and they shall never be judged
   or charged by me therewith; though I must say that a multiplication of
   instances in this kind, as to their own observation, is the principal
   if not the only way whereby men who own the true and proper object of
   religious worship do or may manifest themselves to be influenced by
   that corrupt habit of mind, so that they may relate unto superstition
   as the effect to its cause. But the recrimination here insisted on,
   with respect unto them who refuse admittance unto or observance of
   things so enjoined, is such as ought to be expected from provocations
   and a desire of retortion. Such things usually taste of the cask, and
   are sufficiently weak and impertinent; for it is a mistake, that those
   charged do make, as it is here expressed, "any thing necessary not to
   be done," or put "any religion in the not doing of any thing," or the
   non-observance of any rites, orders, or ceremonies, any other than
   every one puts in his abstinence from what God forbids, which is a part
   of our moral obedience.

   And the whole question in this matter is not, Whether, as it is here
   phrased, "God hath tied up his creatures to nice and pettish laws,
   laying a greater stress upon a doubtful or indifferent ceremony than
   upon the great duty of obedience?" but merely, Whether men are to
   observe in the worship of God what they apprehend he hath enjoined
   them, and to abstain from what he doth forbid, according to all the
   light that they have into his mind and will? which inquiry, as I
   suppose, may be [thus] satisfied, -- that they are so to practice and
   so to abstain, without being liable to the charge of superstition. No
   man can answer for the minds of other men, nor know what depraved,
   vicious habits and inclinations they are subject unto. Outward actions
   are all that we are, in any case, allowed to pass judgment upon, and of
   men's minds as those actions are indications of them. Let men,
   therefore, observe and do in the worship of God whatever the Lord
   Christ hath commanded them, and abstain from what he hath forbidden,
   whether in particular instances or by general directive precepts and
   rules, -- by which means alone many things are capable of falling under
   a prohibition, without the least thought of placing any worship of God
   in their abstinence from this or that thing in particular, -- and I
   think they need not much concern themselves in the charge of
   superstition given in or out by any against them.

   For what is discoursed, section 11, about will-worship, I cannot so far
   agree with our author as I could in what passed before about
   superstition; and that partly because I cannot discern him to be herein
   at any good agreement with himself: for "superstition," he tells us,
   "consists in the apprehensions of men, when their minds are possessed
   with weak and uncomely conceits of God," p. 201; here, that
   "will-worship consists in nothing else than in men's making their own
   fancies and inventions necessary parts of religion," which outward
   actings are not coincident with the inward frame and habit of mind
   before described. And I do heartily wish that some men could well free
   themselves from the charge of will-worship, as it is here described by
   our author, though cautelously expressed, to secure the concernments of
   his own interest from it; for although I will not call the things they
   contend to impose on others in the worship of God their "fancies," yet
   themselves acknowledge them to be their "inventions." And when they
   make them necessary to be observed in the whole worship of God, as
   public and stated, and forbid the celebration of that worship without
   them; when they declare their usefulness and spiritual or mystical
   significancy in that worship or service, designing to honour God in or
   by their use, setting up some of them to an exclusion of what Christ
   hath commanded, -- if I cannot understand but that they make them
   necessary parts of God's worship, as to the actual observance of it, I
   hope they will not be angry with me, since I know the worst they can
   possibly with truth charge upon me in this matter is, that I am not so
   wise nor of so quick an understanding as themselves. Neither doth our
   author well remove his charge from those whose defence he hath
   undertaken; for he doth it only by this consideration, "that they do
   not make the things by them introduced in the worship of God to be
   parts of religion; they are not so," he saith, "nor are made so by
   them;" -- for this hinders not but that they may be looked on as parts
   of divine worship, seeing we are taught by the same hand that "external
   worship is no part of religion at all." And let him abide by what he
   closeth this section withal, -- namely, that they make not any
   additions to the worship of God, but only provide that what God hath
   required be performed in an orderly and decent manner, -- and, as to my
   concern, there shall be an end of this part of our controversy.

   The ensuing paragraphs about "Christian liberty, adding to the commands
   of God, and Popery," are of the same nature with those preceding about
   superstition and will-worship. There is nothing new in them but words,
   and they may be briefly passed through. For the charge of Popery, on
   the one side or other, I know nothing in it, but that when any thing is
   enjoined or imposed on men's practice in the worship of God, which is
   known to have been invented in and by the papal church during the time
   of its confessed apostasy, it must needs beget prejudices against it in
   the minds of them who consider the ways, means, and ends of the fatal
   defection of that church, and are jealous of a sinful compliance with
   it in any of those things. The recharge on those who are said "to set
   up a pope in every man's conscience, whilst they vest it with a power
   of countermanding the decrees of princes," -- if no more be intended by
   "countermanding'' but a refusal to observe their decrees and yield
   obedience to them in things against their consciences, which is all
   that can be pretended, -- if it fall not on this author himself, as in
   some cases it doth, and which, by the certain conduct of right reason,
   must be extended to all wherein the consciences of men are affected
   with the authority of God, yet it doth on all Christians in the world
   that I know of, besides himself. [As] for "adding to the law of God,"
   it is not charged on any that they add to his commands, as though they
   made their own divine, or part of his word and law; but only that they
   add in his worship to the things commanded by him: which being
   forbidden in the Scripture, when they can free themselves from it I
   shall rejoice, but as yet see not how they can so do. Nor are there
   any, that I know of, who "set up any prohibitions of their own," in or
   about the worship of God, or any thing thereunto pertaining, as is
   unduly and unrighteously pretended. There may be, indeed, some things
   enjoined by men which they do and must abstain from, as they would do
   from any other sin whatever; but their consciences are regulated by no
   prohibitions but those of God himself. And things are prohibited and
   made sinful unto them, not only when in particular, and by a
   specification of their instances, they are forbidden, but also when
   there lie general prohibitions against them on any account whatever.
   Some men, indeed, think that if a particular prohibition of any thing
   might be produced, they would acquiesce in it, whilst they plead an
   exemption of sundry things from being included in general prohibitions,
   although they have the direct formal reason attending them on which
   those prohibitions are founded: but it is to be feared that this also
   is but a pretence; for let any thing be particularly forbidden, yet if
   men's interest and superstition induce them to observe or retain it,
   they will find out distinctions to evade the prohibition and retain the
   practice. What can be more directly forbidden than the making or using
   of graven images in or about religious worship? and yet we know how
   little some men do acquiesce in that prohibition. And it was the
   observation of a learned prelate [10] of this nation, in his rejection
   of the distinctions whereby they endeavoured to countenance themselves
   in their idolatry, that the particular instances of things forbidden in
   the second commandment are not principally intended, but the general
   rule of not adding any thing in the worship of God without his
   institution. "Non imago," saith he, "non simulachrum prohibetur; sed
   non facies tibi." What way soever, therefore, any thing becomes a sin
   unto any, be it by a particular or general prohibition, be it from the
   scandal that may attend its practice, unto him it is a sin. And, it is
   a wild notion, that when any persons abstain from the practice of that
   in the worship of God which to them is sinful as so practised, they add
   prohibitions of their own to the commands of God.

   The same is to be said concerning Christian liberty. No man, that I
   know of, makes "things indifferent to be sinful," as is pretended, nor
   can any man in his right wits do so; for none can entertain
   contradictory notions of the same thing at the same time, as these are,
   that the same things are indifferent, that is, not sinful, and sinful.
   But this some say, that things in their own nature indifferent, that
   is, absolutely so, may be yet relatively unlawful, because, with
   respect unto that relation, forbidden of God. To set up an altar of old
   for a civil memorial in any place was a thing indifferent; but to set
   up an altar to offer sacrifices on, where the tabernacle was not, was a
   sin. It is indifferent for a man that understands that language to read
   the Scripture in Latin or in English; but to read it in Latin unto a
   congregation that understands it not, as a part of God's worship, would
   be sin. Nor doth our Christian liberty consist alone in our judgment of
   the indifferency of things in their own nature, made necessary to
   practice by commands, as hath been showed; and if it doth so, the Jews
   had that privilege as much as Christians. And they are easily offended
   who complain that their Christian liberty, in the practice of what they
   think meet in the worship of God, is intrenched on by such as, leaving
   them to their pleasure, because of their apprehension of the will of
   God to the contrary, cannot comply with them in their practice.

   The close of this chapter is designed to the removal of an objection,
   pretended to be weighty and difficult, but indeed made so merely by the
   novel opinions advanced by this author; for, laying aside all respect
   unto some uncouth principles broached in this discourse, there is
   scarce a Christian child of ten years old but can resolve the
   difficulty pretended, and that according to the mind of God: for it is
   supposed that the magistrate may "establish a worship that is
   idolatrous and superstitious," and an inquiry is made thereon what the
   subject shall do in that case? Why, where lies the difficulty? "Why,"
   saith he, "in this case they must be either rebels or idolaters. If
   they obey, they sin against God; if they disobey, they sin against
   their sovereign." According to the principles hitherto received in
   Christian religion, any one would reply and say, No: for it is certain
   that men must obey God, and not contract the guilt of such horrible
   sins as idolatry and superstition; but in so doing they are neither
   rebels against their ruler nor do sin against him. It is true, they
   must quietly and patiently submit to what they may suffer from him, but
   they are in so doing guilty of no rebellion or sin against him. Did
   ever any Christian yet so much as call it into question whether the
   primitive Christians were rebels, and sinned against their rulers,
   because they would not obey those edicts whereby they established
   idolatrous worship? or did any one ever think that they had a difficult
   case of conscience to resolve in that matter? They were, indeed,
   accused by the Pagans as rebels against the emperors; but no Christian
   ever yet thought their case to have been doubtful. But all this
   difficulty ariseth from the making of two Gods, where there ought to be
   but one; and this renders the case so perplexed, that, for my part, I
   cannot see directly how it is determined by our author. Sometimes he
   speaks as though it were the duty of subjects to comply with the
   establishment of idolatry supposed, as pp. 214, 215; for with respect,
   as I suppose, it is to the case as by him stated that he says, "Men
   must not withdraw their obedience;" and, "Better submit unto the
   unreasonable impositions of Nero or Caligula than to hazard the
   dissolution of the state." Sometimes he seems not to oblige them in
   conscience to practice according to the public prescription, but only
   pleads that the magistrate may punish them if they do not, and fain
   would have it thought that he may do so justly. But these things are
   certain unto us in this matter, and are so many kuriai doxai in
   Christian religion:-- That if the supreme magistrate command any thing
   in the worship of God that is idolatrous, we are not to practice it
   accordingly, because we must obey God rather than men. Nextly, That in
   our refusal of compliance with the magistrate's commands, we do neither
   rebel nor sin against him; for God hath not, doth not at any time, shut
   us up, in any condition, unto a necessity of sinning. Thirdly, That in
   case the magistrate shall think meet, through his own mistakes and
   misapprehensions, to punish, destroy, and burn them alive who shall not
   comply with his edicts, as did Nebuchadnezzar, or as they did in
   England in times of Popery, after all honest and lawful private ways of
   self-preservation used, which we are obliged unto, we are quietly and
   patiently to submit to the will of God in our sufferings, without
   opposing or resisting by force, or stirring up seditions or tumults, to
   the disturbance of public peace.

   But our author hath elsewhere provided a full solution of this
   difficulty, chap. viii. p. 308, where he tells us, "That in cases and
   disputes of a public concern, private men are not properly sui juris;'
   they have no power over their actions; they are not to be directed by
   their own judgments, or determined by their own wills, but by the
   commands and determinations of the public conscience; and if there be
   any sin in the command, he that imposed it shall answer for it, and not
   I, whose duty it is to obey. The commands of authority will warrant my
   obedience; my obedience will hallow or at least excuse my action, and
   so secure me from sin, if not from error, because I follow the best
   guide and most probable direction I am capable of; and though I may
   mistake, my integrity shall preserve my innocence; and in all doubtful
   and disputable cases, it is better to err with authority than to be in
   the right against it." When he shall produce any one divine writer, any
   of the ancient fathers, any sober schoolmen or casuists, any learned
   modern divines, speaking at this rate, or giving countenance unto his
   direction given to men for the regulating of their moral actions, it
   shall be farther attended unto. I know some such thing is muttered
   amongst the pleaders for blind obedience upon vows voluntarily engaged
   into for that purpose. But as it is acknowledged by themselves that by
   those vows they deprive themselves of that right and liberty which
   naturally belong unto them, as unto all other men (wherein they place
   much of the merit of them); so by others those vows themselves, with
   all the pretended brutish obedience that proceeds from them, are
   sufficiently evidenced to be a horrible abomination, and such as make a
   ready way for the perpetration of all villanies in the world, -- to
   which purpose that kind of obedience hath been principally made use of.
   But these things are extremely fond, and not only, as applied unto the
   worship of God, repugnant to the gospel, but also in themselves to the
   law of our creation, and that moral dependence on God which is
   indispensable unto all individuals of mankind. We are told in the
   gospel that "every man is to be fully persuaded in his own mind;" that
   "whatsoever is not of faith is sin;" that we are not to be (in such
   things) "the servants of men;" that other men's leading of us amiss,
   whoever they are, will not excuse us, "for if the blind lead the blind,
   both shall fall into the ditch," and he that followeth is as sure to
   perish as he that leadeth. The next guides of the souls and consciences
   of men are, doubtless, those who speak unto them in the name of God, or
   preachers of the gospel; yet are all the disciples of Christ frequently
   warned to "take heed" that they be not deceived by any under that
   pretence, but diligently examining what is proposed unto them, they
   discern in themselves what is good and evil. Nor doth the great apostle
   himself require us to be followers of him any farther than he was a
   follower of Christ. They will find small relief who, at the last day,
   shall charge their sins on the commands of others, whatever hope to the
   contrary they are put into by our author. Neither will it be any excuse
   that we have done according to the precepts of men, if we have done
   contrary to those of God. Ephraim of old was "broken in judgment,
   because he willingly walked after the commandment," Hos. v. 11. But
   would not his "obedience hallow, or at least excuse, his action?" and
   would not the "authority of the king warrant his obedience?" or must
   Ephraim now answer for the sin, and not he only that imposed the
   command? But it seems that when Jeroboam sinned, who at that time had
   this goodly creature of the "public conscience" in keeping, he made
   Israel sin also, who obeyed him. It is, moreover, a brave attempt, to
   assert that "private men," with respect to any of their moral actions,
   "are not properly sui juris,' have no power over their actions, are not
   to be directed by their own judgments or determined by their own
   wills." This is Circe's rod, one stroke whereof turned men into hogs.
   For to what propose serve their understandings, their judgments, their
   wills, if not to guide and determine them in their actions? I think he
   would find hard work that should go about to persuade men to put out
   their own eyes, or blind themselves, that they might see all by one
   public eye; and I am sure it is no less unreasonable to desire them to
   reject their own wills, understandings, and judgments, to be led and
   determined by a public conscience, considering especially that that
   public conscience itself is a mere "tragelaphus," which never had
   existence in "rerum natura."

   Besides, suppose men should be willing to accept of this condition of
   renouncing their own understandings and judgments from being their
   guides as to their moral actions, I fear it will be found that indeed
   they are not able so to do. Men's understandings and their consciences
   are placed in them by him who made them, to rule in them and over their
   actions in his name, and with respect unto their dependence on him; and
   let men endeavour it whilst they please, they shall never be able
   utterly to cast off this yoke of God and destroy this order of things,
   which is by him inlaid in the principles of all rational beings. Men,
   whilst they are men, in things that have a moral good or evil in them
   or adhering to them, must be guided and determined by their own
   understandings whether they will or no; and if by any means they stifle
   the actings of them at present, they will not avoid that judgment
   which, according to them, shall pass upon them at the last day. But
   these things may elsewhere be farther pursued. In the meantime, the
   reader may take this case as it is determined by the learned prelate
   before mentioned, in his dialogue about subjection and obedience,
   against the Papists, whose words are as follow. Part iii. p. 297:-- "
   Philand. If the prince establish any religion, whatever it be, you must
   by your oath obey it. Theoph. We must not rebel and take arms against
   the prince, but with reverence and humility serve God before the
   prince; and that is nothing against our oath. Philand. Then is not the
   prince supreme. Theoph. Why so? Philand. Yourselves are superior, when
   you serve whom you list. Theoph. As though to serve God according to
   his will were to serve whom we list, and not whom princes and all
   others ought to serve. Philand. But you will be judges when God is well
   served, and when not. Theoph. If you can excuse us before God when you
   mislead us, we will serve him as you shall appoint us; otherwise, if
   every man shall answer for himself, good reason he be master of his own
   conscience in that which toucheth him so near, and no man shall excuse
   him for. Philand. This is to make every man supreme judge of religion.
   Theoph. The poorest wretch that is may be supreme governor of his own
   heart; princes rule the public and external actions of their countries,
   but not the consciences of men." This in his days was the doctrine of
   the church of England; and, as was observed before, no person who then
   lived in it knew better what was so.

   The sole inquiry remaining is, Whether the magistrate, having
   established such a religion as is idolatrous or superstitious, may
   justly and lawfully punish and destroy his subjects for their
   non-compliance therewithal? This is that which, if I understand him,
   our author would give countenance unto, contrary to the common sense of
   all Christians, yea, of common sense itself; for whereas he interweaves
   his discourse with suppositions that men may mistake in religion and
   abuse it, all such interpositions are purely sophistical, seeing the
   case proposed to resolution, which ought in the whole to be precisely
   attended unto, is about the refusal to observe and practise a religion
   idolatrous or superstitions. Of the like nature is that argument which
   alone he makes use of here and elsewhere to justify his principles, --
   namely, the necessity of government, and how much better the worst
   government is and the most depraved in its administration than anarchy
   or confusion; for as this by all mankind is unquestioned, so I do not
   think there is any one among them who can tell how to use this
   concession to our author's purpose. Doth it follow that because
   magistrates cannot justly or righteously prescribe an idolatrous
   religion, and compel their subjects to the profession and obedience of
   it, and because the subjects cannot nor ought to yield obedience
   therein, because of the antecedent and superior power of God over them,
   therefore anarchy or confusion must be preferred before such an
   administration of government? Let the magistrate command; what he will
   in religion, yet, whilst he attends unto the ends of all civil
   government, that government must needs be every way better than none,
   and is by private Christians to be borne with and submitted unto, until
   God in his providence shall provide relief. The primitive Christians
   lived some ages in the condition described, refusing to observe the
   religion required by law, and exercising themselves in the worship of
   God, which was strictly forbidden; and yet neither anarchy, nor
   confusion, nor any disturbance of public tranquillity did ensue
   thereon. So did the Protestants here in England in the days of Queen
   Mary, and some time before. The argument which he endeavours in these
   discourses to give an answer unto is only of this importance: If the
   supreme magistrate may command what religion he pleaseth, and enact the
   observation of it under destructive penalties, whereas the greatest
   part of magistrates in the world will and do prescribe such religions
   and ways of divine worship as are idolatrous or superstitious, which
   their subjects are indispensably bound in conscience not to comply
   withal, then is the magistrate justified in the punishing of men for
   their serving of God as they ought, and they may suffer as evil-doers
   in what they suffer as Christians. This, all the world over, will
   justify them that are uppermost and have power in their hands (on no
   other ground but because they are so and have so) in their oppressions
   and destructions of them that, being under them in civil respects, do
   dissent from them in things religious. Now, whether this be according
   to the mind of God or no is left unto the judgment of all indifferent
   men. We have, I confess, I know not how many expressions interposed in
   this discourse, as was observed, about "sedition, troubling of public
   peace, men being turbulent against prescribed rules of worship,"
   whereof if he pretend that every peaceable dissenter and dissent from
   what is publicly established in religious worship are guilty, he is a
   pleasant man in a disputation; and if he do any thing, he determines
   his case proposed on the part of compliance with idolatrous and
   superstitious worship. If he do not so, the mention of them in this
   place is very importune and unseasonable. All men acknowledge that such
   miscarriages and practices may be justly coerced and punished; but what
   is this to a bare refusal to comply in any idolatrous worship, and a
   peaceable practice of what God doth require, as that which he will
   accept and own?

   But our author proceeds to find out many pretences on the account
   whereof persons whom he acknowledgeth to be innocent and guiltless may
   be punished; and though their "apprehensions in religion be not," as he
   saith, "so much their crime as their infelicity, yet there is no
   remedy, but it must expose them to the public rods and axes," p. 219. I
   have heard of some wise and righteous princes, who have affirmed that
   they had rather let twenty guilty persons go free than punish or
   destroy one that was innocent. This seems to render them more like Him
   whose vicegerents they are than to seek out colourable reasons for the
   punishment of them whom they know to be innocent; which course is here
   suggested unto them. Such advice might be welcome to him whom men
   called pelon haimati pephuramenon, -- "clay mingled and leavened with
   blood;" others, no doubt, will abhor it and detest it. But what spirit
   of meekness and mercy our author is acted by he discovereth in the
   close of this chapter, p. 223; for, saith he, "it is easily imaginable
   how an honest and well-meaning man may, through mere ignorance, fall
   into such errors, which, though God will pardon, yet governors must
   punish. His integrity may expiate the crime, but cannot prevent the
   mischief of his error. Nay, so easy is it for men to deserve to be
   punished for their consciences, that there is no nation in the world in
   which (were government rightly understood and duly managed) mistakes
   and abuses of religion would not supply the galleys with vastly greater
   numbers than villany." There is no doubt but that if Phæton get into
   the chariot of the sun, the world will be sufficiently fired. And if
   every Absalom, who thinks he understands government and the due
   management of it better than its present possessors, were enthroned,
   there would be havoc enough made among mankind. But blessed be God, who
   in many places hath disposed it into such hands as under whom those who
   desire to fear and serve him according to his will may yet enjoy a more
   tolerable condition than such adversaries are pleased withal. That
   honest and well-meaning men falling into errors about the worship of
   God, through their own ignorance, wherein their "integrity may expiate
   their crime, must be punished, must not be pardoned," looks, methinks,
   with an appearance of more severity than it is the will of God that the
   world should be governed by, seeing one end of his instituting and
   appointing government among men is to represent himself in his power,
   goodness, and wisdom unto them. And he that shall conjoin another
   assertion of our author, namely, that it is "better and more eligible
   to tolerate debaucheries and immoralities in conversation than liberty
   of conscience for men to worship God according to those apprehensions
   which they have of his will," with the close of this chapter, that "it
   is so easy for men to deserve to be punished far their consciences,
   that there is no nation in the world in which (were government rightly
   understood and duly managed) mistakes and abuses of religion would not
   supply the galleys with vastly greater numbers than villany," will
   easily judge with what spirit, from what principles, and with what
   design, this whole discourse was composed.

   But I find myself, utterly beside and beyond my intention, engaged in
   particular controversies; and finding, by the prospect I have taken of
   what remains in the treatise under consideration, that it is of the
   same nature and importance with what is past, and a full continuation
   of those opprobrious reproaches of them whom he opposeth, and open
   discoveries of earnest desires after their trouble and ruin, which we
   have now sufficiently been inured unto, I shall choose rather here to
   break off this discourse than farther to pursue the ventilation of
   those differences, wherein I shall not willingly or of choice at any
   time engage. Besides, what is in the whole discourse of especial and
   particular controversy may be better handled apart by itself, as
   probably ere long it will be, if this new representation of old
   pretences, quickened by invectives, and improved beyond all bounds and
   measures formerly fixed or given unto them, be judged to deserve a
   particular consideration. In the meantime, this author is more
   concerned than I to consider whether those bold incursions that he hath
   made upon the ancient boundaries and rules of religion and the
   consciences of men; those contemptuous revilings of his adversaries,
   which he hath almost filled the pages of his book withal; those
   discoveries he hath made of the want of a due sense of the weaknesses
   and infirmities of men, which himself wants not, and of fierce,
   implacable, sanguinary thoughts against them who appeal to the
   judgment-seat of God that they do not in any thing dissent from him or
   others but out of a reverence of the authority of God and for fear of
   provoking his holy majesty; his incompassionate insulting over men in
   distresses and sufferings, -- will add to the comfort of that account
   which he must shortly make before his Lord and ours.

   To close up this discourse: The principal design of the treatise thus
   far surveyed is, to persuade or seduce sovereign princes or supreme
   magistrates unto two evils, that are indeed inseparable, and equally
   pernicious to themselves and others. The one of these is, to invade or
   usurp the throne of God; and the other, to behave themselves therein
   unlike him; -- and where the one leads the way, the other will
   assuredly follow. The empire over religion, the souls and consciences
   of men in the worship of God, hath hitherto been esteemed to belong
   unto God alone, to be a peculiar jewel in his glorious diadem; neither
   can it spring from any other fountain but absolute and infinite
   supremacy, such as belongs to him, as he hath alone, who is the first
   cause and last end of all. All attempts to educe it from or resolve it
   into any other principle are vain, and will prove abortive. But here
   the sons of men are enticed to say, with him of old, "We will ascend
   into heaven; we will exalt our throne above the stars of God; we will
   sit upon also the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north;
   we will ascend above the heights of the clouds; we will be like the
   Most High." For wherein can this be effected? What ladders have men to
   climb personally into heaven? and who shall attend them in their
   attempt? It is an assuming of a dominion over the souls and consciences
   of men in the worship of God wherein and whereby this may be pretended,
   and therein alone. And all this description of the invasion of the
   throne of God, whence he who did so is compared to Lucifer, who sought
   supremacy in heaven, is but the setting up of his power in and over the
   church in its worship, which was performed in the temple, the mount of
   the congregation, and in Zion, on the north of the city of Jerusalem,
   Isa. xiv. 12-14. This now princes are persuaded unto, and can scarce
   escape without reproaches, where they refuse, or omit the attempting of
   it. Suppose they be prevailed with to run the hazard and adventure of
   such an undertaking, what is it that they are thereon persuaded unto?
   How are they directed to behave themselves after they have assumed a
   likeness unto the Most High, and exalted themselves to his throne?
   Plainly, that which is now expected from them is nothing but wrath,
   fury, indignation, persecution, destructions, banishments, ruin of the
   persons and families of men innocent, peaceable, fearing God, and
   useful in their several stations, to satisfy their own wills, or to
   serve the interests of other men. Is this to act like God, whose power
   and authority they have assumed, or like to his greatest adversary?
   Doth God deal thus in this world in his rule over the souls of men? or
   is not this that which is set out in the fable of Phæton, that he who
   takes the chariot of the sun will cast the whole world into a
   combustion? So he who of old is supposed to have affected the throne of
   God hath ever since acted that cruelty to his power; which manifests
   what was his design therein, and what would have been the end of his
   coveted sovereignty. And whoever at any time shall take to himself that
   power that is peculiar to God, will find himself left, in the exercise
   of it, to act utterly unlike him, yea, contrary unto him.

   Power, they say, is a liquor that, let it be put into what vessel you
   will, is ready to overflow; and as useful as it is, -- as nothing is
   more to mankind in this world, -- yet when it is not accompanied with a
   due proportion of wisdom and goodness, it is troublesome, if not
   pernicious, to them concerned in it. The power of God is infinite, and
   his sovereignty absolute; but the whole exercise of these glorious,
   dreadful properties of his nature is regulated by wisdom and goodness,
   no less infinite than themselves. And as he hath all power over the
   souls and consciences of men, so he exercises it with that goodness,
   grace, clemency, patience, and forbearance, which I hope we are all
   sensible of. If there be any like him, equal unto him, in these things,
   I will readily submit the whole of my religion and conscience unto him,
   without the least hesitation. And if God, in his dominion and rule over
   the souls and consciences of men, do exercise all patience, benignity,
   long-suffering, and mercy, -- for "it is of his compassion that we are
   not consumed," -- doth he not declare that none is meet to be intrusted
   with that power and rule but they who have these things like himself;
   at least, that in what they are or may be concerned in it, they express
   and endeavour to answer his example? Indeed, sovereign princes and
   supreme magistrates are God's vicegerents, and are called gods on the
   earth, to represent his power and authority unto men in government,
   within the bounds prefixed by himself unto them, which are the most
   extensive that the nature of things is capable of; and in so doing, to
   conform themselves and their actings to him and his, as he is the great
   monarch, the prototype of all rule and the exercise of it, in justice,
   goodness, clemency, and benignity, that so the whole of what they do
   may tend to the relief, comfort, refreshment, and satisfaction of
   mankind, walking in the ways of peace and innocency, in answer unto the
   ends of their rule, -- is their duty, their honour, and their safety.
   And to this end doth God usually and ordinarily furnish them with a due
   proportion of wisdom and understanding; for they also are of God. He
   gives them an understanding suited and commensurate to their work, that
   what they have to do shall not ordinarily be too hard for them, nor
   shall they be tempted to mistakes and miscarriages from the work they
   are employed about, which he hath made to be their own. But if any of
   them shall once begin to exceed their bounds, to invade his throne, and
   to take to themselves the rule of any province belonging peculiarly and
   solely to the kingdom of heaven, therein a conformity unto God in their
   actings is not to be expected; for be they never so amply furnished
   with all abilities of mind and soul for the work and those duties which
   are their own, which are proper unto them, yet they are not capable of
   any such stores of wisdom and goodness as should fit them for the work
   of God, that which peculiarly belongs to his authority and power. His
   power is infinite; his authority is absolute; so are his wisdom,
   goodness, and patience. Thus he rules religion, the souls and
   consciences of men. And when princes partake in these things, infinite
   power, infinite wisdom, and infinite goodness, they may assume the same
   rule and act like him; but to pretend an interest in the one and not in
   the other will set them in the greatest opposition to him.

   Those, therefore, who can prevail with magistrates to take the power of
   God over religion, and the souls of men in their observance of it, need
   never fear that when they have so done they will imitate him in his
   patience, clemency, meekness, forbearance, and benignity; for they are
   no way capable of these things in a due proportion to that power which
   is not their own, however they may be eminently furnished for that
   which is so. Thus have we known princes (such as Trajan, Adrian, Julian
   of old), whilst they kept themselves to their proper sphere, ordering
   and disposing the affairs of this world and all things belonging to
   public peace, tranquillity, and welfare, to have been renowned for
   their righteousness, moderation, and clemency, and thereby made dear to
   mankind, who, when they have fallen into the excess of assuming divine
   power over the consciences of men and the worship of God, have left
   behind them such footsteps and remembrances of rage, cruelty, and blood
   in the world, as make them justly abhorred to all generations. This
   alone is the seat and posture wherein the powers of the earth are
   delighted with the sighs and groans of innocent persons, with the fear
   and dread of them that are and would be at peace, with the punishment
   of their obedient subjects, and the binding of those hands of industry
   which would willingly employ themselves for the public good and
   welfare. Take this occasion out of the way, and there is nothing that
   should provoke sovereign magistrates to any thing that is grievous,
   irksome, or troublesome to men peaceable and innocent; nothing that
   should hinder their subjects from seeing the presence of God with them
   in their rule, and his image upon them in their authority, causing them
   to delight in the thoughts of them, and to pray continually for their
   continuance and prosperity. It may be some may be pleased for a season
   with severities against dissenters, such as concerning whom we
   discourse, who falsely suppose their interest to lie therein. It may be
   they may think meet rather to have all "debaucheries of life and
   conversation tolerated" than liberty for peaceable men to worship God
   according to their light and persuasion of his mind and will, as the
   multitude was pleased of old with the cry of, "Release Barabbas, and
   let Jesus be crucified." Magistrates themselves will at length perceive
   how little they are beholden to any who importunately suggest unto them
   fierce and sanguinary counsels in these matters. It is a saying of
   Maximilian the emperor, celebrated in many authors: "Nullum," said he,
   "enormius peccatum dari potest, quam in conscientias imperium exercere
   velle. Qui enim conscientiis imperare volunt, ii arcem coeli invadunt,
   et plerumque terræ possessionem perdunt."

   Magistrates need not fear but that the open wickedness and bloody
   crimes of men will supply them with objects to be examples and
   testimonies of their justice and severity. And methinks it should not
   be judged an unequal petition by them who rule in the stead and fear of
   God, that those who are innocent in their lives, useful in their
   callings and occasions, peaceable in the Lord, might not be exposed to
   trouble only because they design and endeavour, according to their
   light, which they are invincibly persuaded to be from God himself, to
   take care that they perish not eternally. However, I know I can mind
   them of advice which is ten thousand times more their interest to
   attend unto than to any that is tendered in the treatise we have had
   under consideration, and it is that given by a king unto those that
   should partake of the like royal authority with himself: Ps. ii. 10-12,
   "Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed ye judges of the
   earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the
   Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
   kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in
   him." And he who can inform me how they can render themselves more like
   unto God, more acceptable unto him, and more the concern and delight of
   mankind, than by relieving peaceable and innocent persons from their
   fears, cares, and solicitousness about undeserved evils, or from the
   suffering of such things, which no mortal man can convince them that
   they have merited to undergo or suffer, he shall have my thanks for his
   discovery.

   And what is it that we treat about? What is it that a little truce and
   peace is desired unto and pleaded for? What are the concerns of public
   good therein? Let a little sedate consideration be exercised about
   these things, and the causelessness of all the wrath we have been
   conversing withal will quickly appear. That there is a sad degeneracy
   of Christianity in the world, amongst the professors of Christian
   religion, from the rule, spirit, worship, and conversation of the first
   Christians, who in all things observed and expressed the nature,
   virtue, and power of the gospel, all must acknowledge and many do
   complain. Whatever of this kind comes to pass, and by what means
   soever, it is the interest and design of them who are present gainers
   by it in the world to keep all things in the posture that yields them
   their advantage. Hence, upon every appearance of an alteration, or
   apprehension that any will desert the ways of worship wherein they have
   been engaged, they are cast into a storm of passion and outrage, like
   Demetrius and the rest of the silversmiths, pretending divisions,
   present settlement, ancient veneration, and the like, when their gain
   and advantage, whether known or unknown to themselves, is that which
   both influenceth them with such a frame of spirit and animates them to
   actings suitable thereunto. Thus in the ages past there was so great
   and universal an apostasy, long before foretold, overspreading
   Christianity, that by innumerable sober persons it was judged
   intolerable, and that if men had any regard to the gospel of Christ,
   their own freedom in the world, or everlasting blessedness, there was a
   necessity of a reformation, and the reduction of the profession of
   Christian religion unto some nearer conformity to the primitive times
   and pattern. Into this design sundry kings, princes, and whole nations,
   engaged themselves, -- namely, what lay in them, and according to the
   sentiments of truth they had received, to reduce religion unto its
   pristine glory. What wrath, clamours, fury, indignation, revenge,
   malice, this occasioned in them whose subsistence, wealth, advantages,
   honour, and reputation, all lay in preserving things in their state of
   defection and apostasy, is known to all the world. Hence, therefore,
   arose bloody persecutions in all, and fierce wars in many nations,
   where this thing was attempted, stirred up by the craft and cruelty of
   them who had mastered and managed the former declensions of religion to
   their own use and advantage; the guilt of which mischiefs and miseries
   unto mankind is, by a late writer amongst ourselves, contrary to all
   the monuments of times past, and confessions of the adversaries
   themselves, endeavoured to be cast on the reformers.

   However, a work of reformation was carried on in the world, and
   succeeded in many places; in none more eminently than in this nation
   wherein we live. That the end aimed at, which was professedly the
   reduction of religion to its ancient beauty and glory in truth and
   worship, is attained amongst us, some perhaps do judge, and absolutely
   acquiesce therein; and for my part, I wish we had more [who] did so:
   for, be it spoken, as I hope, without offence on the part of others, so
   without fear of giving it, or having it taken, on my own, there are
   among many such evident declensions from the first established
   reformation towards the old or a new, and it may be worse apostasy,
   such an apparent weariness of the principal doctrines and practices
   which enlivened the reformation, as I cannot but be troubled at, and
   wherewith many are offended; for although I do own a dissent from some
   present establishments in the church of England, yet I have that honour
   for the first reformers of it, and reformation itself, that love to the
   truth declared and established in it, that respect to the work and
   grace of God in the conversion of the souls of thousands by the
   ministry of the word in these nations, that I cannot but grieve
   continually to see the acknowledged doctrines of it deserted, its
   ancient principles and practices derided, its pristine zeal despised,
   by some who make advantage of its outward constitution, inheriting the
   profits, emoluments, and wealth which the bounty of our kings have
   endowed it withal, but not its spirit, its love, its steadfastness in
   owning the protestant truth and cause.

   But to return, for these things may better elsewhere be complained of,
   seeing they relate only to particular persons: That what is done in
   reformation be established, that any farther public work of the same
   nature attempted, or the retrievement of what is done to its original
   condition and estate, belongs to the determination of the supreme
   magistrate, and to that alone. Private persons have no call, no warrant
   to attempt any thing unto these purposes. However, many there are who
   dislike some ecclesiastical constitutions and modes of outward worship,
   which have been the matter of great contests from the first
   reformation, but much more dislike the degeneracy from the spirit, way,
   and principles of the first reformers before mentioned, which in some
   at present they apprehend. And, therefore, though many seem to be at a
   great distance from the present established forms of the church of
   England, yet certainly all who are humble and peaceable, when they
   shall see the ministry of the church, as in former days, in some
   measure acted rightly and zealously towards the known ends of it, and
   such as are undeniably by all acknowledged, -- namely, the conviction
   of the world, the conversion of souls, and the edification of them that
   do believe; and the discipline of it exercised in a conformity at least
   to the rule of the discipline of the secular powers of the earth, --
   "Not to be a terror to the good, but to them that do evil;" and in
   these things a demonstration of the meekness, humility, patience,
   forbearance, condescension to the weakness, mistakes, errings and
   wanderings of others, which the gospel doth as plainly and evidently
   require of us as it doth that we should believe in Jesus Christ, --
   will continually pray for its prosperity, though they cannot themselves
   join with it in sundry of its practices and ways. In the meantime, I
   say, such persons as these, in themselves and for their own concerns,
   do think it their duty not absolutely to take up in what hath been
   attained amongst us, much less in what many are degenerated into, but
   to endeavour the reduction of their practice in the worship of God to
   what was first appointed by Jesus Christ; as being persuaded that he
   requires it of them, and being convinced that, in the unspeakable
   variety that is in human constitutions, rest unto their souls and
   consciences is not otherwise to be obtained. And if, at the same time,
   they endeavour not to reduce the manner and course of their
   conversation to the same rule and example by which they would have
   their worship of God regulated, they are hypocrites. Short enough, no
   doubt, they come, in both, of perfection, but both they profess to aim
   equally at; and herein alone can their consciences find rest and peace.
   In the doctrine of faith, consented on in the first reformation, and
   declared in the allowed writings of the church of England, they agree
   with others, and wish with all their hearts they had more to agree
   withal. Only, they cannot come up to the practice of some things in the
   worship of God, which being confessedly of human prescription, their
   obedience in them would lie in a perfect contradiction to their
   principal design, before mentioned; for those things, being chosen out
   from a great multitude of things of the same nature, invented by those
   whose authority was rejected in the first reformation, or reduction of
   religion from its catholic apostasy, they suppose cannot justly be
   imposed on them, they are sure cannot be honestly received by them,
   whilst they design to reduce themselves unto the primitive rules and
   examples of obedience. In this design they profess themselves ready to
   be ruled by, and to yield subjection unto, any truth or direction that
   can or may be given them from the word of God, or any principles
   lawfully from thence educed. How their conviction is at present
   attempted, let the book under consideration, and some late unparalleled
   and illegal acts of violence, conformable to the spirit of it, be a
   testimony. But, in the management of their design, they proceed on no
   other principles than those of the liberty of judgment (of discretion,
   or discerning, they call it), for the determining of themselves and
   their own practices in what they believe and profess about religion,
   and the liberty of their consciences from all human impositions, than
   were owned, pleaded, and contended for by the first reformers, and the
   most learned defenders of the church of England, in their disputations
   against the Papists; those they will stand to and abide by: yea, than
   what are warranted by the principles of our nature and constitution;
   for no man practiseth any thing, nor can practice it, but according to
   his own will and choice.

   Now, in these things, in their principle, or in their management of it,
   it may be they are mistaken, it may be they are in an error, or under
   many mistakes and errors; but from their integrity they know themselves
   innocent, even in their mistakes. And it is in the nature of men to
   think strange of sedate violences, that befall them without their
   demerit, and of suffering by law without any guilt. Their design of
   reducing themselves in worship and conversation to the primitive
   pattern, they openly avow; nor dare any directly condemn that design,
   nor can they be convinced of insincerity in what they profess. And
   shall they be destroyed if they miss it in some matters of smaller
   concernment? which, whatever some may boast of, is not hitherto
   tolerably proved. Shall now their dissent in religious observances on
   this occasion, and those and that about things mostly and chiefly, if
   not only, that appear neither name nor thing in the Scripture, be
   judged a crime not to be expiated but by their ruin? Are immoralities
   or vicious debaucheries rather to be tolerated, or exempted from
   punishment, than such a dissent? What place of Scripture in the Old or
   New Testament, which of the ancient fathers of the church, do speak at
   this rate? Opinions inconsistent with public tranquillity, with the
   general rules of moral duties in all relations and conditions,
   practices of any tendency in themselves to political disturbances, are
   by none pleaded for. Mere dissent itself, with different observances in
   the outward worship of God, is by some pretended, indeed, to be a civil
   disturbance; it hath always been so by some, even by those whose own
   established ways have been superstitious and idolatrous. But wise men
   begin to smile when they hear private interest pleaded as public good,
   and the affections which it begets as the common reason of things. And
   these pretences have been by all parties, at one time or another,
   refuted and discarded. Let the merit of the cause be stated and
   considered, which is truly as above proposed, and no other; set aside
   prejudices, animosities, advantages from things past and bygone in
   political disorders and tumults, wherein it hath no concern, -- and it
   will quickly appear how little it is, how much, if possible, less than
   nothing, that is or can be pleaded for the countenancing of external
   severity in this case. Doth it suit the spirit of the gospel [of
   Christ] or his commands, to destroy good wheat, for standing, as is
   supposed, a little out of order, who would not have men pluck up the
   tares, but to let them stand quietly in the field until harvest? Doth
   it answer his mind to destroy his disciples, who profess to love and
   obey him, from the earth, who blamed his disciples of old for desiring
   to destroy the Samaritans, his enemies, with fire from heaven? We are
   told that "he who was born after the flesh persecuted him who was born
   after the promise;" and a work becoming him it was And if men are
   sincere disciples of Christ, though they may fall into some mistakes
   and errors, the outward persecuting of them on that account will be
   found to be of the works of the flesh. It is certain, that for those in
   particular who take upon them, in any place or degree, to be ministers
   of the gospel, there are commands for meekness, patience, and
   forbearance given unto them; and it is one of the greatest duties
   incumbent on them to express the Lord Jesus Christ in the frame of his
   mind and spirit unto men, and that eminently in his meekness and
   lowliness, which he calls us all in an especial manner to learn of him.
   A peculiar conformity also to the gospel, to the holy law of love,
   self-denial, and condescension, is required of them, that they may not,
   in their spirits, ways, and actings, make a false representation of him
   and that which they profess.

   I know not, therefore, whence it is come to pass that this sort of men
   do principally, if not only, stir up magistrates and rulers to laws,
   severities, penalties, coercions, imprisonments, and the like outward
   means of fierce and carnal power, against those who in any thing
   dissent from them in religion. Generally, abroad, throughout
   Christendom, those in whose hands the civil powers are, and who may be
   supposed to have inclinations unto the severe exercise of that power
   which is their own, such as they think, possibly, may become them as
   men and governors, would be inclinable to moderation towards
   dissenters, were they not excited, provoked, and wearied, by them who
   pretend to represent Jesus Christ to the world, -- as if any earthly
   potentate had more patience, mercy, and compassion than he. Look on
   those Lutheran countries where they persecute the Calvinists. It is
   commonly declared and proved that the magistrates, for the most part,
   would willingly bear with those dissenters, were they not stirred up
   continually to severities by them whose duty it were to persuade them
   to clemency and moderation, if in themselves they were otherwise
   inclined. And this hath ruined the interest of the protestant religion
   in Germany, in a great measure. Do men who destroy no more than they
   can, nor punish more than they are able, and cry out for assistance
   where their own arm fails them, render themselves hereby like to their
   heavenly Father? Is this spirit from above? Doth that which is so teach
   men to harass the consciences of persons, their brethren and
   fellow-servants, on every little difference in judgment and practice
   about religious things? Whom will such men fulfil the commands of
   patience, forbearance, waiting, meekness, condescension, that the
   gospel abounds with, towards? Is it only towards them who are of the
   same mind with themselves? They stand in no need of them; they stand
   upon the same terms of advantage with themselves. And for those that
   dissent, "Arise, kill and eat," seems to be the only command to be
   observed towards them. And why all this fierceness and severity? Let
   men talk what they please, those aimed at are peaceable in the land,
   and resolve to be so, whatever may befall them. They despise all
   contrary insinuations. That they are in their stations severally useful
   to the commonwealth, and collectively, in their industry and trading,
   of great consideration to public welfare, is now apparent unto all
   indifferent men. It is, or must be, if it be for any thing (as surely
   no men delight in troubling others for trouble's sake), for their
   errors and mistakes in and about the worship of God. All other pleas
   are mere pretences of passion and interest. But who judgeth them to be
   guilty of errors? Why, those that stir up others to their hurt and
   disquietment. But is their judgment infallible? How if they should be
   mistaken themselves in their judgment? If they are, they do not only
   err, but persecute others for the truth. And this hath been the general
   issue of this matter in the world. Error hath persecuted truth ten
   times for truth's once persecuting of error. But suppose the worst,
   suppose them in errors and under mistakes, let it be proved that God
   hath appointed that all men who so err should be so punished as they
   would have Nonconformists, and though I should believe them in the
   truth, I would never more plead their cause. And would these men be
   willingly thus dealt withal by those who judge or may judge them to
   err? It may be some would, because they have a good security that none
   shall ever judge them so to do who hath power to punish them, for they
   will be of his mind. But sure none can be so absolutely confined unto
   themselves, nor so universally, in all their affections and desires,
   unto their own personal concerns, as not to have a compassion for some
   or other who, in one place or other, are judged to err by them who have
   power over them to affix what guilt they please unto that which is not
   their crime. And will they justify all their oppressors? All men have
   an equal right in this matter; nothing is required but being uppermost
   to make a difference. This is that which hath turned Christendom into a
   shambles, whilst every prevailing party hath judged it their duty and
   interest to destroy them that do dissent from them.

   Once more; what name of sin or wickedness will they find to affix to
   these errors? "Nullum criminis nomen, nisi nominis crimen." No man errs
   willingly, nor ought to be thought to tempt or seduce his own will,
   when his error is to his disadvantage; and he is innocent whose will is
   not guilty. Moreover, those pretended errors in our case are not in
   matters of faith; nor, for the most part, in or about the worship of
   God, or that which is acknowledged so to be; but in or about those
   things which some think it convenient to add unto it or conjoin with
   it. And what quietness, what peace is there like to be in the world,
   whilst the sword of vengeance must be continually drawn about these
   things? Counsels of peace, patience, and forbearance, would certainly
   better become professors of the gospel and preachers of everlasting
   peace than such passionate and furious enterprises for severity as we
   meet withal.

   And I no way doubt but that all generous, noble, and heroic spirits,
   such as are not concerned in the empaled peculiar interest and
   advantages of some, and do scorn the pedantic humours of mean and
   emulous souls, when once a few more clouds of prejudices are scattered,
   will be willing to give up to God the glory of his sovereignty over the
   consciences of men, and despise the thought of giving them disquietment
   for such things as they can no way remedy, and which hinder them not
   from being servants of God, good subjects to the king, and useful in
   their respective lots and conditions.

   And now, instead of those words of Pilate, "What I have written I have
   written," -- which, though uttered by him maliciously and despitefully,
   as was also the prophecy of Caiaphas, were, by the holy, wise
   providence of God, turned into a testimony to the truth, -- I shall
   shut up this discourse with those of our Saviour, which are unspeakably
   more our concernment to consider, Matt. xxiv. 45-51: "Who then is a
   faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his
   household, to give them meat in due season? blessed is that servant,
   whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say unto
   you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods. But and if that
   evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and
   shall begin to smite his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the
   drunken; the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh
   not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him
   asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall
   be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [9] The reference is to the Mishna, or the collection of oral
   traditions, which profess to be a comment on the laws of Moses. The
   collection of them is ascribed to Rabbi Jehudah Hakkadosh, a.d. 190, or
   220. -- Ed.

   [10] Dr Bilson. See page 407.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Exodus

   [1]20:4-5   [2]40

   Deuteronomy

   [3]4:2   [4]12:32

   Ruth

   [5]3:11

   1 Kings

   [6]12:33

   2 Chronicles

   [7]17:7-9

   Job

   [8]15:14-16

   Psalms

   [9]2:10-12   [10]95

   Proverbs

   [11]12:4   [12]30:6   [13]31:10   [14]31:29

   Isaiah

   [15]14:12-14   [16]64:6

   Hosea

   [17]5:11

   Malachi

   [18]4:4

   Matthew

   [19]15:3   [20]15:6   [21]16:2-3   [22]24:45-51   [23]28:18-20
   [24]28:19-20   [25]28:20

   John

   [26]3:33

   Acts

   [27]15:10   [28]15:23-29

   Romans

   [29]2:14-15   [30]10:3   [31]10:10

   Galatians

   [32]5:22-23

   Philippians

   [33]3:6-9   [34]4:8

   Titus

   [35]2:11

   Hebrews

   [36]3:1-6   [37]11:1   [38]11:4

   1 Peter

   [39]2:9   [40]2:19   [41]4:3
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Citations

     * Aelian: On tactical arrays of the Greeks: [42]1
     * Anonymous: A Common-place Book out of the Rehearsal Transprosed:
       [43]1
     * Anonymous: A Free Inquiry into the Causes of that very great Esteem
       the Nonconformists are in with their Followers: [44]1
     * Anonymous: Animadversions on a New Book entitled Ecclesiastical
       Polity: [45]1
     * Anonymous: Insolence and Impudence Triumphant; Envy and Fury
       Enthroned; The Mirror of Malice and Madness: [46]1
     * Anonymous: S'too him Bayes: [47]1
     * Aristophanes: The Clouds: [48]1
     * Aristotle: Ethica: [49]1
     * Basil: Letters: [50]1
     * Basil: Prologus 8 (De Fide): [51]1
     * Bellarmine, Cardinal Robert: Disputationes Roberti Bellarmini de
       Controversiis Christianæ Fidei: [52]1 [53]2
     * Bilson, Bishop Thomas: The True Difference Betweene Christian
       Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion: [54]1 [55]2
     * Bramhall, Bishop John: Vindication of the Episcopal Clergy: [56]1
     * Catullus: Carmina: [57]1
     * Cave, William: Lives of the Fathers: [58]1
     * Cicero: De Lega Agricola contra Rullum: [59]1
     * Hickeringill, Edmund: Gregory Father Greybeard with his Vizor off:
       [60]1
     * Homer: Iliad: [61]1 [62]2
     * Horace: Epistles: [63]1
     * Horace: Epistula ad Pisones: [64]1
     * Jerome: Commentary on Haggai: [65]1
     * Jerome: Commentary on Matthew: [66]1
     * John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople: Homilies: [67]1
       [68]2
     * Juvenal: Satires: [69]1
     * Leigh, Richard: The Transproser Rehearsed: [70]1
     * Lucian: Menippus: [71]1
     * Lucretius: De rerum natura: [72]1 [73]2
     * L'Estrange, Roger, Sir: Toleration Discussed in Two Dialogues:
       [74]1
     * Marvell, Andrew: Rehearsal Transprosed: [75]1 [76]2 [77]3
     * Marvell, Andrew: The Rehearsal Transprosed, the second part: [78]1
     * Parker, Samuel: A Defense and Continuation of the Ecclesiastical
       Polity: [79]1
     * Parker, Samuel: A Reproof to the Rehearsal Transprosed: [80]1
     * Parker, Samuel: Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity, and of the
       Power of the Magistrate in Matters of Religion: [81]1
     * Patrick, Simon: A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a
       Nonconformist: [82]1 [83]2
     * Persius: Saturæ: [84]1
     * Plautus: Miles Gloriosus: [85]1 [86]2
     * Plautus: Trinummus: [87]1
     * Plutarch: De Genio Socratis: [88]1
     * Society of Jesus: Apology and Defence of English Catholics: [89]1
     * Stubbes, Henry: Rosemary and Bayes: [90]1
     * Tertullian: Adversus Hermogenem: [91]1
     * Tertullian: De Carne Christi: [92]1
     * Tertullian: De Præscriptione Hæreticorum: [93]1
     * Thomson, Andrew: Life of Owen: [94]1
     * Virgil: Æneid: [95]1 [96]2 [97]3 [98]4
     * Xenophon, Plato: Apology: [99]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Names

     * Alexander the Great: [100]1
     * Amsdorfius, Nicolaus: [101]1
     * Arcadius, Emperor: [102]1
     * Aristides: [103]1
     * Aristophanes: [104]1 [105]2
     * Aristotle: [106]1 [107]2 [108]3
     * Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria: [109]1 [110]2 [111]3
     * Augustine, Bishop of Hippo: [112]1
     * Basil: [113]1
     * Baxter, Richard: [114]1
     * Bellarmine, Cardinal Robert: [115]1 [116]2 [117]3
     * Bilson, Bishop Thomas: [118]1 [119]2
     * Bramhall, Bishop John: [120]1
     * Caligula, Emperor: [121]1 [122]2 [123]3
     * Calvin, John: [124]1 [125]2 [126]3 [127]4 [128]5 [129]6
     * Cato the Younger: [130]1 [131]2 [132]3
     * Cave, William: [133]1
     * Cecil, Lord Burleigh: [134]1
     * Cicero: [135]1 [136]2
     * Clemens of Alexandria: [137]1
     * Columbus, Christopher: [138]1
     * Constantine, Emperor: [139]1 [140]2 [141]3 [142]4
     * Council of Nice: [143]1
     * Demonicus: [144]1
     * Diagoras of Melos: [145]1
     * Domitian, Emperor: [146]1 [147]2
     * Ecebolius: [148]1 [149]2
     * Edward VI., King: [150]1
     * Elizabeth I., Queen: [151]1 [152]2
     * Flacius Illyricus, Martin: [153]1 [154]2
     * Fletcher, John: [155]1
     * Gardiner, Bishop Stephen: [156]1 [157]2
     * Gratian, Emperor: [158]1
     * Gregory de Valentia: [159]1
     * Gregory of Nazianzum: [160]1
     * Hadrian, Emperor: [161]1
     * Hakkadosh, Rabbi Jehudah: [162]1
     * Hale, Judge Matthew: [163]1
     * Hannibal: [164]1
     * Henry VIII., King: [165]1 [166]2
     * Hermogenes: [167]1
     * Homer: [168]1
     * Hooker, Richard: [169]1
     * Hough, Bishop John: [170]1
     * Isocrates: [171]1
     * James I., King: [172]1
     * James II., King: [173]1
     * Jerome: [174]1
     * John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople: [175]1
     * Jonson, Ben: [176]1
     * Judas Maccabæus: [177]1
     * Julian the Apostate, Emperor: [178]1 [179]2
     * Lucian: [180]1
     * Magnus, Valerianus: [181]1
     * Major, Georg: [182]1
     * Marcian: [183]1
     * Marvell, Andrew: [184]1 [185]2 [186]3 [187]4 [188]5 [189]6
     * Mary I., Queen: [190]1
     * Maximilian the emperor: [191]1
     * Meir, Rabbi: [192]1
     * Muræna: [193]1
     * Nebuchadnezzar: [194]1 [195]2
     * Nero, Emperor: [196]1 [197]2 [198]3
     * Owen, John: [199]1 [200]2 [201]3 [202]4 [203]5 [204]6 [205]7 [206]8
     * Paphnutius of Thebes: [207]1
     * Parker, Samuel: [208]1 [209]2 [210]3 [211]4 [212]5 [213]6 [214]7
       [215]8 [216]9 [217]10 [218]11 [219]12 [220]13 [221]14 [222]15
       [223]16 [224]17
     * Patrick, Dr Simon: [225]1
     * Pelagius: [226]1
     * Plato: [227]1 [228]2
     * Plutarch: [229]1
     * Porus, King: [230]1
     * Rullus, Publius Servilius: [231]1
     * Seidelius, Martin: [232]1 [233]2
     * Socinus, Faustus: [234]1
     * Socrates: [235]1 [236]2 [237]3
     * Statius, Publius Papinius: [238]1
     * Tertullian: [239]1
     * Theodosius, Emperor: [240]1
     * Tiberius, Emperor: [241]1
     * Titus, Emperor: [242]1
     * Trajan, Emperor: [243]1
     * Xenophon: [244]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * Euangelikai bibloi kai apostolikai, kai ton palaion propheton
       thespismata saphos hemas ha chre peri tou theiou phronein
       ekpaideuousi· ten polemopoion oun apelasantes erin, ek ton
       theopneuston logon labomen ton zetoumenon ten lusin·: [245]1
     * Zeus d' areten andressin ophellei te minuthei te: [246]1
     * Kai tis ho tauta enguomenos; Paulos. Ouden gar dei legein
       amarturon, oude apo logismon monon· ean ti gar agraphon legetai, he
       dianoia ton akroaton skazei, pe men epineuousa, pe de
       paragraphomene, kai pote men ton logon hos heolon apostrephomene,
       pote de hos pithanon paradechomene. Hotan de engraphos he marturia
       tes theias phones proelthe, kai : [247]1
     * Nephelai: [248]1
     * Hoi neoi eidenai panta oiontai kai diischurizontai: [249]1
     * Ouden ater graphes.: [250]1
     * Pantoioi· epeon de polus nomos entha kai entha.: [251]1
     * Para ton graphon tauta panta punthanesthe: [252]1
     * Polla mal'· oud' an neus hekatozugos achthos aroito.: [253]1
     * Strepte de gloss' esti broton, polees d' eni muthoi,: [254]1
     * U: [255]1
     * Phanera ekptosis, kai huperephanias kategoria, e athetein ti ton
       gegrammenon, e epeisagein ton me gegrammenon·: [256]1
     * di' empeirian: [257]1
     * ei tis arete: [258]1
     * kuriai doxai: [259]1
     * peri ethon: [260]1
     * pelon haimati pephuramenon: [261]1
     * prophorikos: [262]1
     * prosphatos kai zosa: [263]1
     * spermologos: [264]1
     * tou legontos ton logon, kai tou akouontos ten dianoian ebebaiose·:
       [265]1
     * aretas: [266]1
     * arete: [267]1 [268]2 [269]3
     * aneu prooimion kai pathon: [270]1
     * ares: [271]1
     * endiathetos: [272]1
     * exo tou pragmatos: [273]1
     * Esti gar amphoteroisin oneidea muthesasthai: [274]1
     * he ton tropon arete: [275]1
     * Ethika: [276]1
     * isos kai tacha: [277]1
     * Hoppoion k' eipestha epos, toion k' epakousais.: [278]1
     * Hoppos ken ethelesi: [279]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * 'st chyl: [280]1
     * chyl: [281]1
     * mdh: [282]1 [283]2
     * mdvt tvvvt: [284]1
     * sphr hmdvt: [285]1
     * vd' dsvvch': [286]1
     * tsvvchth: [287]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Accubat, et manibus prohibet contingere mensas.: [288]1
     * Adoro: [289]1
     * Amphora cum coepit institui, cur urceus exit.: [290]1
     * At nullos habeo scriptos, sic memini tamen.: [291]1
     * Atque id tamen mihi lubeat suspicarier;: [292]1
     * Cave ne titubes.: [293]1
     * Concionem ... advocari jubet: summâ cum expectatione concurritur.
       Explicat orationem sanè longam, et verbis valdè bonis. Unum erat
       quod mihi vitiosum videbatur, quod tantâ ex frequentitâ inveniri
       nemo potuit, qui intelligere posset, quid diceret. Hoc ille utrum
       insidiarum causâ fecerit, an hoc genere eloquentiæ delectetur,
       nescio. Tamen, siqui acutiores in concione steterunt, de lege
       agraria nescio quid voluisse eum dicere, suspicabantur.: [294]1
     * Consiliis inimica tuis, discordia vecors.: [295]1
     * Cæterum ut sciatis cujus sim religionis, quamvis id scripto meo
       quod habetis, ostenderim, tamen hic breviter repetam. Et primum
       quidem doctrina de Messia, seu Rege illo promisso, ad meam
       religionem nihil pertinet; nam Rex ille tantum Judæis promissus
       erat, sicut et bona illa Canaan. Sic etiam circumcisio, sacrificia,
       et reliquæ ceremoniæ Mosis ad me non pertinent, sed tantum populo
       Judaico promissa, data, et mandata sunt. Neque ista fuerunt cultus
       Dei apud Judæos, sed inserviebant cultui divino, et ad cultum
       deducebant Judæos. Verus autem cultus Dei quem meam religionem
       appello est decalogus, qui est æterna Dei voluntas; qui decalogus
       ideo ad me pertinet, quia etiam mihi a Deo datus est, non quidem
       per vocem sonantem de coelo sicut populo Judaico, at per creationem
       insita est menti meæ. Quia autem insitus decalogus, per
       corruptionem naturæ humanæ et pravis consuetudinibus, aliquâ ex
       parte obscuratus est, ideo ad illustrandum eum adhibeo vocalem
       decalogum, qui vocalis decalogus ideo etiam ad me, ad omnes populos
       pertinet, quia cum insito nobis decalogo consentit, imo idem :
       [296]1
     * Dicendum est, Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclute Memmi!: [297]1
     * Discedo Alcæus puncto illius, ille meo quis?: [298]1
     * Diva Jovis solio juxta comes; unde per orbem: [299]1
     * Ecquid meministi?: [300]1
     * Egregiam verò laudem et spolia ampla!: [301]1
     * Elegit penetrare viros.: [302]1
     * Erat imperator summus; Neptuni nepos,: [303]1
     * Et quinquaginta centum Sycolatron dæ,: [304]1
     * Fortes: [305]1
     * Furiarum maxima juxta: [306]1
     * Hic niger est, hunc tu Romane caveto.: [307]1
     * Illud possumus quod jure possumus.: [308]1
     * Illum aspice contra: [309]1
     * Imprecor, arma armis: pugnent ipsique nepotes!: [310]1
     * In campis Gurgustidoniis,: [311]1
     * Io triumphe!: [312]1
     * Jovi coronam de capite e Capitolio,: [313]1
     * Librat in antithetis;: [314]1
     * Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas: [315]1
     * Macte novâ virtute puer: sic itur ad astra.: [316]1
     * Memini; centum in Ciliciâ,: [317]1
     * Mitte male loqui, dic rem ipsam: [318]1
     * Moralia: [319]1
     * Nam nunc ego te si surripuisse suspicer,: [320]1
     * Ne admittam culpam, ego meo sum promus pectori,: [321]1
     * Nimirum idem onmes fallimur; neque est quisqam,: [322]1
     * Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet; sed nec eligere
       quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos Domini habemus
       authores, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod inducerent
       elegerunt; sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam, fideliter nationibus
       assignaverunt: [323]1
     * Non imago: [324]1
     * Non partûm studiis agimur; sed sumsimus arma,: [325]1
     * Non recipio quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers: [326]1
     * Nondum tot sunt anni tui, quot jam in sacris nobis sunt peracti
       victimis: [327]1
     * Nullum: [328]1
     * Nullum criminis nomen, nisi nominis crimen.: [329]1
     * Nullus amor populis, nec foedera sunto.: [330]1
     * Propheticos et apostolicos libros verum esse verbum Dei, et certam
       et stabilem regulam fidei: [331]1
     * Protestantes ad leones!: [332]1
     * Præstinxit, stellas exortus ut ætherius sol!: [333]1
     * Quanta isthæc hominum summa est?: [334]1
     * Quem non in aliqua re, videre Suffenum Possis.: [335]1
     * Qui Smithfieldensi polleat eloquio.: [336]1
     * Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes: [337]1
     * Qui princeps vitæ rationem invenit eam;: [338]1
     * Qui vocat.: [339]1
     * Quicunque vult: [340]1
     * Quis nisi Callimachus?: [341]1
     * Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?: [342]1
     * Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate
       contemnitur qua probatur: [343]1
     * Quod in culmine astat summo, si non id feceris,: [344]1
     * Quî tu id prohibere me potes, ne suspicer.: [345]1
     * Rara dari, terrisque solet contingere virtus.: [346]1
     * Scriptum esse hoc doceat Hermogenis officina, aut timeat iræ illud
       adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum: [347]1
     * Sed et alia quæ, absque authoritate et testimoniis Scripturarum,
       quasi traditione apostolica sponte reperiunt atque confingunt,
       percutit gladius Dei: [348]1
     * Septem millia.: [349]1
     * Seu Pater Omnipotens tribuit, sive ipsa capaces: [350]1
     * Sunt homines tu quos occidisti uno die.: [351]1
     * Suspicio est in pectore alieno sita.: [352]1
     * Tantum esse oportet; rectè rationem tenes.: [353]1
     * Triginta Sardi, sexaginta Macedones,: [354]1
     * Tutissimum est: [355]1
     * Ubi Bombamachides Cluninstarydisarchides: [356]1
     * Verum, ad populum phaleras.: [357]1
     * actu exercito: [358]1 [359]2
     * animi gladiatorii: [360]1
     * anno: [361]1
     * bona opera sunt perniciosa ad salutem: [362]1
     * boni mores: [363]1
     * contenti sumus hoc Catone: [364]1
     * credenda: [365]1
     * crimina rasis: [366]1
     * currente calamo: [367]1
     * de facto: [368]1
     * divisum imperium cum Jove Cæsar habet: [369]1
     * enormius peccatum dari potest, quam in conscientias imperium
       exercere velle. Qui enim conscientiis imperare volunt, ii arcem
       coeli invadunt, et plerumque terræ possessionem perdunt.: [370]1
     * exercitus: [371]1
     * foro civili: [372]1
     * hic et nunc: [373]1
     * ille decalogus est. Hæc est mea sententia de Messiâ seu Rege illo
       promisso, et hæc est mea religio, quam coram vobis ingenuè
       profiteor.: [374]1
     * jejunium Cecilianum: [375]1
     * jus divinum: [376]1
     * miseri: [377]1
     * non simulachrum prohibetur; sed non facies tibi: [378]1
     * opus est mangone perito: [379]1
     * par animo periculum: [380]1
     * plenitudinem Scripturarum quæ mihi factorem manifestat et facta:
       [381]1
     * potentia: [382]1
     * præsente Numine: [383]1
     * qui solus accessit sobrius ad perdendam rempublicam: [384]1
     * quod erat demonstrandum: [385]1
     * rerum natura: [386]1
     * robur: [387]1
     * salve æternumque vale: [388]1
     * serram reciprocare: [389]1
     * signa cum ad res divinas pertinent sunt sacramenta: [390]1
     * sub judice: [391]1
     * sui juris: [392]1 [393]2
     * tragelaphus: [394]1
     * vexet censura columbas: [395]1
     * vis: [396]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [397]343  [398]344  [399]345  [400]346  [401]347  [402]348  [403]349
   [404]350  [405]351  [406]352  [407]353  [408]354  [409]355  [410]356
   [411]357  [412]358  [413]359  [414]360  [415]361  [416]362  [417]363
   [418]364  [419]365  [420]366  [421]367  [422]368  [423]369  [424]370
   [425]371  [426]372  [427]373  [428]374  [429]375  [430]376  [431]377
   [432]378  [433]379  [434]380  [435]381  [436]382  [437]383  [438]384
   [439]385  [440]386  [441]387  [442]388  [443]389  [444]390  [445]391
   [446]392  [447]393  [448]394  [449]395  [450]396  [451]397  [452]398
   [453]399  [454]400  [455]401  [456]402  [457]403  [458]404  [459]405
   [460]406  [461]407  [462]408  [463]409  [464]410  [465]411  [466]412
   [467]413  [468]414  [469]415  [470]416  [471]417  [472]418  [473]419
   [474]420  [475]421  [476]422  [477]423  [478]424  [479]425  [480]426
   [481]427  [482]428  [483]429  [484]430  [485]431  [486]432  [487]433
   [488]434  [489]435  [490]436  [491]437  [492]438  [493]439  [494]440
   [495]441  [496]442  [497]443  [498]444  [499]445  [500]446  [501]447
   [502]448  [503]449  [504]450  [505]451  [506]452  [507]453  [508]454
   [509]455  [510]456  [511]457  [512]458  [513]459  [514]460  [515]461
   [516]462  [517]463  [518]464  [519]465  [520]466  [521]467  [522]468
   [523]469  [524]470  [525]471  [526]472  [527]473  [528]474  [529]475
   [530]476  [531]477  [532]478  [533]479  [534]480  [535]481  [536]482
   [537]483  [538]484  [539]485  [540]486  [541]487  [542]488  [543]489
   [544]490  [545]491  [546]492  [547]493  [548]494  [549]495  [550]496
   [551]497  [552]498  [553]499  [554]500  [555]501  [556]502  [557]503
   [558]504  [559]505  [560]506
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=4#i.x-p41.6
   2. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=40&scrV=0#i.x-p41.3
   3. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=2#i.x-p41.4
   4. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=32#i.x-p41.4
   5. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=3&scrV=11#i.vi-p5.3
   6. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=33#i.x-p41.7
   7. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=17&scrV=7#i.v-p8.2
   8. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=14#i.iv-p18.1
   9. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=10#i.x-p69.1
  10. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=0#i.x-p37.10
  11. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=12&scrV=4#i.vi-p5.4
  12. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=6#i.x-p41.5
  13. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=10#i.vi-p5.4
  14. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=29#i.vi-p5.4
  15. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=12#i.x-p66.1
  16. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=6#i.iv-p18.2
  17. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=5&scrV=11#i.x-p61.2
  18. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#i.x-p41.1
  19. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=3#i.vii-p14.3
  20. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=6#i.vii-p14.3
  21. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=2#i.vii-p16.3
  22. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=45#i.x-p77.1
  23. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#i.v-p55.1
  24. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#i.x-p41.8
  25. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#i.x-p3.1
  26. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=33#i.vii-p14.2
  27. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=10#i.vii-p8.1
  28. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=23#i.x-p41.10
  29. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#i.vi-p7.3
  30. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#i.vi-p33.2
  31. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#i.vii-p11.1
  32. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#i.vi-p28.2
  33. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=6#i.vi-p32.1
  34. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=8#i.vi-p5.25
  35. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=11#i.vi-p29.1
  36. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=1#i.x-p51.1
  37. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#i.vii-p14.4
  38. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=4#i.vii-p14.1
  39. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#i.vi-p5.23
  40. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=19#i.vi-p5.28
  41. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i.iv-p17.1
  42. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.8
  43. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.12
  44. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.7
  45. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.6
  46. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.4
  47. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.13
  48. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.3
  49. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.17
  50. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.7
  51. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.5
  52. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-p2.4
  53. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p36.3
  54. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.3
  55. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p62.1
  56. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.5
  57. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p5.7
  58. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p51.2
  59. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p4.4
  60. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.11
  61. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p39.13
  62. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p9.8
  63. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.13
  64. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p56.5
  65. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.30
  66. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.28
  67. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.9
  68. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.15
  69. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p22.12
  70. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.9
  71. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.14
  72. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p16.12
  73. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p10.7
  74. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.5
  75. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.7
  76. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.4
  77. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.8
  78. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p4.3
  79. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.3
  80. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.15
  81. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p1.3
  82. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.1
  83. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.3
  84. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p40.7
  85. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p8.9
  86. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.24
  87. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.19
  88. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.14
  89. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.2
  90. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.10
  91. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.18
  92. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.23
  93. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.25
  94. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.13
  95. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p35.5
  96. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p40.9
  97. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p46.5
  98. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p24.7
  99. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.9
 100. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p10.3
 101. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p42.6
 102. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.7
 103. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.3
 104. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.1
 105. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.5
 106. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.14
 107. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.1
 108. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.8
 109. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p48.1
 110. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p48.2
 111. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p51.5
 112. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.9
 113. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.3
 114. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.5
 115. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.7
 116. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-p2.1
 117. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p36.1
 118. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.1
 119. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p58.1
 120. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.4
 121. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.2
 122. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p37.2
 123. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p60.2
 124. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.8
 125. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.10
 126. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.11
 127. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.13
 128. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.15
 129. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p60.2
 130. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.16
 131. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.17
 132. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.1
 133. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p51.1
 134. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p35.1
 135. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p36.2
 136. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p4.1
 137. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.i-p5.3
 138. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p17.1
 139. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.4
 140. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-p10.2
 141. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.1
 142. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.4
 143. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p51.4
 144. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.6
 145. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p53.2
 146. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.3
 147. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.6
 148. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-p9.1
 149. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-p10.1
 150. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.6
 151. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p9.1
 152. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p35.2
 153. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p42.3
 154. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p42.5
 155. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p53.4
 156. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.12
 157. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.17
 158. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.6
 159. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.8
 160. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p47.1
 161. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p68.2
 162. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p17.1
 163. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.4
 164. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p62.1
 165. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.5
 166. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p59.16
 167. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.22
 168. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p9.1
 169. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p53.1
 170. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p1.5
 171. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.5
 172. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-p2.3
 173. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p1.7
 174. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.27
 175. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.8
 176. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p53.3
 177. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p35.1
 178. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-p10.3
 179. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p68.3
 180. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.13
 181. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p50.1
 182. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p42.7
 183. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.8
 184. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.6
 185. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.8
 186. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p4.1
 187. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p4.4
 188. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.2
 189. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.9
 190. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p63.1
 191. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p68.4
 192. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.15
 193. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.15
 194. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.1
 195. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p60.4
 196. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.2
 197. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p37.1
 198. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p60.1
 199. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p1.4
 200. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.2
 201. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.2
 202. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.1
 203. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.5
 204. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.7
 205. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.12
 206. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-p3.1
 207. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p50.1
 208. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p1.1
 209. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p1.6
 210. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.1
 211. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p2.3
 212. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.1
 213. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p3.14
 214. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p4.2
 215. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.3
 216. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.6
 217. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.10
 218. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-p5.11
 219. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p0.3
 220. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p0.4
 221. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p0.3
 222. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p0.4
 223. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p0.3
 224. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p0.3
 225. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.2
 226. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p26.1
 227. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p36.1
 228. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.11
 229. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.13
 230. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p10.4
 231. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p4.2
 232. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p17.4
 233. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p18.3
 234. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p17.5
 235. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.4
 236. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.6
 237. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.12
 238. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p8.1
 239. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.17
 240. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p19.5
 241. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.4
 242. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p10.5
 243. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p68.1
 244. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.10
 245. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.2
 246. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p9.4
 247. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.11
 248. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p37.2
 249. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p4.3
 250. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.i-p5.1
 251. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p39.9
 252. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.16
 253. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p39.5
 254. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p39.7
 255. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p9.9
 256. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.6
 257. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p4.2
 258. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.26
 259. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p60.3
 260. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.2
 261. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p64.1
 262. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p9.2
 263. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-p12.1
 264. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p12.2
 265. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.12
 266. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.22
 267. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.5
 268. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.6
 269. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.21
 270. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p13.2
 271. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.7
 272. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p9.1
 273. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p13.1
 274. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p39.3
 275. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.7
 276. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.3
 277. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p4.1
 278. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p39.11
 279. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p9.6
 280. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.2
 281. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.8
 282. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.13
 283. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.16
 284. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.19
 285. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.18
 286. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.27
 287. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.24
 288. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p24.5
 289. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.19
 290. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p56.3
 291. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.22
 292. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.15
 293. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p15.1
 294. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p4.3
 295. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.i-p4.3
 296. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p18.1
 297. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p10.3
 298. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.9
 299. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p8.4
 300. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.3
 301. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p35.3
 302. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p8.10
 303. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p8.7
 304. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.6
 305. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p61.1
 306. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p24.3
 307. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p27.3
 308. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p11.1
 309. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p13.5
 310. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p40.7
 311. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p8.3
 312. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p52.1
 313. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.11
 314. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p40.5
 315. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p40.5
 316. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p46.3
 317. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.4
 318. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p23.1
 319. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p6.4
 320. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.9
 321. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.5
 322. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p5.3
 323. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.26
 324. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p58.2
 325. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.i-p4.1
 326. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.24
 327. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p47.4
 328. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p68.5
 329. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p75.1
 330. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p40.3
 331. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p36.2
 332. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p31.1
 333. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p16.10
 334. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.13
 335. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p5.5
 336. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p6.5
 337. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p16.8
 338. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p10.5
 339. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p13.7
 340. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p48.3
 341. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p33.11
 342. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p22.10
 343. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.29
 344. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.13
 345. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.17
 346. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p8.6
 347. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.21
 348. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.31
 349. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.16
 350. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p8.8
 351. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.10
 352. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p7.7
 353. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.19
 354. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p34.8
 355. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-p2.2
 356. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p8.5
 357. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p59.1
 358. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p24.2
 359. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p40.1
 360. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p10.1
 361. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p37.1
 362. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p42.4
 363. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.20
 364. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p3.1
 365. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p17.3
 366. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p40.3
 367. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p61.1
 368. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-p6.2
 369. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p31.2
 370. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p68.6
 371. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.12
 372. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p54.1
 373. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p23.1
 374. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p18.2
 375. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p34.1
 376. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p16.2
 377. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p61.2
 378. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p58.3
 379. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p6.3
 380. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p10.2
 381. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p37.20
 382. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.11
 383. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p8.1
 384. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p54.1
 385. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p58.1
 386. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p61.5
 387. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.10
 388. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p61.3
 389. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p61.2
 390. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-p16.8
 391. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-p21.1
 392. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p61.1
 393. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p61.3
 394. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-p61.4
 395. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-p35.4
 396. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-p5.9
 397. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.i-Page_343
 398. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ii-Page_344
 399. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iii-Page_345
 400. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_346
 401. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_347
 402. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_348
 403. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_349
 404. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_350
 405. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_351
 406. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_352
 407. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_353
 408. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_354
 409. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_355
 410. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_356
 411. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_357
 412. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_358
 413. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_359
 414. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_360
 415. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_361
 416. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_362
 417. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_363
 418. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_364
 419. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_365
 420. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_366
 421. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_367
 422. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_368
 423. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.iv-Page_369
 424. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_370
 425. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_371
 426. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_372
 427. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_373
 428. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_374
 429. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_375
 430. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_376
 431. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_377
 432. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_378
 433. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_379
 434. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_380
 435. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_381
 436. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_382
 437. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_383
 438. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_384
 439. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_385
 440. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_386
 441. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_387
 442. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_388
 443. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_389
 444. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_390
 445. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_391
 446. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_392
 447. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_393
 448. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_394
 449. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_395
 450. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_396
 451. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_397
 452. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_398
 453. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_399
 454. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_400
 455. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_401
 456. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_402
 457. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_403
 458. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_404
 459. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_405
 460. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_406
 461. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_407
 462. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_408
 463. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.v-Page_409
 464. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_410
 465. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_411
 466. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_412
 467. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_413
 468. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_414
 469. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_415
 470. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_416
 471. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_417
 472. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_418
 473. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_419
 474. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_420
 475. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_421
 476. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_422
 477. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_423
 478. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_424
 479. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_425
 480. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_426
 481. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_427
 482. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_428
 483. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_429
 484. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_430
 485. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_431
 486. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_432
 487. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_433
 488. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_434
 489. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_435
 490. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_436
 491. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_437
 492. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_438
 493. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vi-Page_439
 494. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_440
 495. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_441
 496. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_442
 497. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_443
 498. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_444
 499. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_445
 500. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_446
 501. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_447
 502. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_448
 503. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_449
 504. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_450
 505. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_451
 506. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.vii-Page_452
 507. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-Page_453
 508. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.viii-Page_454
 509. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_455
 510. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_456
 511. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_457
 512. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_458
 513. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_459
 514. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_460
 515. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_461
 516. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.ix-Page_462
 517. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_463
 518. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_464
 519. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_465
 520. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_466
 521. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_467
 522. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_468
 523. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_469
 524. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_470
 525. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_471
 526. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_472
 527. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_473
 528. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_474
 529. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_475
 530. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_476
 531. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_477
 532. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_478
 533. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_479
 534. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_480
 535. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_481
 536. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_482
 537. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_483
 538. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_484
 539. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_485
 540. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_486
 541. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_487
 542. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_488
 543. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_489
 544. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_490
 545. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_491
 546. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_492
 547. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_493
 548. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_494
 549. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_495
 550. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_496
 551. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_497
 552. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_498
 553. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_499
 554. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_500
 555. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_501
 556. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_502
 557. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_503
 558. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_504
 559. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_505
 560. file:///ccel/o/owen/truthinnocence/cache/truthinnocence.html3#i.x-Page_506
